JOHANNES JEWEL S. T. D. Episcopus Sarisburiensis.
portrait of John Jewel

THE APOLOGY OF THE Church of England; AND An Epistle to one Seignior Scipio a
Venetian Gentleman, Concerning the Council of Trent.

Written both in Latin, By the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord
Bishop of Sarisbury.

Made English by a Person of Quality.

To which is added, The LIFE of the said Bishop; Collected and written by the
same Hand.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Discourses are all designed for the Good and Service of the
Religion by Law established; and two of them are so excellently adapted to that
end by their Author, that if I have not spoiled them by an ill version, there
can be no doubt made, but they will be of great use. Of the Third I beg leave
to give somewhat a larger Account, because I am a little more concerned in it.

THE Life I have collected from Mr. Humfrey's, who wrote Bishop Jewel's Life at
large in Quarto. 2. The English Life put before his Works which was penned about
the Year 1609. 3. Mr. Fuller's Church History. 4. Dr. Heylyn's Ecclesia
Anglicana restaurata, and others who wrote any thing that related to those
times, and fell into my hands in that short time I had to finish it in. Mr.
Humfrey's alone would have been sufficient, if he had observed an exact Method
in Writing this Life; or been altogether free from Affections. But tho he tell
us Bishop Jewel kept a Diary of his Life, and that he had assistance from Dr.
Parkhurst Bishop of Norwich, Aegidius Lawrence, Mr. John Jewel the Bishops
Brother, and one Mr. John Garbrande and others; and Printed his Piece in the
Year 1573. Which was not much above two years after the Death of Bishop Jewel,
yet he has not observed any exact order or method in the History of his Life:
and he no where tells us in what Year he was made a Fellow, or received Orders;
nor from whom, only he tells us Mr. Harding took his Orders at the same time.
Nor has he acquainted us when Mr. Harding published his first or second
Antapologies, nor when the Bishop went to Padua, nor how long he staid there,
nor who were his Partners in his Visitation for the Queen. Nor has he marked
almost any of the principal Actions of his Life when they were done; and tho he
mentions a Sermon at Paul's Cross, and a Conference with the Dissenters not
long before his death, yet he neither tells us the time or occasion of either
of them, but instead of these, runs out into Discourses against Harding and
others of that Persuasion, which were nothing, or very little to his purpose.

THE English Life before his Works, is only an Extract out of Mr. Humfrey's
Latin Work, but yet was helpful to me in many Particulars, being done by a wise
Man, and who does not seem to have been biassed as the former was; who makes it
his business to represent both the Church of England and Bishop Jewel as
wondrous Friends to the Churches of Switzerland, that is, to the Calvinists,
because he, Good Man, was one himself, tho not so mad as those that followed;
and upon this very account I do suspect he has left out many things that he
might have related, and would have afforded great light to the Church History
of those times, and especially to Bishop Jewel's Life.

Fuller is barren in his Relations of those times, the Bishop lived after his
Consecration, tho he afforded me some good helps: Dr. Burnett has continued his
History but a little way in Queen Elizabeth's time, and Dr. Heylyn ended his
with the beginning of the Year 1566. which was about Five Years before the
death of Bishop Jewel, and I have neither time nor leisure, nor Interest to
search the Records of those times, and compare the Editions of Books and other
things by which this Life might have been put into a better Method, as to the
timing of things.

And besides all this, it were perhaps indecent to put a long Life before two
such small Tractates as I am to entertain my Reader with; but yet I hope the
Life, such as it is, will give some light to the Discourses, and raise a
venerable Idea of this good Bishop in the Readers mind, which were the things I
chiefly aimed at in the Writing of it.

As to the Pieces, the first of these the Apology was written in Latin in the
beginning of the Year 1562. or the latter end of the foregoing Year, and was
occasioned by Pope Pius the Fourth, his calling the Council of Trent, and
sending his Nuncio Martiningo to invite the Queen to it, and the interposition
of most of the greatest Princes of Christendom, who wrote to the Queen to
entertain the Nuncio and submit to the Council. Whereupon it was thought but
reasonable to give the World an account of what we had done in the preceding
Parliament, and the reasons of it, and to retort the many Accusations brought
against our Church by the Papists. And therefore it was but reasonable that it
should be in Latin, that being the most common Language, and understood by the
Learned Men of all Nations, and accordingly it found entertainment in all
places, and was read in them. Which is more perhaps than can be said of any
other Book written for our Church since the Reformation.

Mr. Harding had a great Quarrel against it, because it was not inscribed
neither to the Pope nor to the Council. But there being no reason to make them
our Judges, and they having no right to claim that Authority over us, it had
been a great oversight to have made any such Inscription, which would have been
a kind of making them what they had neither right nor reason to expect to be,
and from whom we could expect no Justice.

The Natives had without doubt a great desire to see what was in this Book
which then made so great a noise in the World; and the Learned Men being then
otherwise employed, a Lady who was one of the most Learned of the Age,
undertook that task, and made a very Faithful and perhaps Elegant Version of it
for the time when it was made.

She was then Wife to Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, second Daughter to Sir Anthony Cook Knight, one of the Tutors to King
Edward the Sixth, who being an excellent Scholar, had taken care to improve his
Five Daughters so much in Learning, Lloyd's Stateworthies p. 374
that they became the Wonders of the Age, and were sought in Marriage by great
Men more for their natural and acquired Endowments and Beauty, than for their
Portions, tho they did not want that neither. Mildred the eldest married
William Cecil Lord Treasurer of England; Anne the second was this Lady Bacon;
Katherine the third married Sir Henry Killigrew; Elizabeth the fourth married
Sir Thomas Hobby; the fifth whose name is lost, married Sir Ralph Rowlet, all
three Knights and Men of great Estates and Esteem.

This Version was made soon after the Piece was first printed, tho I cannot
tell precisely in what year, for Mr. Humfrey tells us Mr. Harding answered the
English Book, and it is so well done, that I profess I could never have made so
good a Version as I have, if I had not been assisted by it; but then our
Language is so much refined and exalted since that time (which is above an
hundred years,) that it was perhaps necessary to put it into a more modish
dress, in order to recommend it to the reading of those who do not much admire
excellent Sense in a harsh and obsolete style, and for this reason only have
very many Books of late been new turned; and they of France who put out the
Elegant Mons Version of the New Testament, give no other Reason for it than
this.

The Epistle to Seignior Scipio was written soon after the Apology, and to a
private Venetian Gentleman in a more free and friendly way, as not being at all
intended for the Public. It was first Printed in English and Latin at the end
of the Council of Trent; who made that Version I know not, but it is a very
good one, and if I might have had so much liberty, I would only have altered a
very few words in it, and so have Reprinted it again. But not daring to take
that liberty with what belonged to other men, I have done it over again as well
as I could, and perhaps the Reader will not be displeased to see it in the same
style with the Apology, in English as well as Latin.

But now who can enough deplore the Blindness, Pride and Partiality of those
Men, who being led by Interest, and hoodwinked by Ignorance, did at first
employ all the disingenuous Arts that spite and prejudice could furnish them
with, to ruin this most Excellent, Apostolical, and Primitive Church; or force
her to return back to the State of Corruption, out of which with so much
labor, difficulty, and danger, she was then rising.

But there is some allowance to be made for the misinformation of Strangers,
who being separated from us by the Ocean, were forced to take such Accounts as
were given them by others; and 1. being too apt to believe the reports of their
own Priests, whose Interest it was to blacken her what they could; And 2. those
of our own Fugitives, who made the case much worse than they themselves thought
it, that they might obtain the more pity, and consequently the better Relief
and Provision abroad, which is wont to be afforded to all those that fly for
Religion, amongst those of the same Faith; 3. And also suspecting the Fidelity
of the Relations made by our Ministers in foreign Courts, 4. And of all our
Travelers who stuck to, and embraced the Religion established by Law.

But then what can be said for those Roman Catholics (as they will needs be
called) who living at home here in England, and consequently having better
means of informing themselves concerning the truth of things, cannot pretend to
excuse themselves by those Topics Strangers may? It was both their Duty and
Interest to inform themselves of the Affairs of their own Country, and to
submit to the Laws and Customs of it, whilst Strangers that are not under
those Obligations, may excuse themselves if they do not make so diligent an
inquiry into things, or happen at last to be mistaken in them. Besides in the
Settlement under Queen Elizabeth, All the care imaginable was taken to unite
the whole Nation in one Religion, if it were possible; and whatever was in the
former Liturgy that might exasperate or offend them, was taken out, by which
Complyances, (they are the words of the Learned Dr. Heylyn) and the expunging
of the Passages before remembered, the Book was made so passable amongst the
Papists, Eccles. Restaurat. p. 283.
that for ten Years they generally repaired to their Parish Churches, without
doubt or scruple, as is affirmed not only by Sir Edward Coke in his Speech
against Garnet, and his charge given at the Assizes held at Norwich, but also
by the Queen her self in a Eetter to Sir Francis Walsingham, Tortura Torti. p.
130.
then being her Resident or Leiger Ambassador in the Court of France; the same
is confessed by Sanders also in his Book de Schismate. And there is a report
recorded by Camden, that the Pope offered to his Envoy Parapalia to the Queen,
Liturgiam Anglicam sua Authoritate confirmaturum, and usum Sacramenti
subutraque specie Anglis permissurum, dummodo illa Romanae Ecclesiae se
aggregaret, Romanaeque Cathedrae primatum Agnosceret, etc. That he would
confirm the English Liturgy by his Authority, and grant the English the use of
the Sacrament under both kinds, provided the Queen would unite her self to the
Church of Rome, and acknowledge the Primacy of the Roman See. Since that time
nothing has been added that might in the least offend them. Why then do they
act contrary to their Ancestors? Why do they pretend more Conscience than
either their Forefathers or the Pope: ten Years was a sufficient time for them
to have found out the Heresy in, if there had been any in the Establishment.
And we all know their Separation was not upon any scruple of Conscience they
had, but in obedience to the Popes Bull. 1569. 13 Eli. e. a.
The Pope in the mean time did what he did purely out of worldly Interest and
Policy, to advance his own Grandeur and Wealth at their cost and trouble. If he
could have secured this, the Liturgy and Doctrine of the Church of England
should have been owned for Catholic, and have been confirmed by his Holinesses
Authority. But what is this to them? Are they bound to promote his Temporal
Interest with their Ruin, and the disquiet of their Country? Or how come they
to be more obliged to separate from the Church, than to Rebel against the
Crown, seeing the same Pope commanded both, and for the same ends, and is as
infallible in the one as in the other?

But this is not our only Calamity, about the same time another sort of Men
separated too upon direct contrary Pretenses; Why it is our Antiquity, our
Decency, our too great resemblance to the Church of Rome that offends them. We
are not sufficiently purged for these Pure Men to join with; we have too little
of the Primitive Church cries the one, too much says the other; too few
Ceremonies, too much simplicity say the Papists; too many of the first, too
little of the latter cry the Dissenters. Thus was truth ever persecuted on both
sides, Christ crucified betwixt two Thieves, the Primitive Church persecuted by
the Pagans on one side, and the Jews on the other. I venerate thy Truth and
Moderation, O dear and Holy Mother, who do so exactly resemble thy God and
Savior, and the Primitive Church both in thy Truth and Piety, and in thy
Sufferings too which are thy Glory!

But what shall I say for our Dissenters, who have run into such horrible
Crimes as Schism and Rebellion, only on pretense to avoid that Popery, that
Superstition that was only in their own Fancies and Prejudices? How can one and
the same Church be persecuted justly for being too much and too little
Reformed? Why have you separated from her Liturgy and Rites, who pretend to
embrace her Doctrines? Or if you must needs separate, why yet should you imbrue
your hands in the Blood of your Sovereign and fellow Subjects on that account?
Supposing you were in the right, this would not justify you, Christ never
propagated his Church by Blood and Treason, but by Sufferings and Obedience.

The truth is, this Church has been persecuted because she alone of all the
Churches in Europe, has had the Blessing and singular Favor of God to reform
with Prudence, Moderation, and an exact and regular Conduct, after great and
wise Deliberations, by the consent of our Bishops, Convocations, States, and
Princes, without Tumults or hasty Counsels; and accordingly here was nothing
changed but upon good Advice, after the most irresistible Conviction that it
was contrary to the Word of God, the Sentiments of the Holy Fathers and
Councils, and the Practice of the truly Primitive and Apostolical Church. So
that the Papists themselves do even envy our Primitive Doctrine, Government,
and Discipline, and both fear and hate us more than any other of the Reformed
Churches. I could be contented (said a great Man of that Persuasion) there were
no Priests (i. e. Popish Priess) in England, so there were no Bishops there.
This and our excellent Liturgy, our decent Ceremonies, and our excellent order
moves their envy; they are the same things that have raised the Spleens and
Animosities of the other side, with whom whatever is older than Zuinglius and
Calvin, is presently Popery and must be destroyed. Tell them that Episcopacy
was settled in all Churches in the days of the very Apostles, and by them; and
they reply the Mystery of Iniquity began then to work, intimating if not
affirming, that this Holy Order was a part of it. So that they will rather
traduce these Holy Men, who sacrificed their Bloods for Jesus Christ and his
Church, of Pride, Ambition, and a too great Love of Rule, than allow the
Establishments of our Church. Nay they will rather root out the Monarchy,
because supported by, and upholding Episcopacy, than show any the least
Reverence to the Church, in obedience to our Laws and Princes.

So that leaving these implacable selfcondemned Enemies, give me leave, O ye
Loyal and Religious Sons of this Holy and ever persecuted Church, to make my
last Address and Application to you. You see by whom the Church has been ever
persecuted; you see the reason of it; you cannot but know also what she has
suffered on both sides; you have read the one, and your Eyes have seen the
other; rouse up then, and take effectual care of this innocent, this persecuted
Spouse of Christ. Stretch out your hands to Heaven by humble and fervent
Prayers, and implore the Assistance of the most Holy God, for her safety and
Protection against all her Enemies.

Let the Virtue, Piety, and Holiness of your Lives, assure the World that you
profess this Holy Religion in good earnest, and that you do not dissemble
either with God or Man in it, but are sincere and resolved to live and dye in
this profession.

Put those Laws we now have in execution duly and regularly, and with
Discretion and Mercy, not out of Bitterness and Passion, but out of Conscience
and a true fear of God, and care of his Church; that all the World may see it
is nothing but a sense of your Duties, and a Zeal for God, that makes you
active and prudently severe.

And as far as you shall have opportunity, take further care by new Laws, to
secure this great and inestimable Blessing to your Posterity and the
Generations to come, that they may rise up and bless God for you; and remember
your names with Eulogies and Honor for ever.

And if any thing in these Papers may in any degree be serviceable to, and
promote these good ends, I shall for ever be thankful to God and Man for the
Favor.

THE LIFE OF THE Right Reverend Father in God DR. JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of
SARISBURY.
THO Truth and Reason may justly claim the Privilege of a kind reception,
whoever brings them; yet such is the Nature of Mankind, that the Face of a
Stranger is ever surveyed with a little more than ordinary Attention, as if Men
thought generally that in it were the most lively Characters of what they seek
to know, the Soul and Temper of a Man; now because this is not to be expected
at the first sight, in Books where yet it is most eagerly desired; Men have
attempted to supply that defect with Pictures; and (which affords much more
satisfaction) by premising the Lives and Characters of the Authors, which gives
the Reader a truer and more lasting Idea of Men, than it is possible for
Pensils and Colors to attain to.

The Author of the ensuing Tracts ought to be so well known to all English men,
that his Name alone should have given a sufficient Commendation to any thing
that can claim a descent from him: But it being now above an hundred years
since his death, and his Works which were for a long time chained up in all
Churches, being now superannuated or neglected, it may not be an unseasonable
piece of Service to the Church, to revive the Memory of this great Man, the
stout and invincible Champion of the Church of England; who losing the
opportunity of sacrificing his Life for her in the Reign of Queen Mary, did it
with more advantage to us, and pains to himself, under her glorious Successor,
when he so freely spent himself in her Service, that having wasted his thin
Body by excessive Labor and Study, he died young, but full of good Works and
Glory.

He was born the 24 th of May, in the year of our Lord 1522. at Buden in the
Parish of Berinber in the County of Devon; and tho a younger Brother, yet
inherited his Fathers Name. His Mother was a Bellamie, and he had so great an
esteem for it and her, that he engraved it on his Signet, and had it always
imprinted in his heart; a lasting Testimony both of her Virtue and kindness to
him.

His Father was a Gentleman descended rather of an Ancient and Good, than very
Rich Family. It is observed that his Ancestors had enjoyed that Estate for
almost two hundred years before the Birth of this great Man. And yet such was
the number of his Children, that it is no wonder if this, when young, wanted
the assistance of Good men for the promoting of his Studies; for it is said his
Father left ten Children between Sons and Daughters behind him.

This John Jewel proving a Lad of pregnant Parts, and of a sweet and
industrious Nature and Temper, was from his Youth dedicated to Learning; and
with great care cultivated by his Parents and Masters, which he took so well,
that at the entrance of the Thirteenth year of his Age, about the Feast of St.
James, he was admitted in Merton College in Oxon, under one Mr. Peter Burrey,
a Man neither of any great Learning, nor much addicted to the Reformation,
which then (in the Reign of Henry the Eighth) went on but slowly, and with much
irregularity in its Motions. But we are yet beholding to his first Tutor for
this, that he committed this Jewel to Mr. John Parkhurst a Fellow of the same
College, and afterward first Minister of Cleave, and then Bishop of Norwich,
who was a Man both of more Learning and of a better Faith; and prudently
instilled together with his other Learning, those excellent Principles into
this Young Gentleman, which afterward made him the Darling and Wonder of his
Age.

DURING his continuance in this College, In the English Life before his Works,
is called Witney.
a Plague happening in Oxon, he removed to a place called Croxham, where being
lodged in a low Room, and studying hard in the night, he got a lameness by a
Cold which attended him to his Grave; having spent almost four years in this
College, the 19 th of August Anno Domini 1539. the One and thirtieth of Henry
the Eighth, in the Seventeenth year of his Age, he was, by the Procurement of
one Mr. Slater, and Mr. Burrey and Mr. Parkhurst his two Tutors, removed into
Corpus Christi College in the same University, where, I suppose, he met with
something of an encouragement; but it is much more certain he met with Envy
from his Equals, who often suppressed his ingenious Exercises, and read others
that were more like their own.

THE twentieth day of October in the following year, he took his first Degree of
Bachelor of Arts, with a great and general Applause; when he prosecuted his
Studies with more vigor than before, beginning them at four in the Morning, and
continuing them till ten and night, so that he seemed to need some body to put
him in mind of eating.

BEING now attained to a great Reputation for Learning, he began to instruct
other, and amongst and rest Anthony Parkhurst was committed to his care by Mr.
John Parkhurst his Tuto, which was a great Argument of his great Worth and
Industry.

BEING thus employed, he was chosen Reader of Humanity and Rhetoric of his own
College, and he managed this place seven years with great Applause and Honor.
His Example taught more than any Precepts could; for he was a great admirer of
Horace and Cicero, and read all Erasmus his Works, and imitated them too, for
it was his custom to write something every day; and it was his common saying,
that men acquired Learning more by a frequent exercising their Pens, than by
reading many Books. He affected ever rather to express himself fluently,
neatly, and with great weight of Argument and strength of Reason, than in
hunting after the Flowers of Rhetoric, and the Cadences of Words, tho he
understood them, no man better, and wrote a Dialogue in which he comprehended
the sum of the Art of Rhetoric.

THE ninth of February 1544. he commenced Master of Arts, the Charge of it
being born by his good Tutor Mr. Parkhurst, who had then the Rich Rectory of
Cleve in the Diocese of Gloucester, which is of better value than some of our
smaller Bishoprics. Nor was this the only instance wherein he did partake of
this good man's Bounty, for he was wont twice or thrice in a year to invite him
to his House, and not dismiss him without Presents, Money, and other things
that were necessary for the carrying on his Studies. And one time above the
rest, coming into his Chamber in the Morning, when he was to go back to the
University, he seized upon his and his Companions Purses, saying, What Money, I
wonder, have these miserable, Beggarly Oxfordians? And finding them pitifully
lean and empty, stuffed them With Money, till they became both fat and weighty.

EDWARD the Sixth succeeding his Father the 28 th of January 1546. the
Reformation went on more regularly and swiftly, November 1548.
and Peter Martyr being by that Prince called out of Germany, and made
Professor of Divinity at Oxon, Mr. Jewel was one of his most constant hearers;
and by the help of Characters which he had invented for his own use, took all
his Lectures almost as perfectly as he spoke them.

About this time one Dr. Richard Smith, Predecessor to Peter Martyr in that
Chair at Oxon, who was more a Sophister than a Divine, made an insult upon
Peter Martyr, and interrupted him publicly and unexpectedly in his Lecture:
the German was not to be baffled by a surprise, but extempore recollected his
Lecture, and defended it with a great presence of mind, the two Parties in the
Schools being just upon the point of a Tumult, the Protestants for the present
Professor, and the Papists for the old one.

Peter Martyr nettled with this affront, challenged Smith to dispute with him
publicly, and appointed him a day: But Smith fearing to be called in question
for this uproar, This Dispute began the 28 th of May, Anno Christi 1549. and
lasted five days.
fled before the time to St. Andrews in Scotland. But then Tresham and Chadsy,
two Popish Doctors, and one Morgan entered the Lists against Peter Martyr, and
there was a very sharp but regular Dispute betwixt them concerning the
Lord's Supper. And Mr. Jewel having then a large share in Peter Martyrs
affections, was by him appointed to take the whole Disputation in Writing,
which was printed in the year 1649. for the regulating this Disputation, the
Council sent to Oxon, Henry Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. R. Cox Chancellor of that
University, Dr. Simon Haines, Richard Morison Esqe; and Dr. Christopher Nevison
Commissioners and Moderators.

In the year 1551. Mr. Jewel took his Degree of Bachelor of Divinity, 1551.
whon he preached an excellent Latin Sermon, which is extant almost perfect;
taking for his Text the words of St. Peter, Ep. 1. cap. 4. v. 11. If any man
speak, Let him speak as the Oracles of God, etc. Upon which words he raised
such excellent Doctrines, and made such wise and holy Reflections in so pure
and elegant a style, as satisfied all the World of his great Ability and
Deserts.

In the same time Mr. Jewel took a small Living near Oxon called Sunningwell,
more out of a desire to do good, than for the Sallary which was but small,
whither he went once a Fortnight on Foot, tho he was lame, and it was
troublesome to him to walk; and at the same time preached frequently both
privately in his own College, and publicly in the University.

BESIDES his old Friend Mr. Parkhurst, amongst others, one Mr. Curtop a Fellow
of the same College, afterward Canon of Christ-Church, allowed him Forty
shillings a year, which was a considerable sum in those days; and one Mr.
Chambers, who was entrusted with distributing the Charity of some Londoners to
the Poor Scholars of Oxon, allowed Mr. Jewel out of it six pound a year for
Books.

EDWARD the Sixth dying the sixth of July, 1553.
Anno Domini 1553. and Queen Mary succeeding him, and being proclaimed the
Seventeenth of the same month, Jewel was one of the first that felt the fury of
this Tempest, and before any Law was made, or so much as any order given by the
Queen, was expelled out of the College by the Fellows, upon their private
Authority, who had nothing to object against him, but 1. His following Peter
Martyr; 2. His Preaching some Doctrines contrary to Popery; 3. And his taking
Orders according to the Laws then in force: for as for his Life, it was
acknowledged to be Angelical and extremely honest, Fuller in his Church
History, says he was expelled for refusing to be present at Mass.
by John Moren a Fellow of the same College; who yet at the same time could
not forbear calling him Lutheran, Zuinglian, and Heretic. He took his leave of
the College in these words, as near as I can render them in English.

IN my last Lectures I have ( said he) imitated the Custom of famished Men, who
when they see their meat likely to be suddenly and unexpectedly snatched from
them, devour it with the greater haste and greediness. For whereas I intended
thus to put an end to my Lectures, and perceived that I was like forthwith to
be silenced, I made no scruple to entertain you (contrary to my former usage)
with much unpleasant and ill dressed Discourse, for I see I have incurred the
displeasure and hatred of some, but whether deservedly or no, I shall leave to
their consideration; for I am persuaded that those who have driven me from
hence, would not suffer me to live any where if it were in their Power. But as
for me, I willingly yield to the times, and if they can derive down to
themselves any satisfaction from my Calamity, I would not hinder them from it.
But as Aristides, when he went into exile and forsook his Country, prayed that
they might never more think of him; so I beseech God to grant the same to my
Fellow Collegians, and what can they wish for more? Pardon me my Hearers, if
grief has seized me, being to be torn from that place against my will, where I
have passed the first part of my Life, where I have lived pleasantly, and been
in some Honor and Employment. But why do I thus delay to put an end to my
Misery by one word? Woe is me, that (as with my extreme sorrow and resentment I
at last speak it) I must say farewell my Studies, farewell to these beloved
Houses, farewell thou pleasant Seat of Learning, farewell to the most delightful
Conversation with you, farewell Young men, farewell Lads, far^wel Fellows,
farewell Brethren, farewell ye beloved as my Eyes, farewell ALL, farewell.

Thus did he take his leave (says the Author of the English Life before his
Works) of his Lecture, Fellow-ship and College; and was reduced at one blow to
great Poverty and Dissertion: but he found for some time a place of Harbor in
Broadgates-Hall another College in the same University. Here he met with some
short Gleams of Comfort; for the University of Oxon more kind than his
College, and to alleviate the Miseries of his Shipwrack'd Estate, chose him to
be her Orator, in which capacity he curiously penned a Gratulatory Letter or
Address (as the term now is) to the Queen, on the behalf and in the name of the
University, Expressing in it the Countenance of the Roman Senators in the
beginning of Tiberius his Reign, exquisitely tempered and composed, to keep out
joy and sadness, which both strove at the same time to display their colors in
it; the one for dead Augustus; the other for Reigning Tiberius. And upon the
Assurance of several of her Nobles, that the Queen would not change the
established Religion, expressing some hopes she would so do, which was
confirmed then to them by the Promise the Queen had made to the Suffolk and
Norfolk Gentry, who had rescued her out of the very Jaws of Ruin. Fuller
says, that the Writing this Letter was put upon him with a design to ruin
him, but there is not the least color for this surmize; he being so very
lately, seasonably and kindly chosen Orator. when he was so injuriously
expelled out of his own College; but it is much more probable the sweetness,
smoothness and briskness of his style, was both the reason why he was chosen
Orator first, and then employed to pen this Letter. The Sum or Heads of which
are in Mr. Laurence Humfrey's Life of Jewel: But there is no entire Copy extant.

IT is observed by the last mentioned Author, that whilst Jewel was roading
this Letter to Dr. Tresham Vice Chancellor, the great Bell of Christ-Church
(which this Doctor having caused to be new run a few days before, had
christened by the name of Mary, tolled) and that hearing her pleasant voice now
call him to his beloved Mass, he burst out into an Exclamation. O delicate and
sweet Harmony! O beautiful Mary, how Musically she sounds, how strangely she
pleases my Ears! So Mr. Jewel's sweet Pen was forced to give way to the more
acceptable tinkling of this new Lady. And we may easily conjecture how the poor
man took it.

BEING thus ejected out of all he had, he became obnoxious to the Insolence and
Pride of all his Enemies, which he endeavored to allay by Humility and
Compliance, which yet could not mitigate their Rage and Fury; but rather in all
probability heightened their Malice, and drew more Affronts upon the meek man.
But amongst all his Enemies, none sought his ruin more eagerly than Dr.
Martial Dean of Christ-Church, who had changed his Religion now twice already;
and did afterward twice or thrice more in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: He
having neither Conscience nor Religion of his own, was wondrous desirous to
make Jewel's Conscience or Life a papal Sacrifice.

IN order to this, Anno 1553.
he sends to Jewel by the Inquisitors a bed-roll of Popish Doctrines to be
subscribed by him upon pain of Fire and Faggot, and other grievous Tortures;
the poor man having neither Friend nor time allowed him to consult with, took
the Pen in his hand, and saying, Have you a mind to see how well I can write?
Subscribed his Name hastily, and with great reluctance.

But this no way mitigated the Rage of his Enemies against him, they knew his
great love to, and familiarity with Peter Martyr, and nothing less than his
Life would satisfy these Bloodhounds, of which Turn-coat Martial was the
fiercest: so being forsaken by his Friends for this his sinful Compliance, and
still pursued like a wounded Deer by his Enemies; but more exagitated by the
inward Remorses and Reproaches of his own Conscience, he resolved at last to
flee for his Life.

And it was but time; for if he had staid but one night longer, or gone the
right way to London, he had perished by their Fury: One Augustine Berner a
Switzer, first a Servant to Bishop Latimer, and afterward a Minister found him
lying upon the ground almost dead with vexation, weariness (for this lame Man
was forced to make his escape on foot) and cold, and setting him upon an Horse,
conveyed him to the Lady Ann Warcupps a Widow, who entertained him for some
time, and then sent him up to London, where he was in more safety.

HAVING twice or thrice changed his Lodgings in London, Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton a great Minister of State in those times, furnished him with Money
for his Journey, and procured him a Ship for his Transportation beyond the
Seas. And well it had been if he had gone sooner; but his Friend Mr. Parkhurst
hearing of the restoring of the Mass fled forthwith; and poor Mr. Jewel knowing
nothing of it, went to Cleave to beg his advice and assistance, being almost
killed by his long Journey on foot in bitter cold and snowy weather, and being
forced at last to return to Oxon, more dejected and confounded in his thoughts
than he went out; which Miseries were the occasions of his fall, as Gods Mercy
was the procurer both of his escape and recovery.

FOR being once arrived at Franckford in the beginning of the second year of
Queen Mary's Reign, 1554.
he found there Mr. Richard Chambers his old Benefactor, Dr. Robert Horn
afterward Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Sands Bishop of London, Sir Francis
Knowles a Privy Counselor, and afterward Lord Treasurer, and his eldest Son,
etc. these received Jewel with the more kindness, because he came unexpectedly
and unhoped for, and advised him to make a public Recantation of his
Subscription; which he willingly did in the Pulpit the next Lord's Day in these
words. It was my abject and cowardly mind, and saint heart that made my weak
hand to commit this wickedness. Which when he had uttered as well as he could
for tears and sighs, he applied himself in a servent Prayer, first to God
Almighty for his Pardon, and afterward to the Church; the whole Auditory
accompanying him with Tears and Sighs, and ever after esteeming him more for
his ingenuous Repentance, than they would (perhaps) have done if he had not
fallen.

IT is an easy thing for those that were never tried, to censure the frailty
of those that have truckled for some time under the shock of a mighty
Temptation; but let such remember St. Paul's advice, Let him that stands take
heed least he fall. This great Man's fall shall ever be my Lesson, and if this
glistering Jewel were thus clowded and foiled, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

Mr. JEWEL had not been long at Franckford, before Peter Martyr hearing of it,
often solicited him to come to Strasburgh, Peter Martyr.
where he was now settled and provided for; and all things considered, a wonder
it is that he did not perish in England; Ecclesia Restaurata, p. 196
For there was no Person more openly aimed at than he, because none of them had
given wider Wounds than he to the Catholic Cause. One Tresham a Senior Canon
of Christ-Church, who had held some Points against him at his first coming
thither, now took the benefit of the times to be revenged on him, and incited
those of Christ-Church and of other Houses to affront him publicly. So that
not finding any safety at Oxford, he retired to Lambeth to Cranmer, where he
was sure of as much as the place could afford him. A Consultation had been held
by some of the more fiery Spirits, for his commitment unto Prison. But he came
thither (as was well known) on the public Faith, which was not to be violated
for the satisfaction of some private Persons. It was thought fit threfore to
discharge him of all further employment, Peter Martyr also helped himself, for
he would not go without the Queens Pasport and leave, and when he had it,
concealed himself fourteen days on the English Coast, then privately took Ship
and arrived at Antwerp in the night, and before day took Coach and so got safe
to Strasbourgh, the 30th of October 1553.
and to license him to depart in peace: none being more forward to furnish him
with all things for his going hence, than the new Lord Chancellor; Bishop
Gardener, whether in honor to his Learning, or out of a desire to send him
packing, shall not now be questioned; but less humanity was showed to him in
his Wife, whose Body having been buried in the Church of St. Frideswide, was
afterward by public order taken out of the Grave and buried in a common
Dunghill. But in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth was removed and her bones mixed
with St. Francis: And the truth is, the Queen (who was a bigoted Papist, and
too much Priest-ridden) breaking not only her promise to the men of Suffolk,
who had stood by her in her greatest necessity, and treating them with extreme
severity for but challenging the performance of her promise; Burnet To. 2. p.
246. Ib. p. 245.
one Dobbe who had spoken more boldly than the rest, being ordered to stand
three days in the Pillory; but also her more solemn engagement made the Twelfth
of August 1553. in the Council; That although her Conscience was staid in the
Matters of Religion, yet she was resolved not to compel or strain others,
otherwise than as God should put into their Hearts, a persuasion of that truth
she was in; and this she hoped should be done by the opening his word to them,
by Godly, virtuous, and learned Preachers: I say, considering how ill she kept
her promise to her own Subjects, it is a wonder she should keep the Faith given
to this Stranger in her Brothers Reign, and not by her; and I conceive no
reason can be given for this, but the overruling Providence of God, who
governs the hearts of Princes as he thinks fit.

BUT well it was for Mr. Jewel that there he was, and as much of Mr. Jewel's
Sufferings in England had been occasioned by his great respects he had shown to
Peter Martyr whilst he lived at Oxon: So now Peter Martyr never left
soliciting him (as I said) to come to him to Strasbourgh till he prevailed,
where he took him to his own Table and kept him always with him. And here Mr.
Jewel was very serviceable to him in his Edition of his Commentaries upon the
Book of Judges, which were all transcribed for the Press by him; and he used
also to read every day some part of a Father to him, and for the most part St.
Augustine, with which Father they were both much delighted.

AT Strasbourgh Mr. Jewel found J. Poynet late Bishop of Winchester, Edmund
Grindal Archbishop of York, Sir Edwin Sands, J. Cheek and Sir Anthony Coke
Knight. and several other great Men of the English Nation, who were fled thither
for their Religion. And with these he was in great esteem, which opened a way
for his preferment upon his return into England after the Storm was over.

PETER Martyr having been a long time solicited by the Senate of Zurick to go
thither and take upon him the place of Professor of Hebrew, and Interpreter of
the Scriptures in the place of Conrad Pelican, who was almost the first
Professor of Hebrew in Christendom, and died about this time near an hundred
years of Age; at last accepted the Office, July 13. 1556.
and carried Mr. Jewel with him to Zurick, where he lived still with Peter
Martyr in his own Family. Here he found James Pilkinton Bishop of Durham, and
several others who were maintained by the Procurement of Richard Chambers, but
out of the Purses of Mr. Richard Springham, Mr. John Abel, Mr. Thomas Eton
Merchants of London, and several others; till at last Stephen Gardener finding
who were their Benefactors, threatened he would in a short time make them eat
their Fingers ends for hunger: and it was sore against his will that he proved
a false Prophet, for he clapped up so many of their Benefactors in England, that
after this there came but a small if any Supply out of England to them. But
then Christopher Prince of Wittenberg, and the Senators of Zurick, and the
foreign Divines were so kind to them, that they had still a tolerable
Subsistence, and Mr. Jewel stood in need of the less, because he lived with
Peter Martyr till his return into England.

SO says Mr. Humfrey in his Life; Humfrey p. 90.
but it is apparent by the first lines of his Epistle to Seignior Scipio, that
he studied some time at Padua, and there being no mention of his traveling at
any time before his exile, nor indeed any possibility of it, I suppose that
whilst he was thus with Peter Martyr at Zurick, he made a step over the Alps
to Padua, which was not very distant, and there studied some time, and
contracted his acquaintance with the said Venetian Gentleman; for this Journey
is no where mentioned by any other Author that I have seen, and I can find no
time so likely for it as now.

DURING all the time of his exile, which was about four years, he studied very
hard, and spent the rest of his time in consolating and confirming his
Brethren; for he would frequently tell them that when their Brethren endured
such bitter Tortures and horrible Martyrdoms at home, it was not reasonable
they should expect to fare deliciously in Banishment, concluding always: Haec
non du rabunt aetatem. These things will not last an Age Which he repeated so
very often, and with so great an assurance of mind that it would be so, that
many believed it before it came to pass, and more took it for a Prophetic
Sentence afterward.

When the English left their Native Country, English life.
they were all of a piece; Dr. Peter Heylyn faith the contrary, and that
Wittingham, Williams, and Goodman were Zunglians before they left England, who
were the chief Promoters of the disorder at Frankford. Ecclesia Restaurata. p.
228.
bu^ some of them going to Geneva an other places which had embrace the model
of Reformation settle by Calvin, they became fond (...) these foreign
Novelties, and some of them at Franckford, in the yea^ 1554. began an
alteration of the Liturgy, and did what they could to dra^ others to them; and
to these men Knox the great Intendiary of Scotland afterward, joined himself,
and not long after one Whitehead a zealous Calvinist, but of a much better
temper than Knox. Not contented with this alteration, the fifteenth of November
1554. they writ Letters in open defiance of the English Liturgy to them of
Zurick, who defended it in a Letter of the 28 th of the same month.

Grindal and Chambers were sent from Strasburgh to Frankford to quiet these
Innovators, but to no purpose; so returning back again, the English at
Strasburgh wrote to them the thirteenth of December, all which procured no
other regard from them, but only to obtain Calvin's judgment of it, which being
suitable to their own, as there was no wonder it should; things continued thus
till the thirteenth of March following, when Dr. Richard Cox entered Frankford,
drove Knox out, and resettled the Liturgy there. Whereupon in the end of August
following, Fox with some few others went to Basil, but the main body followed
Knox and Goodman to Geneva their Mother City (as Dr. Heylyn styles it) where
they made choice of Knox and Goodman for their constant Preachers; under which
Ministry they rejected the whole Frame and Fabric of the Reformation made in
England in King Edward's time, and conformed themselves wholly to the fashions
of the Church of Geneva, etc. Thus far Dr. Heylyn.

Mr. Jewel being then at Zurick, used his utmost endeavor to reclaim these
men, and put a stop to this rising Schism; Exhorting them as Brethren to lay
aside all strife and emulation, especially about such small matters; least
thereby they should greatly offend the minds of all good men: which thing (he
said) they ought to have a principal care of. And doubtless this good man
thought that their gratitude to God for restoring them to their Native Country
under the auspicious Reign of Queen Elizabeth of Blessed Memory, had for ever
put an end to this dispute, and he seems to speak as much in his Apology for
the Church of England; Conclusion, Section 2. p. 141.
but within a few years this fury broke loose again, and just about the time of
Jewel's death, became more trouble some than ever before, and just about an
hundred years after its rise, by a dismal Rebellion overturned at once the
Church and Monarchy of Great Britain.

BUT to return to Mr. Jewel and our Exiles; the seventeenth of November 1558.
God remembered the distressed State of the Church of England, and put an end to
her Sufferings, by removing that Bigoted Lady: the news of which flying
speedily to our Exiles, they hasted into England again, to congratulate the
Succession of Queen Elizabeth of ever Blessed Memory.

HIS good Benefactor and Tutor Mr. Parkhurst, upon the arrival of this news,
made him a visit in Germany; but fearing Mr. Jewel had not chosen the safest
way for his return to England, left him and went another way, which seeming
more safe, in the end proved otherwise. Mr. Jewel arriving safely in England
with what he had, whilst the other was robbed by the way; and so at his landing
in England, Mr. Jewel (who was here before him) very gratefully relieved his
great Benefactor.

THE time of Mr. Jewel's arrival in England, Hiller. C. H.
is no where expressed that I can find, The news of the Queens death came to
Zurick the last of November. Mart. Letters.
but he being then at Zurick in all probability, was for that cause none of the
first that returned; so that when he came back, he had the comfort to find all
things well disposed, for the reception of the Reformation: for the Queen had
by a Proclamation of the thirtieth of December 1558. ordered that no man, of
what quality soever he were, should presume to alter any thing in the State of
Religion, or innovate in any of the Rites and Ceremonies thereunto belonging,
etc. until some further order should be taken therein. Only it was permitted,
and with all required, that the Litany, the Lords-Prayer, the Creed and the Ten
Commandments, should be said in the English Tongue, and that the Epistle and
Gospel should be read in English at the time of the High Mass, which was done
(says Dr. Heylyn) in all the Churches of London, on the next Sunday after
being New-Years-day; and by degrees in all the other Churches of the Kingdom:
Further than this, she thought it not convenient to proceed at the present,
only she prohibited the Elevation of the Sacrament at the Altar of the Chapel
Royal: Which was likewise forborne in all other Churches: and she set at liberty
all that had been imprisoned for Religion in her Sisters time, and ordered the
Liturgy to be revised with great care, and that a Parliament should be summoned
to sit at West-minster the 25th of January 1559.

ALL this I suppose at least was done before Mr. Jewel returned into England;
for whether he was here at the Coronation is uncertain. He was entertained
first by Mr. Nicholas Culverwell for almost six months, and then falling into a
Sickness, was invited, by Dr. William Thames, to lodge at his House; but this
was after the Parliament.

THE Liturgy being then reviewed, and whatever might give the Popish Party any
unnecessary Exasperation or Discontent purged out, in order to the facilitating
the passing an Act of Parliament for the settling it, and the establishment of
other things that were necessary, a public Disputation was appointed on the
Thirtieth of March following, to be holden in the Church of Westminster in the
English Tonguo, in the presence of as many of the Lords of the Council, and of
the Members of both Houses, as were desirous to inform themselves in the State
of the Questions. The Disputation was also to be managed (for the better
avoiding of Confusion) by a mutual interchange of Writings upon every Point;
each Writing to be answered the next day, and so from day to day till the whole
were ended. To all which the Bishops at first consented, tho they would not
afterward stand to it. The Questions were Three, concerning Prayers in the
Vulgar Tongue, the Power of the Church, for the changing Rites and Ceremonies,
and the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass for the Living and the Dead.

THE first use that was made of Mr. Jewel after his return, was the nominating
him one of the Disputants for the reformed Party; and tho he was the last in
number and place, yet he was not the least either in desert or esteem, having
made great Additions to his former Learning in his four years Exile and Travel:
which is a great improvement to ingenious Spirits. But this Disputation was
broken off by the Popish Party, who would not stand to the order appointed; so
that Mr. Jewel in all probability had no occasion to show either his Zeal or
Learning.

THE Parliament ended the eighth of May 1559. and by virtue of an Act passed in
this Parliament, soon after Midsummer the Queen made a Visitation of all the
Diocesses in England, by Commissioners for rectifying all such things as they
found amiss, and could not be redressed by any ordinary Episcopal Power,
without spending of more time than the Exigencies of the Church could then
admit of. And this was done by a Book of Articles printed for that purpose, and
the Inquiry was made upon Oath by the Commissioners. Here Mr. Jewel was taken
in again, and made one of these Commissioners for the West. When he visited his
own Native Country, which till then perhaps he had not seen since his return
from Exile, when also he preached to and disputed with his Countrymen, and
endeavored more to win them to embrace the Reformation by good Usage, Civility
and Reason, than to terrify or awe them by that great Authority the Queen had
armed him and his fellow Commissioners with.

RETURNING back to London, and giving the Queen a good and satisfactory account
of their Visitation, the 21st of January following, Mr. Jewel who was then only
Bachelor of Divinity, was consecrated Bishop of Sarisbury, which he at first
modestly declined, but at last accepted, in obedience to the Queens command.
This See had been void by the death of John Capon his immediate Predecessor,
who died in the year 1557. now near three years. And here the Divine Providence
again gave him the advantage in point of Seniority over his Tutor Mr. John
Parkhurst, who was not consecrated Bishop of Norwich till the Fourteenth of
July after; but then his Tutor had the advantage of him in point of Revenue,
for Mr. Jewel's Bishopric had been miserably impoverished by his Predecessor;
so that he complained afterward, that there was never a good Living left him
that would maintain a Learned Man; for (said he) the Capon had devoured all:
because he has either given away or sold all the Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Livings. So that the good Bishop was forced all his Lifetime after to take
extraordinary pains in traveling and preaching in all parts of his Diocese,
which brought him to his Grave the sooner: whereas his Tutor had a much richer
Bishopric, and consequently more ease, and outlived his Pupil Jewel three
years.

THE Sunday before Easter of this year, March 30.
Bishop Jewel preached at Paul's Cross, his famous Sermon upon the 1 Cor. 11.
v. 25. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you,
that-the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took Bread, etc.
This Sermon gave a fatal blow to the Popish Religion here in England, which was
become very odious to all men, by reason of the barbarous Cruelty used by those
of that Persuasion in the Reign of Queen Mary; but the Challenge which he then
made, and afterward several times and in several places repeated, was the most
stinging part of this Sermon, and therefore tho I am concerned to be as short
as I can, I will yet insert this Famous Piece at large.

IF any Learned Man of our Adversaries, Heylyn's Eccl. Restaurata. p. 301.
( said he) or all the Learned Men that be alive, be able to bring any one
sufficient Sentence out of any old Catholic Doctor, or Father, or General
Council, or Holy Scripture, or any one Example in the Primitive Church, whereby
it may clearly and plainly be proved during the first six hundred years. 1.
That there was at any time any private Masses in the World. 2. Or that there
was then any Communion ministered unto the People under one kind. 3. Or that the
People had their Common Prayer in a strange Tongue that the People understood
not. 4. Or that the Bishop of Rome was then called an universal Bishop, or the
Head of the universal Church. 5. Or that the People were then taught to believe
that Christ's Body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally or naturally
in the Sacrament. 6. Or that his Body is or may be in a thousand places or more
at one time. 7. Or that the Priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his
Head. 8. Or that the People did then fall down and worship it with Godly
Honor. 9. Or that the Sacrament was then, or now ought to be, hanged up under
a Canopy. 10. Or that in the Sacrament after the words of Consecration, there
remained only the accidents and shows without the substance of Bread and Wine.
11. Or, that then the Priests divided the Sacrament into three parts, and
afterward received himself alone. 12. Or that whosoever had said the Sacrament
is a Figure, a Pledge, a Token, or a remembrance of Christ's Body, had
therefore been adjudged for an Heretic. 13. Or that it was lawful then to have
thirty, twenty, fifteen, ten or five Masses said, in the same Church in one
day. 14. Or that Images were then set up in the Churches, to the intent the
People might worship them. 15. Or that the Lay People were then forbidden to
read the word of God in their own Tongue. 16. Or that it was then Lawful for
the Priest to pronounce the words of Consecration closely, or in private to
himself. 17. Or that the Priest had then Authority to offer up Christ unto his
Father. 18. Or to communicate and receive the Sacrament for another, as they
do. 19. Or to apply the virtue of Christ's Death and Passion to any Man by the
means of the Mass. 20. Or that it was then thought a sound Doctrine to teach
the People that Mass, Ex opere operato (that is, even for that it is said and
done) is able to remove any part of our sin. 21. Or that any Christian man
called the Sacrament of the Lord, his God. 22. Or that the People were then
taught to believe, that the Body of Christ remains in the Sacrament, as long
as the accidents of Bread and Wine remain there without Corruption. 23. Or that
a Mouse or any other Worm or Beast, may eat the Body of Christ, (for so some of
our Adversaries have said and taught.) 24. Or that when Christ said, Hoc est
Corpus meum, the word Hoc pointed not to the Bread, but to an individuum vagum,
as some of them say. 25. Or that the Accidents, or Forms, or shows of Bread and
Wine be the Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood, and not rather the very Bread
and Wine it self. 26. Or that the Sacrament is a sign or token of the Body of
Christ, that lies hidden underneath it. 27. Or that ignorance is the Mother
and cause of true Devotion. The Conclusion is, that I shall then be content to
yield and subscribe.

This challenge (says the Learned Dr. Heylyn) being thus published in so great
an Auditory, startled the English Papists both at home and abroad, but none
more than such of our Fugitives as had retired to Lovain, Doway, or St. Omers,
in the Low Country Provinces belonging to the King of Spain. The business was
first agitated by the exchange of friendly Letters betwixt the said Reverend
Prelate and Dr. Henry Cole the late Dean of St. Paul's; more violently followed
in a Book of Rastal's, Rastal was a common Lawyer, and published his Book in
1563.
who first appeared in the Lists against the Challenger, followed herein by
Dorman and Marshall, who severally took up the Cudgels to as little purpose;
the first being well beaten by Nowel, and the last by Calfhill, in their
Discourses writ against them; but they were only Velitations, or preparitory
Skirmishes in reference to the main encounter, which was reserved for the
Reverend Challenger himself, and Dr. John Harding, one of the Divines of
Lovain, and the most Learned of the College. The Combatants were born in the
same County, bred up in the same Grammar School, and studied in the same
University also: -- Both zealous Protestants in the time of King Edward, and
both relapsed to Popery in the time of Queen Mary; Jewel for fear, and Harding
upon hope of Favor and Preferment by it. But Jewel's fall may be compared to
that of St. Peter, which was short and sudden, rising again by his Repentance,
and fortified more strongly in his Faith than before he was: but Harding's like
to that of the other Simon, premeditated and resolved on, never to be restored
again (so much was there within him of the gaul of bitterness) to his former
standing. But some former Differences had been between them in the Church of
Sarisbury, Harding was then Prebendary when Mr. Jewel was elected and gave his
vote for him. Humf. p. 140.
whereof the one was Prebendary, and the other Bishop, occasioned by the
Bishops visitation of that Cathedral; in which as Harding had the worst, so was
it a Presage of a second foil which he was to have in this encounter. Who had
the better of the day, will easily appear to any that consults the Writings, by
which it will appear how much the Bishop was too hard for him at all manner of
Weapons. Whose learned Answers as well in maintenance of his Challenge, as in
defense of his Apology (whereof more hereafter) contain in them such a Magazin
of all sorts of Learning, that all our Controversors since that time, have
furnished themselves with Arguments and Authority from it.

THUS far that Learned man has discoursed the event of this famous Challenge
with so much brevity and perspicuity, that I thought it better to transcribe
his words, than to do it much worse my self.

WHEN Queen Mary died, Paul the Fourth was Pope, to whom Queen Elizabeth sent
an account of her coming to the Crown, which was delivered by Sir Edward Karn
her Sisters Resident at Rome; to which the angry Gentleman replied, Dr.
Burnett's History of the Reformation. Tom. 2.
That England was held in Fee of the Apostolic See, that she could not succeed
being illegitimate; nor could he contradict the Declarations made in that
matter by his Predecessors Clement the Seventh, and Paul the Third: he said it
was a great boldness in her, to assume the Crown without his Consent; for which
in reason she deserved no favor at his hands; yet if she would renounce her
Pretensions, and refer her self wholly to him, he would show a fatherly
affection to her, and do every thing for her that could consist with the
dignity of the Apostolic See. Which answer being hastily and passionately
made, was as little regarded by the Queen. But he dying soon after, Pius the
Fourth an abler man succeeded; and he was for gaining the Queen by Arts and
Kindness; to which end he sent Vincent Parapalia Abbot of St. Saviors with
courteous Letters to her, dated May the fifth 1560. with order to make large
proffers to her under hand; but the Queen had rejected the Popes Authority by
Act of Parliament, and would have nothing to do with Parapalia, nor would she
suffer him to come into England. In the interim the Pope had resolved to renew
the Council at Trent, and in the next year sent Abbot Martiningo his Nuncio to
the Queen, to invite her and her Bishops to the Council, and he accordingly
came to Bruxells, and from thence sent over for leave to come into England: but
tho France and Spain interceded for his Admission, yet the Queen stood firm,
and at the same time rejected a motion from the Emperor Ferdinando, to return
to the old Religion as he called it. Yet after all these denials given to so
many and such potent Princes, one Scipio a Gentleman of Venice, who formerly
had had some acquaintance with Bishop Jewel when he was a Student in Padua, and
had heard of Martiningo's ill success in this Negotiation, would needs spend
some Eloquence in laboring to obtain that Point by his private Letters, which
the Nuncio could not gain as a public Minister; and to that end he writes his
Letters of Expostulation to Bishop Jewel his old Friend, preferred not long
before to the Sea of Sarisbury. Which Letter did not long remain unanswered;
that Learned Prelate (says my Author) was not so unstudied in the nature of
Councils, Dr. Heylyn Eccl. Rest. p. 349.
as not to know how little of a General Council could be found at Trent: And
therefore he returned an answer to the proposition so elegantly penned, and so
elaborately digested, that neither Scipio himself nor any other of that Party
durst reply upon him. Which Letter the Reader will find in this small piece new
translated. But this was written some time after the Apology was Printed in
England.

IN the year following Bishop Jewel put out The Apology of the Church of
England in Latin; 1562. Humfrey's in the Life of Jewel. p. 177. Peter Martyr's
Letter to Bishop Jewel concerning this Book is dated Aug. 24. 1562.
which tho written by him, was published by the Queens Authority, and with the
advice of some of the Bishops, as the Public Confession of the Catholic and
Christian Faith of the Church of England, etc. and to give an account of the
reasons of our departure from the Sea of Rome, and as an answer to those
Calumnies that were then raised against the English Church and Nation, for not
submitting to the pretended General Council of Trent then sitting.

SO that it is not to be esteemed as the private work of a single Bishop, but
as a public Declaration of that Church whose name it bears. Mr. Humfrey seems
in this place to confound this and the Epistle together, as if they had been
written at the same time which it is apparent they were not.

THIS Apology being published during the very time of the last meeting of the
Council of Trent, was read there, and seriously considered, and great threats
made that it should be answered; and accordingly two Learned Bishops, one a
Spaniard and the other an Italian, undertook that task, but neither of them did
any thing in it.

BUT in the mean time the Book spread into all the Countries in Europe, and was
much applauded in France, Flanders, Germany, Spain, Poland, Hungary, Denmark,
Sweden and Scotland; and found at least a passage into Italy, Naples and Rome
it self; and was soon after translated into the German, Italian, French,
Spanish, Dutch, and last into the Greek Tongue; in so great esteem this Book
was abroad: and at home it was translated into English by the Lady Bacon Wife
to Sir Nicholas Bacon, English Life. Before his Works. Humfrey. p. 234.
Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England.

IT very well deserves the Character Mr. Humfrey has given of it, whose words
are these. Page 187.
It is so drawn, that the first part of it is an Illustration, ^and as it were
a Paraphrase of the Twelve Articles of the Christian Faith (or Creed) the
second is a short and solid Confutation of whatever is objected against the
Church; if the Order be considered, nothing can be better distributed; if the
Perspicuity, nothing can be fuller of Light; if the Style, nothing more terse;
if the words, nothing more splendid; if the Arguments, nothing stronger.

THE good Bishop was most encouraged to publish this Apology by Peter Martyr
(as Heylyn. p. 328.
appears by Martyr's Letter of the 24 th of August) with whom he had spent the
greatest part of his time in Exile. But Martyr only lived to see the Book which
he so much longed for, dying at Zurick, on the twelfth day of November
following, 1562. In the LXIII. of his Age.
after he had paid his thanks for, and expressed his value of this piece in a
Letter which is subjoyned to this Book in all the following Prints. And Mr.
Camden also in his Annals expressly says, this Apology was printed first in the
year 1562.

In the year 1564. 1564.
Mr. Harding put out a pretended Answer to Bishop Jewel's famous Challenge at
Paul's Cross, mentioned above, to which in the year following the Bishop made a
very learned Reply, the Epistle before which bears date at London the 27 th of
October of that year: the Bishop is said to have spent two years in that Piece.
The same year the University of Oxon gave him (tho absent) the degree of Doctor
of Divinity; and certainly he well deserved to have that extraordinary respect
and Honor shown him, who was so eminently employed then in the Service and
defense of the Church.

HE had no sooner brought this to a Conclusion, 1567.
but Harding was again upon him, and put out an Antapology, or answer to his
Apology for the Church of England. A Defense of which the Bishop forthwith
began, which he finished, as appears by his Epistle to Mr. Harding at the end
of it, the 27 th of October 1567.

THE next year after Mr. Harding put out another piece, which he entitled, A
detection of sundry foul Errors, etc. which was a cavilling reply to some
passages in his defense of the Apology, which not seeming to deserve an answer
by it self; he answered rather by a Preface to a new Impression of his former
Defense, which he finished the eleventh of December 1569. and dedicated his
Works to the Queen; Harding having told the World that she was offended with
Bishop Jewel for thus troubling the World. 1569


THE same year Pope Pius the Fourth having published a Bull of Excommunication
and Deprivation against the Queen, Bishop Jewel undertook the defense of his
Sovereign, 1570.
and wrote a learned Examination and Confutation of that Bull; which was
published by John Garbrand an intimate acquaintance of his, together with a
short Treatise of the Holy Scriptures, both which, as he informs us, were
delivered by the Bishop in his Cathedral Church in the year 1570. 1570.


BESIDES these he writ several other large pieces; as 1. a Paraphrastical
Interpretation of the Epistles and Gospels throughout the whole year. 2ly.
Diverse Treatises of the Sacraments and Exhortations to the Readers. 3ly.
Expositions of the Lords Prayer, the Creed and Ten Commandments. And also 4ly.
An Exposition upon the Epistle to the Galatians; the first of St. Peter, and
both the Epistles to the Thessalonians; which I suppose were his Sermons: for
he was of opinion that it was a better way of teaching, Humfrey's, p. 111.
to go through with a Book, than to take here and there a Text; and that it
gave the People a more clear and lasting knowledge.

IN the beginning of the next year was a Parliament, April 5. 1571.
and consequently a Convocation, when Tho. Cartwright and others of that
Faction, having alarmed the Church by their Oppositions to the established
Religion, it was thought fit to obviate their bold attempts, and thereupon
command was given by the Archbishop, That all such of the lower House of
Convocation, who had not formerly subscribed unto the Articles of Religion
agreed upon Anno 1562. should subscribe them now; or on their absolute refusal,
or delay, be expelled the House: Which occasioned a general and personal
Subscription of those Articles. And it was also farther ordered, That the Book
of Articles so approved, should be put into Print, by the appointment of the
Right Reverand Doctor John Jewel then Bishop of Sarum; which shows he was
there, and in great esteem.

IT was in some part of this year also, that he had his Conference, and
preached his last Sermon at Paul's Cross about the Ceremonies and State of the
Church, which he mentioned on his Deathbed. But I cannot fix the precise time
of either of them, or give any further account with whom that Conference was.
But however this Holy man sought nothing but the Peace and Welfare of the
Church, by these gentle and mild ways of Correption: the Dissenters of those
times treated him for it with as little respect as Mr. Harding and his
Confraternity had before, as Bishop Whitgift assures us; his words are these.
They (the Dissenters) will not stick (says he) in commending themselves, to
deface all others, yea even that notable JEWEL, whose both Labor and Learning
they do envy; and amongst themselves deprave, as I have heard with mine own
ears, and a number more besides. For further proof whereof, I do refer you to
the report, that by this faction was spread of him after his last Sermon at
Paul's Cross, because he did confirm the Doctrine before preached by a famous
and learned man touching obedience to the Prince and Laws. It was strange
(says he) to me, to hear so notable a Bishop, so learned a Man, so stout a
Champion of true Religion, so painful a Prelate, so ungratefully and spitefully
used by a sort of wavering, wicked and wretched Tongues: but it is their
manner, be you never so welll learned, never so painful, so zeal^us, so
virtuous, all is nothing with them, but they will deprave you, rail on you,
back-bite you, invent lies of you, and spread false rumors, as though you were
the vilest Persons in the whole earth.

THUS writes that venerable Archbishop in his Defense of the Answer to the
Admonition, p. 423. upon occasion of a Paper written also about this time by
Bishop Jewel, upon certain frivolous Objections against the Government of the
Church of England, made by Thomas Cart wright; which the Bishop had confuted,
and Cartwright writing against him, Whitgift defended them in this place; and
by the by shows how ill the good Bishop was treated for his last Sermon at
Paul's Cross, by this generation of Vipers; which extorted from him that
Protestation he made on his Deathbed, of which I shall give an account
hereafter.

BEING naturally of a spare and thin Body, and thus restlesly trashing it out
with reading, writing, preaching and traveling, he hastened his death, which
happened before he was full fifty years of Age; of which he had a strange
Perception a considerable time before it happened, and wrote of it to several
of his Friends, but would by no means be persuaded to abate any thing of his
former excessive Labors, saying, A Bishop should die preaching.

THO he ever governed his Diocese with great diligence, yet perceiving his
death approaching, he began a new and more severe Visitation of it; correcting
the Vices of the Clergy and Laity more sharply; injoyning them in some places
tasks of Holy Tracts to be learned by heart, conferring Orders more carefully,
and preaching oftener.

HAVING promised to preach at Lacock in Wiltshire, a Gentleman who met him
going thither, observing him to be very ill by his looks, advised him to return
home, assuring him it was better the People should want one Sermon, than to be
altogether deprived of such a Preacher. But he would not be persuaded, but went
thither and preached his last Sermon out of the fifth to the Galat. Walk in the
Spirit, etc. which he did not finish without great labor and difficulty.

THE Saturday following being the 22d. of September 1571. he piously and
devoutly rendered up his Soul into the Hands of God, having first made a very
devout and Christian Exhortation to those that were about him, and expressing
much dislike of one of his Servants who prayed for his Recovery. He died at
Monketon farly, when he had been a Bishop almost twelve years; and was buried
almost in the middle of the Quire of his Cathedral Church, and Aegidius
Lawrence preached his Funeral Sermon. He was extremely bewailed by all men; and
a great number of Latin, Greek and Hebrew Verses were made on this occasion by
learned men, which are collected and printed by Mr. Lawrence Humfrey Regius
Professor of Divinity at Oxon, in the end of his Life written in Latin by the
order of that University; nor has his name been since mentioned by any Man,
without such Elogies and Commendations as befitted so great, so good, so
learned and laborious a Prelate.

HAVING thus brought him to his Grave, my Reader may be pleased to permit me to
collect some particular things which could not so well be inserted into the
History of his Life, without breaking the thread of it.

HE had naturally a very strong Memory, Memory.
which he had strangely improved by Art. Mr. Humfrey gives several Examples of
this, but I will instance in two only, John Hooper Bisop of Gloucester, who was
burnt in the Reign of Queen Mary, once to try him, writ about forty Welsn and
Irish words; Mr. Jewel going a little while aside, and recollecting them in his
Memory, and reading them twice or thrice over, said them by heart backward and
forward exactly in the same order they were set down. And another time he did
the same by ten Lines of Erasmus his Paraphrase in English, the words of which
being read sometimes confusedly without order, and at other times in order by
the Lord Keeper Bacon, Mr. Jewel thinking a while on them, presently repeated
them again backward and forward, in their right order and in the wrong, just as
they were read to him; and he taught his Tutor Mr. Parkhurst the same Art.

THO his Memory were so great and so improved, Industry.
yet he would not entirely rely upon it, Common place Books.
but entered down into Common place Books, whatever he thought he might
afterward have occasion to use; which, as the Author of his Life informs us,
were many in number, and great in quantity, being a vast Treasure of Learning,
and a rich Repository of Knowledge, into which he had collected Sacred,
Profanne, Poetic, Philosophic and Divine Notes of all sorts; and all these he
had again reduced into a small piece or two, which were a kind of General
Indexes, which he made use of at all times when he was to speak or write any
thing; which were drawn up in Characters for brevity, and thereby so obscured,
that they were not of any use, after his Death, to any other person. And
besides these, he ever kept Diaries, Diaries.
in which he entered whatever he heard or saw that was remarkable; which once a
year he perused, and out of them extracted what ever was more remarkable.

AND from hence it came to pass, that wh^^^eas Mr. Harding in that great
Controversy they had, abounded only in Words, Bishop Jewel overwhelmed him
with a cloud of Witnesses and Citations out of the ancient Fathers, Councils,
and Church Historians; confirming every thing with so great a number of
incontestableo Authorities, that Mr. Harding durst never after pretend to a
second perfect and full Answer, but contented himself with snarling at some
small pieces: the truth is, as Dr. Heylyn observes, all the following
Controversies were in this point beholding to the indefatigable Industry of
this great Leader.

YET he was so careful in the use of his own Common place Books, that when he
was to write his Defense of the Apology, and his Reply, he would not trust
entirely to his own Excerpts or Transcriptions, but having first carefully read
Mr. Hardings Books, and marked what he thought deserved an Answer, he in the
next place drew up the Heads of his intended Answer, and resolved what
Authorities he would make use of upon each Head, and then by the Directions of
his Common place Book, read and marked all those Passages he had occasion to
make use of, and delivered them to some Scholars to be transcribed under their
proper Heads, that he might have them together under his Eye, when he came to
write; which Care and Diligence of his speaks at once both his Industry,
Fidelity, and Modesty, in that he would not trust his own Transcripts, and is a
just reprehension of the Falsehood of those who knowingly make false Citations,
and of the supine ^^gligence of those who take them up upon ^ust from other
men, and use them without any Examination; by which means great Mistakes are
made, and Cotroversies spring up to the Disturbance of the World. The truth is,
a man ought to re-examine his own Thoughts, for what may seem very pertinent at
a first reading to any purpose, may prove otherwise upon second thoughts, and a
close Observation of what goes before, or follows after in the Author; and few
men are so exact in their first Excerpts, but through Has, Inadvertence or
Mistake, they may more or less err and be deceived; not to say that a man's
Intention of Mind is much exalted by the fixing it upon one particular Object,
and the expectation of a Conviction from his Adversary, in case he make the
least Mistake. This Account of our venerable Bishop was given by one Mr. John
Garbrand, who was intimately acquainted with him, in an Epistle Dedicatory
before some of his Sermons, printed in Octavo, in the year 1583.

HE was an excellent Grecian, Languages.
and not unacquainted with the Italian Tongue, and as to the Latin, he wrote
and spoke it with that elegance, politeness, purity and fluency, that it might
very well be taken for his Mother Tongue; and certainly he took the right
course to be Master of it, having made himself in his youth, perfectly Master
of Horace (upon whom he writ a large Comentary) Tully and Erasmus, all whose
voluminous and excellent Works he read over, excerpted and imitated every day
he lived, especially during his continuance at Oxon, and he was then wont also
to declaim extempore to himself in Latin in the Woods and Groves as he walked.

AND when the Lady Bacon wrote him a Letter in Greek, His Greek Learning.
he replied in the same Language. He was excellently read in all the Greek
Poets, Orators and Historians, especially in the Ecclesiastical Historians, and
above all other, loved Gregory Nazianzen, and quoted him all on occasions.

His Learning was much improved by his Exile, Travail.
in which, besides his Conversation with Peter Martyr and the other learned men
at Strasburgh and Zurick, and his Society with Mr. Sands, afterward
Archbishop of York, who was his Bedfellow almost all the time they were in
exile, his Curiosity led him over the Alps into Italy, and he studied some time
in Padua, and by the Acquaintance he contracted with Seignior Scipio a great
man, seems to have been very much esteemed there.

HE was of a pleasant debonair Humor, His Humor.
extremely civil and obliging to all; but withal of great Gravity, and of so
severe a Probity and Virtue, that he extorted from his bitterest Enemies a
Confession, that he lived the Life of an Angel; and tho he were lame, yet till
his being a Bishop, he travailed for the most part a-foot, both at home and
beyond the Seas; he was contented in every condition, and endeavored to make
all others so, by telling them when he was in exile, that neither would their
Calamity last an Age, neither was it reason they should bear no share of the
Cross of Christ, when their Brethren in England fared so much worse.

HE was so extreme grateful to all that had done him good, Gratitude.
that when he could not express his Gratitude to Mr. Bowin his Schoolmaster,
he paid it to his Name, and did good to all that were so called for his sake,
tho they were not related to that good man.

HE was a most laborious Preacher, Preaching.
always traveling about his Diocese, and preaching wherever he came; wherein
h^ labored to speak to the apprehensions of the People, hating all light
gingling Discourse and Phrases, as beneath the Dignity of tha^ sacred Place,
yet he was careful here too i^ the Choice of his Words, and endeavoure to move
the Affections of his Auditory by pathetick and zealous Applications, avoiding
all high-flown Expressions, and using a grave and sedate, rather than sweet way
of speaking, and never venturing in the meanest Auditory to preach extempore.

Mr. Humfrys, who was himself a Calvenist, Page III, No friend to the Disenters
(as Mr. Camden informs us in his Annals,) has done what he could to represent
Bishop Jewel as a favourer of our English ^^^^enters; but it is certain he
opposed them in his Exile, when they began the Stirs at (...); and the last
public Act he did in all his Life, was to reprehend them severely, in a Sermon
preached at Paul's Cross, which I take to be the last Sermon, printed in the
Collection of his Works in 1609; and to defend the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church against them; both which he mentioned on his Deathbed in these words.
My last Sermon at Paul's Cross in London, and the Conference I held with some
Brethren concerning the Ceremonies and present State of our Church, was not
undertaken to please any M^rtal man, or ^o exasperate or trouble those that
thought otherwise than I did; but last (...) Party should prejudice the other,
and that the love of God through the operation of (...) which is given to us,
might be shed abroad in (...) hearts. To which he wisely subjoyns his opinion,
that these Contentions were kindled and fomented by the Popish Party; as (...)
well known now. The truth is, the Schimsm was then in its Rise, and those great
Impostors Coleman, Button, and Hallingham, The (...) to the first Tom. of Col.
by Dr. (...)
which were nothing but Popish Priests in the Masquerade of Puritan Preachers,
being severly corrected in the year 1568, there was no great motion made by
that Party, till the Parliament held in the Thirteenth year of the Queen, April
2. 1570. had confirmed the Articles of the Church by Act of Parliament; and
Subscription thereupon, being (...) urged than before, Fuller's C. H. lib. 9.
Sect 3. n. 3.
many Dissenters kept their private Meetings in Woods, Fields, their Friends
Houses, etc. as Fuller from Tho. Cartwright's second Reply, p. 38. informs us.
These disorders in all probability occasioned the Sermon at Paul's Cross, and
the Conference at London, which happened not long before his death, and
probably after this Session of Parliament, which the Bishop survived but six
months. Humfrey's.
So that if the Bishop did rarely and unwillingly preach any thing concerning
the Rites and indifferent parts or Circumstances of Religion, as our Author
tells, us, it was because he had no great occasions given him: but what he
thought of these men, will best appear from the Sermon I mentioned above; his
words are these. By whose name shall I call you? I would I might call you
Brethren: But alas this heart of yours is not Brotherly; I would I might call
you Christians: But alas you are no Christians, I know not by what name I shall
call you: For if you were Brethren, you would love as Brethren: If you were
Christians, you would agree as Christians. So that he could have no good
opinion of those whom he every where in that Sermon styles proud,
self-conceited, disobedient, and unquiet men, who did not deserve the title of
Brethren or Christians. What would he have said if he had lived in our days?

BESIDES confuting some of the Seditious Doctrines of Thomas Carwright, In a
short Paper written by this good Bishop against certain frivolous objections
made against the Government of the Church of England. Printed at Lond^n 1641.
Bishop Whitgift in the defense of the Answer to the Admonition, tells us,
Cartwright was the man; and that hereupon the Faction used the Bishop most
ungratefuly and depitefully, p. 423.
who became famous by his Admonition to the Parliament; in the year following
the Bishop said, Stultitia nata est in cord pueri, Prove. 22. 15.
and virga disciplinae fugabit illam. Which shows he was no encourager of
Faction by Lenity and Toleration; tho he was a man of great moderation
otherwise, and expressed a great sense of the Frailties of Mankind in other
Instances; as appears by his Letter to Dr. Parkhurst when Bishop of Norwich.
Let your Chancellor (says he) be harder, but you easier; let him wound, but do
you heal; let him Lance, do you Plaster; wise Clemency will do more good than
rigid severity, one man may move more with an Engine, than six with the force
of their hands. And accordingly he would often sit in his own Consistory with
his Chancellor, hearing, considering, and sometimes determining Causes
concerning Matrimony, Adultery, and Testaments, etc. not thinking it safe to
commit all to the sole care and sidelity of his Chancellor and Officials. But
tho as a Justice of Peace he often sat in the Courts of Quarter Sessions, yet
judgment were desired concerning some scruple of Religion, or some other
suchlike difficulty. So exact was his care, not to entangle himself with
secular affairs; and yet not to be wanting to his duty in any case.

THO he came to a Bishopric miserably impoverished and wasted, Liberality.
yet he found Means to exercise a prodigious Liberality and Hospitality. For
the first, his great Expense in the building a fair Library for his Cathedral
Church, may be an instance which his Successor Dr. Gheast furnished with Books,
whose name is perpetuated, together with the Memory of his Predecessor by this
Inscription. Haec Bibliotheca extructa est sumptibus. R. P. ac D. D. JOHANNIS
JEWELLI, quondam Sarum Episcopi; instructa vero libris a R. in Christo P. D.
Edmundo Gheast, olim ejusdem Ecclesiae Episcopo, quorum memoria in Benedictione
erit A. D. 1578.

HIS Doors stood always open to the Poor, and he would frequently send his
charitable Reliefs to Prisoners, Charity.
nor did he confine his Bounty to English men only, but was liberal to
Foreigners, and especially to those of Z^rick, and the Friends of Peter Martyr.

BUT perceiving the great want of learned men in his times, his greatest care
was to have ever with him in his House half a dozen or more poor Lads which he
brought up in Learning; and took much delight to hear them dispute Points of
Grammar-learning in Latin at his Table when he was at his Meal, improving,
them, and pleasing himself at the same time.

AND besides these, he maintained in the University several young Students,
allowing them yearly Pensions; and when ever they came to visit him, Mr. Hooker.
rarely dismissed them without liberal G^atuities. Amongst these was the famous
Mr. Richard Hooker his Countryman, Dr. Walton (...) Mr. Hooker's Life.
whose Parents being Poor, must have been bound Apprentice to a Trade, but for
the Bounty of this good Bishop, who allowed his Parents a yearly, Pension
toward his maintenance well near seven years before he was fit for the
University, and in the year 1567, appointed him to remove to Oxford, and there
to attend Dr. Cole then President of Corpus Christi College, who according to
his Promise to the Bishop, provided him a Tutor, and a Clerks place in that
College; which with a Contribution from his Uncle Mr. John Hooker, and the
continued Pension of his Patron the Bishop, gave him a comfortable subsistence;
and in the last year of the Bishops Life, Mr. Hooker making this his Patron a
visit at his Palace, the good Bishop made him, and a Companion he had with him,
dine at his own Table with him, which Mr. Hooker boasted of with much joy and
gratitude, when he saw his Mother and Friends, whither he was then traveling a
Foot. The Bishop when he parted with him, gave him good Counsel and his
Blessing, but forgot to give him Money, which when the Bishop bethought himself
of, he sent a Servant to call him back again, and then told him, I sent for you
Richard, to lend you a Horse which has carried me many a mile, and I thank God
with much ease. And presently delivered into his hand a walking-staff, with
which he professed he had traveled many parts of Germany; and then went on and
said, Richard, I do not give but lend you my Horse; be sure you be honest and
bring my Horse back to me at your return this way to Oxford; and I do now give
you ten Groats to bear your charges to Exeter; and here is ten Groats more
which I charge you to deliver to your Mother, and tell her, I send her a
Bishops Blessing with it, and beg the continuance of her Prayers for me. And if
you bring my Horse back to me, I will give you ten more to carry you on foot to
the College; and so God bless you good Richard. It was not long after this,
before this good Bishop died, but before his death he had so effectually
recommended Mr. Hooker to Edwin Sandys then Bishop of London, and after
Archbishop of York, that about a year after he put his Son under the Tutelage
of Mr. Hooker, and was otherwise so liberal to him, that he became one of the
learnedest men of the Age; and as Bishop Jewel soild the Papists, so this Mr.
Hooker in his Books of Ecclesiastical Polity, gave the Dissenters such a fatal
Defeat, as they never yet could, nor ever shall be able to recover from. Nor
was Mr. Hooker ungrateful, but having occasion to mention his good Benefactor
in that Piece he calls him (Bishop Jewel) the worthiest Divine that Christendom
has bred for the space of some hundreds of years.

BUT to return to Bishop Jewel, Lib. 2.. 6.
he had collected an excellent Library of Books of all sorts, not excepting the
most impertinent of the Popish Authors; and here it was that he spent the
greatest and the best part of his time, rarely appearing abroad, especially in
a Morning till eight of the Clock; so that till that time it was not easy to
speak with him; when commonly he eat some slight thing for the support of his
thin Body; and then, if no Business diverted him, retired to his Study again
till Dinner.

HE maintained a plentiful, but sober Table, and tho at it he eat very little
himself, yet he took care his Guests might be well supplied, entertaining them
in the mean time with much pleasant and useful Discourse, telling and hearing
any kind of innocent and divertsiing Stories: for tho he was a man of a great
and exact, both Piety and Virtue, yet he was not of a morose, sullen,
unsociable Temper, and this his Hospitality was equally bestowed upon both
Foreigners and English men.

AFTER Dinner he heard Causes, if any came in; and dispatched any Business that
belonged to him (tho he would sometimes do it at Dinner too;) and answered any
Questions, and very often arbitrated and composed Differences betwixt his
People, who knowing his great Wisdom and Integrity, did very often refer
themselves to him as the sole Arbitrator, where they met with speedy,
impartial, and unchargeable Justice.

AT nine at night he called all his Servants about him, examined how they had
spent their time that day, commended some, and reproved others, as occasion
served, and then closed the day with Prayers, as he began it: the time of his
public Morning Prayers seems to have been eight.

AFTER this, he commonly went to his Study again, and from thence to Bed, his
Gentlemen reading some part of an Author to him, to compose his Mind, and then
committing himself to his God and Savior, he betook himself to his Rest.

HE was extreme careful of the Revenues of the Church, not caring whom he
offended to preserve it from impoverishing in an Age, when the greatest men
finding the Queen not over liberal to her Courtiers and Servants, too often
paid themselves out of the Church Patrimony, for the Services they had done the
Crown, till they ruined some Bishoprics entirely, and left others so very
poor, that they are scarce able to maintain a Prelate.

THERE is one instance of this mentioned by all that have written our Bishops
Life; a Courtier (who was a Layman) having obtained a Probendary in the Church
of Sarisbury, and intending to let it to another Layperson for his best
Advantage, acquainted Bishop Jewel with the Conditions between them; and some
Lawyers opinion about them. To which the Bishop replied; What your Lawyers may
answer I know not; but for my part, to my Power, I will take care that my
Church shall sustain no loss whilst I live. What was the event of this, none of
them have told us.

NOR was he careful of his own Church only, but of the whole English Church, as
appears by his Sermon upon Psalm 69. v. 9. The Zeal of thine House has eaten
me up. Which he preached before the Queen and Court, as appears by it in
several Addresses to her in the body of that Sermon. In it he has this
observation. In other Countries the receiving of the Gospel has always been
the cause that Learning was more set by; and Learning has ever been the
furtherance of the Gospel. In England, I know not how it comes otherwise to
pass, for since the Gospel has been received, the maintenance for Learning
has been decayed; and the lack of Learning will be the decay of the Gospel.
And a little after he tells us, Those that should be fosters of Learning, and
increase the Livings, had no Zeal. What said I, increase? Nay the Livings and
Provisions which heretofore were given to this use, are (says he) taken away.
And a little after, Whereas all other Laborers and Artificers have their hire
increased double, as much as it was wont to be; only the poor man that
labors and sweateth in the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, has his hire
abridged and abated. And he applies himself toward the Conclusion thus to the
great men. You enriched them which mocked and blinded and devoured you; spoil
not them now that feed and instruct and comfort you.

I had not taken the pains to transcribe so much of this excellent Discourse,
which may easily enough be read by any that desire it in his Works, but to
raise a little consideration if it be possible, in this debauched Age. This
good man foretold here, that this Sacrilegious Devastation of the Church would
in time be the ruin of the Gospel, as he calls the Reformation, and so it came
to pass: for whereas he observed then, that by reason of the Impropriations,
the Vicarages in many places, and in the properest Market Towns were so simple,
that no man could live upon them, and therefore no Man would take them, but the
People were forced to provide themselves as they might with their own Money;
the Consequence of this in a few years was, that these mercenary men becoming
Factious, or being such, crept into such places out of hopes of the greater
advantage; and so infected the minds of the Tradesmen, that as the Church
became very much weakened and disquieted by their Factions; so our Parliaments
in a little while became stuffed with a sort of Lay-Brethren who were Enemies
both to the Church and Crown, which was a great part of the occasion of the
Rebellion in 1640. ^n which many of those Families whose Ancestors had risen by
the Spoils of the Church were ruined: and tho much care was taken upon the
Restitution of his late Majesty Charles the Second, for the prevention of such
Mischiefs for the future, yet no care was taken of these Livings in Market
Towns and Corporations; by which means it came to pass, that within about
twenty years more, we were very fairly disposed for another change, and nothing
but God prevented it. From whence I conclude, that till this leak is stopped,
both Church and Crown will be in danger of a Shipwreck.

There is fixed upon the Bishops Gravestone, a Plate of Brass with the Arms of
his Family, and this following Inscription.
D. IOhanni Iewello Anglo Devoniensi ex Antiqua Iuellorum familia Budenae
Oriundo, Academiae Oxoniensis Laudatissimo Alumno: Mariana tempestate per
Germaniam Exuli, Praesuli Regnante Elizabetha Regina Sarisburiensis Diocoeseos
(cui per Annos XI. Menses IX. summa fide and integritate praefuit)
Religiosissimo: Immaturo fato Monkton-farleae praerepto XXIII. Sept. Anno
salutis humanae Christi Merito Restitutae 1571. and Aetatis suae 49. Positum
est Observantiae ergo Hoc Monumentum.

This Epitaph was drawn for him by Mr. Humfrey, and much more; which in
probability could not be all put upon the Brass: But yet he took care to
publish it at large in his Life of the Bishop, from whence I have transcribed
it, which is in these words.
D. Joanni Juello Anglo, Devoniensi
Ex antiqua Juellorum Familia Budenae oriundo,
Academiae Oxoniensis Laudatissimo Alumno:
Marianae Tempestate per Germaniam Exuli.
Praesuli
Regnante Elizabetha Regina,
Sarisburiensis Dioeceseos.
(Cui per Annos XI. menses IX. summa fide
and integritate praefuit.)
Religiosissimo, viro singulari eruditione,
Ingenio Acutissimo, judicio gravissimo,
Pietate, Humanitate egregie
Praedito,
Theologiae cum primis cognitione
Instructissimo;
Gemmae Gemmarum
Immaturo fato Monkton-farleae Praerepto,
Sarisburiae Sepulto.
Coelorum civi.
Laurentius Humfredus
Hoc Monumentum observantiae ergo
Et Benevolentiae Consecravit,
Anno salutis Humanae
Christi Merito Restitutae
MDLXXIII. ix. Kal. Oct.
Vixit Annos XLIX. menses IV.
Psalm. 112.
In memoria aeterna erit Justus.
A Letter written to the Reverend Father in God Dr. John Jewel Lord Bishop of
Sarisbury, by Dr. Peter Martyr.
BY the favor of the Bishop of London (most worthy Prelate and my very good
Lord) there was brought me one of your Apologies for the Church of England;
which neither I nor any others hereabouts before had seen: It is true in your
last Letter you rather intimated that it might come out, than signfied that it
should; but however it came not hither till about the middle of July. And from
hence your Lordship may consider how much we suffer from the distance of
places. It has not only given me an entire satisfaction, who approve and am
strangely pleased with all you do; but to Bullinger and his Sons, and Sons in
Law: And it seems so very wise, admirable and elegant to Gualter and Wolphius,
that they can put no end to their Commendations of it, as not thinking there
has been any thing printed in these times of so great a Perfection. I do
infinitely congratulate this great felicity of your Parts, this excellent
Edification of the Church, and the Honor you have done your Country, and I do
most earnestly beseech you to go on in the same way; for tho we have a good
Cause, yet the Defenders of it are few in comparison of its Enemies; and they
now seem so awakened, that they have of late won much upon the ignorant
Multitude, by the goodness of their Style, and the subtilty of their Sophistry.
I speak this of Staphylus and Hosius, and some other Writers of that Party, who
are now the stout Champions of the Papal Errors. But now you have by this your
most elegant and learned Apology, raised such an hope in the minds of all good
and learned men, that they generally promise themselves, that whilst you live,
the reformed Religion shall never want an Advocate against its Enemies. And
truly I am extremely glad, that I am so happy as to live to see that day which
made you the Father of so illustrious and eloquent a Production. May the God of
Heaven of his goodness grant that you may be blessed in time with many more
such.

Zurick, Aug. 24. 1562.
The Reader is desired to amend these few Errata's with his Pen, the rest being
generally nothing but literal mistakes, are left to his Candor.
PReface to the Reader, Page 14. Line 19. for to his Envoy, read by his Envoy,
Apology p. 10. for Sardus r. Sardis. p. 12. l. 22. for last r. late p. 66. l.
5. r. and because the Gospel. p. 76. l. 3. for or r. for. p. 140. l. 13, and
14. for security p. 151. in Marginal note for August 1560. 4. 1562.

THE APOLOGY OF THE Church of ENGLAND. Written by the very Learned and Reverend
Father in God John Jewel, Bishop of Sarisbury.
CHAP. I.
Of the true Religion professed in the Church of England, with a short Account
of the Opposition the Truth and true Religion has met with in all Ages.
IT is an old Complaint derived down Truth ever persecuted.
to us from the very times of the Patriarchs and Prophets, and confirmed by the
Evidence of all Histories, and the Testimonies of all Ages, that Truth is a
Stranger upon Earth, Tertul. in Apologia.
and does too easily find Enemies and Defamers, because she is not known: and
although this may seem perhaps incredible to those who have not attentively
reflected on it, because Mankind, by the instinct of Nature, without any
Teacher, does spontaneously breathe after Truth; and Christ himself our
Savior, whilst he conversed with Men, chose to be called the TRUTH, as if that
Name did aptly express all the Power and Force of his Divine Nature: yet we who
are acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, and have read and considered what has
happenned to pious men in almost all Ages, what befell the Prophets, the
Apostles, the holy Martyrs, and Christ himself; with what Slanders, Curses, and
Injuries they were vexed whilst they lived, only for the sake of Truth. We ( I
say) see by this, that it is no new thing, but usual, and the Custom of all
Ages. Indeed it would appear much more wonderful and incredible, if the Father
of Lies, the Devil, that Enemy of all Truth, should now of a sudden change his
Mind, and entertain any other hopes of oppressing the Truth than by Lies; or
should now begin to establish his Kingdom by other Arts than those he has
hitherto employed: For in all Ages we shall scarce find any Period of time in
which Religion increased, established it self, or was reformed, but that at the
same time Truth and Innocence were most unworthily and most injuriously treated
by men; for the Devil knows very well, that if Truth does flourish in safety,
his Affairs can neither be safe nor prosperous.

2. FOR to speak nothing of the Ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, no part of
whose Lives (as I said) was free from Reproaches and Slanders. We know that of
Old there were some who averred and publicly told the World, Cor. Tacitus.
Tertul. in Apolog. c. 7. c. Plinius.
that the Ancient Jews, who we doubt not worshipped the only true God,
performed their Religious Rites to a Swine or an Ass, and that all that
Religion was a mere Sacrilege and a Contempt of all Deities. We know that the
Son of God our Savior Jesus Christ, John 8. 9. 10. Mar. 11.
whilst he taught the truth, was reputed an Impostor, an Inchanter, a
Samaritan, a Beelzebub, a Deluder of the people; a Wine-bibber and a Glutton.
Who knows not what was said of St. Paul, that powerful Preacher and Assertor of
Truth, sometimes he was a seditious man, and listed Soldiers, and designed a
Rebellion; and at other times, that he was an Heretic, a mad man; that out of
a contentious and perverse Disposition, he was a Blasphemer against the Law of
God, and a Despiser of the Customs of the Fathers? Who knows not that so soon
as ever St. Stephen had admitted the Truth, and suffered it to take Possession
of his Soul, and thereupon (as he ought) began freely and stoutly to preach and
own it, he was immediately called in question for his Life, as one that had
spoken Blasphemy against the Law, against Moses, against the Temple and God?
Marcion, ex Tertullian^. Aelius, ^ Lactan.
or knows not that the Holy Scriptures have been accused of Vanity and Folly,
upon pretense that they contained things contrary and repugnant one to another,
and that all the Apostles of Jesus Christ disagreed amongst themselves, and
that St. Paul differed from all the rest? And that I may not trouble you with
all the Instances of this nature which are upon Record (for they are infinite)
who knows not what Slanders were of old raised against our Forefathers, Tertul
Apolog. c. 2, 3. and 7. 8, 9.
who first embraced and professed the Name of Christ; that they conspired
amongst themselves against the Government, and for that purpose, met very
early, whilst it was yet dark; that they murdered Male-Infants, gorged
themselves with Man's Flesh, and in a barbarous manner drank humane Blood; and
at last, putting out the Candles, perpetrated Incests and Adulteries; and that
Brothers lay with their Sisters, and Sons with their Mothers, without any
reverence to their Bloods and Families, without Difference or Modesty; that
they were impious, destitute of all Religion, Atheists, the Enemies of all
Mankind, and unworthy of the Light or Life.

3. THESE things were spoken against the Jews, the People of God, against
Christ Jesus, against St. Paul, St. Stephen, and against all those who in the
first Ages embraced the truth of the Gospel, and were called Christians,
Tertul. Apolog. ^ap. ^.
a Name then hated by the Many. And although none of these things were true,
yet the Devil thought it sufficient to his Purpose if they were believed true;
that so the Christians might incur the public Hatred, and be pursued by all to
Ruin and Destruction. And thus Kings and Princes being deceived, slew all the
Prophets of God to a Man, they condemned Isaiah to the Saw, Jeremia to be
stoned, Daniel to the Lions, Amos to the Iron Bar, Paul to the Sword, and
Christ to the Cross, and all Christians to Prisons, Sueton, in Nerone. Juvenal.
Sat.
to Racks, to Crosses, to Rocks and Precipices, to wild Beasts and Fires, and
burnt whole Piles of their living Bodies for nocturnal Lights, and by way of
Sport and Recreation; and never esteemed them better than the most vile Filth
of the Earth, the Off-scourings and Scorn of the World; thus the first Authors
and Professors of the Truth, were ever treated.

4. WHEREFORE all we who have now undertaken the Profession of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, ought to bear it with the less disturbance of Mind, if in the
same Cause, we are treated after the same manner; and as heretofore our
Fathers, 1 Timothy 4.
so we in this Age, are persecuted also with Reproaches, Slanders and Lies,
only because we teach and profess the Truth.

5. THEY roar out in all Places, The Accusations of the R. Catholics*
that we are Heretics, that we have forsaken the true Faith, and broken the
Union of the Church with new Opinions and impious Doctrines. 2. That we fetch
from Hell, and revive the old and long since condemned Heresies, and sow the
Seeds of new Sects, and unheard of Broils: that we are already divided into
contrary Factions and Opinions, and we could never yet in any manner agree
amongst our selves. 3. That we are wicked men, and like the Giants of old, have
entered into a Rebellion against God himself, and live without the least regard
to the Deity, and without any religious Worship. 4. That we despise all good
Actions; that we do not use any virtuous Discipline, that we regard neither
Laws nor good Manners, nor Right, nor Justice, nor Equity, nor Order; that we
let loose the Rein, and suffer all sorts of Villainies, and even provoke the
People to all the Licentiousness and Luxury that is possible. 5. That our
Business and great Design is the subverting Monarchies and Kingdoms, that all
States may be reduced under the Dominion of the ignorant Multitude, and the
indiscreet Populace. 6. That we have made a tumultuous Defection from the
Catholic Church, and have shaken the Peace of the World, and disturbed the
Quiet of the Church by a detestable Schism; and that as heretofore Dathan and
Abiram rose up against Moses and Aaron, so we, without any just cause have
revolted from the Pope of Rome. 7. That we despise the Authority of the
Primitive Fathers and ancient Councils: That we have imprudently and insolently
abrogated the ancient Ceremonies which have been approved for many Ages by our
Fathers and Grandfathers, who had better Manners, and lived in better Times;
and that by our own private Authority, without the Consent of a Holy and
General Council, we have introduced new Rites into the Church; and that we have
not done this for the Sake of Religion, but purely out of a contentious Humor;
that they on the contrary have changed nothing, but have retained all things as
they were delivered to them by the Apostles; approved by the most ancient
Fathers, and have been kept ever since, through all the intermediate Ages to
this day.

6. AND least all this might seem to be only a Calumny, and that managed by
secret Whispers only, with design to excite an Envy against us, the Popes of
Rome have suborned eloquent and not unlearned Men to undertake the Defense of
this desperate Cause, and to represent it to the World in Books and long
Discourses, in the best Colors it was possible to give it, to the intent, that
being elegantly and copiously pleaded, unskilful men might suspect there was
something more than ordinary in it; for indeed they saw that their Cause was
every where in a declining Condition; their Arts were now seen through, and so
were the less esteemed; their Fortresses were every day undermined, and their
Case stood in need of a powerful Patronage and Defense. But then as to those
things which they have charged us with, some of them are manifestly false, and
condemned by the Consciences of them that object them against us; others,
though in the bottom they are false too, yet they have the show and similitude
of truth, so that an incautious and unthinking Reader may (especially if he be
surprised by any of their labored and elegant Discourses) be easily
circumvented and deceived: and others of the things thus charged upon us, are
such as we ought to acknowledge and profess, and not decline the owning them,
as if they were Crimes, but defend them, as things that were well and
rationally done. For to speak in a word, they slander whatever we do, even
those Actions of ours, which themselves cannot deny to be rightly and well
done; and maliciously deprave and pervert all our Words and Actions, as if it
were not possible We should do or speak any thing as we ought. They ought
indeed to treat us with more Simplicity and Candor, if they designed truth; but
on the other hand, they do not oppose us with truth, nor in a Christan Way or
Manner, but with Lies, in a close and crafty way; and abuse the blindness and
ignorance of the Rabble, and the want of Learning in Princes, to the inflaming
their Hatred against us and the Oppression of the Truth. This is indeed the
Power of Darkness, and the Folly of Men, who trust more in the Stupidity and
benighted Minds of the unpolished Multitude, than in the Light of Truth; or as
St. Jerome expresses it, This is to contradict with shut Eyes, the Truth, when
it is most perspicuous. But we bless the great and Holy God, our Cause is such,
that though they never so much desire to defame it, yet they can fix no
Reproach upon it, which they may not with as much Reason and Justice employ
against the Holy Fathers, the Prophets, the Apostles, against St. Peter, St.
Paul, and even against Christ himself.

7. BUT now if they are so ambitious of the Honor of being thought polite and
eloquent Slanderers, it does so much the less befit us to be mute and careless
in the Defense of our most excellent Cause; for it is certainly the part only
of dissolute Men, who can securely and wickedly shut their Eyes when the Divine
Majesty is injured, to be wholly unconcerned; what is (though falsely and
unjustly) said of them and their Cause, especially when it is of that Nature,
that the Glory of God, and the Affairs of Religion are at the same time
violated; for although other, and those often very great Injuries, may be born
and dissembled by a modest Christian, yet He (says Ruffinus) who shall
patiently put up the Name of an Heretic, does not deserve to be called a
Christian. Permit us then to do that which all Laws, and the very Voice of
Nature commands us, that which Christ himself did, when he was in a like Case
assaulted with Reproaches; that is, suffer us to repel their Defamations, and
with Modesty and Truth, to defend our Cause and Innocence: for Christ himself,
when the Pharisees charged him with Conjuration, as if he had entered a
Combination with impure Spirits, and by their Assistance wrought many Wonders,
John 8. 49.
replied, I have not a Devil, but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me;
and St. Paul, when he was undervalued by Festus the Proconsul, as a Madman,
Act. 26. 25.
answered, I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the Words of Truth
and Soberness. And the Primitive Christians, when they were traduced to the
People as Murderers, Adulterers, Incestuous Persons, and Disturbers of the
Government, and saw that the Excellence of their Religion might be called in
question, especially if they held their Peace, and by their Silence, seemed to
confess the truth of these Accusations, and so the Course of the Gospel might
be hindered, they thereupon Quadratus, Justinus, Melito, Tertullian. Quadratus
a Disciple of the Apostles, and Bishop of Athens, wrote Books for the Christian
Religion, and made an Oration in the Defense of it before Hadrian the Emperor,
by which he put a stop to a furious Persecution then moved against it. Anno
Christi 128. Spondanus.

Justinus the Martyr, a Christian Philosopher, wrote an Apologetick Oration for
the Christian Religion, with great freedom and truth, which he dedicated to
Antoninus Pius the Emperor, and his adopted Sons Marcus and Lucius, and to the
very Senate and People of Rome. Anno Christi 150. for which he lost his Life.

Melito, Bishop of Sard^s, wrote an excellent Apology to Aurelius the Emperor
for the Christians, which he presented to that Emperor in the tenth year of his
Reign. Anno Christi 172. Baronius.

Tertullian wrote a very learned and a sharp Apology for the Christian
Religion, which was some few years since made English. It was first published
by the Author, without his Name, in the year of Christ 201. in the very City of
Rome, and did great service to Christianity, which was then most miserably
oppressed by the Lies and Defamations of the Pagans, which did it more hurt
than all their other Fury.


made public Orations, wrote supplicant Books, and discoursed before Emperors
and Princes in the public defense of themselves and the Chruch.

8. BUT we perhaps may seem not to need any Defense, so many thousands of our
Brethren in the last twenty years having born testimony to the Truth, amidst
the most exquisite Tortures; and Princes, in endeavoring to put a stop to the
Progress of the Gospel, and to that purpose using several Methods, having yet
in the end been able to effect nothing; and the whole World now beginning to
open their Eyes, and to see the Light, and therefore it may seem (as I said)
that enough has been spoken, and that our Case is sufficiently defended, the
thing speaking for it self; for if the Popes themselves would, or indeed, if
they could consider with themselves the Beginning and Progress of our Religion;
how theirs without any Resistance, without any humane Force has fallen; and in
the interim, ours has increased, and by degrees been propagated into all
Countries, and has been entertained in the Courts of Kings, and the Palaces of
Princes, even whilst it was opposed from the beginning by Emperors, by Kings,
by Popes, and almost by all others; these things (I say) are clear Indications
that God himself sights for us, and does from Heaven deride and scorn their
Projects and Endeavors, and that the Power of Truth is so great, that no
humane Force, nor the very Gates of Hell shall ever be able to prevail against
it; for so many free Cities, so many Princes cannot be supposed mad, as at this
day have fallen from the Sea of Rome, and chosen rather to join themselves to
the Gospel.

9. FOR although Popes have not as yet at any time been at leisure to think
attentively and seriously of these things; or although other Thoughts may now
hinder and distract them, or they may think these things light, and beneath the
Dignity of the Popedom; is our Cause therefore to be thought ever the worse? or
if perhaps they will pretend not to see what indeed they do see, and that they
choose rather to oppose the Truth, even then when they are convinced of it; are
we therefore presently to be reputed Heretics, because we cannot comply with
their Wills? If Pope Pius the IIII. had been such a Person as his Name speaks
him, and as he so much desires to be thought; nay, indeed if he had but been so
good a man, as to have esteemed us as his Brethren, or as MEN, certainly he
would diligently have considered our Reasons, and what could have been alleged
for and against us, and not with so rash and blindfold a precipitancy have
condemned without hearing our cause, or allowing the Liberty of a Defense so
considerable a part of the World, so many learned, so many Religious men, so
many Commonwealths, so many Kings, and so many Princes as he has sentenced in
his Bull, concerning his late pretended Council.

10. BUT now, because We are so publicly in this unjust manner noted by him,
left by our silence we should seem to confess the Crimes charged upon us, and
the rather, because we could in no manner be heard in any public Council;
where he would suffer none to have any Suffrage, or propose his Judgment, who
was not first sworn to him, and entirely addicted to his Interest (for of this
we had too great an experience in the last Council of Trent, when the
Ambassadors and Divines of the Princes and free Cities of Germany were totally
excluded out of the Council; nor can we forgot that Julius the III. above ten
years since, took a mighty care by his Rescript, that none of our Men might be
heard in the Council, except it were one that was disposed to recant and change
his Opinion.) For these causes (I say) we have thought fit by this Book to give
an account of our Faith, and to answer truly and publicly what has been
publicly objected against us, that the whole World may see the Parts and
Reasons of that Faith which so many good men have valued above their Lives, and
that all Mankind may understand what kind of men they are, and what they think
of God and Religion, whom the Bishop of Rome has inconsiderately enough, before
they had made their Defense, without Example and without Law condemned for
Heretics, upon a bare report, that they differed from him and his in some
points of Religion.

11. AND though St. Jerome will allow no man to be patient under the Suspicion
of Heresy, yet we will not behave our selves neither sowerly nor irreverently,
nor angerly, though he ought not to be esteemed either sharp or abusive, who
speaks nothing but the truth; no, we will leave that sort of Oratory to our
Adversaries, who think whatsoever they speak, although it be never so sharp and
reproachful, modest and apposite, when it is applied to us, and they are as
little concerned whether it be true or false; but we, who defend nothing but
the Truth, have no need of such base Arts.

12. NOW if we make it appear, and that not obseurely and craftily, but bona
fide, before God, truly, ingeniously, clearly and perspicuously, that we teach
the most holy Gospel of God, and that the ancient Fathers, and the whole
Primitive Church are on our side, and that we have not without just cause left
them, and returned to the Apostles and the ancient Catholic Fathers; and if
they, who so much detest our Doctrine, and pride themselves in the name of
Catholics, shall apparently see, that all those Pretenses of Antiquity, of
which they so immoderately glory, belong not to them, and that there is more
strength in our Cause than they thought there was; then we hope that none of
them will be so careless of his Salvation, but he will at some time or other
bethink himself which side he ought to join with. Certainly, if a man be not of
an hard and obdurate Heart, and resolved not to hear, he can never repent the
having once considered our Defense, and the attending what is said by us, and
whether it be agreeable or no to the Christian Religion.

13. FOR whereas they call us Heretics, that is so dreadful a Crime, that
except it be apparently seen, except it be palpable, and as it were to be felt
with our Hands and Fingers, it ought not to be easily believed that a Christian
is or can be guilty of it; for Heresy is a Renunciation of our Salvation, a
Rejection of the Grace of God, and a departure from the Body and Spirit of
Christ. But this was ever the Custom and Usage of them and of their
Forefathers, that if any presumed to complain of their Errors, and desired the
Reformation of Religion, they condemned them forthwith for Heretics, as
Innovators and factious men. Christ himself was called a Samaritan, for no
other cause, but for that they thought he had made a defection to a new
Religion or Heresy. And St. Paul the Apostle being called in question, was
accused of Heresy, to which he replied. Acts 24. 14.
After the Way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
believing all things which are written in the Law, and in the Prophets.

14. In short, all that Religion which we Christians now profess in the
beginning of Christianity, Tertul. in Apolog.
was by the Pagans called a Sect or Heresy; with these words they filled the
ears of Princes, that when out of prejudice they had once possessed their minds
with an Aversion for us, and that they were persuaded, that whatever we said
was Factious and Heretical, they might be diverted from reflecting upon the
thing it self, or ever hearing or considering the Cause: but by how much the
greater and more grievous this Crime is, so much the rather ought it to be
proved by clear and strong Arguments, especially at this time, because men
begin now adays a little to distrust the Fidelity of their Oracles, and to
inquire into their Doctrine with much greater industry than has heretofore been
employed; for the People of God in this Age are quite of another Disposition
than they were heretofore, when all the Responses and Dictates of the Popes of
Rome were taken for Gospel, and all Religion depended upon their Authority; the
Holy Scriptures, and the Writings of the Apostles and Prophets are every where
now to be had, out of which, all the true and Catholic Doctrine may be proved,
and all Heresies may be refuted.

15. BUT seeing they can produce nothing out of the Scriptures against us, it
is very injurious and cruel to call us Heretics, who have not revolted from
Christ, nor from the Apostles, nor from the Prophets. By the Sword of Scripture
Christ overcame the Devil when he was Tempted by him; with these Weapons every
high thing that exalts it self 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5.
against God, is to be brought down and dispersed, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
for all Scripture (says St. Paul) is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction, that the
Man of God may be perfect and thoroughly furnished unto all good Works; and
accordingly, the Holy Fathers have never fought against Heretics with any
other Arms, than what the Scriptures have afforded them. St. Augustine, when he
disputed against Petilianus a Donatist Heretic, De Vnitate Eccl. c. 3. contra
Max. lib. 3. c. 14.
uses these words, Let not (says he) these words be heard, I say, or thou
say, but rather let us say, thus says the Lord, let us seek the Church
there, let us judge of our Cause by that. In prim. cap. Aggei.
And St. Jerome says, Let whatever is pretended to be delivered by the
Apostles, and cannot be proved by the Testimony of the written Word, be struck
with the Sword of God. And St. Ambrose to the Emperor Gratian, Let the
Scriptures (says he) let the Apostles, let the Prophets, let Christ be
interrogated. The Catholic Fathers and Bishops of those times, did not doubt
but our Religion might be sufficiently proved by Scripture; nor durst they
esteem any man an Heretic, whose Error they could not perspicuously and
clearly prove such by Scripture. And as to us, we may truly reply with St.
Paul, Acts 24. 14.
After the way which they call HERESY, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets, or the
Writings of the Apostles.

16. IF therefore we be Heretics, and they (as they desire to be called) be
Catholics; why do they not do what they see the Fathers and all other
Catholics have done? why do they not convince us out of the Holy Scriptures?
why do they not try us by them? why do they not show that we have made a
defection from Christ, from the Prophets, from the Apostles, and from the Holy
Fathers? Why do they stand? Why do they draw back? It is the Cause of God. Why
then should they fear to commit it to the Arbitriment of the Word of God? But
if we are Heretics, who submit all ou^ Controversies to the Holy Scriptures,
and appeal to those very Words which we know were consigned to writing by God
himself, and prefer them before all other things which can possibly be
excogitated by the Wit of Man; what are they, or by what Name shall they be
called, who fear and shun the Sentence of the Scriptures, that is, the Judgment
of God himself, and prefer their own Dreams and silly Inventions before them,
and have for some Ages violated the Institutions of Christ and his Apostles,
for the sake of their Traditions? There is a Story of Sophocles the Tragedian,
that when he was very old, he was accused before the Judges by his own Sons,
for a childish and a silly Person, as one that had wasted his Estate by ill
managery, and stood in need of a Guardian in his old Age, to take care of him
and it; the old Man appeared in Court, and instead of a De^ence, recied a
Tragedy, which he had very elaborately and elegantly written, just in that time
the Suit was depending, and thereupon asked the Judges if that Poem were the
Work of a childish person.

16. SO we therefore, because we are taken by them for madmen, and are
traduced as if we were Heretics, and as if we had nothing to do with Christ,
nor with the Church of God; have thought it not unreasonable or unprofitable to
propound openly and freely the Faith in which we stand, and all that Hope which
we have in Christ Jesus, that all may see what we think of every part of the
Christian Religion, and so determine with themselves, whether that Faith which
they must needs perceive to be consonant to the Words of Christ and the
Writings of the Apostles, and the Testimonies of the Catholic Fathers, and
which is confirmed by the Examples of many Ages, be only the Rage of a sort of
madmen, and a Combination, or Conspiracy of Heretics.

CHAP. II.
Containing the Doctrine received in the Church of England.
WE believe that there is one certain Nature and Divine Power which we call
GOD, and that this is distinguished into three equal Persons, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, all of the same Power, of the same Majesty, of the same
Eternity, of the same Divinity, and of the same Substance; and although these
three Persons* are so distinguished, that the Father is not the Son, nor the
Son the Holy Ghost or Father; yet there is but one GOD, and that this one God
created Heaven and Earth, and whatever is contained within the Circumference of
the Heavens.

2. WE believe that Jesus Christ, the only Son of the eternal Father, as it had
been decreed, before the beginning of all things, when the fullness of time
came, took our Flesh and perfect Humane Nature of that blessed and pure Virgin,
that he might reveal to Men, that hidden and secret Will of his Father, which
was concealed from all former Ages and Generations; and that in this humane
Body, he might finish the Mystery of our Redemption, Coll. 2. 14.
and might nail to his Cross our Sins, and the Obligation which lay against us.

3. FOR we believe that for our sakes he died, was buried, descended into Hell,
and the third day, by a Divine Power, returned to Life, and arose, and after
forty days, in the sight of his Disciples, ascended into Heaven, that he might
fill all things, and that the very Body in which he was born, in which he
conversed, in which he was despised, in which he had suffered most grievous
Torments, and a most direful Death, in which he rose, and now ascended to the
right hand of his Father; was placed above all Principalities and Power, and
every Name which is mentioned, not only in this World, but in that which is to
come, in Majesty and Glory. And we believe that he does now sit there, Act^ 3.
2^.
and shall sit there till all things are fulfilled; and although the Majesty and
Divinity of Christ is diffused every where, yet his Body (as St. Augustine
says) ought to be in one place; Tract. 30. in Joan.
we believe that tho Christ added Majesty to his Body, yet he took not from it
the Nature of a Body; Epist. ad Dardan.
nor is Christ to be so asserted to be God, that we should deny him to be Man:
Fulgentius ad Regem Thrasi mundum.
and as the Martyr Vigilius said, Christ left us as to his Humane Nature, but
he has not left us in his Divine Nature; and tho he is absent from us by the
Form of a Servant, yet he is ever with us by the Form of God.

4. AND from thence we believe Christ shall return to exercise a general
Judgment, as well upon those he shall then find alive, as upon all that are
then dead.

5. WE believe that the Holy Ghost, who is the third Person in the Holy
Trinity, is true God, not made nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding from
both, that is, from the Father and the Son, in a way neither known to Mortals,
nor possible to be expressed by them. We believe that it is He who softens the
Hardness of Man's Heart, when he is received into their Hearts, by the saving
preaching of the Gospel, or by any other way whatsoever; that it is He who
inlightens them, and leads them to the Knowledge of God, into all the ways of
Truth, into a perfect newness of Life, and a perpetual hope of Salvation.

6. WE believe that there is one Church of God, and that not consigned as it was
heretofore to the Jewish People, in one Angle or Kingdom, but that it is
Catholic and Universal, and so diffused or spread over the Face of the whole
Earth; that there is no Nation which can justly complain that it is excluded,
and cannot be admitted into the Church and People of God; that this Church is
the Kingdom, the Body and Spouse of Christ; that Christ is the only Prince of
this Kingdom; that there is in the Church diverse Orders of Ministers, that
there are some who are Deacons, others who are Presbyters, and others who are
Bishops, to whom the Instruction of the People, and the Care and Management of
Religion is committed. And yet that there neither is, nor is it possible there
should be, any one man who has the care of this whole Catholic Church, for
Christ is ever present with his Church, and needs not a Vicar, or sole and
perfect Successor; and that no mortal Man can in his mind contain all the Body
of the Universal Church, that is, all the parts of the Earth, much less can he
reduce them into an exact Order, and rightly and prudently administer its
Affairs. That the Apostles, De Simpl. Praelatorum.
as St. Cyprian says, were all of equal Power and Authority, and that all the
rest were what St. Peter was; that it was said to all alike, Feed: To all, go
ye into all the World: To all, teach ye the Gospel. And that as St. Jerome
says, All Bishops, wheresoever they are settled, whether it be at Rome or
Eugubium, at Constantinople or Rhegium, they are of equal Worth, and of the
same Priesthood. And as St. Cyprian says, there is but one Episcopacy, and
each of them has a perfect and entire share of it. And that according to the
Judgment and Sentence of the Council of Nice, the Bishop of Rome has no more
Authority in the Church of God than the other Patriarchs, viz. the Patriarchs
of Alexandria and Antioch. That the Bishop of Rome, who now endeavors to draw
all the Ecclesiastical Authority to himself alone, if he does not his Duty,
that is, if he does not administer the Sacraments, if he does not instruct the
People, Admonish and Teach, he is not to be called a Bishop, or indeed a
Presbyter; for as St. Augustine says, Bishop is the Name of a Work or Office,
and not a Title of Honor; so that he who would usurp an unprofitable
Pre-eminence in the Church is no Bishop. But then, that the Bishop of Rome, or
any other Person should be the Head of the whole Church, or an universal Bishop
is no more possible, than that he should be the Bridegroom, the Light, the
Salvation, and the Life of the Church, for these are the Privileges and Titles
of Christ alone, and do properly and only belong to him; nor was there ever any
Bishop of Rome, who would suffer so insolent and proud a Title to be given him,
before the Times of Phocas the Emperor, who as we very well know, aspired to
the Empire by a most detestable Villainy (the Murder of Mauritius the former
Emperor, his Sovereign) that is, till the year of Christ 613. That the Council
of Carthage expressly decreed, Chap. 47.
that no Bishop should be called the highest The Title of Pontifex Maximus was
that of the Roman Heathen Priests, and cannot properly be rendered into English
any other way, than by that of Priest, it being not of the same nature with the
Word Bishop, yet have the Popes of Rome usurped this very heathen Title.
P^ntiff or chief Priest. But the Bishop of Rome, because he now desires to be
so called, and usurps a Power which belongs not to him, besides that, he acts
directly against the ancient Councils and the Fathers, if he dares believe St.
Gregory, Gregory lib. 4. Ep. 76. 78. 80. lib. 7. Ep. 69.
one of his own Predecessors, he has taken upon him an arrogant, profane,
sacrilegious, antichristian Title, and is therefore the King of Pride, Lucifer,
one that sets himself above his Brethren, who has denied the Faith, and is
thereby become the forerunner of Antichrist.

7. WE say that a Minister ought to have a lawful Call, and be duly and orderly
preferred in the Church of God, and that no Man ought at his own Will and
Pleasure to intrude into the sacred Ministry. So that a very great Injury is
done us, by them, who so frequently affirm, that nothing is done decently and
in order with us, but all things are managed confusedly and disorderly; and
that with us all (that will) are Priests, Teachers, and Interpreters.

8. WE say that Christ has given to his Ministers the Power of Binding and
Loosing, of Opening and Shutting. And we say that the Power of Loosing consists
in this, that the Minister, by the preaching of the Gospel, offers to dejected
Minds and true Penitents, through the Merits of Christ, Absolution, and does
assure them of a certain Remission of their Sins, and the hopes of eternal
Salvation. Or secondly, reconciles, restores, and receives into the
Congregation and Unity of the Faithful, those Penitents, who by any grievous
Scandal or known and public Offense, have offended the Minds of their
Brethren, and in a sort, alienated and separated themselves from the common
Society of the Church, and the Body of Christ. And we say, the Minister does
exercise the Power of Binding or Shutting, when he shuteth the Gate of the
Kingdom of Heaven against Unbelievers and obstinate Persons, and denounces to
them the Vengeance of God and eternal Punishment; or excludes out of the
Bosom of the Church, those that are publicly excommunicated; and that God
himself does so far approve whatever Sentence his Ministers shall so give, that
whatsoever is either loosed or bound by their Ministry here on Earth, he will
in like manner bind or loose, and confirm in Heaven: The Key with which these
Ministers do shut or open the Kingdom of Heaven, we say with St. Chrysostom, is
the Knowledge of the Scripture; with Tertullian, is the Interpretation of the
Law; and with Eusebius, is the Word of God. We say the Disciples of Christ
received this Power (from him) not that they might hear the private Confessions
of the People, and catch their whispering Murmurs, as the Popish Priests every
where now do; and that in such a manner, as if all the force and use of the
Keys consisted only in this; but that they might go and Preach and Publish the
Gospel, that so they might be a savor of Life unto Life, to them that did
believe; and that they might be also a savor of Death unto Death, to those
that did not believe; that the Minds of the Pious, who were affrighted with the
sense of their former ill Lives and Errors, after they beheld the Light of the
Gospel, and believed in Christ, might be opened by the Word of God, as doors
are with a Key. And that the wicked and stubborn, who would not believe and
return into the Way, might be left, shut up, 2 Timothy 3. 13.
and locked, and as St. Paul expresses it, might wax worse and worse; this we
take to be the meaning of the Keys, and that in this manner the Consciences of
Men are either bound or loosed. We say that the Priest is a Judge; but then we
say with St. Ambrose, that he has not the Right of any Dominion; and therefore
Christ reprehended the Scribes and Pharisees with these words, that he might
reprove their Negligence in teaching: Math. 23. 13. Luke 11. 52.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for you have taken away the Key of
Knowledge, and shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men. Seeing then the Key,
by which a Passage is opened for us into the Kingdom of Heaven, is the Word of
the Gospel, and the Interpretation of the Law and the Scriptures: where there
is no such Word, there is no Key. And seeing the same word was given to all,
and the Key which pertains to all, is but one; we say that the Power of all
Ministers as to binding and loosing, is one and the same; and we say, that even
the Pope himself, notwithstanding his Flatterers, do so sweetly sooth him up
with these words, Math. 16. 19.
I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; as if they belonged
to him, and to no other Mortal under Heaven; except he makes it his Business to
bend and subdue the Consciences of Men to the Word of God, we deny that even he
(as I said) can either open or shut, or has at all the Keys; and although he ^oth
teach and instruct the People (which I wish he would sometimes do truly, and at
last be persuaded to believe it is at least some part of his Duty and Office)
but yet if he did so, his Key would be neither better nor greater than that of
others; for who made that difference? Who taught him to open more learnedly, or
absolve more powerfully than his Brethren?

9. WE say that Marriage is Honorable and Holy in all degrees of Men, in
Patriarchs, in Prophets, in Apostles, in Holy Martyrs, in the Ministers of the
Churches, and in the Bishops, In Titum. Hom. I. Theoph. ad Titum. Eusebius. lib.
18. c. 5. in Monodia sua super Basilium.
and that as St. Chrysostom says, it is both lawful and just that he should
ascend the Episcopal Throne with it; and we say as Sozomen did of Spiridion,
and Nazianzen did o^ his own Father, that a pious and industriou^ Bishop is
nothing the worse for being married, bu^ rather much the better, and more
useful in his Ministry. And we say that the Law, which by force takes away
this Liberty from Men, an^ties them to a single Life against their Wills, is as
St. Paul styles it, 1 Timothy 4. 1*
the Doctrine of Devils* and that from hence (as is confessed by the Bishop of
Huldericus.
Augusta; Faber, the Abbot of Pale^mo, Latomus, the tripartite Work, which
(...) joined to the second Tome of the Council^ and other defenders of the
Papal Party, and which is apparent from the thing it self, and confessed by all
Histories) an incredible im^purity of Life and Manners, and horribl^
Debaucheries in the Ministers of God have sprung and arisen; so that Pius the
second^ Bishop of Rome was not out, when h^ said he saw many Causes why the
Clerg^ should be denied Wives; Platina in vita Pij secundi.
but then he saw more and greater Causes to allow them Wives again.

10. WE receive and embrace all the Canonical Scriptures, both of the Old and
New Testament; and we give our gracious God most hearty Thanks, that he has
set up this Light for us, which we ever fix our Eyes upon, lest by humane
Fraud, or the Snares of the Devil, we should be seduced to Errors or Fables: We
own them to be the heavenly Voices by which God has revealed and made known
his Will to us; in them only can the Mind of Man acquiesce; in them all that is
necessary for our Salvation is abundantly and plainly contained, as Origin,
St. Augustine, St. Chrysostom, and St. Cyrill have taught us. They are the very
Might and Power of God unto Salvation; they are the Foundations of the Apostles
and Prophets, upon which the Church of God is built; they are the most certain
and infallible Rule by which the Church may be reduced, if She happen to
stagger, slip, or err, by which all Ecclesiastical Doctrines ought to be tried;
no Law, no Tradition, no Custom is to be received or continued, Gal. 1. 8.
if it be contrary to Scripture. No, tho St. Paul himself, or an Angel from
Heaven should come and teach otherwise.

11. WE receive also and allow the Sacraments of the Church, that is, the
sacred Signs and Ceremonies which Christ commanded us to use, that he might by
them, represent to our eyes the Mysteries of our Salvation, and most strongly
confirm the Faith we have in his Blood, and seal in our Hearts his Grace; and
we call them Figures, Signs, Types, Antitypes, Forms, Seals, Prints or Signets,
Similitudes, Examples, Images, Remembrances and Memorials; with Tertullian,
Origin, St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Jerome, St. Chrysostom, St. Basil and
Dionysius, and many other Catholic Fathers. Nor do we doubt with them, to call
them a kind of visible Words; the Signets of Righteousness, and the Symbols of
Grace; and clearly affirm, that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Body
and Blood of our Lord, is truly exhibited to Believers; that is, the enlivening
Flesh of the Son of God; the Bread that comes from above, the Nourishment of
Immortality, the Grace, the Truth, and the Life; and that it is the Communion
of the Body and Blood of Christ, by the Participation of which we are quickened,
strengthened, and fed to immortality, and by which we are conjoined, united and
incorporated with Christ, that we may remain in him, and he in us.

12. WE acknowledge that there are two Sacraments properly so called, Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord; for so many we see were delivered to us, and
consecrated by Christ, and approved by St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, and the
ancient Fathers.

13. AND we say that Baptism is the Sacrament of the Remission of Sins, and of
that Washing which we have in the Blood of Christ, and that none are to be
denied that Sacrament, who will profess the Faith of Christ, no, not the
Infants of Christians, because they are born in sin, and belong to the People
of God.

14. WE say that the Eucharist is the Sacrament or visible Symbol of the Body
and Blood of Christ, in which the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and what he
did in his humane Body, is in a manner represented to our eyes, that we may
give him thanks for his Death, and our Deliverance by it; and that by
frequenting the Sacrament, we may often renew the Remembrance of it, and that
by the Body and Blood of Christ, we may be nourished into the Hope of the
Resurrection, and of eternal Life; and that we may be assured that the Body and
Blood of Christ has the same effect in the feeding of our Souls, which the
Bread and Wine have in the repairing the Decays of our Bodies. To this great
and solemn Feast the People are to be invited, that they may all communicate
together, and may publicly signify and testify both their Union and Society
amongst themselves, and that Hope which they have in Christ Jesus; and
therefore, if there was any one heretofore, before the private Mass was
introduced, who would be only a Spectator, and yet would abstain from the Holy
Communion, the Bishops of Rome in the Primitive Times, and the ancient Fathers
would have excommunicated him as a wicked man and a Pagan: Chrysostom. ad AEphe.
Ser. 3. De conser. did. 1. cap. Omnes.
Nor was there any Christian man in those times, who communicated alone, in the
presence of others who were only Spectators. So But now in the Decretum under
the Name of Anacletus.
Calixtus long since decreed, that when the Consecration was finished, all
should communicate, if they would not be deprived of the Communion of the
Church, and be shut out of it; for so (says he) the Apostles ordained, and the
Holy Church of Rome holds. And we say, that both the Parts of the Sacrament
ought to be given to all that come to the Holy Communion, for so Christ
commanded, and the Apostles instituted throughout the World, and all the
ancient Fathers and Catholic Bishops so practiced; De consecratione Did. 1.
cap. comperimus.
and if any one shall do otherwise (says Gelasius) he commits Sacrilege; and
therefore our Adversaries, who exploding and rejecting the Communion, defend
the private Mass, and a multitude of Sacraments, without the authority of the
Word of God, without any ancient Council, without any Catholic Father, without
any Example of the Primitive Church, and without Reason, and this against the
express Command of Christ, and also against all Antiquity in so doing, act
wickedly and sacrilegiously.

15. WE say that the Bread and Wine are the Holy and Heavenly Mysteries of the
Body and Blood of Christ, and that in them, Christ himself, the true Bread of
eternal Life is so exhibited to us as present, that we do by Faith truly take
his Body and Blood, and yet at the same time we speak not this so as if we
thought the Nature of the Bread and Wine were totally changed and abolished, as
many in the last Ages have dreamt, and as yet, could never agree amongst
themselves about this Dream. For neither did Christ ever design that the
Wheaten Bread should change its Nature, and assume a new kind of Divinity, but
rather that it might change us; and that as In Joan. cap. ^.
Theophylact says, we might be trans-elemented into his Body: For what can be
more perspicuous than what De Sacra. l. q. c. 4.
St. Ambrose says on this occasion, the Bread and Wine are what they were, and
yet are changed into another thing? Or what In Dialo. l. 2.
Gelasius says, The Substance of the Bread, and Nature of the Wine do not
cease to be. Or then what In Sermon ad infantes de Consecratione.
Theodoret, after the Consecration the mystical Symbols, do not cast off their
own proper Nature (for they remain in their former Substance and Figure and
Species. Or then what St. Augustine says, that which you see, is Bread, and a
Cup, as your Eyes inform you; but that which your Faith desires to be
instructed in, is this, the Bread is the Body of Christ, and the Cup is his
Blood. Or then that of In Math. 15.
Origin, that Bread which is consecrated by the Word of God, as to the Matter
of it, goes into the Belly, and is cast out by the Draught. Or then that of
Christ himself, who said, not only after the Consecration, but after the
finishing of the Communion: Luke 22. 18. I will drink no more of the Fruit of
the Vine; for it is certain the Fruit of the Vine is Wine, and not Blood? And
yet when we speak thus, we do not so depress the Esteem of the Supper of the
Lord, as to teach that it is a mere cold Ceremony, and that nothing is done in
it, which many falsely report of us; for we assert that Christ in his Sacraments
does exhibit himself truly present: In Baptism, that we may put him on: In his
Supper, that we may eat him by Faith, and in the Spirit, and that by his Cross
and Blood we may have Life Eternal; and this we say is not slightly and coldly,
but really and truly done; for although we do not touch Christ with our Teeth
and Lips, yet we hold and press him by Faith, Mind, and Spirit. Nor is that
Faith vain which imbraceth Christ, nor that Participation cold, which is
perceived by the Mind, Understanding and Spirit; for so Christ himself is
entirely offered and given to us in these Mysteries as much as is possible,
that we may truly know that we are Flesh of his Flesh, Genesis 2. 23. John 6. 56.
and Bone of his Bone, and that he dwells in us, and we in him.

16. AND therefore in the Celebration of these Mysteries, before we come to
receive the Holy Communion, the People are fitly admonished to lift up their
Hearts, and that they should direct their Minds to Heaven, for there he is, by
whom we are to be fed and live. And St. Cyrill says, that in partaking of the
Holy Mysteries, all gross Imaginations are to be excluded. And the Nicen
Council, as it is cited by some in Greek, does expressly forbid us to think only
on the Bread and Wine that are set before us. And St. Chrysostom Writes well,
We say that the Body of Christ is the Carcass, and we are to be the Eagles,
that thereby we may learn to mount aloft, if we will approach the Body of
Christ; for this is the Table of Eagles, and not of Jayes. And St. Cyprian, In
coena Domini.
This Bread is the Meat of the Soul, and not of the Belly. And St. Augustine,
How shall I lay hold on him who is absent? In Johan. tract. 50.
how shall I reach my Hand into the Heavens, and touch him who sits there? Send
thy Faith thither (says he) and thou have him sure.

17. BUT then as to the Fairs and Sales of Masses, and the carrying about and
adoring the Bread, and a number of such like Idolatrous and blasphemous
Follies, which none of them dare affirm to have been delivered to us by Christ
of his Apostles; our Church will not endure them, and we justly blame the
Bishops of Rome for presuming, without any Command of God, without any
Authority of the Holy Fathers, and without any Example, not only to propose the
Sacramental Bread to be adored by the People with a divine Worship, but also to
carry it about before them upon an ambling Nag wherever they go, Lib. de
caerem. Eccl. Romans
as the Persian Kings did heretofore their sacred Fire, and the Egyptian their
Image of Isis, and so have turned the Sacraments of Christ into Pageantry and
Pomp, that, in that very thing in which the Death of Christ was to be
celebrated and inculcated, and the Mysteries of our Redemption ought to be
piously and reverently represented, the Eyes of men should only be fed with a
foolish show, and a piece of Ludicrous Livity. And then, whereas they say, and
sometimes persuade Fools, that they can by their Masses distribute and apply to
men (who very often think of nothing less, and never know what is then doing)
all the Merits of the Death of Christ; this Pretenc^* I say, is ridiculous,
heathenish and silly; for it is our Faith which applies the Death and Cross of
Christ to us, and not the Action of a Priest: the Faith of the Sacraments
(says St. Augustine) justifies, and not the Sacrament. And Origin says, He
(Christ) is the Priest, and the Propitiation, and the Sacrifice, and this
Propitiation comes to every one by way of Faith; and therefore agreeably
hereunto we say that the Sacraments do not profit the Living without Faith, and
much less the Dead; for as to what they pretend concerning their Purgatory,
Purgatory.
tho that is no very late Invention, yet it is nothing but a silly old wives
Story. St. August in Psalm. 85. in Enchiri^io c. 6. 7. de civitate Dei. lib. 21.
cap. 26. lib. 11. contra Pelegian. lib. Hipognostcon. 5.
Augustine sometimes says there is such a place, sometimes he does not deny but
there may be such a Place, sometimes he doubts if there be, and at other times
he positively denies there is any such place at all, and thinks that men, out
of humane kindness to the Dead, are deceived in that point. And yet from this
one Error there has sprung such a Crop of small Priests, that Masses being
publicly and openly sold in every corner, they have turned the Churches of God
into mere Shops, and deluded poor Mortals into a Belief that there was no
Commodity more useful; and certainly, as to those small Levites, these Masses
were very advantageous.

18. Of Cer^monies.
WE know that St. Augustine grieviously complained of the vast number of
impertinent Ceremonies in his time, and therefore we have cut off a great many
of them, because we know they were afflictive to the Consciences of Men, and
burdensome to the Church of God. Yet we still retain, and re^igiously use, not
only all those which we know were delivered to the Church by the Apostles, but
some others which we saw might be born without any inconvenience* because, as
St. Paul commands, we desire al^things in the Religious Assemblies, ^ Cor. 1^.
40.
should be done decently and in order; but then as to al^those that were very
superstitious, or base, or ridiculous, or contrary to the Scriptures, or did
not seem to be^it sober men, an infinite number of which, are still to be found
amongst Papists; we have rejected all these, I say, without excepting any one
of them, because we would not have the Service of God any longer contaminated
with such Fooleries.

19. Prayer in our own Tongue.
WE pray (as it is fit we should) in that Tongue our People do all understand,
that the People, as St. Paul admonishes, may reap a common Advantage by the
common Prayers; as all the Holy Fathers and Catholic Bishops, not only in the
Old, but in the New Testament also did ever pray, and teach the People to pray,
least, as St. Augustine says, We should like Parrots, and other prating Birds,
seem to sound Words which we did not understand.

20. Mediators and Intercessors.
WE have no Mediator and Intercessor, by whom we approach to God the Father,
but Jesus Christ, in whose name only all things are obtained. But that which we
see done in their Churches, is base and heathenish; not only because they have
set up an infinite number of Intercessors, without any Authority of the Word of
God; so that as Jeremiah says, Jerem. 2. 28. 11. 13.
According to the number of thy Cities, so are thy Gods; so that miserable men
know not which to apply themselves to, and tho they are innumerable, yet they
have ascribed to each of them their Office, and what was to be obtained, had,
and received from each of them; but also because they have not only impiously,
but impudently solicited the Virgin Mary, that she would remember she is a
Mother, that she would be pleased to command her Son, and that she would make
use of the Authority she has over him.

21. Original Sin.
WE say that Man is born, and does live in Sin, and that no man can truly say
his Heart is clean; that the most holy Man is an unprofitable Servant: that the
Law of God is perfect, and requires of us a full and perfect Obedience, and
that we cannot in any way keep it perfectly in this Life; and that there is no
Mortal who can be justified in the sight of God by his own Deserts; and
therefore our only Refuge and Safety, is in the Mercy of God the Father by
Jesus Christ, and in the assuring our selves that he is the Propitiation for
our Sins, 1 John 2. 2. 4. 10. Col. 1. 20. Heb. 10. 14.
by whose Blood, all our Stains are washed out; that he has pacified things by
the Blood of his Cross; that He, by that only Sacrifice which he once offered
upon the Cross, has perfected all things; and therefore when he breathed out
his Soul, said IT IS FINISHED; John 19. 30.
as if by these words he would signify, now the Price is paid for the Sins of
Mankind.

22. Sacrifice.
NOW if there be any who think not that this Sacrifice is sufficient, let them
go and find out a better; but as as for us, because we know this is the only
Sacrifice, we are contented with it alone, nor do we expect any other; and
because it was only once to be offered, we do not enjoin the Repetition of it;
and because it was full, and in all its Numbers and Parts perfect, we do not
substitute to it the perpetual Successions of our own Sacrifices.

23. Of good Works.
THO we say there is no trust to be put in the Merits of our Works and Actions,
and place all the Hopes and Reason of our Salvation only in Christ, yet we do
not therefore say that men should live loosely and dissolutely, as if Baptism
and Faith were sufficient for a Christian, and there were nothing more
required; the true Faith is a living Faith, and cannot be idle; therefore we
teach the People, that God has not called us to Luxury and Disorder, but as
St. Paul says, Ephesians. 2. 10. Col. 1. 10.
Unto good Works, that we might walk in them. That God has delivered us from
the Power of Darkness, that we might serve the living God: that we should root
up all the Relics of sin; Phil. 2. 12.
that we should work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; that it might
appear that the Spirit of Sanctification was in us, and that Christ himself
dwells in our Hearts by Faith.

24. To conclude, We believe that this Body of ours in which we live, tho after
Death it turns to Dust, yet in the last day it shall return to Life again, by
the Spirit of Christ that dwells in us; and that then, whatever we suffer for
Christ in the interim, he will wipe away all Tears from our Eyes, and that then
through him, we shall enjoy everlasting Life, and be always with him in Glory,
AMEN.

CHAP. III.
Containing a plain Demonstration of the Causes why, and whence Heresies arose
in the Church, with Instances of all sorts, in all Times.
THESE are the horrible Heresies for which a considerable part of the World at
this day are condemned by the Pope unheard; it had been better to have entered
a Contest with Christ, the Apostles and holy Fathers; for they it was, who did
not only give a beginning to these Doctrines, but commanded them; unless they
of the Church of Rome will say (as perhaps they will) that Christ did not
institute the Holy Communion, that it might be distributed amongst the
Faithful; or that the Apostles of Jesus Christ, or the ancient Fathers said
private Masses in all the corners of their Churches, sometimes ten, and at
other twenty in one day; or that Christ-and the Apostles deprived the People of
the Cup; or that That which they now do, and that with that eagerness, that
whoever will not comply with them in it, is by them condemned for an Heretic,
is not called Sacrilege by one of their own Popes, Gelasius; or that those are
not the Words of Ambrosius, Augustinus, Gelasius, Theodoret, Chrisostom, and
Origin. That the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament remain what they were before;
that that which is seen on the Holy Table is Bread; that the Substance of the
Bread does not cease to be, nor the nature of the Wine; that the Substance and
Nature of the Bread is not changed; that this very Bread, as to what concerns
the Matter of it, goes down into the Belly, and is cast out by the Draught: or
that Christ and his Apostles and the Fathers did not pray in that Tongue which
was understood by the People; or that Christ by that one Oblation which he once
offered, has not perfected the Work of our Redemption; or that this Sacrifice
was so imperfect, that we need another. Either they must say all these things,
or else they must aver, which perhaps they had rather say, that all Right and
Justice is enclosed in the Cabinet of the Popes Breast; and as one of his
Followers and Flatterers once said, Distinct. 36. Lector in Glossa Distinct.
81. Presbyter.
that he may dispense against the Apostles, against the Councils, and against
the Apostolical Canons, and that he is not bound by those Examples,
Institutions and Laws of Christ.

2. THUS we have been taught by Christ, by the Apostles and Holy Fathers, and
we do faithfully teach the People of God the same things, and for so doing, we
are called Heretics, by the great Leader and Prince of Religion. O immortal
God! What have Christ and his Apostles, and so many Fathers all erred? What,
are Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, Gelasius and Theodoret Apostates
from the Catholic Faith? Was the Consent of so many Bishops and Learned men,
nothing but a Conspiracy of Heretics? or that which was commendable in them,
is it now blameable in us? And that which was Catholic in them, is it by a
Change in the Wills of Men, become schismatical in us? Or that which was once
true, is it now, because it displeases them, become false? Let them then
produce a new Gospel, or at least, set forth their Reasons, why those things
which were so long publicly observed and approved in the Church, ought now at
last to be recalled. We know that the Word which was revealed by Christ, and
propagated by the Apostles, is sufficient to promote our Salvation and all
Truth, and to convince all Heresies: Out of it alone we condemn all sorts of
ancient Heresies (which they pretend we have recalled from the bottom of Hell)
and pronounce the Arrians, Eutichians, Marcionites, Ebionites, the
Valentinians, Carpocratians, Tatians, and Novatians; and in one word, all those
who have thought impiously, either of God the Father, or of Christ, or of the
Holy Ghost, or of any other part of the Christian Religion; all these (I say)
because they are convicted by the Gospel of Christ, we pronounce them wicked
and lost men, and detest them to the Gates of Hell; and not only so, but if any
of those Heresies happen to break out, anew amongst us, we severely and
seriously correct the George Paris an Arrian, was burnt in the Reign of Edward
the 6th. April the 4th. 1551. for Heresy, tho he was a German by Nation.
Godwins Annals.
Revivers of them with lawful and civil Punishments.

3. We confess, that upon the beginning of the Reformation, there arose some
new and unheard of Sects, as Anabaptists, Libertines, Menonians, and
Zwenkfeldians; but we render our unfeigned Thanks to God, that the World is now
well satisfied, that we neither brought forth, nor taught, nor maintained those
Monsters. Whoever thou art who think otherwise, be pleased to read our
Books, which are every where to be had. What is there in them that can fairly
be taken to favor the madness of these People? Yea, there are at this day no
Nations so free from these Pests, as those in which the Gospel is freely
taught. Now if they would rightly and attentively consider this thing, it is a
strong-Argument, that the Doctrine we teach is the very truth of the Gospel;
for neither Tares nor Chaff use to spring up or be found but in Corn. And who
knows not what a number of Heresies arose when the Gospel was first propagated
in the World, in the Times of the very Apostles? Who before these Times, ever
heard of Simon Magus, Menander, Saturninus, Basilides, Corpocrates, Cerinthus,
Ebion, Valentinus Secundus, Marcosius Colorbasius, Heracleo, Lucian, and
Severus? But why should I mention this contemptible Number? Epiphanius reckons
LXXX. and St. Augustine more distinct Heresies which grew up with the Gospel.
What then? was not the Gospel the Gospel, because, together with it, so many
Heresies were produced? or shall we therefore say, that Christ was not Christ?

4. AND yet (as I said) this cursed Crop has not sprung up in our Fields, where
the Gospel is freely preached, and publicly received and settled. Those Plagues
have had their Rise in the darkness and blindness of our Adversaries, and with
them too they have increased and spread themselves where the Truth is oppressed
with Tyranny and Cruelty, nor are these things to be heard of any where but in
Corners and Conventicles. Let them make a Trial, let them grant the Gospel its
free Course, let the Truth of Jesus Christ freely shine and extend its Rays to
all Parts without hindrance, and they shall soon see, that as the Darkness of
the Night vanishes at the approach of the Sun, so will these Shadows disappear
before the Light of the Gospel. For as for us, we daily make it our business to
repel and confute these Heresies, which we are falsely reported to nourish and
encourage, whilst our adversaries sit still and mind nothing less.

5. AND whereas they say we are divided into diverse Sects, and that some of us
have taken the Names of Lutherans, and others of Those who were called
Zuinglians when this Piece was written, afterward were called Calvinists, and
the other Name is now not commonly known, but Zuinglius was the Author of the
Doctrine, and Calvin of the Discipline of this Sect of turbulent men.
Zuinglians (or Calvinists) and we could never yet agree amongst our selves
concerning the Articles of our Doctrines. What would they have said if they had
lived in the Times of the Apostles and Holy Fathers? When one said I am of
Paul, another, I am of Cephas, and another, I am of Apollo; when St. Paul
reprehended St. Peter; when by reason of a Quarrel, Paul and Barnabas separated
one from the other, and went several ways; when as Origin acquaints us, the
Christians were divided into so many Factions, that they had no Name common to
them, but that of Christian, and they agreed in nothing else but that Nane; and
as Socrates informs us, they were derided publicly in the Theaters by the
People, for their Dissentions and Sects; and when, as Constantine the Great
said, there was so many Contentions and Controversies in the Church, that this
very single Calamity seemed to exceed the Miseries of the former times (of
Persecution;) when Theophilus, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Augustine, Ruffinus, and
St. Jerome, all of them Christians, all Fathers, and all Catholics, contested
each others with most violent and implacable Animosities; when, as Nazianzen
says, the Members of the same Body consumed one another; when the Eastern and
Western Churches contended about Leavened Bread, and the time of keeping
Easter, things of no mighty consequence; when in every Council (which were then
numerous) there was a new Creed, and new and contrary Decrees minted. What
would these men have then said? to whom would they have applied themselves?
from whom would they have fled? in what Gospel would they have believed? whom
would they have esteemed Catholics, and whom Heretics? Now there are only two
Names, Luther and Zuinglius, and what a Noise is made about them! But because
these two could not agree about some Points; shall we therefore think they are
both in the wrong, that neither of them has the Gospel, and that neither has
preached well and truly?

6. BUT O good God! who are they that so bitterly reflect on us for our
Dissentions? Do they in the mean time all agree amongst themselves? Have there
never been any Dissensions and Controversies amongst them? Why then do the
Scotists and Thomists agree no better concerning the Merit of Congruity, and
that of Condignity; concerning Original Sin in the Virgin Mary, and about a
solemn and simple Vow? Why do the Canonists affirm, that Auricular Confession
is founded in Humane and Positive Laws; and the Schoolmen on the contrary, on
Divine Institution? Why does Albertus Pighius differ from Cajetan; Thomas from
Lombard, Scotus from Thomas, Occham from Scotus, Alliacensis from Occham, and
the Nominalls from the Reallists? and that I may not mention the Disagreements
of the small Brotherhoods and Monks, some of which, place their admired
Sanctity in eating of Fish, others in living upon Herbs, some in wearing of
Shoes, others in Sandals; some in Linen Garments, and others in Woollen;
Steven Gardener, in Sophist. Diab. Richard Faber. Recantatio Berengarii Scholar
Glossa. Guimundus. De Conscoral. Did. 2. Ego Berengarius.
some in black, and some in white Clothes; some shave their Heads broad, and
others narrow; some wear Shoes, and others go barefoot; some are girded, and
some go loose; besides these, they should remember that some of their Divines
say, that the Body of Christ is naturally present in the Sacrament, which is
again denied by others; that then there are some who say, that the Body of
Christ in the Sacrament is torn and ground with our Teeth; and again, there are
others who deny this; there are some who say, that the Body in the Sacrament
has quantity, others deny it; some say Christ did consecrate by a cortain
Divine Power, others that he did it by his Blessing; some that he did it by
conceiving the five Words in his Mind, others that it was by uttering them;
there be some that say, that of these five Words, the demonstrative Pronoun,
THIS, showed the Wheaten Bread, others say no; but it relates to a certain
Individuum vagum (a no Man knows what;) Gardener.
there be some who say Dogs and Mice may truly and really eat the Body of
Christ? but then there are others who stoutly deny this; there be some who say
the Accidents of the Bread and Wine can nourish, De consecratione Did. 2.
species Glossa.
and others say the Substance returns again. But why should I add any more? It
is a long and troublesome Business to count up all their Divisions; the whole
Form of this Religion and Doctrine, is to this day controverted and uncertain
amongst them who first gave being and entertainment to it; for they scarce ever
agree, except it be as the Pharisees and Saducees, or as Herod and Pilate did
of old, against Christ.

7. LET them go then, and put an end to their own Quarrels, Unity and Agreement
do excellently become Religion; yet it is no certain and proper sign of the
Church of God; for there was a wonderful Agreement amongst them who worshipped
the Golden Calf, and amongst those, who with one Voice cried out against our
Savior, Crucify him, crucify him. Nor are we presently to determine, because
there was some Dissentions in the Church of Corinth; or because St. Paul
differed with St. Peter, or Barnabas with St. Paul; or that the Christians in
the Infancy of the Church, disagreed amongst themselves concerning some things,
that therefore there was no Church of God amongst them. Those very men whom
they contemptuously call Lutherans and Zuinglians, are both of them Christians,
and Friends each to others, and Brethren; they do not disagree about the
Principles and Foundations of our Religion, concerning God or Christ, or the
Holy Ghost, not concerning the manner of our Justification, or of eternal Life;
it is only about one Point, and that of no great consequence; nor do we
despair, or rather, we do not so much as doubt, but that in a small time an
Agreement will be made betwixt them; and tho there are some who now think
otherwise than they ought, we hope that laying aside all Passions and Factious
Names and Reproaches, God will reveal to them what they now know not, and
having better considered and searched into the thing, as it happened heretofore
in the Council of Calcedon, all the Causes and Fibers of Dissentions shall be
plucked up by the Roots, and buried in eternal Oblivion. Amen.

8. BUT the most insufferable of all their Slanders, is their Pretense that we
are impious Men, and have cast off all care of Religion. But this is the less
to be regarded, because they who make this Objection, do themselves know, that
it is contumelious and false. And Justin Martyr writes also, that when the
Gospel was first published, and the Name of Christ discovered to the World,
that all Christians were then styled (...); that is, Men without a God, or
Atheists. And when the Holy Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, stood before the
Tribunal, Eusebius. H. 3: Lib. 4.
the Rabble incited the Proconsul to the Slaughter and Destruction of all those
who professed the Gospel, with these words, (...), that is* exterminate out of
the World those wicked men who have no God. Not that the Christians had indeed
no God, but because they would not adore the Stones and Blocks which were then
worshipped as Gods. But the World now sees plainly what we and ours have
suffered from them, for the Sake of God and our Religion. They have cast us
into Goals, and Fire, and Water, and have rol'd themselves in our Bloods, not
because we are Adulterers, or Thieves, or Murderers, but purely because we
embrace the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and put our whole Trust only in the living
God; and, O good God! because we truly and justly complain, that they have for
their most impertinent Traditions, violated the Laws of God; and that these
Enemies of ours, who knowingly and willingly despise the Commandments of God,
are the haters of the Gospel, and the Enemies of the Cross of Christ.

9. NOW these Men, when they saw they could six no Slanders upon our Doctrine,
then they began to declaim against our Manners; that we hated all good Works,
that we made way for Disorder and Luxury, and did drive the People off from all
Care and Exercise of Virtue. And certainly the Lives of all Men, even those of
the most Holy and Christian Men, now are, and ever were, even in the best and
most chaste state of things, liable to some exceptions on that account; and such
is the Propensity of men to do Ill on the one side, and the Proneness of all to
Suspicion on the other, that many things which were never done nor thought of,
have yet been pretended to be heard, and have obtained a Belief too; and as a
small Spot is easily seen in a very white, Garment, so in the purest course of
Life, the slightest Note of Turpitude or disorder, is easily taken notice of.
Nor do we think our selves, or all those who have embraced the Reformation, to
be Angels, and to live without the least Speck or Unevenness; or that those who
hate us, are so blind, that they cannot observe whatever is blameable in us,
even through the smallest Chink; or that they are so candid, as that they will
put a mild Sense upon any thing; or so ingenious, that they will at any time
turn their Eyes upon themselves, and estimate or compare our Manners with their
own. But then if we should here run the thing up to the Fountains head, we know
that in the Apostles times, there were Christians who made the Name of God to
be blasphemed and evil spoken of amongst the Gentiles.

10. CONSTANTIUS the Emperor complains in Sozomen, that many after they entered
the Christian Church, became worse than they were before. And St. Cyprian, in a
mournful Oration, describes the Corruptions, of his own times. Ease and a long
Peace ( says he) had destroyed that Discipline which the Apostles delivered to
us. Men were intent upon the enlarging their Estates, and forgetting what
Believers did under the Apostles, and what they ever ought to do; they applied
themselves with an insatiable Appetite to the Improvement of their Fortunes. By
Ministers here, I suppose the Decons are meant.
There is not now that devout Piety in the Priests, that sincere Faith in the
Ministers, that Compassion in Works of Mercy, that Restraint in Men's Manners;
Men color their Beards, and Women paint their Faces. And before him,
Tertullian. O woe to us who are now called Christians! for we live the Lives of
Heathens under that venerable Title.

11. To conclude, and not to trouble the Reader with many Authors, Gregory
Nazianzen speaks thus, of the deplorable State of his own times. We are (said
he) hated by the Heathens now for our Vices, and we are made a Spectacle, not
only to Men and Angels, but to the wickedest of Men. This was the State of the
Church of God, when the Light of the Gospel began first to shine upon it, when
the Fury of Tyrants was not yet assuaged, or the Sword diverted from the necks
of the Christians; in truth, it is no wonder that Men are Men, tho they are
called Christians.

CHAP. IV.
Containing an Account of the Rule, Lives, and Manners of the Popes and
Papists, who would seem to be the only Head and Members of the Holy Catholic
Church.
BUT whilst these men so bitterly reflect upon us, Why do they not sometimes
think what they themselves are? Are they who have so much leisure to attend
what is done at a distance in Germany and England, so forgetful or so blind,
that they cannot see what is done at Rome? Are we to be impeached by them whose
Lives are so dissolute, as no honest modest man can without blushing tell their
Story?

2. WE do not now intend to bring to light all those Villainies which may much
better be buried with them; it becomes neither our Religion nor our Modesty and
Shamefacedness: and yet he that will needs be called the Vicar of Jesus Christ,
and the Head of the Church, may easily consider with himself what those things
are, which he hears, and sees, and suffers to be done at Rome; for we will go
no further in giving an account what they are: Let him make use of his own
Memory. Let him be pleased to consider that they are his own Canonists who have
taught the People, that simple Fornication is no Sin; as if they had learned
from the heathen Comedian, this Doctrine, that it is not a sin for a young Man
to Whore. Let him consider they are his own again, 3. Quest. 7. lata ext. de
Bigamis Quia circa.
who have determined, that a Priest is not to be deposed for Fornication. Let
him remember that Cardinal Campejus, Albertus Pighius, and many others o^ his
Lawyers, have taught, that the Priest wh^ keeps a Concubine, lives much more
chastely and holily than he who has a lawful Wife. I hope he has not forgotten
that there is at Rom^ many thousands of public licensed Whores and that he
levies upon them yearly, by way of Tax, thirty thousand Duccats. He can not
forget surely that himself is a public Pimp, and from this base Profit, does
as dishonorably and wickedly increase his Revenues and Pleasures. Were all
things well and Holy at Rome, when Pope Joan, a Woman of a dissolute Life, was
the Head of their Church, and when for two years she had in that Holy See
prostituted her self to the Lust of others; at lenght, in a public Procession,
in the sight of all the Cardinals and Bishops, in the open Street she brought
forth a Child?

3. BUT why should we mention their Concubines and Pimping? for these are
common and public Crimes at Rome, and not unprofitable neither; for the Misses
there do not sit without the Gates with their Faces veiled and covered as in
ancient times, Genesis 38. 14.
but they dwell in Palaces and stately Houses, In Concilio dilectorum
Cardinalium. To. 3.
and pass to and fro in the most public Streets without Masks, as if their
Trade were not only Lawful but Honorable; but why should I use many words,
their Lusts are sufficiently known to the whole Earth. St. Bernard writes thus
truly and freely of the Popes Family, and of the Pope himself. De
consideratione ad Eugenium.
. Your Court receives good Men sometimes, but it makes none good. Evil Men
thrive there, good Men are ruined. And whoever he was who wrote the Tripartite
Work, which is commonly joined to the Lateran Council, he says thus: There is
now so prrvailing a Luxury, not only in the inferior Clergy and Priests, but
also in the Prelates and Bishops, that it strikes Horror into the Hearers of it.

4. BUT these things are not only usual, and even for the sake of the Custom
approved (as most of their Vices are;) but they are now become so well known by
their long use, that they are putid ripe for Judgment. For who has not heard
what Petrus Aloisius, the Son of Paul the III. designed against Cosmus Cherius,
Bishop of Fano? What Jo. Casa Archbishop of Benevento, the Popes Legate at
Venice wrote of a Sin to be abhorred; whilst with a Iewd Eloquence and
abominable Words, he commends what ought not to be named. Who knows not that
Alphonsus Diazius a Spaniard, was sent from Rome into Germany of purpose to
murder the most innocent and holy Man John Diazius his own Brother, only
because he had embraced the Gospel, and would not return to Rome, which he
accordingly did? But they may pretend perhaps that such things as these are,
may sometimes happen in the best constituted Governments, and that there is
excellent Laws against them.

5. Be it so, But what Law passed upon these Pests? Petrus Aloisius, when he
had attempted the Villainy I have hinted at, was ever after in the Bosom of Paul
the III. his Father, and his Joy. Diazius, after he had assassinated his
Brother, was delivered ou^ of the hands of the Law, by the Interposition of the
Pope. Johannes Casa, Archbishop of Benevento, is yet alive, and at Rome, and
live, under the Eyes, and in the Sight of his Holiness. They have stain
infinite numbers of our Brethren, only because they truly and purely believed
in Jesus Christ; but then of that infinite number of Harlots, Sodomites and
Adulterers, who have they at any time, I will not say slain, but
excommunicated, or so much as touched? What are Fornications Adulteries,
Pimping, Sodomy, Parricides, Incests and the like, no sins at Rome? or if they
be, why are they so easily born, as it they were not Sins, in the City of Rome,
that Bulwark of Sanctity; and by the Pope, the Vicar of Christ, the Successor
of St. Peter, that most holy Father.

6. O Holy Scribes and Pharisees, to whom this Sanctity was never known! O
Sanctity and Catholic Faith! St. Peter did never teach these things at Rome,
nor St. Paul live there at this rate. They did not publicly exercise the Trade
of Pimping, they took no Tribute of the Whores; they did not openly and freely
tolerate Adulterers and Parricides; they did not admit them into their Bosoms,
their Families, their Councils, nor into the Congregations of Christian Men.
These Men ought not to have aggravated so much the Faults of our Lives; it had
been much better to have approved their own to the World, or at least, to have
concealed them a little more from the Eyes of Men.

7. FOR as for us, we retain and use our ancient Paternal Laws; and administer
Church Discipline seriously and diligently as far as we possibly can, in so
much Corruption of all things, both as to Manners and Times; we have no Stews
nor Herds of Harlots and Concubines; nor do we prefer Adulteries before
Marriage, nor do we exercise Pimping, nor raise Money from Whorehouses; neither
do we suffer Incests and flagitious Lusts; our Aloise's, or our Casa's, or our
Parricidical murdering Diasio's do not go unpunished; for if these things had
pleased us, there had been no occasion of separating from the Society of those
Men, where these (rare) things flourish and are in great esteem, and so we had
also escaped the Hatred of Men, and the apparent Dangers we have run into by
our Departure from them. It is not many months since Paul the IV. had some
Monks of the Augustine Order in Prison at Rome, Paul IIII.
and many Bishops, and a vast number of pious Men for the sake of Religion; he
exercised his Tortures and his Racks, and left nothing untried, and at the
last, how many Adulterers, how many Sodomites, how many Fornicators, how many
Incestuous Men did he find amongst them? Blessed be God, tho we are not what we
should be, nor what we profess to be, yet what ever we are, if we be compared
with these, our very Lives and Innocence will easily confute all these Slanders
For we excite the People, not only by Books and Sermons, but by Example and
good Manners, to all sorts of Virtues and good Works. We teach that the Gospel
is not an^ Ostentation of Knowledge, but a Law of Life; and that as Tertullian
expresses it, ^ Christian should not speak great things, In Apol. c. 45. Romans
2. 13.
but live them, and that not the Hearers, but the Doers of the Law shall be
justified before God.

8. To all these things they commonly add and amplify it too with all manner
of Reproaches, that we are a turbulent sort of Men that we snatch the Scepters
out of the Hands o^ Princes, arm the People against them, subver their
Judicatories and Courts of Justice, and endeavor to reduce Monarchies to
popular States or Commonwealths, dissolve the Laws and retrench the Revenues
of Princes, and tur^ all things topsie turvy, and that in short, if w^ had our
Wills, there should nothing continu^ safe in the Governments of the World. O
how often have they by such Pretenses incensed the Minds of Princes against us,
that so they might crush the Reformation in its first springing up, and Princes
might be possessed with an Aversion for our Religion, before they knew what it
was? and that Magistrates might entertain an Opinion, that when ever they saw
one of us, they saw one of their Enemies?

9. IT would have been a great Affliction to us, to be thus hatefully accused
of so great a Crime as Treason, but that we know that Christ himself and his
Apostles, and an infinite number of other pious Christians have been made the
Objects of public Envy on the same Pretense; for Christ, tho he commanded to
render unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's, Math. 22. 21.
yet he was accused of Sedition, in that he was said to design a Change in the
Government, and to affect and intend a Kingdom; and so they loudly charged him
before the Tribunal of Pilate, John. 19. 12.
If thou let this man go (say they) thou art no Friend to Caesar. And the
Apostles, although they constantly taught that we ought to obey Magistrates, and
that every Soul should be subject to the Higher Powers, Romans 13. 1.
and that not only for fear of Wrath and Punishment, but also for Conscience
sake; yet they were said to stir up the People, and to incite the Multitude to
Rebellion. 5.
Haman brought the Jews into the disfavour of Assucrus, by representing them as
a stubborn and rebellious People, that despised the Edicts and Laws of Princes.
The wicked King Ahab, charged Elijah the Prophet of God that he troubled
Israel. Amasias the Priest of Bethel, accused Amos the Prophet, of a Conspiracy
before Jeroboam. And behold, Amos 7. 10.
says he, Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the House of
Israel, and the Land is not able to bear all his Words. In short, Tertullian
says this was the general Accusation against all Christians in his times, that
they were Traitors, Plotters, and the common Enemies of Mankind. And therefore
if Truth, which is still the same, suffers the same Reproaches as it did
formerly, it may indeed seem troublesome and uneasy, but it is not new or
unusual.

10. IT was easy forty years agon, to fi^ such Slanders upon the then rising
and unknown Truth, when the first Rays of it burst forth in the midst of so
great a Darkness and few men had heard what Doctrines were taught. When Martin
Luther, and Huldericus Zuinglius, two excellent Persons, who were given by God
to enlighten the World, began first to preach the Gospel; when the Thing was
new, and the Event uncertain and the Minds of Men surprised and unsettled and
their Ears open to all manner of Calumnies; and it was not possible to invent
tha^ Defamation of us which would not be believed by the People, even upon the
Account of the Novelty and strangeness of the thing. And so it was in the more
ancien^ times; the first opposers of Christianity, Symmachus, Celsus, Julianus,
and Porphyrius, represented the Primitive Christians as a seditious and
rebellious Sect, before either Prince or People knew well what the Christians
were, or what they professed, or what they would have. But now when our Enemies
may see, and cannot deny that in all our Words and Writings, we diligently
admonish the People of their Duty; that they should obey their Princes and
Magistrates, tho they are wicked men, which is also confirmed by Experience,
and seen and observed by all the World; certainly (I say) it is now a senseless
thing to attempt to make us odious by a parcel of superannuated over-worn Lies,
when they have no new and fresh Crimes to lay to our Charge.

11. WE bless our gracious God, It had been infinitely for the Honor of the
Reformation, if the same Modesty, Loyalty, and Duty had ever attended the
Professors of it. But alas, our Author lived and wrote in a critical Moment,
before the Scotch Tumults, the Civil Wars of France, and the Revolt of the
Netherlands; those that have confirmed the truth of the Popish Objections by
ill Principles which they borrowed from them and worse Practices, shall do well
to consider what Answer they will be able to give in the Day of Judgment, for
the Sin and Scandal they have brought upon the Reformation; but when all is
done, blessed be God, the Church of England and her Children have maintained
this Doctrine inviolably, and the Honor of that Church thereby unspotted to
this day, though she has suffered very much for her Fidelity and Loyalty.
whose Cause this is, that there has yet been no Example of any Insurrection
or Rebellion in any of those Countries, Kingdoms or Commonwealths which have
embraced the Reformation. We have not subverted any Monarchy, we have not
diminished any^Princes Jurisdiction or Rights, we have not troubled any
Commonwealth. The Kings of England, Denmark and Sweden, the Dukes of Saxony,
the Counts of the Palatinate, the Marquesses of Brandenburgh, the Lantgraves of
Hessia, the Commonwealths of the Switzars, the free Cities of Strasbourgh,
Basil, Frankfort, Ulm, Augsburg, and Norimburg are all in the same State they
were before the Reformation; or rather, because the People are now better
instructed in the matters of Obedience to their Governors than they were
before, in a better State. Let our Defamers go into those places where the
Gospel is settled by the Blessing of God, and then tell us where Princes have
more Majesty? Where there is less Pride and Tyranny? Where are Princes treated
with more Respect? Where the People are less Tumultuous? Where the Civil
Government or Ecclesiastical was ever in greater Tranquillity?

12. BUT you will say the Boors of Germany fell into Tumults and Insurrections
upon the first preaching of this Doctrine. Be it granted, but then Martin
Luther, the first Divulger of it, did with great vehemence and sharpness write
against them, and reduced them to their Allegiance and Duty.

13. AND whereas some ignorant men have objected that the Switzars murdered
Leopold the Archduke of Austria, and changing the State, erected a
Commonwealth, and so freed their Country; this was done, as appears by all
Histories, above two hundred and sixty years since, under Boniface the 8th.
when the Papal Power was at the highest, about two hundred years before
Huldericus Zuinglius began to preach the Gospel, or indeed was born. But from
that time to this, all things there have been in the greatest Tranquillity and
Quiet that was possible, not only in relation to foreign Wars, but intestine
Commotions; so that if it were a sin to deliver their Country from a foreign
Dominion, which oppressed them with great Insolence and Tyranny, yet it is
unjust and absurd to load the Reformation with the Crimes of others, or them
with those of their Forefathers.

14. BUT O immortal God! Shall the Bishop of Rome accuse us of Treason? Will he
pretend to teach the People Subjection and Obedience to Magistrates? Or has he
any regard to Majesty? Why then does he suffer himself to be called by his
Flatterers the LORD OF LORDS, which none of the ancient Bishops of Rome ever
did; as if he would have all Kings and Princes whoever they were, and
wheresoever, be no better than his Vassals and Slaves? Augustus Steuchus Anto.
de Rosellis.
Why does he boast that he is the KING OF KINGS, and that he has the Right of
commanding them as his Subjects? Why does he force Emperors and Monarchs to
swear Obedience to him? Why does he boast that his own Majesty is seventy seven
times greater than the Majesty of the Emperor, and that forsooth, because God
made two great Lights in Heaven, De major and obed solit.
and because the Heavens and the Earth had not two several, but one single
Beginning? Why have he and his Followers in that, De major and obed. Vnam
Sanctam.
like the Anabaptists and Libertines, shaken off the Yoke, and exempted
themselves from the Jurisdiction of all Civil Powers, that they might with the
greater liberty and security plague the World?

15. WHY has he his Legates, that is, a crafty sort of Spies, as it were in
ambush, in the Courts, Councils and Chambers of all Kings? Why does he (as his
Interest requires) set Princes at variance amongst themselves; and at his
pleasure, fill the Earth with Seditions? Why does he proscribe and take for an
Heathen and Pagan, whatever Prince withdraws himself from his Dominion, and
promise his Indulgences so freely, if any man will by any means whatsoever
assassinate his Enemies? Does he preserve Empires and Kingdoms, or at all
consult and desire the Public Peace? You ought, O pious Reader! to pardon us,
if these things seem a little more sharp and eager than becomes a Divine; for
so great is the Provocation, so great and so impotent with all is the Ambition
of the Popes, that it cannot be expressed in other or milder Words. For he had
once the Insolence to say in a public Council, that all the Authority of all
the Kings in the World depended upon him. Clement. 5. in Council Viennensi Leo
papa.
He, out of Ambition and Desire to Rule, distracted the Roman Empire, and tore
in pieces the Christian World; he absolved the Italians, and amongst them,
himself, from the Oath wherein they were obliged to the Emperor of Greece, with
great perfidy; and solicited his Subjects to revolt from him, and called
Charles Martell the Great out of France into Italy; and after a new and till
then unheard of manner, made him Emperor. Zacharias Papa.
He deposed Chilperick King of France, an innocent Prince, only because he did
not like him, and set up Pipin in his Place. He would, if he had been able,
have cast out Phillip the Fair, another King of France, and have adjudged the
Kingdom of France to Albert King of the Romans. He broke the Power of Florence,
Clemens Papa. 7.
tho his own Country, which was then a most flourishing City, and changing its
free and peaceable State, he delivered it up to the Lust of one man. He made
all Savoy to be torn in pieces by the Emperor Charles the 5th. on the one side,
and Francis the First, King of France on the other, The same Clemens.
scarce leaving to the miserable Duke, one City to shelter himself in.

16. I am weary of Examples, and indeed there is nothing more troublesome than
to enumerate the great Actions of the Popes of Rome of this nature. I pray of
whose Party were they, who poisoned the Emperor Henry the 7th. in the
Eucharist? and they who did the same to Pope Victor in the holy Chalice? Who
exercised the same Art upon our King John of England, in a common Table Cup?
whoever they were, and of what Party soever, this is certain, they were neither
Lutherans nor Zuinglians. Who is it, that at this day permits the greatest
Kings and Monarchs to kiss his Feet? Who is it that commands the Emperor to
hold his Bridle, and the King of France his Stirrup? Who was it that cast
Francis Dandalus, Sabellicus.
Duke of Venice, and King of Crete and Cyprus under his Table, to gnaw the
Bones with the Dogs? who crowned Henry the 6th. Coelestinus Papa.
the Emperor at Rome, not with his Hands, but with his Feet; and then with his
Foot kicked his Crown off again; adding, that he had power to create Emperors
and to depose them? Who armed Henry the Son against Henry the 4th. his Father;
Hildebrandus Papa.
and caused the Son to take his Father Prisoner, and having shaven and treated
him ignominiously, to cast him into a Monastery, where he pined away with
Hunger and Sorrow? who was it that trod insolently upon the Neck of the Emperor
Frederick; and as if this had not been a sufficient Affront, subjoyned out of
the Psalms of David, Psalm. 91. 13.
Thou shall walk upon the Asp, and the Basilisk, and shall tread the Lion and
the Dragon under thy Feet. Where is there such another Example of despised and
injured Majesty, in all History, except in Tamberlane the Scythian, a fierce
and a barbarous Prince, and in Saphores, King of Persia? All these were Popes,
all of them Successors of St. Peter; all most Holy Men, whose Words were every
one of them to be Gospel to us.

17. IF we be guilty of Treason, who reverence our Princes, who submit to them
in all things as far as the Scriptures will permit us; what then are these Men,
who have not only done all these base things, but have also extolled them as
generous Actions? Do they thus teach the People to revere Magistrates? or can
they with any Modesty, accuse us of being Seditious Men, the Disturbers of the
Public Peace, and Contemners of the Majesty of Princes? For as for us, none of
us shake off the Yoke, nor imbroil Kingdoms, nor dispose of Empires; nor do we
reach Poison to our Kings, nor put out our Feet to them to kiss, nor do we
insultingly tread upon their Necks. No, our Profession, our Doctrine is this,
Chrysostomus 13. ad Romans
That every Soul, whose ever it is, whether it be a Monk or an Evangelist, or a
Prophet, or an Apostle, it ought to be subject to Kings and Magistrates; and so
the Pope himself, except he affect to seem greater than the Evangelists,
Prophets and Apostles, ought to acknowledge and call the Emperor his Lord, as
the ancient Popes in better times ever have done. Gregorius saepe in epist.
Romans 13. 2.
We publicly teach, that Princes are to be obeyed as Men sent by God, and
whosoever resists them, resists the Ordinance of God. These are our Doctrines,
these Principles shine forth in our Books, in our Sermons, in our Lives, and in
the Modesty and dutiful behavior of our People.

18. AND whereas they pretend we have departed from the Uuity of the Catholic
Church, this is not only odious, but tho it is not true, yet it has an
appearance and similitude of Truth in it. But then, not only those things which
are true and certain find belief with the ignorant Multitude, but those things
also which may seem probable; and so we shall ever observe, that crafty cunning
Men, who had not the Truth on their sides, have ever maintained their Cause
with the Resemblances of Truth; that those who could not dive into the bottom
of things, might be taken at least with the show and probability of their
Arguments. Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 16.
Because the Primitive Christians, our Forefathers, when they Prayed to God,
turned their Faces toward the rising Sun; there were some that said they
worshipped the Sun, and that it was their GOD; and because they said, that as to
their eternal and immortal Life, they lived on nothing but the Flesh and Blood
of the Lamb without spot, meaning thereby our Savior Jesus Christ: Envious
Men, the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose only business it was, Tertul. in
Apolog. cap. 7. 8, 9.
to render the Christian Religion by any means hateful, did thereupon persuade
the People that the Christians were impious Men; that they offered Humane
Sacrifices, and drank Man's Blood; and when the Christians said with God, there
is neither Male nor Female, that is, that as to the obtaining of Justification,
there is no distinction of Persons, and did salute one another commonly by the
Names of Brother and Sister; there were not wanting some who slandered the
Christians thereupon, Idem. cap. 39.
and said, they made no distinction amongst them of Sex or Age, but like
Beasts, promiscuously lay together. And when they met frequently in Vaults and
secret places to Pray and hear the Gospel, which sort of private Places and
Meetings, had sometimes been made use of by Conspirators against the
Government; there was thereupon a Rumor spread abroad, that they conspired
together, and had secret Consultations about murdering the Magistrates and
subverting the Government. And because in celebrating the Holy Communion, they
made use of Bread and Wine, according to the Institution of Christ, they were
thought by many not to worship Christ, but Bacchus and Ceres, because those
heathen Deities were worshipped by the Pagans with a like Rite, with Bread and
Wine. These things were then believed by many, not because they were true (for
what could possibly be less so?) but because they had a kind of resemblance of
Truth, and by that show of truth were fitted to deceive them.

18. SO they traduce us, and say, that as Heretics we have departed from the
Unity of the Catholic Church, and the Communion of Christ; not that they
believe this to be true (nor are they at all concerned whether it be true or
false) but because the thing may in some sort seem true to ignorant Men; for we
have indeed departed, not as Heretics ever have done, from the Church of
Christ; but, as good men ought to do, from the Contagion of wicked Men and
Hypocrites; and yet here they insult wonderfully, that theirs is the Church,
the Spouse of Christ, the Pillar of Truth, the Ark of Noah, out of which, no
Salvation is to be hoped for; and in the interim, they assert with the same
Confidence, that we have revolted, that we have rent the Coat of Christ, and
torn our selves from his Body, and made a desection from the Catholic Faith.
And when they have thus left nothing unsaid, which can possibly be (tho never
so falsely and slanderously) objected against us, yet at last they cannot
pretend that we have forsaken the Word of God, or the Apostles of Christ, or
the Primitive Church.

19. NOW we have ever thought, that the Primitive Church which was in the times
of Christ and the Apostles and holy Fathers, was the Catholic Church. Nor do
we doubt, but that that Church is the Ark of Noah, the Spouse of Christ, the
Pillar and Foundation of Truth; or to place in it all the Hopes of our
Salvation. It is indeed an odious thing to break off and depart from that
Society a Man has long lived in, especially if that Society consist of Men who
seem to be, and are therefore called Christians, tho in truth they are none.
And in reality, we do not so contemn their Church, as bad as it now is, (for
the Name sake, and (...) Gospel of Jesus Christ was once truly and purely
taught there) as that we have willingly departed from it without necessity. But
what if an Idol be set up in the Church of God, and that Desolation appears
there, which Christ foretold should stand in the holy Place? What if some
Pirate or Robber possesses himself of the Ark of Noah? certainly, as often as
these men thus preach to us of the Church, they make themselves only to be that
Church, and ascribe all those glorious Titles to themselves, and triumph like
those of Old, Jerem. 7. 4.
who cried The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; or like the Scribes
and Pharisees, John 8. 39.
when they boasted they were the Children of Abraham.

20. THUS do they impose upon silly men, by vain and useless Shows, and see^ to
overwhelm us with the mere Name of the Church; just as if a Thief having got
po^^session of another man's House, and havin^ by force expelled or slain the
true Owne^ should afterward claim it as his own, an^ keep the true Heir out;
or as if Antichris^ after he has seized the Temple of God^ should afterward
pretend it were his ow^ and that Christ had no right to it. For the^ our
Adversaries have left almost nothing li^ a Church, in the Church of God, yet
the^ will needs seem the only Patrons and Defe^^ders of the Church; just as
Gracchus defende^ the Roman Exchequer, by making such profuse Largesses, and
such unreasonable Expenses, that he quite ruined the Public Treasury. But then
there was never any thing yet so absurd or wicked, but it might seem easy to
be covered and defended by the Name of the Church; for Wasps make Combs, and
impious Men have their Assemblies not much unlike the Churches. But they are
not presently the People of God who are called so, nor are they all Israelites
who are of Israel. The Arrian Heretics boasted that they only were Catholics,
Augustine. Ep. 48. ad Vincentium.
and they called all the rest, sometimes Ambrosians, and at other Athanasians,
and Johannites. And Theodoret tells us, that tho Nestorius was an Heretic, yet
he covered himself (...), with the Pretense and Cloak of the Orthodox Faith.
Ebion, tho he was of the same Opinion with the Samaritans, yet, as Epipha^es
assures us, he would needs be called a ^^hristian. The Mahometans at this day,
tho ^t is clear from all Histories, and they themselves cannot deny it, that
they are descend^^d from Hagar; yet, as if they were the Children of Sarah the
free Woman, the Wife of Abraham, they will needs, for the Name and Race sake,
be called Saracens.

21. SO the false Prophets in all times, who ^pposed themselves to the true
Prophets of God, to Isaiah, to Jeremias, to Christ and ^is Apostles, boasted of
nothing so much as ^f the Name of the Church: Nor did they so ^ercely persecute
them, and call them Do^erters and Apostles upon any other account (...) much,
as because they departed from their Society, and would not observe the Customs
of their Ancestors. And if we be obliged to submit to the Judgment of those
Men, who then governed the Church, and will regard neither God nor his Word,
nor any thing else, it cannot be denied, but that the Apostles made Defection
from the High Priests and Priests, that is, from the Catholic^ Church, and
without, and against their Wills, innovated in many things which pertained to
Religion, and consequently were rightly condemned according to the Law^ And so
as they say, Antaeus was to be lifte^ by Hercules from the Earth his Mother,
before he could be conquered by him: So our A^^versaries are to be lifted up
from that Mothe^ of theirs, the vain Pretense and Shadow (...) the Church, or
else they will never yield (...) the Word of God. So as Jeremiah says, (...)
not so much boast that you have the Temp^ of God with you, that Con^idence is
Vain^^ for these are (says he) lying Words. Jeremiah 8. 4. Revel. 2. 9.
And the Angel in the Apocalypse; they say that they (...) Jews, but they are
the Synagogue of Satan. A^ when the Pharisees boasted that they were (...) the
Stock and Blood of Abraham, Chr^^ told them they were of the Devil their Fath^^
John 8. 44.
for you do not resemble Abraham your (...) as if he should have said, you are
(...) what you so much desire to be called, (...) impose upon the People by
vain Titles; an^ abuse the Name of the Church to the Rui^ of the Church; and
therefore they ought (...) the first place to prove this truly and plain^ to
us, viz. that the Church of Rome, as it (...) now managed by them, is the true
and O^^thodox Church of God, and that it agrees with the Primitive Church of
Christ and his Apostles, and of the Holy Fathers; which Primitive Church, we
doubt not was the Catholic Church. We indeed will readily grant, that there is
no cause why we should forsake their Society, if we could once persuade our
selves that Ignorance, Error, Superstition, the Worship of Idols, the
Inventions of Men, and they very often quite contrary to the Holy Scriptures,
did either please God, or sufficiently promote our Salvation; or if we could
once believe that the Word of God were only written for some years, and after
that were to be abrogated; or that the Words and Laws of God, were entirely to
be submitted to the Wills of Men; so as whatever he says or commands, except
the Bishop of Rome wills and commands the same too, it were to be esteemed void
and not spoken. But in that we have departed from a Church, whose Errors are
attested and manifest, and which has apparently departed from the Word of God;
and whereas we have not so much departed from her as from her Errors, and that
not turbulently and injuriously, but quietly and modestly; in all this, we say
we have done nothing contrary to Christ and his Apostles: For the Church of God
is not of that nature, that it cannot possibly be darkened with any Spots, or
sometimes not need a Reformation; for if it were so, what need were there of
all those Councils and great Meetings, without which, as Aegidius says, In
Lateran. Council. sub ^^lio.
the Christian Faith cannot stand? for (says he) as often as Councils are
intermitted, so often is the Church left by Christ. Or if there be no danger,
that the Church can take damage; what need is there of the insignificant (as
they have ordered the Matter) Name of Bishops? Why are they called Pastors, if
there be no Sheep that can go astray? Why are they called Watchmen if there be
no City that can be betrayed* Why Pillars, if there be nothing that can sink
down into Ruin, when not supported by them? In the very beginning of the World
the Church of God was begun, and she was then instructed by a heavenly Word,
which God sent out of his own Mouth; She was furnished with Ceremonies, taught
by the Spirit of God, by the Patriarchs and Prophets and so she was preserved
and brought down to those times, in which Christ showed himself in the Flesh.

22. BUT O immortal God! How often was She in the mean time, and how horrible
darkened and diminished? For where w^^ She when all Flesh had corrupted their
wa^ upon the Earth? Where was She when then was only eight Persons, and not all
those neither Chaste and Pious, whom God was plea^ed to rescue out of a common
Ruin, and preserve alive in a general Destruction? When Elijah so bitterly and
mournfully complained that he only was left of all the Earth, 2 Kings 19.
wh^ did truly and rightly worship God. When Isaiah said, Isaiah 1. 22.
the Silver of the People of God that is, the Church, was become Dross, and the
once Faithful City was become an Harl^^ and that in her, from the Head, to the
Sole (...) the Foot, there was no soundness in her whol^ Body; or when Christ
said, Math. 21. 13.
that the House of God, was by the Scribes and Pharisees turned into a Den of
Thieves? for the Church of Christ, like a Corn-field, if it be not ploughed and
broken, tilled and dressed, instead of Wheat it will bring forth Thistles,
Darnel, and Nettles. And therefore God from time to time, sent Prophets and
Messengers, and at last Christ himself, to reduce the People into the right
way, and to restore the sinking Church to her former Strength and Beauty. And
now let no man say these things could only happen under the Law, when the
Church was under the Shadow, and in her Infancy; when Truth was covered with
Figures and Ceremonies, and nothing was yet brought to perfection; when the Law
was not written on the Hearts of Men, but on Tables of Stone: (tho this
Pretense is very ridiculous) for there was then the same God, the same Christ,
the same Spirit, the same Doctrine, the same Faith the same Hope, the same
Inheritance, the same Covenant, and the same efficacy in the Word of God. Lib.
1. c. 1. HsE.
And Eusebius faith, that all the Faithful from Adam were indeed Christians
(tho they were not so called.) Let no man I say, speak thus, for St. Paul the
Apostle found the same Errors and Defects under the Gospel, in the highest
Perfection and the greatest Light; so that he was forced to write thus to the
Galatians, whom he had just before settled, I am afraid of you, Cap. 4. v. 11.
least I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain, and that you have to no purpose
heard the Gospel; O my little Children, V. 19.
of whom I travel in Birth again, until Christ be formed in you! For there is
no need of speaking how fearfully the Church of Corinth was corrupted. And now
could the Churches of Galatia and Corinth fall, and is the Church of Rome the
only Church that can neither fall nor err? Certainly Christ long since foretold
concerning his Church, Math. 24. 15.
that there should be a time, when the Abomination of Desolation should stand
in the Holy Place. And St. Paul says, 2 These. 2. 4.
that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, 2 Timothy 4. 3. 4.
showing himself that he is God. And the time will come, when men will not
endure sound Doctrine, but in the Church, shall be turned unto Fables. 2 Pet.
2. 1.
And St. Peter says, there shall be in the Church false Teachers; and Daniel
the Prophet says of the last times, the Days of Antichrist, the Truth shall be
cast down and trodden upon in the Earth. And Christ says, there shall be such
great Calamities and Confusions upon the Earth, Math. 24. 24.
that the very Elect (if it were possible) shall be deceived. Now all these
things are to come to pass, not amongst Pagans and Turks, but in the Holy
Place, the Temple of God, in the Church, the Assembly and Society of Christians.

23. AND although these things alone are sufficient to forewarn a wise man, not to
suffer himself easily to be imposed upon by the Name of the Church, so as not
to examine it by the Word of God, yet besides all this, many of the Fathers and
pious and learned Men have oftentimes grievously complained that there
Predictions were come to pass in their times. For God, in the midst of that
Darkness, would that there should be some men, who should as Sparks be observed
by Men, tho they could not give them a very clear and bright Light. Certainly
Hilarious, when things were in some sort sincere and uncorrupted, tells them,
Contra Maxentium.
that they did ill in doting upon Walls; that they were mistaken in venerating
Houses and Buildings, as if they were the Church of God, and offering them to
us instead of Peace. Is it doubtful (says he) whether Antichrist shall sit
there? The Mountains, Woods, Lakes, Prisons and Gulphs to me seem safer,
because the Prophets of God remaining willingly, or being forcibly put into
them, prophesied by the Spirit of God. Gregory the Great, as if he then
perceived and foresaw the Ruin that was near at hand, wrote thus to John
Bishop of Constantinople, who first commanded himself to be called by the Name
of the Universal Bishop, Epistola ad Mauricium lib. 4. Epist. 32.
If the Church should depend upon one man, it would certainly fall. And who is
there that has not observed that this is come long since to pass? It is a
great while since the Bishop of Rome would have the whole Church depend upon
him only, and therefore it is no wonder if it be long since fallen. St. Bernard
above four hundred years agon said, there is nothing sound in the Clergy now,
therefore there is nothing remaining but the Revelation of the Man of Sin; and
in his Sermon on the Conversion of St. Paul, he expresses himself thus. It may
seem perhaps to some, that Persecutions are ceased: No (says he) they now
begin from them who have obtained the Primacy in the Church; thy Friends and
thy Neighbors have approached and stood against thee, from the Sole of the
Foot to the Crown of the Head; there is no Soundness; Iniquity is proceeded
from thy Elders, Judges and Vicars, who seemed to govern thy People. We cannot
now say, as the People are, so is the Priest, because the People are not so bad
as the Priests. Alas, alas, O Lord God! they are the first in persecuting thee,
who seem to love the Primacy, and exercise a Principality in thy Church. Sermon
33.
And upon the Canticles, All my Friends, and all my Enemies, all my
Acquaintance and all my Adversaries, the Servants of Christ; serve Antichrist.
Behold in my Peace, my Bitterness is increased! And Roger Bacon, a man of great
Name, when he had in a sharp Discourse represented the miserable State of his
own times, In libello de idiomate Linguarum.
concludes thus, those many and great Errors require Antichrist as near at hand.

24. GERSON complains, Gerson.
that in his times all the force of Theology was degenerated into a mere
contest of Wit and Sophistry. The Lugdunensian Brothers, Fratres Lugdunenses.
a sort of men which were not ill as to their Lives, used to affirm, that the
Church of Rome, from whence alone the Oracles of Faith were then fetched, was
the Whore of Babylon; concerning which, such clear Predictions were in the
Revelations, and that she was the Assembly of Hell. I know that the Authority
of these Men is in no esteem with them; but what now would they say if I should
produce Witnesses which are of the highest Value with them? What if I say that
Pope Adrian ingenuously confessed, Adrian in Platina.
that all those Mischiefs fell upon the Church from the top of the Papal Power?
Pighius.
Pighius confesses that they erred in this, that they suffered many Abuses to
be brought into the Mass, tho they would have it esteemed most Holy. Gerson,
Gerson.
that the multitude of light foolish Ceremonies, had extinguished all that
Power of the Holy Spirit which should have flourished in us, and all that was
truly Pious. All Greece and Asia complained that the Popes of Rome, by their
Doctrines of Purgatory, and Sales of Indulgences, had both offered Violence to
the Consciences of Men, and robbed their Purses.

25. Laurentius Valla, Marsilius Patavinus, Franciscus Petrarcha, Hieronymus
Savanarola, Abbas Joachimus, Baptista Mantuanus, and before them all, St.
Bernard, have very often grievously complained of the Tyranny and Persian Pride
of the Bishops of Rome, and have not obscurely hinted (whether true or falsely,
I will not inquire) that the Pope was Antichrist; not to mention a number of
others, who, because they have freely and ingenuously reprehended the Vices of
the Popes, will perhaps be numbered by them amongst their Enemies; but all these
I have named, lived either at Rome it self, or under the eyes of these most
Holy Fathers, and were intimately acquainted with their way of living, and did
never depart from their Catholic Faith. Neither can any man object that these
were Lutherans or Zuinglians, for they lived not only some few years, but some
entire Ages before the Names of these Men were heard of in the World; and they
saw also even then, that Errors were crept into the Church, and desired they
might be amended. And where was the Wonder if the Church fell into some Errors
in those times, in which neither the Bishop of Rome, who alone had the chiefest
Management of Affairs, or almost any other Persons either did; or indeed
understood what was their Duty; for it is not credible, that in that time, in
which they were so idle and drowsy, the Devil was perpetually a sleep or idle
too. For what kind of men they were, and with what fidelity they took care of
the House of God; tho we are silent, they may be pleased to hear their own St.
Bernard. Those Bishops (says he) to whom the Church of God is now committed,
are not Teachers, but Seducers; not Pastors, but Impostors; not Prelates, but
Pilates. Thus St. Bernard wrote then of him that called himself the Great
Pontiff, and of the Bishops, who then sat at the Helm. He was no Heretic, he
was no Lutheran, he never forsook their Church, and yet he never stuck at
calling those Bishops they then had, Seducers, Impostors, Pilates. And now when
the People were openly seduced, and Christians imposed upon, and Pilate mounted
the Tribunal and adjudged Christ and his Members to the Fire and Sword; O good
God! in what condition was the Church then? And now of so many and such gross
Errors, what one Error have they reformed to this day? yea, what one Error have
they at any time acknowledged and confessed.

26. BUT now, whereas they pretend to be in Possession of the whole Catholic
Church, and call us Heretics, because we do not agree with them. Let us see
what Mark that Church has of the Church of God: Nor is the Church of God very
difficult to be found, if you seriously and diligently seek for it; for it is
placed in an high and illustrious Place, and built on the top of a Mountain,
and the Foundations of it are laid upon the Apostles and Prophets. Ephesians 2.
20.
There (says St. Augustine) let us seek the Church, there let us try our Cause;
De Vnitate Eccl. cap. 3. Ib. cap. 4.
and in another place he says, the Church is to be shown cut of the sacred
Scriptures, and whatever (Society) cannot derive it self from them, is not the
Church. And yet I know not whence it proceeds, whether from Reverence or
Conscience, or a despair of Victory, that these men always dread and shun the
Word of God, as much as a Thief does the Gallows; and in truth it is no Wonder,
for as they say, a Beetle is presently extinguished in Opobalsam, although it is a
most fragrant Ointment: So they see their Cause is suffocated and ruined when
ever it comes near the Scriptures, which are a sort of deadly Poison to it.
Therefore they accustom themselves to call the Holy Scriptures, which our
Savior Jesus Christ did not only cite on all occasions, Our Savior resigned
up his Soul to his Father in the Words of David. Luke 23. 46. Psalm. 31. 5.
but at the last, sealed them with his Blood: that they may drive the People
from them, as if they were dangerous and destructive, with the greater
facility; these very Scriptures I say, they call a cold, uncertain,
unprofitable, dumb, killing, dead Letter, which seems to us to be the same
thing as if they should wholly deny them to be the Word of God: And besides all
this, they commonly add a no very proper Simile too. Pighius in Hierarchia.
They are (say they) a Nose of Wax, and may be formed and set all manner of
ways, and be made to serve all manner of Purposes. Does the Pope not know that
that these things are said by his Followers? Does he not understand what kind
of Patrons he has?

27. LET the Pope then be pleased to hear how piously and how holily Hosius a
certain Polander, and a Bishop, as he says himself, certainly an eloquent and
not unlearned man, and a sharp and violent defender of his Interest, writes
concerning the Scriptures. I believe he will admire a pious man could possibly
entertain such impious Thoughts, or write so contemptuously of those very words
which he knew proceeded from the Mouth of God; and above all that, he should
seem to desire that it might not pass for his Sense alone, but the common
Opinion of the whole Popish Party. We (says he) have bid adieu to the
Scriptures, having seen so many, not only different, but contrary
Interpretations given of them; let us then rather hear God himself speak, then
apply our selves and trust our Salvation to those jejune Elements: There is no
need of being Skilful in the Law and Scriptures, but of being taught by God:
That Labor is ill employed that is bestowed on the Scriptures, for the
Scripture is a Creature and a poor kind of Element. Thus far Hosius, in his
Book of the express Word of God, in this place craftily, under the Person of
another Man, tho he speaks the same thing in several other places in the same
Book, as his own Opinion without any disguise: which is said with the same
Spirit and Affection, as the like things were heretofore by Montanus and
Marcion, who are reported frequently to have said, when they contemptuously
rejected the Holy Scriptures, that they knew more and better things than either
Christ or his Apostles ever knew. What then shall I say on this Occasion? O ye
Pillars of Religion! O ye Presidents of the Church of Christ! is this the
Reverence ye pay to the Word of God? Do ye bid an Adieu to the Sacred
Scriptures, which St. Paul says are divinely inspired, 2 Timothy 4. 16.
which the Holy God has illustrated by so many Miracles, in which the certain
Footsteps of Jesus Christ are imprinted, which were cited as Testimonies by all
the Holy Fathers, by the Apostles, by Christ himself the Son of God, when
occasion required it? do ye (I say) bid adieu to these, as if they were not
worthy of your regard? that is, do ye impose silence upon God, who it is that
speaks clearly to you in the Scriptures? Or will you call that Word a poor and
a dead Element, by which only, as St. Paul says, we are reconciled to God, 2
Cor. 5. 19.
and which, as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 19. 8.
is Holy and Pure and shall endure for ever? Or will you say, that all the
Pains we spend in that which Christ commanded us to search diligently, and to
have ever in our Eye, is lost? and that Christ and the Apostles, when they
exhorted the People to a careful Perusal of the Scriptures, that they might
thereby abound in all Knowledge and Wisdom, designed only to delude and abuse
Men? It is no wonder that these men despise us and our Writings who thus
undervalue God himself and his Oracles; but it was a most foolish Action to
offer so great an Affront to the Word of God, that they might do us a small
mischief.

28. AND now, as if all this were too little, they commit the Holy Scriptures
to the Fire, as the wicked King Jehojakim, and as Antiochus and Maximinus, two
Heathen Persesecutors, did, calling them the Books of Heretics; and they seem
altogether disposed to imitate Herod the Great, in what he did for the
establishing of his Power; for he being an Idumaean of another Race and Blood
then the Jews were, and desiring to be thought a Jews, that so he might the
better settle that his Kingdom over them, which he had obtained from Augustus
Caesar, he commanded all their Genealogies which they kept in their Public
Register, and were carefully preserved from Abraham's times, (by which, without
any Error, it was easy to find of which Tribe any person was descended) to be
burnt and abolished, Eusebius. lib. 1. c. 7.
that there might be nothing to be found for the future, by which it might be
proved he was of another Nation. So these men, pretending that all their
Innovations were consigned to them by Christ and his Apostles, and desiring
they should be accordingly esteemed, lest there should be any thing any where
extant, which might contradict these Dreams and Shams, either burn or suppress
the Scriptures, and keep them from the People. St. Chrysostom has written very
well and appositely against such men as these; In opere imperfecto.
Heretics (says he) shut the Gates of Truth, for they know if they be kept
open, the Church will never be thought theris. And Theophylact styles the Word
of God a Candle, by the Light of which, a Thief may be discovered. And
Tertullian says, the Scriptures convict the Frauds and Thefts of Heretics:
For why else do they hide and suppress the Gospel, which Christ commanded his
Disciples to publish from the House top? Why else do they endeavor to put that
Candle under a Bushel, which ought to be set in a Candlestick? Why do they
trust more to the Ignorance, Blindness, and Folly of the Multitude, than to the
Goodness of their Cause? Do they think their Arts are not disclosed? or that,
as if they had Gyges his Ring, they can go undiscovered? The World sees now
with both Eyes, what is so carefully locked up in the Cabinet of the Popes
Breast; this one Argument is sufficient to prove they do not act well and
sincerely: that Cause deserves to be suspected, which declines a Scrutiny, and
hates the Light; for as Christ says, John 3. 20.
he that does Evil seeks Darkness and hates the Light, but a mind conscious of
what is good, willingly comes forth, that the Works which come from God may be
seen; but these Gentlemen are not so blind, but they see what will become of
their Kingdom, if the Scriptures come once to be generally known; and as it is
said of old, all the Idols of the Demons, which before gave Oracles, suddenly
became dumb upon the appearance of Christ upon Earth; so now will all their
Arts, at the approach of the Gospel, 2 These. 2. 8.
sink down into Ruins and Rubbish, for Antichrist is not to be deposed by any
other thing than the Brightness of the coming of Christ.

29. WE do not, like them, presently betake our selves to Fire and Sword, but
to the Scriptures, nor do we assault them with force and Arms, but with the
Word of God. By them, as Tertullian says, we nourish our Faith, by them we
erect our Hope, by them we establish our Confidence; for we know that the
Gospel of Jesus Christ is the Power of God unto Salvation, and that in it there
is eternal life, and as St. Paul admonishes us, we would refuse to hear an
Angel of God that came from Heaven, if he endeavored to turn us away from any
part of this Doctrine. Yea, as that most holy man, Juastin Martyr said of
himself, we would not believe God himself, if he should teach us another
Gospel; Galat. 1. 8.
for whereas they make the Holy Scriptures like silent Masses, dumb and
useless, and appeal rather to God himself speaking in the Church, and in
Council^ that is to their own (better) Senses and Opi^nions, that is a very
uncertain and dangerou^ way of finding out Truth, and in a sort Pha^natical,
and which was never approved b^ the Holy Fathers. St. Chrysostom says indeed^
that many boast of the Holy Spirit, but if the^ they speak what is their own,
they glory falsely (...) what they have not; for (says he) as Christ denied
that he spoke from himself, when he spoke out of the Law and the Prophets; so
now, if an^^thing besides the Gospel is obtruded upon us under the Name of the
Holy Ghost, it is not to be believ^ed; for as Christ is the Completion of the
La^ and the Prophets, so the Spirit is the Completion (...) the Gospel.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the Answers and Objections out of the Fathers and Councils.
BUT though they have not the Scriptures on their side, perhaps they will
pretend they have the ancient Doctors and the Holy Fathers; for that they have
ever boasted, that all Antiquity, and the perpetual Consent of all times is for
them, and that all our Pretenses are Novel, and were never heard of, till
within the course of a very few years last past.

2. NOW certainly there can nothing of more weight be said against Religion,
then that it is new. We know not how this has come to pass, but from the
beginning of the World, thus it has ever been; for whenever God has
discovered and restored to Mankind the light of his Truth, tho it is not only
of the utmost Antiquity, but older than time it self, and eternal; yet it ever
seems to wicked men, who hate it, to be new and of no Antiquity. That impious
and bloody man Haman, that he might bring the Jews into disfavour, thus accused
them to Ass^erus: Thou, O King, Esther 3. 8. According tothe vulgar Latin.
have here in thy Dominions, a certain People scattered abroad, which observes
new Laws, but is stubborn and rebellious against thy Laws. St. Paul also, when
he began first to preach the Gospel to the Athenians, was said to be a Setter
forth of strange Gods, Act. 17. 18.
that is of a new Religion; and accordingly thus they bespeak him, May we know
what this new Doctrine whereof thou speak is? And Celsus, Origin contra
Celsum.
when he wrote expressly against Christ and his Gospel, that he might expose it
to the scorn of men, under the pretense of its Novelty, writes thus, What
(says he) has God after so many Ages, now at last bethought himself? Eusebius
also is our Author, that from the beginning, the Christian Religion was in
derision, styled (...), the new and strange Religion; and so our Adversaries
condemn all our Doctrines as new and strange; but then they desire that all
their own, without exception, should be reputed most ancient; just as the
Magicians and Conjurers, whose business is with the infernal Spirits, that
their abominable Art may be thought the more sublime and divine, as being
derived from great Patrons and Inventors, and of a very ancient Original, do
commonly say, that they have their Books and all their Rites and secret
Mysteries from Athanasius, Cyprian, Moses, Abel and Adam, and from the
Archangel Raphael. So our Enemies, that their Religion too, which they have
not long since patched up for themselves, may with the more ^ase be recommended
to ignorant men, and those that rarely consider what themselves or others do,
pretend that it came down to them ( just such as now it is) from St. Augustine,
St. Hierom, St. Chrysostom and St. Ambrose, from the Apostles and Christ, for
they very well know, that there is nothing more popular, and of greater esteem
with men, than those venerable Names. But now, what if those things they
pretend are so new, do indeed prove to be most ancient? and what if on the
other side, almost all those things which they extol so very much upon the
pretense of Antiquity, when they are well and diligently examined, are in the
end sound to be new and of a very late Original.

3. IN truth, the Laws and Ceremonies of the Jews, although accused by Haman as
new, could never be thought so by any man, who did well and rightly consider
the thing, for they were written on most ancient Tables; and Christ, tho many
thought he departed from Abraham and the ancient Fathers, and brought in a new
Religion in his own name, yet answered truly, John. 5. 46.
if ye believed Moses, ye would believe me also, for my Doctrine is not so new,
for Moses, a very ancient Author and of great esteem with you, has spoken of
me: and St. Paul says, of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which many thought to be
new, that it had the most Ancient Testimony of the Law and the Prophets. And
our Doctrine, which we may much better call the Catholic Doctrine of Christ,
is not so new, but that it is commended to us by the Ancient of days, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in most ancient Monuments, the Prophets and
Gospels, and the Writings of the Apostles; and these cannot now seem new to any
man, but to him to whom the Faith of the Prophets, the Gospel, and Christ
himself seems new. But then as to their Religion, if it be so ancient as they
pretend, why do they not prove it so from the Examples of the Primitive Church,
from the old Fathers and the ancient Councils? Why does so ancient a Cause lie
desolate and without a Patron so very long? Indeed they never want Fire and
Swords; but then as to the ancient Fathers and Councils, there is with them a
deep silence. But it is the height of Absurdity and Folly to begin with those
bloody and brutish Reasons, if they could possibly have found out easier and
milder Arguments.

4. AND again, if they do indeed entirely trust to Antiquity, and do not
dissemble any thing, why did one John Clement, an English man, rend and burn
some Leaves of Theodoret, a most ancient Father, and a Greek Bishop, in the
presence of several persons of good Worth and Credit, believing that another
Copy of that Book was no where to be found, because this Father had
perspicuously and clearly taught, that the Nature of the Bread was not
abolished in the Eucharist? Why does Albertus Pighius deny that the ancient
Father St. Augustine had a true notion of original Sin? Or of Matrimony, in that
he says that a Marriage made after a Vow entered, is a good Marriage, and
cannot be dissolved; upon which occasion Pighius says, Cause. 27. 9. 1.
Nuptiarum bonum in controversiis. This Book is every where to be had thus
imperfect.
Augustine erred and made use of false Logic? And why did they in a late
Impression of Origin, upon the Gospel of St. John, omit the whole sixth
Chapter, in which it is probable, or rather certain, that Father has delivered
many things contrary to their Opinions, concerning the Eucharist, choosing
rather to deface and to mutilate this ancient Father, than to suffer any thing
to appear in the World which might contradict their Doctrine, When this piece
was written, the design of a general Index Expurgatorius upon all the printed
Fathers was not known, which is an undeniable Argument under their own hands,
that the ancient Fathers are not in their Interest; the first of these Indexes
was found at the Sack of Cales in Spain, Anno Domini 1596. many years after
this Apology was published.
by printing the Book perfect? Is their Rending, Suppressing, Maiming and
Burning the Writings of the ancient Fathers, an Argument of their Reliance on
Antiquity?

5. IT is worth the while to see how rarely these Gentlemen agree in matters of
Religion with those ancient Fathers, of whose concurrence they boast so
unmeasurably. 1. The ancient Elibertin Council decreed, Cap. 3.
that what was the Object of Worship should not be painted in Churches. The old
Father Epiphanius says, it is a h^rrible wickedness, Images.
and an insufferable villainy, for any man to set up the Picture, even of Christ
in Christian Churches: but they have filled all their Churches and every Corner
of them with Pictures and Statues, as as if there were no Religion without
them. 2. The ancient Fathers, Scripture. Origines in Leviticum. cap. 16.
Chrysostom in Math. 1. Hom. 2. in Johan. Hom. 3.
Origin and St. Chrysostom, have exhorted the People to the diligent reading of
the Scriptures, that they would buy Books, and discourse amongst themselves of
holy things in their Families, the Wives with their Husbands, and the Parents
with their Children; but our adversaries condemn the Scriptures as dead
Elements, and drive the People from them as much as they can possibly. 3. The
ancient Fathers, Cyprian, Epiphanius and St. Jerome, Marriage. Epist. 11. lib.
1. cont. Ap. Haerct. 61. de virginitate servanda ad Demetriadem.
if any Person who had vowed to live a single Life, did afterward fall into
impurity, and could not overcome the Rages of his Concupiscence, said, it was
better for him to marry, and live chastely in a State of Matrimony; and such a
Marriage is by St. Augustine, another ancient Father, adjudged to be valid and
good, and that it ought not to be recalled or rescinded; but they, if a man has
once bound himself by a Vow, although he is afterward burnt, although he Whores,
although he lives never so lewdly and dissolutely, yet they will never suffer him
to marry; or if he does perhaps marry, they deny that it is a lawful Marriage;
and they ^each, that it is much more holy to keep a Concubine or a Whore, than
to live in a state of Matrimony. 4. St. Augustine, an ancient Father, complained
of the excessive number of impertinent Ceremonies. Ceremonies,
with which the Minds and Consciences of Men were even then oppressed; they, as
if God regarded nothing else, have since swelled the number of them to so
immense a quantity, that there is scarce any thing else left in their Churches.
5. The same ancient Father denies it to be lawful for a Monk to live lazily in
idleness; and under the Show and Pretense of Sanctity, Monks.
to live on what is another; and the ancient Father Apollonius says, such a
Monk is no better than a Thief: But they have whole Flocks or Herds shall I
call them of Monks, who do nothing, nor do they so much as pretend to any show
of Holiness, and yet do not only live by the Labor of others, but fare
deliciously and luxuriously. Cap. 3.
6. An ancient Roman Council decreed, that no man should be present at that
Divine Service which was celebrated by a Priest which he knew kept a Concubine;
Concubines.
but they permit the Priests to keep Concubines for Money, and by force, compel
men to be present at their Sacrilegious Services. Magistracy. Cap. 8.
7. The ancient Apostolical Canons command that Bishop to be deposed, who shall
exercise at the same time the Office of a Bishop, and the Function of a Civil
Magistrate; but these men do, and will exercise both, or rather indeed totally
neglect that which is most of all their Duty, and yet there is no man to remove
and punish them. 8. The ancient Council of Gangra, Married Priests.
forbid any man to put such difference between a married and a single Priest,
as to esteem the one more Holy than the other upon that account; but they put
such a Difference, that they think all the Holy Services which are performed by
a pious and good man who has a Wife are profaned. 9. The ancient Emperor In
Novellis Constable it. 23. and 146. Divine Service to be performed in an audible
Voice. Let those Clergy men of the Church of England consider this, who read
the Service so low, that no man can hear it.
Justinianus, commanded all things in the Divine Service to be pronounced with
an audible, loud, clear, articulate Voice, that the People might thereby reap
some benefit by it; but they, that the People may never understand them,
whisper their Divine Service, not only in an obscure and low Tone, but also in
a strange and barbarous Tongue. 10. The old Only the Canonical Scriptures to be
read in Churches.
Carthagenian Council forbad any thing besides the Canonical Scriptures to be
read in the holy Assemblies of the Church; but they read in their Churches,
what they themselves do not doubt to be mere Lies and silly Fables. And now if
any man thinks these things are of no great consideration, because they were
decreed by Emperors and small Councils, consisting of Bishops of less esteem,
and not in full Councils, and therefore are more fond of the Authority and
Names of Popes. 11. Julius expressly forbad the Priest in the Celebration of the
holy Communion, to dip the Bread in the Calice; but they, contrary to this
Decree, do divide the Bread and dip it. 12. Clemens the Pope says, it is not
lawful for a Bishop to bear both (the Spiritual and Civil) Swords; and (says
he) if thou will have both, thou deceivest thy self and those that hear thee;
but now the Pope claims both, and bears both, and therefore the Wonder ought to
seem the less, if that has followed which Clement foretold, and he has
accordingly deceived himself and those which have heard him. 13. Pope Leo
says, it is not lawful to celebrate more than one Mass in one Day, in one
Church; they say every day sometimes ten, at others twenty, and at other
thirty, and sometimes more in the same Church, at the same time, so that the
miserable Spectator knows not which way to turn him. 14. Gelasius the Pope
says, that if any man divide the Sacrament, and when he has received one part,
refuses the other, he does act Wickedly and Sacrilegiously; but they, contrary
to the Word of God, and the Decree of this Pope, command only one part of the
Eucharist to be given to the People, and by so doing, have made their Priests
guilty of Sacrilege.

6. BUT now if they shall pretend that all these things are antiquated and worn
out of use, and so are in a sort dead, and do not concern our times, yet that
men may see what Faith is to be given to these Men, and with what Hope they
call Councils, let us consider in a few instances, how well they observe those
things which have been ordained of late years, and which are fresh in Memory,
by Councils which they pretend were lawfully called, and in which they
themselves decreed those things I shall mention, to be Religiously observed. In
the last Council of Trent, March 3d. 1547.
not much above fourteen years since, it was decreed by the common Vote of all
Orders there present, Pluralities.
that two Benefices should not be committed at one time to the same Person.
Where is that Sanction now? Is that so soon antiquated and dead too? for they
do frequently give not only two Benefices, but sometimes also several
Monasteries too, and sometimes two, three or four Bishoprics to one Man, and
he too sometimes not only unlearned, and consequently thereby unfit for them,
but a Soldier. In the same Council it was decreed, that all Bishops ought to
preach the Gospel; but they never Preach, nor ever come in a Pulpit, nor do
they think it in the least any part of their Duty. What then is the meaning of
all that show of Antiquity? Why do they glory so in the Names of the Fathers,
and of the ancient and modern Councils? Why would they so fain seem to rely
upon their Authority, whom, as occasion serve, at their Pleasure they despise?

7. BUT I have a great desire to have a little discourse with the Pope himself,
and to tell him some things to his Face. Be pleased then, O Holy Father! who so
often boastest of Antiquity, and pretendest that all the Ancients are entirely
addicted to thy Service to inform us; which of all the ancient Fathers ever
called your Holiness the chief Pontif, or the Universal Bishop, or the Head of
the Church? Which of them ever said that both the Swords were given to thee?
Which of them ever said that you have the Right and Authority to call Councils,
De Major and Obed. Vnam Sanctam in Extravag. Bonifac. 8. Durand. Council. Lat.
sub Julio 2^.
that the whole World was your Diocese? Which of them ever said that all
Bishops had received of your Fullness? That all Power, both i^ Heaven and Earth
was given to you? That you could not be judged by Kings, nor by the whole
Clergy, nor by all the People^ Which of them ever said that Kings and Emperors,
Distinct. 9. Innocentii de major in obed. solite in Extravag. John 22. c. cum
inter nonnullos. in glossa finali, in impressa Editione Parisiis. 1503.
by the Command and will of Christ derived Authority from you? Which of them
ever affirmed with a Mathematical Exactnes^ and Certainty, that your Authority
was pre^cisely seventy seven times greater than that o^ the greatest Kings?
Which of them ever sai^ that you had a greater power than the other Patriarchs?
Which of them ever said you were the Lord God, or not a mere Man like other
Mortals, or styled you a certain Hotch-potch a Mixture or Concrete of God and
Man^ which of them ever said that you were the fountain of all Law? that you
had an Empire^ and Dominion over Purgatory; Antonius de Posellis.
and that yo^ might at your pleasure command the Angels of God? Which of them
ever said that you were King of Kings and Lord of Lords? And now we are in, we
may inquire of a fow other things of the same Nature. What one Man of all the
ancient Bishops and Fathers ever taught you to say a private Mass, whilst the
People did nothing but look on; or to lift the Eucharist above your Head, in
which you now place all your Religion; or to curtail the Sacrament of Christ,
and contrary to his Institution and express Command, to deprive the People of
one half of it? And that we may conclude what one of all the ancient Fathers
taught you, to dispense the Blood of Christ, and the Merits of the Martyrs, and
to sell your Indulgences and all the Apartments and Lodgings of Purgatory, like
Commodities in the Market for Money? They are wont often to celebrate their own
wonderful secret Learning, and their manifold and various Readings. Now let
your Partisans at last produce something of it if they can, or let them at
least show they have read, and do know more than or dinary; for they have often
made hideous Outcries amongst their Hearers, that all the parts of their
Religion are ancient, and approved, not only by the number, but also by the
Continuance and Consent of all Nations and Times.

8. WELL, then let them at least show this their boasted Antiquity; let them
make it appear, that what they so much extol is indeed of so vast an Extent;
let them prove that all Christian Nations have embraced their Religion. But
alas! (as I said before) they flee from their own Decrees, and have already
plucked up those Canons which but a very few years since they made to last for
ever. Why then should we trust them in relation to what they pretend concerning
the Fathers, the ancient Councils, and the Scriptures? They have not, O good
God! they have not, on their sides, what they pretend to have; they have
neither Antiquity, nor Universality, nor the consent of either all times, or
all Nations. And of this they are not ignorant themselves, tho they craftily
dissemble their Knowledge: Yea, at times they will not obscurely confess it;
and therefore sometimes they will allege, that the Sanctions of the ancient
Councils and Fathers, are such as may lawfully be changed, for different
Decrees (say they) will best suit the different State of the Church in
different times And so they hide themselves under the name of the Church, and
by a wretched sham delude Mankind. And in truth it is a great wonder that Men
should be so blind, as not to see these things; or if they do see them so
patient, as to bear and endure them with that stupidity and unconcernment they
seem to have.

9. BUT tho they have abrogated the Canons of the ancient Councils, as too old
and overworn, yet perhaps they have settled ne^ and more useful Rules in their
place; for they have the confidence to say, that if Christ himself, or his
Apostles, should arise from the Dead, they could not administer the Affairs of
the Church of God better or more piously than it is now administered by them:
Indeed they have put others in the place of the former: XXIII. 28. I. 12.
but as Jeremias says, Chaff instead of Wheat, or as Isaiah says, What God
never required at their Hands; for they have stopped up all the veins of Living
Waters, and have hewn for the People of God, broken and polluted Cisterns,
being full of mud and dregs, which neither have in them any pure Water, nor can
hold it if it were put into them. They have torn from the People the Holy
Communion; the word of God from which all true Comfort could only be expected;
the true Worship of God; the right use of the Sacraments and Prayers of the
Church; and they have given us to please our selves withal in the mean time,
of their own pure invention, consecrated Salts, Waters, Oils, Spittle, Palms,
Bulls, Jubiles, Indulgences, Crosses, Censings, and an infinite number of
Ceremonies. And as Plautus calls others of the like nature, Ludos
Ludificabiles, Shows and Pageants, that are very divertising, and good for
nothing else. In these things they have made all Religion to consist; and they
have taught the People that by these things God is rightly appeased, and that
by these things Devils are put to flight, and the Consciences of Men quieted
and confirmed. For these are the Paints and Perfumes of Christianity, these are
the grateful and acceptable things to the All-seeing God; these are to be had
in honor; that Christ's and his Apostles Institutions may be taken away. And
as heretofore the wicked King Jeroboam when he had taken away the true Service
of God, and persuaded the People instead of it to accept the Golden Calves, for
fear they might change their minds, and fall from him, and return to the Temple
of God at Jerusalem, made a long Oration to them, exhorting them to Constancy,
saying to them, These are thy Gods O Israel; thus did your God command you to
worship him. But it would be very grievous and troublesome for you to take so
long a Journey, and to go up every year to worship and adore God at Jerusalem.
Even so our Adversaries when they had once by their Traditions quashed the Laws
of God, lest the People should afterward open their Eyes and fall off from
them, and seek a better way of assuring their Salvation. O how often have they
exclaimed that this is the true Worship of God, which he is pleased with, and
has required of us, and by which he will be appeased when he is angry! and
that it is grievous and troublesome to the People to have recourse to Christ,
and the Apostles and Fathers, and to attend perpetually what they require of
them. Is this their way of bringing the People of God off from the weak
Elements of the World, from the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, and from
humane Traditions? Are the Commandments of Christ and his Apostles to be taken
away, that these goodly things may succeed them? O most righteous Cause, why
should an old Doctrine which has been approved for many Ages, be antiquated,
and a new Form of Religion be brought into the Church of God! Ay (but say they)
be it what it will, nothing ought to be changed, the minds of Men are wondrous
well satisfied with these things; the Church of Rome has so decreed, and she
cannot err; for Sylvester Prierias says, That the Church of Rome is the Rule
and Model of Truth; and that the Holy Scriptures have received from her all
their Faith and Authority. The Doctrine (says he again) of the Church of Rome,
is the infallible Rule of Faith, from whence the Holy Scriptures have all their
strength. For Indulgences were not made known to us by the Authority of
Scriptures; but they were made known by the Authority of the Church, and Popes
of Rome, which is greater than the Scriptures. Pighius does not fear to say,
that without the command of the Church of Rome, we are not to believe the most
clear place of Scripture: Which is just as if one of those who cannot speak
good and pure Latin, and yet by use and custom has got the faculty readily and
fluently to blunder on in the Lawyer's Latin, should therefore stand stoutly to
it, that all others are bound to speak it after the same manner, that was many
years since in use with Mammetrectus and the Catholicon, which they still use
in their Pleadings; because by that means men might very easily be understood,
and their Humors might be gratified: but on the other side that it were
ridiculous to trouble the World now with a new way of speaking, and to reduce
into practice again the old Purity and Eloquence of the Latin Tongue used in
the times of Cicero and Caesar.

10. SO much are they indebted to the Ignorance and blindness of the former
times, that as one says, Many things are often had in great esteem, C. Plinius.
because they were once dedicated to the Service of the Gods. So now we see
many things are magnified and applauded by them, not because they judge them
worthy of this Esteem; but only because by Custom they were once received, and
thereby in a sort dedicated to the Service of God. But they pretend that their
Church cannot Err. I suppose they speak this in the same sense as the
Lacedaemonians were wont to say, there was no such thing as Adultery in their
Commonwealth, when in truth they were all Adulterers, and used an uncertain
sort of Marriages, and had their Wives in common. Or, as the Hungry Canonists
now say of the Pope, that he being Lord of all Benefices, although he sells
Bishoprics, Monasteries, and Livings, and suffers nothing to go from him
without Money: yet because he claims all these as his own, tho he would, yet he
cannot commit Simony: But then how well or rationally this is spoken, we poor
Men cannot see or understand; except as the ancient Romans served Victory,
Plutarch.
so they have served Truth, for when she once came flying to them, they clipped
her Wings that she might no more sly from them. But what if Jeremias should
tell them, as we have observed above, that these are lying Words? And what
again if he should say, XII. 9.
That many Pastors (who ought to have dressed) have destroyed my Vineyard? What
if Christ should say, that those who should have taken the greatest care of the
Temple, have made the House of God a D^n of Thieves? Mat. XX. 13.
For if the Church of Rome cannot Err, she is more beholding to her own good
Fortune, than to their Prudence or Care; for such are their Lives, Doctrines,
and Diligence, that if we are to take our Measures from thence, this Church is
not only in danger of falling into ^rror, but of a total Ruin and Destruction:
And certainly if that Church can err which has departed from the Word of God,
the Commandments of Christ, the Institutions of the Apostles, the Examples of
the Primitive Church, and from the Canons and Sanctions of the ancient Fathers
and Councils, yea, and from her own too, which will be obliged by neither old
nor new Laws, by neither her own nor any others, by neither Divine nor Humane
Laws; I say if all this be to err, then it is certain that the Church of Rome
not only may err, but that she has most wickedly and lewdly erred.

11. BUT they say we were once of their Communion, but now we are Apostates,
and have departed from them; indeed we have departed from them, and we bless
the Great and Holy God for it, and please our selves mightily in it; but then
we have not departed from the Primitive Church, from the Apostles, from Christ;
we were educated indeed with them in darkness and ignorance of God, as Moses
was in the Discipline and bosom of the Egyptians. We were of your Number (says
Tertullian) and I confess it, but what wonder is there in that, Men are made,
and not born Christians. But then I may as well ask them why they have
descended from the seven Hills on which the ancient City of Rome stood, to
dwell in the Plains in the Martian Field; to which perhaps they would reply,
that the Aquaeducts, without which they could not conveniently dwell on those
Hills, have failed. Let them then but grant the same liberty in relation to the
Waters of Life, which they expect we should afford them in regard of the common
Family-water. The Springs did now fail with them: XIV. 3.
The Elders (says Jeremiah) sent their little ones to the Waters, they came to
the Pits and found no Water, they returned with their Vessels empty; they were
ashamed and confounded, XLI. 17.
and covered their heads. Or, as Isaiah says, The Poor and the Needy seek
Water, and there is none, and their Tongue fails for thirst. They had broken
all their Conduits and Watercourse; they had stopped up all the Springs, and
covered the Fountain of Living Waters with mire and mud; and as Caligula, by
shutting up all the public Granaries, enjoined the People of Rome to fast: so
they by stopping up the Fountains of the Word of God, had enjoined the People
to undergo the Miseries of a destructive Thirst; they have (as the Prophet Amos
says) brought upon the World a Famine; VIII. 11.
Not a Famine of Bread, nor a thirst for Water, but of hearing the Words of the
Lord. Miserable Men went searching about for a small spark of Divine Light to
cheer their Consciences, but they were all gone out and they could find none;
this was the miserable Condition and State of their Church, men lived
wretchedly in it with out the Gospel, and without Light or Conslation.

12. AND therefore how afflictive soever our departure from them may seem to
them, yet they ought at the same time to consider how just the cause of it was;
for if they say in general, it is not lawful to leave that Society in which
thou were educated; this were in our Persons to condemn the Prophets, Apostles,
and Christ himself; for why is it not as reasonable to blame Lot for leaving
Sodom, Abraham for leaving Chaldea, the Hebrews for leaving Egypt, Christ for
leaving the Jews, and St. Paul for leaving the Pharisees? For except it be
granted that there may be a just cause of departure, we can see no cause why
these may not in the same manner as we are, be accused of Faction and Sedition.
But if we are to be thought Heretics because we will not obey all their unjust
commands, what are they? Who or what are they to be thought, who have contemned
the Commands of Christ and his Apostles? If we are Schifmaticks who have
forsaken them, by what name shall we call them who have forsaken the Greeks,
from whom they first received the Christian Faith, the Primitive Church,
Christ, and the Apostles, who were their Spiritual Parents? For the Greek
Church who at this day profess the Religion and Name of Christ: The Grecian
Church.
although they have in many things contaminated it, yet they still retain a great
part of those things which they received from the Apostles. And so they have no
private Masses, no maimed Sacraments, no Purgatory nor Indulgences: And as to
the Papal Titles and magnificent Names, they have this esteem of them, that
whoever calls himself the universal Bishop, and the Head of the whole Church,
is a proud Man, and injurious to all the other Bishops who are his Brethren,
nor will they scruple on this single account to call him Heretic.

13. BUT now seeing it is apparent, and cannot be denied, that they have made a
defection from them, from whom they received the Gospel, the Christian Faith
and Religion, yea, and the very being of a Church; what cause is there to be
given, why they should not return back to them as to their Original? Why should
they so much dread the times of the Fathers and Apostles, as if they had seen
nothing? Why, do they see more, or love the Church better than they who
delivered what they have, to them? for as for us we have forsaken a Church in
which we could neither hear the pure Word of God, nor administer the
Sacraments, nor invoke the Name of God as we ought; which they themselves
acknowledge to be faulty in many things, and in which there was nothing to
retain a prudent Man, who thought seriously of his Salvation. Lastly, We have
departed from a Church which is not now what anciently she was; and so we have
departed, as Daniel did, out of the Den of Lions, as the three Children did out
of the fiery Furnace; or to speak more properly, we have not so much departed
from them, as been cast out by them with Execrations and Curses.

14. BUT then we have united our selve to that Church, in which if they would
spea^ their minds truly and freely, they themselve cannot deny but that all
things are purly and reverently administered, and as far as we can possibly,
according to the Example and Manner of the ancient times. Let them compare
their Church and ours together, and they will soon see that they have most
basely departed from the Apostles, and we have most justly and reasonably
departed from them; for we, with Christ and the Apostles, and Primitive
Fathers, give the entire and whole Eucharist to the People; but they contrary
to the Practice of all the Fathers and Apostles, and of Christ himself, divide
that Sacrament with an high Sacrilege, as Gelasius expresses it, and deprive
the People of one half of it. 2. We have recalled the Lords Supper to its first
Institution, and have made it common to as many as was possible, that it might
be as it is called a Communion: But they, contrary to the Institution of
Christ, of a Holy Communion have, made it a private Mass; and so we give the
People the Lords Supper, they entertain them with a vain Show. 3. We affirm
with the ancient Fathers, that the Body of Christ is eaten by none but Holy and
Faithful Men, who are endowed with the Spirit of Christ; but they say that the
very Body of Christ may be truly and indeed, or as they express it, really and
substantially eaten, not only by impious and unbelieving Men, but which is
abominable to be spoken, by Mice and Dogs. 4. We pray so in our Churches, 2
Cor. XIV.
that according to St. Paul's Admonition, the People may know what is prayed,
and understandingly answer Amen to the common Prayers: They like tinkling Brass
pour out in the Church unknown and strange Words, without Understanding, Sense,
or Meaning; and take all the care they can that the People may understand
nothing. 5. And that we may not mention all the differences, because they are
almost infinite, we have turned the Holy Scriptures into all Languages, and
they will scarce allow them to be extant in any Tongue: We invite the People to
read and hear the Word of God, they drive them away from it: We desire the
Cause in Controversy should be understood by all, but they fly from Judgment:
We trust to Knowledge, they to Ignorance; We trust to the Light, and they to
Darkness; We venerate, as it is fit we should, the Words of the Apostles and
Prophets; they burn them. Lastly, in the Cause of God we desire to stand or
fall by the Judgment of God alone; and they would stand only by their own. Now
therefore if they would consider all these things with a sedate and quiet mind,
well disposed to hear and learn, they would not only approve our design, who
having left their Errors, have applied our selves to follow Christ and his
Apostles; but they would likewise fall off from themselves, and certainly unite
with us in our way.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Great Value we have for Councils, and of the little regard the Papists
have for them.
BUT in the next place they pretend that it is altogether unlawful to attempt
any of these things, without the consent of a General Council; because in that
is lodged all the Power of the Church; and Christ has promised that there he
will never fail to be present. But as I said they have violated the
Commandments of God, the Decrees of the Apostles, and almost all the
Institutions and Doctrines of the Primitive Church, without ever expecting any
such Sacred Council.

2. AND whereas they pretend that it is not Lawful for any Church to change any
thing without a General Council; who imposed these Laws upon us, or from whence
had they this Edict? That King acted very ridiculously, who when he was assured
by an Oracle, Agesilaus.
of the Will and Pleasure of Jupiter the Great Heathen God, referred the thing
again to Apollo, that he might see whether he were of the same mind with his
Father Jupiter. But we should act much more imprudently, if when we have heard
God himself speaking to us in the Scriptures, and thereby know his Will and
Pleasure, as if all this were nothing, we should after all refer the thing to a
Council, which is nothing better than to try whether God and Man are both of
one mind; and whether Men will please to approve and enforce the Laws of God by
their Authority. For what, shall not truth be truth, except a Council is
pleased to will and require it? Or shall not God be God without their consent?
If Christ at the beginning would have acted thus, and would neither have taught
nor spoken any thing without the consent of the High Priests, and if he had
referred his whole Doctrine to Annas and Caiphas, where had the Christian Faith
been now? Or who had ever heard of the Gospel? And St. Peter, whom the Pope
mentions more frequently, and with greater Elogies than he does Jesus Christ
himself, confidently withstood the Sacred Council, and replied, Acts 4. 19.
it is better to obey God than Man. And St. Paul, when he had once thoroughly
imbibed the Gospel, and that neither from man nor by man, Gal. 1. 12. 16.
but only by the Will of God, deliberated not with Flesh and Blood; nor did he
refer the thing to his Kinsmen and Brethren, but straight way went into Arabia,
that he might there publish the Divine Mysteries which he had learned of God
himself.

3. WE do not despise Councils, nor the Meetings and Consultations of Bishops
and learned Men; nor have we done what we have done without Bishops and a
Council; the thing was debated along time in a full Assembly of the States. In
the fourth year of Pius the IV. Anno Christi 1563. in the sixth year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, was an end put to the Council of Trent, which is so
often mentioned by this Author.
But what we may expect from that Council which is now pretended to be held by
Pope Pius the IV. in which men are with such facility condemned, uncalled,
unheard, and unseen, is not mighty difficult to conjecture. When Nazianzen in
his times, Nazian. ad Procopium.
saw men in these Meetings so blind and obstinate, that they were wholly lead
by their Affections, and that they sought Victory more than Truth, he
confidently said, that he never saw a good end put to any of the Councils. What
would he now say if he were living and understood their Transactions? for then,
although there was some Faction and Partiality, yet Causes were heard and
considered, and manifest apparent Errors were taken away by their united
Suffrages. But our Adversaries will not so much as suffer the Cause to be
freely debated, nor will they suffer any one of the many Errors that are crept
into the Church to be changed; for they are wont frequently and impudently to
boast that their Church cannot Err, that there is not the least fault in it,
that nothing was to be yielded to us, or that if any thing were granted, it was
to be at the Discretion of the Bishops and Abbots; that they were the sole
Moderators of Affairs, and that they were the Church of God. Aristotle says,
that Bastards cannot make a Civil Society or State, and they may consider
whether they be any better qualified for the making of a Church of God; for
certainly they are neither lawful Abbots, nor genuine Bishops. But suppose they
are the Church, suppose they are to be heard in Councils, and that they have
the sole Right of Voting, yet in ancient time, when the Church of God was well
governed, especially if it be compared with their Church; as St. Cyprian
acquaints us, the Presbyters and Deacons, and some part also of the Laity, were
then called to assist at the hearing of Ecclesiastical Causes.

4. BUT what now, if those Abbots and Bishops know nothing? What if they know
not what Religion is, nor what they ought to believe of God? What if the Law
has perished from the Priests, and Counsel from the Elders? What if, as Micah
says, Micah. 3. 6.
the Night be unto them instead of a Vision, and Darkness instead of a
Divination? What if, I. VI. 10.
as Isaiah says, the Watchmen of the City are all blind, they are all
ignorant? Math. 5. 13.
and what if the Salt (as Christ says) has lost its Force and Savor, Luke
14. 35.
and is become good for nothing, not fit even to be cast upon the Dunghill? for
they defer all to the Pope, who cannot err, but then this in the first place is
ridiculous, It was a common Proverb in the time of the Council of Trent, that
the Holy Ghost was sent from Rome to the Council in a Cloak-Bag, which was
spoken in derision of the Councils depending too much upon the Directions sent
them very frequently from thence by Carriers, as Father Paul acquaints us in
his History of that Council; and to this Proverb our Author in this place
alludes: The same Proverb is mentioned by the Bishop of Quinque Ecclesiae; in a
Leter printed in the end of the Council of Trent in English.
that the Holy Ghost should be sent by a Carrier from the Holy Council to Rome;
that if any Doubt or Stop happens which he cannot expedite, he may take better
Instruction and Counsel from I know not what more learned Spirit; for if it
must come to this at last, what need is there that so many Bishops should with
such great Expense be called from very distant places at this time to Trent? It
had certainly been more prudent, and much better, a shorter and an easier way,
to have at first turned over all this Business to the Pope, and have gone
directly to the Oracle of his sacred Br^ast; besides, it is unjust to devolve
our Cause from so many Bishops and Abbots, to the Judgment of any one man, and
above all others, to the Judgment of the Pope, who is accused by us of many
very great Crimes; and though he has not answered for his own Misdemeanors,
yet has presumed to condemn us before we were called, and that without any
Trial. Now do we invent all this? or is it not now the manner of our late
Councils? Are not all things referred to the Pope by the Council; so that as if
nothing were done by so many Sentences and Subscriptions, he alone may add,
diminish, abrogate, approve, relax, and restrain whatsoever he please? Whose
Words are these? Why did the Bishops and Abbots in the end of the late Council
at Trent, put in these words as a part of their Decree: De electione and electi
potestate. ca. significa.
Saving in in all things the Authority of the Apostolical See? Or why did Pope
Pascal write thus insolently of himself: as if (says he) any Councils could
prescribe a Law to the Church of Rome, when all Councils are held by the
Authority of the Church of Rome, and derive their Force from it too, and
whereas they do patiently in their Decrees except the Authority of the Pope of
Rome? If they will confirm and approve these things, why are Councils called?
but if they are indeed repealed and abrogated, why are they still left in their
Books, as if they were in force.

5. WELL, but suppose in the next place, that the Pope, tho one is above all
Councils, that is, that he is a part greater than the whole, has more Power,
yea, and more Wisdom too, than all his Party besides; and that in spite of St
Jeroms Judgment, the Authority of this one City, Ad Evagrium.
is greater than that of the whole World. What if he has seen none of these
things, and has neither read the holy Scriptures, nor the ancient Fathers, nor
so much as any of his own Councils? What if like Pope Liberius of old, he
becomes an Arrian, or like Pope John, who lived not many years since, thinks
very leudly and wickedly of the Immortality of the Soul, and of the Life to
come; or as Pope Zosimus, heretofore corrupted the Council of Nice, so he, for
the enlarging of his own Power, should corrupt the other Councils, and aver,
that those things were deliberated and constituted by the holy Fathers, in them
which were never so much as thought off; and that, as Camotensis says, the
Popes do frequently, he should offer Violence to the holy Scriptures, that he
may thereby possess himself of a Plenitude of Power? What if he renounce the
Christian Faith, and becomes an Apostate, as Lyranus says, many Popes have
done? What, will the holy Spirit for all these things knock at the Cabin of
his Breast, and obtrude such a Light upon him, contrary to his Inclinations,
and against his Will, that he shall not err though he would? Or shall such a
Pope as this, be the Fountain of all Laws, and all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge be notwithstanding found in him as in a Cabinet? Or if these things
be not in him, can he nevertheless judge well and conveniently of things of
this great weight? Or if he be not qualified to judge of them, does he yet
desire that all these things should be referred to him alone? What now, if the
Popes Advocates, the Abbots and Bishops dissemble nothing, but declare
themselves openly to be the Enemies of the Gospel, and will not see what they
do see, but wrest the Scriptures, and knowingly and willingly deprave and
adulterate the Word of God, and do foully and impiously transfer to the Pope,
what is perspicuously and properly spoken of Christ, and cannot be applied to
any other Mortal? What if they say the Pope is all, and above all, Host. ca.
quanto Abas Panor. de elect. ca. Venerabilis.
or that he can do all those things which Christ can do; or that the Tribunal
and Consistory of the Pope is the same with Christ's? or that the Pope is that
Light which came into the World, which Christ spoke of himself only, and that
he that does Evil hates that Light, and flees from it; Cornelius Episcopus in
Concilio Tridentino. Durandus.
or that all other Bishops have received of his Fullness? Or lastly, what if
they do, without dissimulation or obscurity, clearly and manifestly determine
contrary to the Word of God? Shall whatever they say, nevertheless presently
become Gospel? Shall such as these be the Army God? Will Christ be present with
such Men? Will the Spirit of God move upon their Tongues, Acts 15. 28.
or may they say truly, it seems good to the Holy Ghost and to us?

6. P^trus a Soto and his Voucher Hosius, make no s^ruple to affirm, that that
very Council which condemned our Savior to death, had then the Spirit of
Prophecy, and Truth, and the Holy Ghost with them, and that what those High
Priests said was not false or vain, when they said, (...) have a Law, and by
that Law be ought to die; that in this (according to Hosius) they gave a true
Judgment, Hosius contra Brentium. lib. 2.
and that their Decree was perfectly just, by which Christ was adjudged worthy
of Death. It is a wonder in the mean time these men cannot defend themselves,
and propagate their own Cause, except at the same time they undertake the
Patronage of Annas and Caiaphas. For what Council will these men ever
acknowledge to be vicious and erroneous, who say that was a lawful and good
Council, in which the Son of God was most ignominiously condemn^d to the Death
of the Cross^ and yet considering what almost all their Councils have been, it
was necessary for them thus to pronounce of the Council held by Annas and
Caiaphas. But are they ever like to be the Men which are to reform the Church,
who are at once the Judges and the Criminals? Will they ever lessen their Pride
and Ambition? Will they depose themselves, and give Judgment against
themselves, that the Bishops shall not be unlearned, slow Bellies, multiply
Benefices, carry themselves like Princes, nor bear Arms? Will the Popes beloved
Sons the Abbots decree, that that Monk who does not earn his Bread with the
Sweat of his Brows, is a Thief? or that it is not Lawful for them to live in
the City, or in a Crowd of Men, or of that which belongs to another; that a
Monk ought to lie upon the bare Ground, to live hardly with Herbs and Pease; to
study hard, dispute, pray and labor to prepare himself for the Service of the
Church? It is as reasonable to expect that the Scribes and Pharisees will
reform the Temple, and of a Den of Thieves, will again make it become a House
of Prayer.

7. THERE were some amongst them, who observed that many Errors were crept into
the Church. Pope Adrian, Aeneas, Sylvius, Cardinal Pool, Pighius, and others^
as we have said: After which, they had a Council at Trent, in the same place
where there is one now indicted. Many Bishops and Abbots, and others who ought
to be in a Council met; they were alone, and there was no body to disturb them
whatever they did; for they had taken care to exclude all that were for the
Reformation, and there they sat with a great Expectation six years; in the
first six months they decreed many things concerning the Holy Trinity, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which were pious, but no way necessary for those
Times; and yet of all these clear, manifest, confessed Errors which had gotten
into the Church, what one single Error or Corruption have they reformed? From
what kind of Idolatry have they reclaimed the People? What Superstition have
they taken away? What part of their Tyranny and Pomp have they abated or
diminished? as if the World were so blind that it could not see and observe
that this is a Conspiracy rather than a Council, and that all the Bishops which
the Pope have there called together, are sworn and addicted to his Interest,
and resolved before hand, not to do any thing but what shall please him, and
increase his Power, and which they see he desires; or that Votes there are not
numbered rather than considered and weighed; or that the wiser and better part
of the Council, is not often overborn by the greater, but worse part of it. And
therefore we know perfectly well, that many good Men and Catholic Bishops,
when such Councils were indicted, and they saw clearly that Parties and
Factions were served by them, and that they should lose their Pains, and harden
the Minds of their Adversaries by their Oppositions, without doing the least
Good, have wisely staid at home, and refused to be present in them. Theodorer.
lib. 1^^. 2^.
Athanasius would not come to the Council at Caesarea, when he was called by
the Emperor, seeing he should there meet an enraged parcel of Enemies; and
afterward when he came to the Council at Syrmium, and in his mind foresaw from
the Fury and Malice of his Enemies, what the Event would be, he packed up his
Carriages, and went away immediately. Tripart. lib. 10. cap. 13.
St. Chrysostom, tho he was called four times by Letters from Arcadius the
Emperor, to an Arrian Council, yet staid at home. When Maximus, Bishop of
Jerusalem sat in a Council in Palestine, the old Paphnutius took him by the
hand and led him out of it, and then told him, ' it is not lawful for us to
consult about these things with wicked men. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 17.
The Bishops of the WEST would not be present at that Council at Syrmium, from
which Athanasius departed. St. Cyril, by Letters appealed from the Council of
the Patropassians, Soz. lib. 5. c. 15.
as they were called. Paulinus, Bishop of ^reves, and many others, would not
come to the Council of Milan, when they saw the Power and Intrigues of
Auxentius; for they saw it was to no purpose to go thither, where Faction and
not Reason would he heard, and were Causes would be certainly determined by
Affection and Passion, and not by Judgment. But then all these, tho they were
to deal with enraged and obstinate Adversaries, yet if they had come, they
should have been freely heard in the Council.

8. BUT now no man need wonder, when none of us are permitted, not only not to
sit, but not so much as to be seen in their Council, so far are we from being
freely heard, when the Popes, Legates, and all the Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops and Abbots are in a Conspiracy, and united by their common Crimes, all
sworn in the same Oath, only sit, and have alone the Power of voting: and as if
all this were not enough, have submitted all their Judgments to the Will and
Humor of the Pope alone: That he who ought to answer for his own Faults, shall
give Sentence in his own Cause upon himself, when that ancient Christian
Liberty, which it is absolutely necessary should be very great in Councils, is
totally taken away. (I say) after all this, wise and good Men ought not to
wonder, if we do now, that which they have seen done before in the like case,
by so many Fathers and Catholic Bishops: That is, that seeing we cannot be
heard in the Council, and that the Ambassadors of Princes are had in Contempt
and Scorn there; and that as if the thing were already determined and agreed,
we are condemned before we are heard: if after all this we had rather sit at
home and commit the business to God, than to go thither, where we shall have no
place nor effect any thing. But tho we can patiently and quietly bear our own
Injuries; yet why should they shut Christian and Pious Princes out of their
Councils? Why do they so rudely and insolently put them out, and not suffer
them to hear the business of Religion debated; or to understand the State of
their own Churches, as if they were not Christians, or could not judge well of
it; or if these Princes interpose their Authority, and do that which they may,
are commanded, and ought to do, and which we know David and Solomon, and other
good Princes have done; that is, if they restrain the Luxury of the Priests,
and compel them to do their duty, and keep them to it. If they pluck down
Idols, extirpate Superstitions, and restore the Worship of God to its ancient
Purity. Why do they presently make an Outcry, that these Princes disturb all
things, break in upon other Men's Offices, and do act ill things and immodestly?
What Scripture (I pray) has excluded Christian Princes from hearing these
Causes? Who besides these Men ever decreed any such Laws? But they will reply,
that Civil Princes have learned to govern their States, and to manage Arms, but
they understand nothing of the Mysteries of Religion. And now, what is the Pope
at this day, but a Monarch or Prince, and what are the Cardinals (who are now
scarcely suffered to be any other but) the Children of Kings and Princes? What
are the Patriarchs, and for the most part the Archbishops, Bishops and Abbots
others than Princes, Dukes and Earls, in the Papal Kingdom? and accordingly
whithersoever they go, they a^^ attended with a great Retinue, and adorned with
Chains and Collers of Gold, and ot^^^ Ensigns of Honor. And they have
sometimes also a peculiar Habit belonging to them, as Crosses, Pillars, Hats,
Myters and Palls; which Pomp the ancient Bishops, St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose,
and St. Augustine, were not acquainted with; but then excepting these outward
Ornaments, what do they teach, what do they speak, what do they do and what do
they Live, so as becomes, I will not say, a Bishop, but a common Christian Is
it then of so mighty a Consequence to go under this or that Title; and by
changing nothing but a Man's Clothes, to be called a Bishop?

9. CERTAINLY it is a proud, injurious, and unjust thing and not to be born by
Christian and Prudent Princes, to permit the sum of all that concerns
Religion, to be managed by such Men as these alone, who know nothing of the
Mysteries of Religion, nor care to know any thing more than what belongs to
their Bellies and Kitchins, and do not value any thing of Religion as worth
a^rush, who are no better than blind men placed in a Watchtower; and that in
the interim a Christan and a Catholic Prince should stand like a trunk or a
stock, and without vote, and without giving his judgment, only observe what
they are pleased to command and impose upon him, and as if he had neither Ears,
nor Eyes, nor Mind, nor Heart of his own to receive without Exception, and with
a blindfold submission, do whatever they are pleased to command him, although
they are Blasphemous and wicked things, yea, although they should command him to
extinguish all Religion, and to crucisie his Savior: For why? Can Caiphas and
Annas judge well of Matters of Religion, and cannot David and Ezechias? Is it
lawful for a Cardinal, a Martial, and a bloody Man to sit in a Council, and is
it unlawful for an Emperor and a Christian Prince? For we attribute nothing
more to our Princes, than what is allowed them by the Word of God, and approved
by the Examples of the best Governments. For besides that, the care of both
Tables is committed by God to a Faithful Prince, that he may thereby
understand, that not only the Civil but the Ecclesiastical Polity belongs to
him and his Office: And besides all this, God has often expressly commanded
Princes to cut down the Groves, and overthrow the Statues and Altars of Idols,
to transcribe for himself a Book of the Law; XLIX. 23.
and Isaiah says, that Kings should be nursing Fathers to the Church, and
their Queens her nursing Mothers. Besides all these things, I say we see by
Histories and the Examples of the best times, that Pious Princes did never
think the Administration of Ecclesiastical Affairs, a thing that was foreign to
their Duty.

10. Exodus 12.
MOS ES who was the Civil Magistrate, and Leader of the People, received from
GOD the whole Body of their Religion, and the Order of their Sacred Rites, and
delivered them to the People, and severely and sharply chastised Aaron their
Bishop, for making the Golden Calf, and violating the Religion by Law
established. Joshua 1.
And Joshua, tho he were no other than a Civil Magistrate, yet when he was
first inaugurated and set over the People, he received express Commands
concerning Religion and the Worship of God. David the King, 2 Chronicles. XIII.
when their Religion had been miserably disordered by Saul a wicked King,
brought back the Ark of God, that is, restored Religion. And he was not only
present as an Admonisher or Perswader of the Work, but he published Psalms and
Hymns, disposed the Priests and Levites into Classes and Orders, and in a sort
governed the Priests as a Priest. 2 Chronicles. VI.
Solomon the King built a Temple to the Lord, which his Father David had only
designed in his thoughts; and after made an excellent Oration to the People
concerning Religion and the Worship of God: And after this he removed Abiathar
the High Priest, 1 King. VIII.
and substituted Sadoc in his place. And when after this the Temple was
wretchedly ruined by the Vice and Negligence of the Priests, 2 Chr. XXIX.
Ezechias the King commanded it to be cleansed of its Rubbish and Dirt, the
Lamps to be lighted, Incense to be offered, and the Sacred Rites to be
performed according to the ancient Order: And caused the Brazen Serpent that
was then irreligiously worshipped by the People, to be taken away and reduced
to Dust. 2 King. XVIII. 2 Chr. XVII.
Iosaphat the King overthrew and took away all the High Places, and destroyed
the Groves, by which he perceived the Worship of God was hindered, and the
People by a Private Superstition, diverted from attending the Service of God in
the public and common Temple, to which they were bound to go three times in
the Year out of all Parts of his Kingdom. 2 King. XXIII.
Josias another King diligently admonished the Priests and Bishops of their
duty. 2 King. X.
Jods the King repressed the Luxury and I^^olence of the Priests. Jehu slew the
wicked false Propliets. And that I may trouble the Reader with no more Examples
out of the Scriptures, and rather pass to see and consider how the Church has
been governed since the Birth of Christ and the Publishing of the Gospel.
Heretofore Christian Emperors called Councils of the Bishops; Constantinus
called the Nicene Council, Theodosius the First the Constantin^
stantinopolitan, Theodosius the Second the Ephesian, Martianus the
Chalcedonian; and when Ruffinus had alleged a Synod as making for him, his
Adversary St. Jerome, that he might confute him, replied, Tell us what Emperor
commanded it to be assembled. And he also in his Funeral Oration for Paula a
Roman Lady, cites the Letters of the Emperors, who had commanded the Greek and
Roman Bishops to meet at Rome for the holding of a Council.

11. IT is most certain that for Five hundred Years the Emperor alone took care
of calling all the General Councils and Sacred Meetings, and therefore we do
now the more admire the unreasonableness of the Bishop of Rome, who tho he
knows that during the subsistence of the Roman Empire in its Greatness, this
was the sole right of the Emperor, and that now Kings have succeeded to part of
the Caesarean or Imperial Majesty, this Right is devolved to all Princes in
common, yet has so unjustly usurpt it to himself alone, Pius IV. In bulla sua
ad Imperatorem Ferdinandum.
and thinks it sufficient to communicate his design of holding a Council to the
Greatest Prince in Christendom as to his Servant. But if the Modesty of
Ferdinand the Emperor be so great, perhaps because he does not thoroughly
understand the Papal Arts, that he can digest this Injury; yet the Pope who
pretends to so much Sanctity, ought not to have offered him this Affront, and
thus to have arrogated to himself another Man's Right.

12. BUT some of his Party may reply, that the Emperor then called the
Councils, because the Bishop of Rome was not then arrived to that height of
Greatness; and yet he did not even then sit with the Bishops, or at all
interpose his Authority in their Deliberations and Consultations: Hist. Eccl
lib. 1. cap. 5.
Yes, as Theodoret acquaints us, Constantine the Emperor did not only sit with
the Bishops, but admonished them to determine the Controversy then depending,
out of the Prophetic and Apostolical Writings. In this Disputation (said the
Emperor) concerning Divine things there is set before us, which we ought to
follow, the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost; for the Books of the Evangelists and
Apostles, and the Oracles of the Prophets do sufficiently show us what we ought
to think of the Will of God. Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 10.
Theodosius another Emperor not only sat amongst the Bishops, (as Socrates
says) but also was Moderator of the Dispute, and rent the Papers of the
Heretics, and approved the Sentiments and Doctrine of the Catholics. And in
the Council of Chalcedon the Civil Magistrate (who under the Emperor governed
that Council) condemned three Bishops, Dioscorus, Juvenalis, and Thalassius by
his Sentence for Heretics, Act. 2.
and gave judgment that they should be deposed from that degree. In the Third,
the Constantinopolitan Council, the Civil Magistrate not only sat with the
Bishops, but also subscribed the Canons with them: We have read (said he) and
subscribed them. In the Second Council of Orange, the Ambassadors of the
Princes being Noblemen themselves, sat and not only voted concerning Matters
of Religion, but also subscribed amongst the Bishops; for thus it is written in
the end of that Council. Petrus Marcellinus and Felix Liberius two Noble and
Illustrions Praefecti Praetorio] of Gaul, and Patricians have consented and
subscribed. Syragrius, Opilio, Pantagathus, Deodatus, Cariatho and Marcellus
honorable Men (and Magistrates) have subscribed. But if the Praefecti
Praetorio, and Patricians, or Noblemen could then subscribe the Councils, may
not Emperors and Kings do it now. There were no need to prosecute so plain and
apparent a point as this is, but that we have to do with a parcel of Men who
use to deny the clearest things, oven those things which lie plain and open
before their Eyes, out of a contentious Disposition and a desire of Victory.
The Emperor Justinianus made a Law for the correcting the Manner, and curbing
the Insolence of the Clergy, and although he was a most Christian and Catholic
Emperor, yet he deposed Sylverius and Vigilius two Popes, Successors of St.
Peter, and Vicars of Jesus Christ, as they are now called.

13. AND now seeing that Princes have employed their Authority upon Bishops,
received commands from God concerning Religion, brought back the Ark of God,
composed Sacred Hymns and Psalms, governed the Priests, made public Discourses
concerning the Worship of God, purged the Temple, demolished High Places, burnt
Idolatrous Groves, and have admonished the Priests concerning their Office, and
given them Laws of Living, have slain wicked Prophets, deposed Bishops, called
Councils of Bishops, and sat with them, and taught them what they should do,
have punished Heretical Bishops, have taken cognizance of Religion, subscribed
Councils, and given Sentence in them, and done all this, not by the command of
another, but in their own Names, and that rightly and piously; shall we say
after all this, that the care of Religion belongs not to them? Or that a
Christian Prince, who is pleased to concern himself in these things acts ill,
immodestly and wickedly? In all these Affairs the most Ancient and most
Christian Kings and Emperors have intermeddled, and yet were never accused of
Impiety or Immodesty for so doing; and will any pretend to find either more
Catholic Princes, or more Illustrious Examples.

14. BUT now if they might do all these things, tho they were only Civil
Princes, and governed their several States? Wherein have our Princes offended,
who tho they are in the same Authority, may (it seems) not do the same things?
Or wherein consists the wonderful force of their Learning, Wisdom, and
Holiness, that contrary to the Custom of all the Ancient and Catholic Bishops,
who have heretofore deliberated with Princes concerning Religion; they should
now reject and exclude Christian Princes from the cognizance of the Cause now
depending, and from all Participation and Congress with them in their Councils?
But yet it cannot be denied they have taken a prudent care for themselves and
the upholding their Kingdom, which they foresaw otherwise would soon have
perished. For if they who are placed by God in the highest Station, had once
seen and understood these Men's Arts, that the Commands of Christ are contemned
by them, that the light of the Gospel is obscured and extinguished by them;
that they play tricks with, and delude them, and shut up against them the
entrance into the Kingdom of God: They would never so patiently have suffered
themselves to be so proudly despised, and injuriously scorned and abused. But
now on the other hand, they have rendered all Princes obnoxious and subject to
them by their blindness and Ignorance.

15. WE (as I said before) have done nothing in the changing of Religion,
either insolently or rashly; nothing but with great deliberation and slowly;
Nor had we ever thought of doing it, except the Will of God undoubtedly and
manifestly opened to us in the most Sacred Scriptures, and the necessity of our
Salvation had compelled us so to do; for although we have departed from that
Church which they call the Catholic Church, and thereupon they have kindled a
great envy against us in them, who cannot well judge of us yet it is enough for
us, and ought to be so to any prudent and pious man, who considers seriously of
his Salvation, that we have only departed from that Church which may enr, which
Christ who cannot err, so long since foretold should err, and which we see
clearly with our Eyes has departed from the Holy Fathers, the Apostles, Christ
himself, and the Primitive and Catholic Church. And we have approached as much
as possibly we could, to the Church of the Apostles, and ancient Catholic
Bishops and Fathers, which we know was yet a Perfect, and as Tertullian says,
an unspotted Virgin, and not contaminated with any Idolatry or great and
public Error. Neither have we only reformed the Doctrine of our Church, and
made it like theirs in all things, but we have also brought the Celebration of
the Sacraments, and the Forms of our Public Rites and Prayers to an exact
resemblance with their Institutions or Customs. And so we have only done that
which we know Christ himself and all pious and good Men have in all Ages ever
done; for we have brought back Religion, which was foully neglected and
depraved by them, to her Original and first State; for we considered that the
Reformation of Religion was to be made by that which was the first Pattern of
it: For this Rule will ever hold good against all Heretics, says the most
ancient Father Tertullian, That that is true which is first, and that is
adulterated and corrupted which is later. Irenaeus does often appeal to the
most ancient Churches who were the nearest to Christ, and which therefore were
not at all likely to have erred. And why is not that course now taken also? Why
do we not return to a Conformity with the most Ancient Churches? why cannot
that be now heard amongst us, which was pronounced in the Council of Nice,
without the least contradiction or opposition from so many Bishops and
Catholic Fathers; (...). LET THE OLD CUSTOMS STAND FIRM? When Esdras was to
rebuild the Temple, he did not send to Ephesus, tho there was there a most
beautiful Temple of Diana, which was adorned most exquisitely; and when he was
to restore the Rites and Ceremonies, he did not send to Rome, tho perhaps he
might have heard there of The Author mentions in this place Hecatombae,
Solitaurilia, Lectisternia, and Supplications, Heathen Rites that cannot be
supposed to be easily understood by an English Reader, and are not worth the
while to expound them at length.
Hecatembs, etc. and the ritual Books of Numa Pompilius; he thought it was
sufficient for him, if he set before him as an example, and followed the
ancient Temple built by Solomon according to the Prescription of God Almighty,
and the ancient Rites and Ceremonies which God had expressly commanded Moses.
When the Temple was rebuilt by Esdras, Hagg. II. 3, 4, etc.
and the People might seem to have a just cause to rejoice in so very great a
Blessing granted to them by the Great and Holy God; yet Haggai the Prophet
brought Tears from all their Eyes, because they that were yet living, and had
seen the Structures of the former before it was destroyed by the Babylonians,
did well remember how far this latter was from the splendour of the former
Temple. But on the contrary, they would have thought it excellently restored,
if it had answered the Model, and represented the Majesty of the old Temple.

16. St. Paul, that he might reform the Abuses of the Lords Supper, which the
Corinthians began even then to corrupt, proposed to them the Institution of it
by Christ to follow. That (says he) have I delivered to you which I received
of the Lord. And Christ, that he might refute the Errors of the Pharisees in
another case, sends them up to the beginning. In the beginning (says he) it
was not so. And that he might show the Sordidness and Avarice of the Priests.
This, says he, in the beginning, was a House of Prayer, that Men might in it
pray to God Religiously and Purely; and so you ought still to have kept it, for
it was not built to be a Den of Thieves. So all religious and approved Princes
in Scripture, are especially honored with this Commendation, that they walked
in the ways of David their Father; that is, that they returned to the Original
and Fountain, and restored Religion to its first Integrity. And so we seeing
all things perverted by them, and that there was nothing left in the Church of
God but miserable Ruins, thought it was but reasonable to set before us those
Churches for our Example, which we were sure had not erred, and had neither
private Masses, nor unintelligible and barbarous Prayers, nor that Corruption
of the Holy Rites, or other Fooleries. And desiring to restore the Church of
God to its first Integrity [and Purity] we would not seek any other Foundation
to build upon, than what was laid by the Apostles, that is, by our Savior
Jesus Christ.

17. WHEN therefore we had heard God himself speaking to us in his word, and
had seen and considered the illustrious Examples of the Ancient and Primitive
Church, and that the expectation of a General Council was very uncertain, and
the event that would follow it much more uncertain; and especially when we had
the utmost certainty what was the Will of God, and therefore thought it a Sin
to be too sollicitous and anxious what the opinion of Men might be: After all
this I say we could no longer deliberate with flesh and blood; but proceeded
and have accordingly done that which may both lawfully be done, and which has
already been often done, by many pious Men and Catholic Bishops, that is, to
take care of our own Church in a Provincial Synod. For so we see the ancient
Fathers ever took that course, before they came to a General and Public
Council of the whole World; and there are still extant the Canons made in
Muncipial or Provincial Councils at Carthage under St. Cyprian, at Ancyra,
Neocaesarea, and at Gangra also in Paphlagonia; all which, as some think, were
held before the name of the Nicene General Council was thought of. And in this
manner without any General Council by a private dispute they of old opposed the
Pelagians and Donatists. So when Constantius the Emperor openly favored
Auxentius a Bishop of the Arrian Party, Athanasius a most Christan Bishop did
not appeal to a General Council, in which he saw nothing could be done, by
reason of the Power of the Emperor, and the great partiality and stiffness of
the Faction; but to his own Clergy and People, that is to a Provincial Council.

18. SO it was decreed in the Nicene Council, that twice in the year, and in a
Carthagenian Council, that at least once in a year Meetings of the Bishops
should be celebrated in every Province, which the Council of Chalcedon says
was done, that if any Errors or Abuses arose any where, they might presently
and upon the spot be extinguished. And so when Secundus and Paladius rejected
the Council of Aquileja, because it was not a Public and General Council, St.
Ambrose Bishop of Milan replied, that it ought not to seem new or strange, if
the Bishops of the West assembled in Pr^vincial Conventions or Synods; for it
had been not seldom done by the Western Bishops before, and was very frequently
by the Greek Bishops. So Charles the Great, Emperor of Germany, held a
Provincial Council in Germany, for the taking away Images out of the Church
against the second Nicene Council, which had determined for them; nor is this
thing new and unheard of in England, for we have heretofore had many Provincial
Synods, and have governed our Church by our own domestic Laws, without the
Interposition of the Popes of Rome, or any other foreign Bishops or Churches.
What need is there of many words? Certainly those greatest and fullest
Councils, of which these Men so often Glory, if they be compared with all the
Churches which throughout the World own and confess the Name of Christ, what I
pray can they seem to be, more than some Private Councils of the Bishops, and a
sort of Great Provincial Synods? For tho perhaps Italy, France, Spain, England,
Germany, Denmark and Scotland should meet: yet, Asia, Greece, Armenia, Persia,
Media, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Aethiopia, India and Mauritania, in all which places
there are many Christians and Bishops would yet be absent: And how could such a
Council as this ever be reputed a General Council by any understanding Man? And
when so many and such considerable parts of the World are absent, how can they
pretend to have the Consent of the whole World? Or what kind of Council was the
last at Trent, or how could it in any sense be said to be General, when only
Forty Bishops met there, out of all the Christian Kingdoms in Europe; and some
of them too were so very Eloquent, that it had been fit to send them to the
Grammar Schools again; and so Learned, that they had never in all their Lives
read the Bible over. But be these things as they will, the truth of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ does not depend upon General Councils, 1 Cor. 4. 3.
or as St. Paul says, upon Man's Judgment. But if they who ought to take care
of the Church will not understand, and will be wanting to their duty, and will
harden their hearts against God and against his Christ, and still go on to
pervert the direct and straight ways of the Lord, God will make the stones to
cry out, and endow Infants with an Oratorical Eloquence, that there may ever be
some to confute their Shams; for God can protect and enlarge his Church, not
only without the help, but against the opposition of Councils: Prove. 19. 21.
There be many Devices in Man's heart (says Solomon) but the Counsel of the
Lord, that shall stand; for there is neither Wisdom, nor Prudence, nor Counsel
against the Lord; In Psalm 126.
for says Hilary, Those things the^ are set up by Humane Industry, do not
continue long: the Church was otherwise built, and must be preserved by other
means; for she was built upon the Foundations of the Apostle^ and Prophets, and
is fixed, and cemented together by one corner stone Jesus Christ.

18. VERY elegant, and to our times, most seasonable are the Words of St.
Jerome, In Prophet. Nahum. cap. 3.
As often (says he) as the Devil lulls any a sleep with the sweet
Blandishments of his Sirens, the the Holy Scriptures never fail to awaken them
with a Surge qui dormis, Ephesians. 5. 14.
elevare, and illuminabit te Christus. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from
the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. At the coming of Christ, and of the
Word of God, and of the Ecclesiastical Doctrine; when the time of the Ruin of
Nineve, that beautiful Harlot is come; then shall the People awake, which had
before been lulled a sleep under their former Teachers, and shall pass to the
Mountains of the Scriptures; there shall they find the Mountains of Moses and
Joshua the Son of Nun; the Mountains of the Prophets, and the Mountains of the
New Testament, the Apostles and Evangelists; and when the People have fled to
these Mountains, and are exercised in the reading of them, tho they find no
Teacher (for the Harvist shall be great, and the Laborers few) yet the
Industry of the People shall be approved, in that they have fled to these
Mountains, and the Negligence of their Teachers shall be reprehended. Thus has
St. Jerome written so very plainly, that here is no need of an Interpreter; and
with so great a Congruity to the Events which have happened in our Times, that
it looks as if he had designed to foretell and describe to us, with a Prophetic
Spirit, the whole State of our Times, the Ruin of that richly adorned
Babylonish Harlot, and the Reformation of the Church of God, the Blindness and
Negligence of the Bishops, and the Alacrity and Zeal of the People. For who can
be so blind, as not to see that these were the Masters, who, as St. Jerome
says, led the People into Error, and stupefied them in it; or that Rome, their
Nineve, which was once painted with the most lovely Colors, is not now better
known and less valued; or that pious Men being now as it were awakned out of a
deep Sleep, have not betaken themselves to the Mountains of the Scriptures, the
Word of God, and the Light of the Gospel, without ever expecting the Councils
of such Teachers as these?

19. BUT without the Popes Consent at least (some may think) these things ought
not to have been attempted, because he is the Bond that unites the Christ an
Society; he is that one Priest whom God means in Deuteronomy, from whom Counsel
was to be expected in all difficult Cases, and from whom the Judgment of Truth
was to be fetched; and if any man should dare to disobey him, he was to be put
to death in the sight of his Brethren; and whatsoever he does, he can be judged
by no mortal Man, that as Christ reigns in Heaven, so he rules on Earth; that
be can do whatever Christ or God himself can do; that his Consistory and
Christ's are one and the same; that without him there is no Faith, no Hope, no
Church; that he who forsakes him, rejects his own Salvation. For thus the
Canonists the Flatterers of the Pope, write not very modestly of him, for they
could scarce say more, and certainly not greater things of Christ himself. As
for us, we have not forsaken the Pope for any humane Pleasure or worldly
Profit, and we wish passionately, he would behave himself so, that there should
be no need of a Departure from him; but so it was, except we left him, there
was no coming to Christ. Nor will he now enter a League with us upon any other
terms than those proposed by Nahash King of Ammon, 1 Samuel 11. 2.
to the men of Jabeth-gilead, that he may thrust out all our right Eyes; for he
will deprive us of the Holy Scriptures, the Gospel of our Salvation, and of all
that Hope we have in Christ Jesus, for upon other Conditions no Peace with him
can be had.

20. AND as to that which so many of them accustom themselves to extol so very
much, that the Pope only is St. Peter's Successor, as if upon that account, he
always carried the Holy Ghost in his Bosom, and so could not err; it is an
airy and a silly Pretense. The Grace of God is promised to pious Souls, and to
those that fear God, and not affixed to Chairs and Successions. Riches (says
St. Jerome) may render one Bishop more powerful than another; but yet all
Bishops, what ever they are, are the Successors of the Apostles. But if the
Place and Inauguration be it they so much rely on, both Manasses succeeded
David, and Caiaphas, Aaron, and an Idol has often stood in the House of God.
Long since one Archidamus a Lacedemonian, made a mighty boasting that he was
descended from Hercules; one Nicostratus chastised his Insolence, by telling
him it did not seem probable that he could be descended from Hercules, because
Hercules made it his Business to rid the World of bad Men, but (says he) you
make all the good men you can bad. And when the Pharisees boasted of their
Succession and Linnage, that they were of the Blood of Abraham, John 8. 40. 44.
Christ replied, ye seek to kill me, a Man that has told you the Truth which I
have heard of God; this did not Abraham -- ye are of your Father the Devil, and
the Lusts of your Father ye will do. But now suppose we should grant something
to Successions, does the Pope only succeed St. Peter? In what Thing? in what
Religion? in what Function? in what part of his Life? What one thing ever had
St. Peter like the Pope, or the Pope like St. Peter? unless they will say, that
when St. Peter was at Rome he never taught the Gospel, he never fed the Flock;
that he took away the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, hid his Lords Treasure;
that he only sat in the Lateran, and with his Finger, pointed out all the
Spaces of Purgatory, and the several sorts of Pains there; presently, and at
his Pleasure, dismissed some Souls for Money, and sent other miserable Souls
into Torture; that he taught them the use of private Masses, which might be
mumbled over in every Corner; that he muttered the sacred Mysteries in a low
soft Voice, and in a strange Language; that he hanged up the Eucharist or
consecrated Bread in every Church, and enshrined it on every Altar, and carried
it before him whither-ever he went on an ambling Jennet, with Lights and Bells.
That he consecrated Oil, Wax, Wool, Bells, Calices, Temples and Altars with
his sacred Breath: that he sold Jubilees, Graces, Immunities, Expectancies,
Preventions, first Fruits, Palls, the use of Palls, Bulls, Indulgencies and
Pardons* that he called himself the Head of the Church the High Priest, the
Bishop of Bishops, and the only most Holy; that he usurped Authority over other
Churches; that he exemped himself from all Civil Power; that he made Wars, set
Discord amongst Princes; that he was carried upon the Shoulders of Noble men in
a gilded Chair, with a Crown full of Labels or Tassils, with a Persian
Gallantry; adorned with a royal Scepter and a golden Diadem glittering with
Jewels. Did St. Peter heretofore do all these things at Rome, and as it were
from hand to hand deliver them down to his Successors? for all these fine
things are now done at Rome, and that in such manner, as if nothing else ought
to be done.

21. UNLESS perhaps they would be better pleased with turning the Table, and
saying, that the Pope does all those things which we know heretofore St. Peter
did; that he travails into all Countries, preaches the Gospel, not only
publicly, but privately from House to House; that he insisteth opportunely and
inopportunely, in season and out of season; that he does the Work of an
Evangelist, and performs the Ministry of Christ; that he is the Watchman of
the House of Israel; that he receives the Oracles and Word of God, and delivers
them, as he received them, to the People; that he is the Salt of the Earth, the
Light of the World; that he feeds not himself, but the Flock; that he does not
entangle himself with the Civil Affairs of this Life; that he does not exercise
Lordship and Dominion over the People of the Lord; that he does not so much
seek to have others minister to, and serve him, but rather that he may serve
and assist others; that he thinks with St. Peter, that all Bishops are his
Companions and Equals; 1 Peter. 5. 1. He styles himself (...); that is, your
Fellow Presbyter, or Copriest, which is not so plainly rendered in our English
Version as it might be.
that he submits himself to Princes, as to them that are sent by God; that
he renders to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and (which all the ancient
Bishops of Rome without exception have done) calls the Emperor his Lord. Now
unless the Popes at this day do all these things, or that St. Peter did all the
other which we have set forth in the foregoing Paragraph, there seems to be no
reason why he should so strangely value himself upon the Account, either of St.
Peter's Name or Succession.

22. THERE is much less cause for them to complain so dreadfully as they do, of
our departure from them, and to recall us back again to their Society and Faith.
There is a Story that one Cobilon a Lacedaemonian, being sent to make a League
with the King of Persia, and sinding by chance his Courticrs playing at Dice,
he returned forthwith, without dispatching or mentioning the Business he came
about. Being examined upon his return home why he had not executed the public
Commission they had given him, he replied, that it seemed to him to be a great
Dishonor to their Commonwealth, if he had made an Alliance with a parcel of
Dicers. Now, if we should return to the Pope and the Popish Errors, and make a
League, not only with Dicers, but with men infinitely more debauched, it would
not only bring an ill Report upon our Fame and Reputation, but would be
pernicious and destructive to us, by incensing the Wrath of God against us, and
burthening and wasting our Consciences; for we have only left him, who we saw
had for many Ages blinded the Nations of the Earth, and departed from him, who
with too much Insolence, uses to pretend that he cannot err, and that whatever
he does, he cannot be judged by any mortal man, no, not by Kings nor Emperors,
nor all the Clergy, nor all the People, tho he should carry a thousand Souls
with him to Hell; from him who assumed Dominion, not only over Men, but over
the Angels of God, commanding them when he pleased to go and come, and carry
Souls to Purgatory, and bring them back again as his Holiness thought fit. Whom
Gregory the Great styled plainly the Forerunner and Harbinger of Antichrist,
and an Apostate from the Faith; from whom those I suppose by this Expression,
he means the several English Bishops who had been Protestants in the Reign of
Edward the 6th. and turning Papists aagain in the Reign of Queen Mary, were
ashamed to take a third turn now in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and so not
only sliffly persisted now in Popery, but were more clamorous against the
Reformation than others were. Heylin, his Ecclesia Restaurata, Anno primo Eliz.
page 286.
Champions, who now so vigorously opposed the Gospel, and that Truth they are
very well satisfied of, have every man of them heretofore fallen, and would now
again freely and willingly leave him, if the Note and Shame of being thought
too too inconstant, and their Credits with the People did not hinder them from
it. Lastly, we have departed from him, to whom we were no way bound, and who
has nothing to pretend for our Submission to him; but I know not what Genius
of the Place and the Succession he possesses.

23. AND we of all the Nations in Christendom have had the greatest reason to
desert the Pope; for our Kings (even those who followed the Faith and Authority
of the Bishops of Rome, with the utmost observance and deference) a long time
since, sufficiently felt the weight of their Yoke, and groaned under the
Tyranny of the Papal Kingdom; for the Roman Bishops plucked the Diadem from off
the Head of our Henry the 2d. Henry the 2d.
and compelled him to wait upon their Legate in a private Habit, without any of
the Insigns of Majesty that he might be exposed to the Contempt of all his
Subjects. And another Bishop of Rome armed against King John, John.
another of our Princes, the Bishops and Monks, and some part of the Nobility,
and absolved all his Subjects from that Oath of Allegiance they had taken to
him, and at last, by the highest Impiety, not only deprived him of his Kingdom,
but his Life; and they wounded Henry the VIII. a most noble Prince, with their
Curses and Excommunications, and stirred up against him sometimes the Emperor,
and sometimes the King of France, and as much as in them lay, exposed our
Kingdom to be a Prey and a Booty to them; like a company of silly men as they
were, to think so great a Prince would be frighted with Vizors and Rattles, or
that so great a Kingdom could be devoured at one mouthful; and as if all this
had not been enough, they would needs make England a tributary Province, and
yearly, most unjustly exacted a considerable Revenue out of it; so much has the
Friendship of the City of Rome cost us. Now if they extorted these great
Advantages from us by Impostures and ill Arts, there is no reason why we should
not by good Methods and Laws recover them back again: but if on the other side,
our Kings induced by an Opinion of their simulated Holiness, in the darkness of
those times freely bestowed these things on them, upon the account of Religion,
there is now very good reason that our latter Kings, having discovered the
Error of their Ancestors, should take them away again, they being possessed of
the same Power with the former Kings; for every Donation becomes void, when it
is no longer approved by the Will of the Giver; but it can never seem a Will,
which is clouded and impeded by Error.

The Conclusion.
THUS I have acquainted thee, my Reader, that it is no new or strange thing to
see the Christian Religion in these days upon its Restitution and Revival in
the World, entertained with Slanders and Reproaches, for the same things
happened to Christ himself and his Apostles. And yet, least thou should be
misled and imposed upon by these Clamors of our Adversaries, we have
represented to thee what the whole manner of our Religion is; what we believe
concerning God the Father, concerning his only Son Jesus Christ, and concerning
the Holy Ghost; what our Opinion is concerning the Church, the Sacraments, the
Ministry, the Holy Scriptures, the Ceremonies of the Church, and all the other
parts of the Christian Religon. We have declared also, that we detest, as
pernicious to the Souls of Men, and plagues, all those Ancient Heresies that
have been condemned by the old Councils and Holy Scriptures. That we have
reduced into practice again, as much as we can possibly, the Ecclesiastical
Discipline, which our Adversaries had much weakened; and that we punish all
Licentious Courses of Life, and Debauchery in Manners, by our ancient and
established Laws, and that with as much (...) as is fit and possible. That we
p^^serve all Kingdoms in the same State we found them, without any Diminution
or Mutation, and preserve the Majesty of our Princes entire as much as we can
possibly. That we have departed from that Church which they had made a Den of
Thieves, in which they had left nothing sound or like a Church, and which they
themselves confessed to have erred in many things, as Lot left Sodom, or
Abraham Chaldea, not out of Contention, but out of Obedience to God; and have
sought the certain way of Religion out of the sacred Scriptures, which we know
cannot deceive us, and have returned to the Primitive Church of the ancient
Fathers and Apostles, that is, to the beginning and first Rise of the Church,
as to the proper Fountain.

2. THAT we have not indeed expected the Authority or consent of the Council of
Trent, in which we saw nothing was managed well and regularly, where all that
entered took an Oath to one Man; where the Ambassadors of our Princes were
despised and ill treated; where none of our Divines could be heard; where
Partiality and Ambition openly carried all things, and according to the
Practice of the Holy Fathers, and the Customs of our own Ancestors, we have
reformed our Churches in a Provincial Synod, and according to our Duty, we have
cast off the Yoke and Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, who had no just Authority
over us, nor was like either Christ or St. Peter, or the Apostles, or indeed,
like a Bishop in any thing. Lastly, This Apology was penned before the Puritan
Schism in in the Church of England broke out. As Fuller informs us, they first
began to appear in 1563. which was the year after this Apology was written, but
it came not to an open Rupture till the year 1570. Fuller.
we do all agree amongst ourselves in all the Doctrines and Points of the
Christian Religion, and do with one Spirit and one Mouth worship God, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

3. WHEREFORE, O Christian and Pious Reader, now thou feast the Reasons and
Causes of the Reformation of Religion with us, and of our Departure from them,
thou ought not to wonder that we should rather choose to obey our Savior
than Men. St. Paul has admonished us, that we should not be carried away with
every Wind of false Doctrine, Romans 16. 17. 18.
and especially, that we should mark them which cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which we have learned, and avoid them; for they that
are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly, and by good
Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the simple. Their Impostures
accordingly, like Batts and Owls, do now sometime since begin to fly and steal
away before the rising Sun, and cannot endure the Light of the Gospel; and
although they were in some sense built and heaped almost up to Heaven, yet they
sink down into Ruins of their own accord. For thou ought not to think that
those things happened accidentally or by chance. It was certainly the Will of
God, that in these times the Gospel of Jesus Christ should, in defiance of all
opposition, be spread abroad in the World; and therefore men being moved by the
Word of God, freely betook themselves to the Doctrine of Christ; and as for us,
we sought neither Riches nor Pleasure, nor case by this Change; for our
Adversaries abound in all these, and we had a much larger Share of them whilst
we continued with them.

4. NOR do we decline Concord and Peace with Men neither, but yet we will not
continue in a State of War God, that we might have Peace with Men. The Name of
Peace (says St. Hilary) is Pleasant, but then Peace and Servitude are not the
same thing; for (if according to their desire) the Name of Christ should be
suppressed, the Truth of the Gospel betrayed, their wicked Errors be dissembled,
the Eyes of Christian Men be deluded, and a plain and apparent Conspiracy be
carried on against God himself; this is not (says that great Man) Peace, but
the conditions of a most base Slavery. There is, says Nazianzen, an
unprofitable Peace, and there is an useful sort of Discord; for we must pursue
Peace with Conditions, as far as (...) lawful, and in us lies; and unless
these Limitations may attend it, Christ himself came not to bring Peace into
the World, but a Sword.

5. WHEREFORE, if the Pope does indeed desire we should be reconciled to him,
he ought first to reconcile himself to God; for as St. Cyprian says, Schisms
arise from hence, that the Head is not sought, and a Return is not made to the
Fountain of the Holy Scriptures, and the Precepts of our Heavenly Master are
not kept, for else it is not Peace (says he) but War; neither can any man be
united to the Church, who is separated from the Gospel. But these men, (with
whom we are concerned) do use to make a base gain by the Name of Peace, for the
Peace they seek, is only a Peace of idle Bellies; Tit. 1. 12.
for all these Controversies betwixt us and them might with great facility be
ended, if Ambition, Gluttony and Luxury did not hinder it; and from hence
proceed all their Tears; their Souls are in their Dishes, and all their loud
Clamors and Noise, are only that they may basely and wickedly keep what they
have acquired knavishly.

6. IN these times the Pardoners, Dataries, Collectors and Pimps of the Court
of Rome make the greatest Complaints against us, who with others of their
Trade, think that great Gain is Godliness, and serve not our Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own Bellies; for in the foregoing Ages, this sort of men had a very
profitable employment; but now, whatever is gained to Christ, turns as they
think, to their Loss. Yea, his Holiness too complains sadly that Piety is grown
cold, and his Revenue is become much smaller than heretofore it was; and
therefore the good man does his utmost to make us hated, loads us with
Reproaches, and condemns us for Heretics (without any mercy) that they who
know not the real cause of all this, may thereby be induced to believe us the
very worst of men, and yet in the interim we are not therefore ashamed, nor
indeed ought we to be so, of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, because we esteem the
Glory of God more than the good Opinion of Men. We know that all we teach is
true, and we cannot offer Violence to our own Consciences, or give Testimony
against God, for if we deny any part of the Gospel of Jesus Christ before Men,
he will in like manner deny us before his Father; and if there be any that will
be offended, and cannot bear the Doctrine of Christ, they are blind, and the
Leaders of the Blind; but the Truth is still to be preached and owned, and we
must patiently expect the Judgment of God.

7. AND in the interim, our Adversaries should do well to bethink themselves
seriously of their own Salvation, and to put an end to their Raging Hatred and
Persecution of the Gospel of the Son of God, that at last, they may not find
him the Vindicator and Revenger of his own Cause; for God will not be had in
derision; and men too, now see what is doing; that Flame, the more it is
repressed, with so much the greater Violence does it break out again and
display it self. Their Infidelity and Unbelief shall never be able to frustrate
or put a stop to the Faith of God; and if they shall still persist in the
Hardness of their Hearts, and refuce to receive the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Math. 21. 31.
The Publicans and the Harlots shall go into the Kingdom of God before them.

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ open all their Eyes, that they may
see that blessed Hope to which they are called, that we may altogether glorify
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent down to us from Heaven;
to whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be rendered all Honor and Glory
to all Eternity. Amen. Amen.

AN EPISTLE Written by the Reverend Father in God JOHN JEWEL, Lord Bishop of
SARUM, TO SEIGNIOR SCIPEO A Venetian Gentleman.
In Answer to a Letter of his, in which he complains of the Kingdom of England,
for their not appearing in the Council of Trent, nor excusing their Absence by
Letters.
SIR,
YOU are pleased to write to me with much freedom, according to the great
Acquaintance which has been between us (ever since we lived together at Padua,
where you were employed in the public Service of your Commonwealth, and I in
the Pursuit of Learning) that both your self, and many others with you, in
those Parts, do much admire, that seeing there is at this time a General
Council called by the Pope at Trent, for the composing Controversies in
Religion, and the extinguishing all Contentions that have arisen on that
account; and that, whereas all other Nations are assembled there, the Kingdom
of England alone, has neither sent any Ambassador thither, nor excused their
Absence by Envoys or Letters; but in the mean time, without the Consent of the
Council, has changed almost the whole Order of their Ancient and Paternal
Religion; that one of these things has the appearance of a proud Contumacy,
and the other of a pernicious Schism; for it is a great Wickedness for any man
(say you) to decline the most holy Authority of the Pope of Rome; or to to
withdraw himself, when he is called to a Council by him. And that Controversies
in Religion ought not to be determined any where but in such Conventions, for
there are the Patriarchs and Bishops, and the most Learned of all Orders of Men
in the Church; at their Mouths the Truth is to be sought, there are the great
Lights of the Church, and there the Holy Ghost is ever present, and
accordingly, pious Princes have in every age referred all those Doubts which
have happened concerning the Worship of God, to such public Consultations.
That neither Moses, nor Joshua, nor David, nor Ezechia, nor Josias, nor any
other of the Judges, Kings or Priests, did ever deliberate of the Affairs of
the Church any other way, than in a Council of the Bishops. That the Apostles
of Christ and the Holy Fathers held Councils; that so the Truth was discovered,
so Heresies were suppressed, so Arrius, so Eunomius, so Eutyches, so
Macedonius, and so Pelagius were overcome, and so at this time the Dissentions
of the World may be composed, and the Ruins of the Church repaired, if Men
would be pleased to lay by their Animosities and Partiality, and come to this
Council; but without a Council it is utterly unlawful to attempt any Change in
Matters of Religion.

2. THIS Sir, is almost the whole Sum of your Letter, and as for me, I will not
now presume to give you in Answer, on the behalf of England, an exact Account
of the reason of all our public Transactions; nor do I think it is your Will
or Expectation that I should; the Counsels of Kings are concealed and secret,
and so they ought to be, and this you Sir know perfectly well, that they are
not to be revealed at random to every body, or any body; and yet in compliance
with that old and intimate Acquaintance that has been between us (because I see
you so earnestly desire it) I will shortly and friendly tell you what my
Judgment is; but as (another says) as far as I know and may, which I doubt
not, will give you an entire Satisfaction.

3. WE wonder (say you) that no Ambassadors from England are come to the
Council. I beseech you Sir, are the English the only Nation who have not come
to the Council? Have you Sir been at the Council your self? Have you taken an
exact Account? Have you told them exactly by Poll? Did you Sir, see there all
the other Nations come together from all Parts of the World, except the
English? But Sir, if you are so mightily in love with Wondering, why did you
not admire this too, that neither any one of the three great Patriarchs of
Constantinople, Antioch, nor Alexandria, nor Presbyter John, nor the Grecians,
Armenians, Medes, Persians, Egyptians; those of Barbary, Ethiopia, or the
Indies, did not come to the Council too? for is there not many in those Nations
who believe in Christ? have they not Bishops? are they not by Name, and in
reality Christians? And Sir, did Ambassadors come from all these Nations to the
Council? or will you rather say the Pope did not call them, or that they are
not bound by your Ecclesiastical Sanctions?

4. BUT Sir, we have much greater reason to wonder, that when the Pope has
beforehand condemned us, and publicly pronounced us excommunicated as
Heretics, without ever hearing us make our Defense, or alleging any thing
against us, he should afterward call us to the Council; for to condemn and
punish men first, and then to call them to Judgment, is a very absurd way of
Procedure, a mere (...), a Cart before the Horses. But Sir, I would very gladly
be informed if the Popes Intentions be to consult with us concerning Religion
in this Council, whom he has condemned for Heretics, as I said, or if he
intends we shall stand at the Bar, and be obliged forthwith to change our
Minds, or be immediately condemned again? one of these things is new or without
Example, and stiffly denied to those of our Persuasion, by Pope Julius the
third; and the other is ridiculous, if he thinks the English so silly, as to
come to the Council for no other purpose but to be accused, and make their
Defense as well as they can, and before his Holiness especially, who is long
since accused himself, not only by us, but by his own party, of many great
Crimes.

5. BUT Sir, if England only seems so stubborn to you, where are the
Ambassadors of the King of Denmark, the Princes of Germany, and the King of
Sweden, of the Switzers, of the Grisons, of the Hanse Towns of the Realm of
Scotland, and of the Dukedom of Prussia? and now when so many of the Christian
Nations are absent from your Council, it is a most foolish thing to speak of
none but the English; but why do I speak of them? the Pope himself will not
vouchsafe to come to his own Council; and did you not wonder at this too? for
what Insolence is this, for any one man at his Pleasure, when he will, to call
together all the Christian Kings, Princes and Bishops, and to require them to
yield Obedience to him in it, and in the mean time, not meet them there
himself? Sure I am, when the Apostles called a Council at Jerusalem, St. Peter
the Apostle of whose Chair and Succession the Popes glory so infinitely, would
not be absent. But I suppose the Pope Pius the 4th. who now sits in that Chair,
remembers very well what betided John XXII. that he had no good Fortune at his
Appearance in the Council of Constance; for he came thither a Pope, but
returned a Cardinal; and therefore the Popes ever since have very wisely taken
care of themselves, and kept out of reach, and at home, and have stoutly
withstood all Councils and free Debates for above forty years since; when Dr.
Martin Luther was assaulted with all manner of Curses and Thunderbolts by the
Pope, because he had begun to preach the Gospel, and reform Religion by the
Word of God and with all Humility; begged that his Cause might be reserved to
the Hearing and Determination of a General Council, he could not be heard; for
Leo the X. saw very well, if the thing had been referred to a Council, that his
own Concerns would be brought in danger, and that he might hear what he would
not.

6. THE Name of a General Council sounds well, if it be convened as it ought,
and Men would lay by their Passions, and refer all things to the Word of God,
submitting to the Truth only; but if Piety and Religion are openly oppressed,
if Tyranny and Ambition are confirmed, if Factions, Gluttony and Luxury are
encouraged, there can then be nothing thought of that is of worse Consequence
to the Church of God. And all this I have said upon a Supposition, that there
is such a Council somewhere as you mention, and yet I heartily believe there is
none at last; but if indeed there be any where any Council at all, it must be a
very obscure private Council; for tho we are at no very great distance from the
Place, yet we could never hear what Bishops were met, nor what was done, nor
indeed whether any Bishops at all would meet. 29th. of Nobemb. 1560. So that
this Letter was writ about August 1560.
And about twenty months since, when this Council was first called by Pope
Pius, Ferdinandus the Emperor made answer, that tho all other things were
agreeable, yet the Place the Pope had chosen did very much displease him, for
that, tho Trent was a fine City, yet it was not convenient for all the Nations,
and besides, could not possibly entertain that great Number of Persons who did
usually follow a general Council. And almost the same Answer was generally
given by all the Christian Princes, and some of them answered much more
sharply; and therefore we thought all these fine Shows, would, together with
the Council, end in smoke.

7. BUT I pray Sir, who called this Council, and assembled the World together?
you will say Pope Pius the IV. and why he, rather than the Archbishop of
Toledo? by what Authority and Example of the Primitive Church, and by what law
has he done this? did Peter, Linus, Cletus or Clemens thus put the World in
commotion by their Edicts? this, during the Integrity and Prosperity of the
Roman Empire, was a sole Prerogative of the Emperor; but now that the Power of
the Empire is diminished, and that the several Kingdoms in Christendom have
shared the Imperial Power amongst them, this Power is devolved to all the
Christian Kings and Princes. Now Sir, search all the Annals, and gather
together all the Memoirs of Antiquity, and you shall find that all the ancient
Councils, as those of Nice, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Constantinople, were called
by the Emperors of Rome, Constantinus, Theodosius the First and Second, and
Martianus, and not by the Popes of Rome.

8. POPE Leo, a Man sufficiently kind to himself, and who did not in any thing
neglect the Authority of his See, did yet most humbly supplicate Martian the
Emperor, that he would be pleased to call a Council in Italy, because that
Country did then seem most convenient for that purpose; his Words are these:
All the Priests do most earnestly beseech your Clemency, that You would be
pleased to command a General Synod to be celebrated in Italy. But this Emperor,
that he might show that he had the Right of calling Councils, and none but he;
commanded the Council to meet at Chalcedon in Bithynia, and not in Italy, where
the Pope did most violently desire it should have been held. And when Ruffinus,
in the Contest which he had with St. Jerome, alleged a Synod, tell us (said
St. Jerome) what Emperor commanded it to meet; St. Jerome did not think a
General Council of any great Validity, except some of the Emperors called it.
Now I do not inquire what Emperor commanded the Bishops to meet now at Trent;
but only whether the Pope (who takes so much upon him) has consulted with the
Emperor about holding this Council, and what Christian King or Prince has he
prae-acquainted with his Will? Now to break in upon the Rights of another, and
to assume to a man's self what belongs to another man by Fraud or Force is
injurious, and for him to abuse the Clemency of Princes, and to command them as
if they were his Servants, is a superlative and intolerable piece of Injury and
contumely, and it would be an equal Injustice in us to confirm and allow that
Injury and Insolence of his by our Compliance; and therefore if we should only
reply, That this Council of yours at Trent is not lawfully called, and that
nothing relating to it has been rightly and orderly managed by Pope Pius, no
man can with any Justice blame our Absence.

9. I shall not here trouble you with an exact account of the Injuries our
Nation has received from the Popes of Rome; that they have snatched the
Scepters out of the Hands, and plucked the Diadems from off the Heads of our
Kings; that they pretend that this Kingdom is theirs, that it is possessed in
their Right, and that our Kings are their Beneficiaries of Homagers: These are
old Injuries; but of late years, they have stirred up at one time the King of
France, and at another the Emperor; and what this Pope Pius has consulted,
spoken, done, contrived and threatened against us, need not be remembered here,
for his Words and Actions are not so close and secret, but they may be known,
and his Will thereby be discovered. And as to the means by which he acquired
the Popedom, and the steps by which he climbed to that height of Dignity, I
shall say nothing. I do not say that he corrupted the Cardinals, by purchasing
their Votes, and by Bargain and Purchase, as by Mines and Ambushes aspired to
the Popedom. I do no say neither, that very lately, when he was not able to pay
the Cardinal Caraffa, by whose Assistance he purchased the Votes of the other
Cardinals, and to whom, upon that Score, he owed a very considerable Sum of
Money, he cast the poor man into Prison, and there basely murdered him. I
leave these, and such other things as these are, rather to you, who being
nearer to them, must needs see them more clearly, and understand them better
than we do at this distance. And now Sir, do you wonder that we should not come
to this bloody man, this Purchaser of Votes, this Bankrupt, and this Simonaical
Heretic? It becomes not a wise man (believe me) to throw himself into the
Chair of Pestilence, and to consult concerning Religion with the Enemies of all
Religion. My Mother (said one) commanded me not to approach to the Infamous;
and St. John the Apostle, durst not remain in the same Bath, and wash himself
with one Cerinthius a Heretic, lest he should perish with him by a Thunder
Clap from Heaven. I have not sat (said David) in the Council of the Wicked*
neither have I walked with the Workers of Iniquity.

10. WELL, but be it so, for this time let it be granted, that the Right of
calling Councils belongs to the Pope, and that he can (in this point) command
the World; and let whatever we have said concerning the Power of the Emperor,
and the Right of Kings be taken for false and vain, and let Pius be supposed
too to be a good man; that he was rightly and lawfully chosen Pope, that he has
not sought the Life of any man, that he has not murdered Caraffa in Prison;
yet it is fit that Councils should be free after all this, and that who
pleases may be there, who cannot conveniently, may on the other side be
absent; this was the equity and moderation of better men: Princes then were not
treated with so much Violence and Rudeness, so that if any person happened to
stay at Home, or did not send Ambassadors to the Council, he should presently
be noted by the Eyes and Fingers of all men. I beseech you Sir, what Observer
kept count who was absent from the Councils of Nice, Ephesus, Constantinople
and Chalcedon? but there was in none of these any Ambassadors from England,
Scotland, Poland, Hungary, Spain, Denmark, nor any part of Germany. See, read
and consider the Subscriptions, and you will find what I say is true. And why
do you not rather wonder that the Britans did not come to those full, famous,
celebrated and frequented Councils? Or that the Popes then were so wonderful
patient, that they did not presently censure them for Contumacy? But this Papal
tyranny was not then grown up, it was then lawful for Pious Bishops and the
Holy Fathers, without any Prejudice, to stay at Home. Paul the Apostle, would
not trust himself to the Council of Jerusalem, but appealed unto Caesar; and
tho St. Athanasius the Bishop was called to the Council at Caesarea by the
Emperor, yet he would not come; and he also, when he perceived the Arrian Party
the strongest in the Council of Syrmium, would not stay, but presently withdrew
and went away; and the Bishops of the West following his Example, refused to
come to that Council. St. John Chrysostom did not come to an Arrian Council,
tho he was invited both by Letters and Messengers sent by Arcadius the Emperor.
When the Arrian Bishops in Palestine were met together, and had the greatest
part of the Votes on their side, Paphnutius an old man, and Maximus Bishop of
Jerusalem departed out of the Convention and went away. Cyrillus a Bishop,
appealed from the Council of the Patropassians; Paulinus Bishop of Treves,
would not come to the Council of Millan, because he saw, by reason of the
Favor and Power of Constantius the Emperor, every thing plied under, and was
overruled by Auxentius an Arrian Bishop. The Bishops who came to the Council
at Constantinople, would not afterward come to that which was holden at Rome,
to which they were called also, which yet was no prejudice to them, tho they
were commanded to attend there by Letters from the Emperor; it was then thought
a sufficient Excuse, that they must attend the Reformation and Care of their
own Churches, tho they saw that the Arrians then prevailed every where, and
that their Presence might have been of a mighty consequence for the abating
their Rage.

11. WHAT if our Bishops should now make the same Answers, that they can spare
no time from the sacred Ministry, that they are totally taken up in restoring
and reforming their Churches, that they cannot be spared from home five, six,
or seven years, and especially in that place where they can do no good? for our
Bishops have not the same leisure with those who luxuriously spend their time
in Palaces at Rome, and depend upon the Cardinals, and lie at the catch for
rich Preferments; for our Churches are so miserably ruined and perverted by the
ill Management of these men, that it is neither a small time nor an ordinary
Diligence that can reform them. And now we see plainly that they design a
Diversion and mis-spending of our times, that when there is no need of it, we
may be drawn from Home, and so may neither promote the Reformation at Home, nor
be suffered by them to do it in the Council.

12. For the Pope indeed does but dissemble with the World (that you may not be
deluded) he intends no Council: nor are you to think that he acts any thing
sincerely and truly. He that knows not how to dissemble (said Lewis the 11th.
to Charles the 8th. his Successor) knows not how to Reign: And much more he
that knows not how to dissemble, and conceal his Counsels under the Gravity of
his Looks, as things go now, will never be able to act the part of a Pope, for
that See is supported merely by Hypocrisy; and is forced to supply the Defects
of a natural Strength with pretended Colors and Shows. For if the Popes did
indeed think that a General Council was of such wonderful efficacy for the
suppressing Schisms, why did they so very long delay so necessary a means of
it? Why did they sit still thirty years, and suffer Luthers Doctrine to take
root? Why did they not presently call a Council? Why did they at last call the
Council of Trent with great unwillingness and reluctance, and more by the
Impulse of Charles the Emperor, than by their own free Wills? and when the
Council had sit almost ten years at Trent, why after so tedious a Consultation,
was nothing brought to an Issue? Why did they leave their Business undone? Who
hindered them? Who withstood them? Believe me in this my Brother, the Pope has
no design now that a Council should meet, or Religion be reformed, which they
perfectly despise. All their Business, Desires and Contentions, aim at nothing
but the deluding the Minds of Religious Men, and the whole World, with the
Expectation of a General Council.

13. THEY see long since that their Revenues are diminished and ruined, that
their Arts have not the same success they have had heretofore, that an
Incredible number of men do every day fall off from them; there is not now that
vast concourse of People to Rome; men do neither esteem nor purchase their
Indulgences, Interdictions, Benedictions, Absolutions, and vain Bulls at the
Rate they have done; the Sales of their Ceremonies and Masses, and all that
Whorish Paint is not much valued; so that a very great part of their Pomp and
Tyranny is fallen, their Incoms reduced to a lower Ebb than ever; they and
their Partisans are become the Scorn of Children, so that now their whole
Concern is at the Stake: Nor is there any wonder that those things should fall,
which were supported by no roots. Our Savior JESUS CHRIST has put an end to
them, not by Arms or the force of Soldiers, but by an Heavenly Impulse, and the
Breath of his mouth; and he will entirely consume and abolish them by the
brightness of his coming: such is the force of the Word of God, the Power of
the Gospel; and these are the Weapons which will bring down every high thing
which is built up or exalted against the Knowledge of God. This Doctrine shall
be preached in spite of all throughout the World, and the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it; the Merit-mongers Shops at Rome do now lie desolate;
their Wares (Like the Goods of Porsenna) are cried at a low price, and there is
scarce any to buy them; a poor Dealer in Indulgences does now wander about, and
rarely finds a Fool that will purchase one. This Sir, is the great Concern;
from hence spring the Papal Tears and Cares; they see this Light sprung out of
one small Spark, and what now may be the Event when there are so many Fires
kindled every where on the Earth, and so many Christian Kings and Princes own
and prosess the Gospel? for these men do no serve our Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own Bellies. There goes a Story, that when Carneades the Philosopher was
at Rome, and made that memorable Oration against Justice, amongst other things,
he added this, That this Virtue, if it was a Virtue, was not of less use to any
part of Mankind, than to the Romans; for they, by Force and Stealth had subdued
those Kingdoms to themselves, which of right belonged to other men, and by a
most flagrant Injustice had arrived to the Empire of the World; and that if now
they should fall to the Exercise of Justice, all these must be restored to the
right owners, which they possessed so unjustly; and so they should be reduced
to their Shepherds Cottages, and poor cold Sheds, which was all they had at
first. And so now these, if they should lay aside their Dissimulation, and act
sincerely, and do their Duty, and give every one what was truly their own, they
must then return to the Staff and Scrip again, to Sobriety and Modesty, to the
Labors and Duty of a Bishop; for they have heard what St. Augustine said,
Bishop, is a Name of Labor, and not of Honor: and that they were no Bishops
who sought more to be over the People, than to do them good, and therefore they
see that the spreading of the Gospel is of less advantage to them than to any
other men in the World; for if ever they should entertain a thought of
reforming, they are undone, and therefore now they fill the World with Tumults
and Disorders; as Demetrius the Silver-Smith heretofore did, when he saw his
Trade was going down. And this is the true cause why Councils are now called,
and the Bishops and Abbots are assembled; for this seems now the cunningest
way, to prolong the time for some few years, by suspending the minds of men
with Expectation: and in the interim, many things (as is usual) may happen, a
War may break out, some of the Princes may dye, and the strange Inclinations of
Men toward the Reformation, may be blunted by delays, and languish by degrees,
and in the mean time (as one said) I hope something will be done.

14. OF old, when the Athenians (after they had beaten the Persians out of
Greece) began to rebuild their Walls, which they themselves had levelled with
the Ground during the War. And the Lacedaemonians, that they might still have
the Athenians at their Mercy, did severely prohibit them not to do it:
Themistocles the General of the Athenians, promised that he would go to
Lacedemon, and deliberate with them about this Business; and accordingly, when
he had began his Journey, that he might gain time, first he pretended a
Sickness, that he might stay a while by the way; and when at last he got to
Lacedemon, he began one Delay after another, one while the Articles did not
please him; another while, he must consider of them a while; now he must stay
for his fellow Ambassadors, without whom he could do nothing; and soon after,
he must send Messengers to Athens, to know their Pleasures, and in the interim,
whilst he was spinning out the time, the Athenians fortified their City, that
in case any Force were employed against them, they might be in a condition to
repel it: and just thus our Adversaries, by gaining one day after another, and
pretending to refer all thins to a Council, in the mean time build their own
Walls, whilst we sit still and expect I know not what Wonders from them, and in
the end; when they have taken their Measures, and put their Affairs out of
danger, then they will shut us out of doors, and tell us that no Council can be
held, nor any thing else done.

15. FOR it is worth the while to consider their Arts and Stratagems; how often
have Councils been called, and yet have not met? how often has a small flying
Rumor defeated all their Preparations, and other men's Expectations? How often
have the Purple Dons slipped home, without doing any thing, and adjourned the
next Session to the ninth or tenth year? How often has the Weather, Provisions,
the Place, or the Time not suited with their Humors? For the Pope alone calls
the Councils, and dismisseth them when he will: if any thing does not please
him, or things begin to go cross to his Interest, presently you hear his Valete
and Plaudite, Clap your Hands and farewell. A Council was called at Basil,
great numbers assembled from all Places, many things were seriously debated:
Pope Eugenius is condemned as an Heretic and a Simonaical Prelate by all the
Votes; and Amideus, Duke of Savoy substituted in his place. Eugenius, as he had
reason, takes this ill, as a thing of bad example to Posterity; his Power being
very much above all Councils: no Council can meet (said he) but by his Order,
nor determine any thing against his Will, therefore it is a lewd thing to
search into his Life in a Conventicle of Bishops. So without delay, he calls
the Council first to Ferrara in Italy, and then translates it to Florence. What
is the matter I pray? did Pope Eugenius think the change of Air would produce a
change in their Minds, or that the Holy Ghost would give Answers more wisely in
Italy, than he had in Germany? No, he did not seek Christ in all his Changes,
but his own dear Interest; he saw that in Germany, Sigismund the Emperor was
his Enemy, and that his authority, and the Favor he had there, was too great;
and he thought that if these Fathers were transplanted from those cold Climates
into Italy (they might like trees removed) become more mild, and their Fruit
more pleasant: for (O immortal God!) that is not now any part of the Business
of a Council to find out the Truth, or suppress Falsehood; the only Business of
Popes in Councils in these latter Ages, has been the confirming the Roman
Tyranny, the promoting Wars, the imbroiling the Christian Princes, and engaging
them one against another; the Levying Money, sometimes for Expeditions into the
Holy Land, at other times for the building St. Peter's Church; sometimes for I
know not what other Uses, or rather Abuses, which all tended to promote the
Luxury and Lusts of a few ill men: and these were the only Aims of all the late
Councils, for as for the Errors and Abuses, as if there had been none, nothing
could ever be handled.

16. Petrus Alliacensis complained much in the Council of Constance, concerning
the Avarice and Insolence of the Court of Rome: But what did he gain by it?
What part of their Avarice or Insolence was ever restrained by the Authority of
any Council? and he moved too that the number of Holy Days, and the Herds of
lazy Monks might be diminished; and another (in a certain Work which is called
the Tripartite, and is put in the end of the Council of Laterane) says, that
the whole World is scandalized, and speaks against the vast Multitude of
begging Friars, and the Fathers in that Laterane Council say, We command all
men straightly for time to come, not to invent any more new Religious Orders.
From these times to ours, what has been done concerning Holy Days I know not,
but it is highly probable there has been no diminution of them: but the Order
of Monks has been infinitely increased; for the late Popes have added the
Jesuits, the Capuchins, and the Theatins, as if we had not had before a
sufficient Swarm of Idle ^ellies. John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris offered to
the Fathers of the Council of Constance a Catalogue of LXXV. Abuses in the
Church of Rome, which he earnestly desired might be reformed; but now of so
great a number, what one Abuse have they since reformed? Johannes Picus
Mirandula writes to Pope Leo, that he would diminish the number of vain
Ceremonies, and curb the Luxury of the Priests. After this, a great number of
Bishops met in the Laterane Council, with a mighty expectation of the whole
World; but what one Ceremony did they cut off? What one Priest did they punish
for Luxury and Wickendess? the Poet Mantuan complained (by name) of the Manners
of the Church of Rome. St. Bernard the Abbot wrote thus to Eugenius the Pope,
your Court sometimes receives good Men, but it makes none: the bad do there
thrive, the good are ruined. And concerning the miserable state in which the
Church then was, he writes that from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the
Foot there is no soundness. And again, where is he that preaches the
acceptable year of the Lord? they do not (says he) in these times keep but
corrupt the Spouse of Christ; they, do not keep, but kill and devour the Lords
Flock. Pope Adrian the VI. when he sent his Legate into Germany, did
ingeniously and truly confess that the state of the whole Clergy was extremely
corrupt: all we, the Ecclesiastical Prelates (says he) have declined every one
into his way, and there is not now one that does good, no, not one. Albertus
Pighius confesses, that in the very Mass, which they will have to be most
sacred, and in which they place the Center of all the Christian Religion, there
may be found Abuses and Errors. And why should Words be multiplied? I omit
other Witnesses, for they are almost infinite; many Councils have been held
since that time, and Bishops assembled; and the Synod of Basil was expressly
called, as they then pretended, for the Reformation of the whole Clergy; but
notwithstanding, from that time forward, Errors increased every where, and the
Corruptions of the Clergy became twice more than they were before.

17. THE Cardinals who were nominated and chosen by Pope Paul the III. to
consider the State of the Church, gave in this Answer, That there were many
things faulty in the Church, and especially in the Manners of the Bishops and
inferior Clergy; that the Bishops were lazy, and did not teach the People, feed
the Flock, or take care of the Vineyard; that they lived in the Courts of
Princes, and were rarely resident; that there was sometimes three, and at
others, four Bishoprics held in commendam by one Cardinal, which tended very
much to the Damage of the Church: for those multiplied Offices (as they said)
were not compatible or to be held together (nor could be well managed by any
one person) and that all the Cloystered Orders should be banished out of the
Church. After this, there was a Council at Trent; but did the Bishops from that
time begin to feed the Flock? or did they cease from their former
Non-residence, or abstain from frequenting the Courts of Princes? did the
Cardinals cease from multiplying Bishoprics? or was any care taken that the
Church might have no damage by it? were the Conventual Orders diminished? is
Religion reformed amongst them? what occasion then was there that so many
Bishops should be assembled from very distant places, or should to no purpose
deliberate so many years concerning the Reformation of the Church? this in
truth is just as if the Pharisees should pretend to restore the Temple of God
to its former Sanctity.

18. THEY confess the errors and Abuses, convoke Councils, fain a great care of
Religion and Piety, promise their utmost Labor and Industry for the
restitution of whatever is fallen into decay, and that they will join with us
in this Work. That is, just after that manner as the Enemies of the People of
God of old said, that they would, together with Nehemia, help to build the
Temple of the Lord; for indeed their design was not to promote the building of
the Temple of the Lord, but to hinder it as much as they could possibly: they
would willingly make a Peace with us, but it is upon the terms offered by
Nahash to the Jews of Jabesh, if we will suffer them to bore out our right
Eyes; that is, if we will suffer them to deprive us of the Word of God, the
Gospel of our Salvation.

19. FOR have they any concern for Religion? do they take any care of the
Church of God, who never regarded the Wrath of God, nor the Salvation of the
People, nor any part of their Office? they say, let Pan take care of his Sheep.
They in the mean time manage Wars, Hunt, take their Pleasures and fare
deliciously. That I may not mention any thing that is more base. O immortal
God! who can think that these men ever think on the Church of God or Religion?
when or what Errors will these men ever remove? what Light will they afford to
us? whatever you say, tho you could bring the Sun it self in your hands, yet
they would never the more see. They excuse, paint, and comb as much as ever
they can, the most manifest Errors, as Symachus or Porphyrius heretofore did
the Heathen Errors and Follies. All their business is to persuade the World
that they have not deceived the People, and that they have not erred in any
thing; or if they sometimes prevail upon themselves to reform any thing, which
they never, or very rarely and sparingly do, they imitate Alexander the Roman
Emperor, who not being totally averse to the Christian Religion, is reported to
have worshipped Christ and Orpheus in the same Chapel; or as the ancient
Samaritans retained together the Worship of the true God, and the Service of
Idols; so they will sometimes perhaps receive some part of the Gospel upon
condition that they may at the same time retain their Superstition and their
doting Errors; they receive some Truths, upon condition they may hold some
other things which are false; they do so approve ours, as not to disapprove
their own; and so they do not take away Abuses, but color them over, and only
new case the old Pillars.

20. THIS is their way of reforming the Church of God, thus they celebrate
Conventions and Councils; the Truth is not served, but Affection, the better
part is brought under by the greater; the very Name of a General Council is
beautiful and glorious, but Poison is oftentimes given in a beautiful Cup: for
it is not sufficient that some Bishops and Abbots meet in one place; the
efficacy of a Council is not placed in Miters and Purple Robes; nor is whatever
a Council decrees, presently to be taken for an Oracle. It was a Council of
which the Prophet Isaiah writes thus, XXX. I. according to the Septuagint
version. Chap. 8. v. 10. Psalm. 2. 2.
Woe to the rebellious Children, says the Lord, who assemble a Council, but not
by me; take Council, says he, and it shall come to naught, in another place.
It was a Council of which the Prophet David says thus, The Kings of the Earth
stand up, and the Rulers take Counsel together against the Lord, and against
his Christ. It was a Council which condemned the Son of God Jesus Christ to the
Cross; it was a Council, and celebrated at Carthage under St. Cyprian, which
decreed that those that were baptized by Heretics, when they returned to the
Church should be rebaptized; which Error was afterward forced to be repealed
by so many Councils and Writings of the Fathers. And: what need is there of so
many Words? The second Council of Ephesus was openly for Eutyches, that the
Humane Nature of Christ was changed into the Divine. The second Council of Nice
decreed a manifest Idolatry in the Worship of Images. The Council of Basil, as
Albertus Pighius says, decreed against all Antiquity, against Nature, against
Reason, and against the Word of God. The Council of Ariminium wickedly decreed
for Arrius, that Christ was not God; and to conclude, many other Councils
afterward erred too, as the Selucian, and the Syrmian, which did both condemn
the Homousians or Catholics, and also subscribed to the impious Heresy of the
Council of Ariminium. Why do you doubt? the very Council of Chalcedon, which
was one of the four which Pope Gregory compared to the four Evangelists; Pope
Leo made no Scruple to accuse that very Council of Temerity of Rashness.

21. THUS we see some Councils to have been contrary to other Councils; and
that as Pope Leo quashed the Acts of Adrian, Stephen of Formosus, John of
Stephen; and that as Pope Sabinian commanded all the Writings of Pope Gregory
to be burnt as perverse and wicked; so very often a latter Council has
abrogated all the Decrees of a former. The Council of Carthage decreed, that
the Bishop of Rome should not be called the highest Priest, or the Prince of
the Priests, or by any other such like Title: but the latter Councils have not
only called him the High Priest, but the Great Pontiff, and the Head of the
Universal Church. The Eliberitan Council decreed, that it should not be lawful,
that what was worshipped should be painted on the Walls of the Churches. The
Council of Constantinople decreed, that Images were not to be endured in the
Christian Churches; on the other side, the second Council of Nice did allow
them not only to be erected in Churches, but also to be worshipped. The Laterane
Council under Pope Julius the II. was called for no other purpose but to
rescind the Decrees of the Council of Pisa: thus the latter Bishops frequently
oppose the forgoing, and some Councils damm up the Lights of others; and these
men will not be bound, even by their own Councils, any farther than they please
and is for their Convenience, and (...), brings Grist to their Mill. The
Council of Basil decreed, that a Council of Bishops is above the Pope; but the
Laterane Council under Pope Leo, decreed the Pope to be above a Council. And
the Pope does not only carry himself so as if he thought so; but also if any
man is of the Opinion of this Council, he commands him to bo reputed a
Heretic. I pray Sir, what would you do here? whatever you say or think, either
the Pope or the Council will make you a Heretic, and all the Popes for some
Ages, have opposed these Truths of the Council of Basil; and therefore in the
esteem of the Council of Basil, all the Popes, for all these last Ages, are
Heretics. The same Council with one Voice, deposed Pope Eugenius for Simony
and Schism, and named Amideus for his Successor. But yet Eugenius did not
regard the Decree of the Council, and although he was a Simonist and a
Schismatic, yet he did not cease to be the Successor of St. Peter, the Vicar
of Christ, and the Head of the Catholic Church, and in spite of all, retaind
his former Dignity, and was born as before on the shoulders of Noble Men
magnificently and loftily. And Amideus, a simple man, like one unhorsed, walked
upon his Feet, and thought himself happy enough, that of a Pope he was become a
Cardinal. The late Council at Trent made a Decree, that the Bishops should
teach the People, and that no one of them should at the same time have two or
more Bishoprics: they on the other side, contrary to the Canon of their own
Council, enjoy Pluralities, and teach nothing, and so they make such Laws as
they will not be bound by but when they please; at this rate have they ever
valued their own Councils and Decrees.

22. AND now (Sir) what reason have we to expect at this time a better Event of
things? for, for what cause, upon what hope and Expectation is the Council
held? be pleased Sir, to consider with your self but this one thing, what kind
of Men they are, upon whose Fidelity, Learning and Judgment the weight of the
whole Council, the debating all those great Questions, and the sum of the whole
Affair depends? they are indeed called Abbots and Bishops grave Men, and great
Names, and, as it is thought, of great account in the Management of the Church
of God; but if you strip them of the Names, Robes, and Personages of such Men,
what have they that is at all like a Bishop or an Abbot? for they are no
Ministers of Christ, no Dispensers of the Mysteries of God; they do not attend
the reading, nor teach the Gospel, nor feed the Flock, nor till the Ground, nor
plant the Vincyard, nor light the Fire, nor carry the Ark of the Lord, nor
perform the Ambassie of Christ, nor Watch, nor do the Work of an Evangelist;
they do not fulfill their Ministry, they entangle themselves in secular
Affairs; they hide the Treasure of their Lord, and take away the Keys of the
Kingdom of God; they neither go in themselves, nor do they suffer others to
enter; they beat their Fellow Servants; they feed themselves and not the Flock;
they sleep, they snore, they feast, they fare deliciously; they are Clouds
without Water, Stars without Light, dumb Dogs, slow Bellies, and as St. Bernard
said, they are not Prelates but Pilats; not Teachers, but Seducers; not
Pasters, but Impostors: the Servants of Christ (says he) serve Antichrist. And
these are the only men to whom the Popes will allow a Place and Vote in the
Council; in their Judgments and Power will they have the whole Care and
Administration of the Catholic Church to be: Pope Pius has now chosen these
alone to put his Trust in; but O good God! what kind of Mortals, what sort of
Men are these? and yet as they think, all these Queries are ridiculous: for it
is not, say they, one farthing difference, whether they be Learned or Pious or
no, or what they will or think; for in truth it is sufficient if they can but
ride upon a Mule, and with great State and Noise make the public Cavalcade to
the Council, and when they cam^ there say nothing. If Sir you will not believe
me, and conceive I have feigned all this for Diversion and Sport, be but pleased
to hear the Honorable Judgment, and what the most sacred Faculty of the whole
Sorbon decreed in this case; that, say they, which our Master have said
concerning a legitimate Assembly, is, That it is to be noted, that to the
legitimate assembling of a Council, it is sufficient that the Solemnity and
Form of the Law be solemnly observed: for if any man would bring this in
question, whether the Prelates that sit there have a good Intention, and
whether they be learned, and whether they have the Knowledge of the Holy
Scripture, and a mind well disposed to sound Doctrine, the Process would be
infinite; for they it seems who sit as mute as the Statues of Mercury, and know
not in the least what Religion is, will yet answer wondrous well and aptly
concerning the sum of Religion, and whatever they say, cannot possibly err.

23. Bound by Oath.
AND all these are bound to the Popes Interest, not only by their Error and
Ignorance, but by the Tie and Religion of an Oath; so that if they should
chance to think right, yet, unless they will be prejured, they must not speak
what they think, and openly profess and own the Truth; so that they must of
necessity be false to God or man, for they all swear in this very form: The
Form of the Bishops Oath to the Pope.
J. N. Bishop, from this hour forward will be faithful to St. Peter, and to the
Holy Apostolic Church of Rome; to my Lord Pope N. and to his Successors
canonically entering: I will neither be of Counsel nor in any Action whereby he
may lose his Life or Limbs, or be taken Prisoner; that Counsel which he shall
impart to me by Letters or by Messengers, I will discover to man to his Damage:
I will be a Helper to defend the Papacy of the Church of Rome, and the Canons
of the Holy Fathers, and to retain them against all men. Of old, when the
Priests of Apollo Pythius spoke plainly in favor of Philip King of Macedonia,
there were some who facetiously said, that Apollo began (...), to Philippize.
And now we see plainly, that nothing is decreed in the Council but by the Will
and Consent of the Pope; why may we not say that the Oracles of the Councils do
(...), Papize, that is, speak nothing but what the Pope please? Verres of old
acted wisely, of whom it is reported, that being plainly guilty of many Crimes,
he would not commit his Reputation and Fame to any but confiding men of his own
Flock and Party. But yet the Pope is many degrees wiser, for he will not have
any Judges but such as he knows will not determine any thing against his Will,
because they have the same Interest he has, and esteem all things by the
relation they have to their Pleasures and Bellies; and yet if they would they
could not do otherwise, because they are bound to him by an Oath too: indeed
they place the Bible in the midst of the Council, because they would seem not
to act any thing against the Prescription thereof, and yet they only look upon
it at a good distance, but never read one word of it: in truth they bring with
them a prejudicated Sentence, and never attend what Christ says, or determine
any thing, but as it best pleases them.

24. AND thus is all that Liberty which ought to be in all Consultations, and
especially in those which concern holy things, and which does best befit the
holy Spirit, and the Modesty of Christian Men, wholly taken away St. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 14. 30.
that if any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold
his Peace; but these men command him to be forthwith taken and hurried to
Prison and burnt, who shall but mutter any thing to the contrary: as the cruel
Death of the two holy and stout men John of Hus, and Jerome of Prague is an
excellent Witness against them; which two men they murdered contrary to the
public Faith, and were thereby false both to God and Man. So the false Prophet
Zedechias, 1 Kings 22. 11.
when he had made himself a pair of iron Horns, smote Micaiah the Prophet of
the Lord, and said, has the Spirit of the Lord left me, and come to thee? thus
having now excluded all others, they reign in Councils alone, and have the sole
Right of Suffrages, and so make and divulge such Laws as the Ephesians did of
old. Let no man (said they) who (...) wiser than the rest, presume to live
here, upon pain of Banishment and Transportation: for these men will hear none
of us. 1551.
About ten years since, in the late Council at Trent, the Ambassadors of the
Princes of Germany and of the free Towns who came thither, that they might be
heard, were excluded out of the Assembly, and denied the Liberty of Speech: for
the Bishops and Abbots said they would suffer no free Debate of the Cause, nor
would they determine the Controversies by the Word of God; and that those of
our Side were not to be heard, except they would recant; which if they refused,
they were to expect no other terms in the Council, but to be condemned; for
Julius the III. in his Brief, by which he called that Council, publicly
declared, that if they did not change their Minds, they should be condemned for
Heretics without ever hearing their Cause. And Pius the IV. who has now
resolved to call again that Council, has by the prejudice of his own single
Judgment, commanded all those who have made defection from the Authority of the
Church of Rome (that is, the greatest part of Christendom) without ever seeing
or hearing them to be taken and reputed Heretics. They are wont to say, and
that upon all occasions, that all things are well, and that they will not
suffer the least part of their Doctrine and Religion to be altered. Albertus
Pighius says, that without the Command of the Church of Rome, the most plain
place of Scripture is not to be believed. Now is this their way to restore the
Church to her Integrity? Is this their seeking Truth? Is this the Liberty and
Moderation which be^its a Council?

25. AND although these things are most unjust, and most contrary to the Practice
of the ancient Councils, and the Usage of modest and good Men in their
Deliberations; yet it is much more unreasonable, that whereas the whole World
complains of the Ambition and Tyranny of the Pope of Rome, and is persuaded,
that until he is reduced to a better Order, all their Labors for the
Reformation of the Church of God will be in vain, and nothing will be done; yet
at last, all things are referred to him alone, as to the most equal Arbiter and
Judge. But (O good God!) to what Man? I will not now say any of these things
against him; that he is an Enemy of the Truth, an Ambitious Covetous Proud Man,
who is already become intolerable to his own: But I say that it is the utmost
pitch of Folly and Injustice, to make him the sole Judge of all Religion, who
commands all his Dictates to be had in the self same Honor and Esteem as the
Words of St. Peter are; and says, that in case he should Mislead a thousand
Souls, and carry them with himself to Hell, yet no man ought to reprehend him
for it: Who says, he can make Injustice to become Justice: Whom In Corn.
Agripp. de Vanitate Scient.
Camotensis confesses to have corrupted the Scriptures, that he might have a
Plenitude of Power. And why should I use more words? whom his own Companions
and Ministers, Joachimus Abbas, Petrarcha, Marsilius Patavinus, Laurentius
Valla, and Hieronymus Savanarola have not obscurly hinted to be the Antichrist.
To the Judgment and Will (I say) of this one Man are all things submitted, that
this very Criminal may be both the Party accused, and the Judge of his own very
Case; that this guilty man may sit aloft upon a Throne, and his Accusers stand
beneath, whilst he gives Sentence for himself: for Pope Julius had given us
these just and reasonable Laws. There is (says he) no Council which is valid,
nor ever shall be, unless supported by the Authority of the Church of Rome. And
Bonifacius the VIII. says, that every Creature ought to be subject to the
Church of Rome; and that as they tender their Salvation. And Pope Pascal uses
this Expression, as if any Councils had given Laws to the Church of Rome, when
in truth, all the Councils have been held, and received their Force from the
Authority of the Church of Rome; and in all their Statutes, the Authority of
the Pope of Rome is plainly and apparently excepted. And another says,
whatever the Pope approves or disapproves, we ought also to approve or
disapprove: and what the Pope allows, no other man may disallow. And another
Flatterer, who has lost all Modesty, says, that although the whole World should
contradict the Opinion of the Pope in any thing, yet it seems but reasonable to
stand to the Judgment of the Pope. And another no less impudently says, it
would be a sort of Sacrilege to dispute concerning an Action of the Pope; who,
tho he is not a good man, is yet ever presumed to be such. And another more
impudently, The Pope (says he) has a Heavenly Will, and therefore in those
things which he wills, his Will is instead of a Reason to him; nor is there any
man who may say to him, why do then act thus? And that I may pass by many
other things which might be alleged here, because they are without number, and
at length come to a Conclusion, Pope Innocentius the IX. more impudently than
any other, uses these words, This Judge (the Pope) may neither be judged by
the Emperor, nor by Kings, nor by the while Chrgy, nor yet by all the people. O
immortal God! how little is wanting of the Pride of Luciser. (...) 14. 14.
I will ascend above the North, and I will be like the most highest. If all
these things are true, and the Popes have not belyed the World, what need is
there of a Council? or if they will hold a sincere and free Council, let all
these things be condemned as dishonest and insolent Lies, and let them not only
be laid aside, as to the court, and use of them, but be razed out of all Books,
that the sum of Affairs may never more be left to the Will and Lust of one man;
and he too for many most just causes suspected. But now on the contrary, the
Popes say they cannot err, and that the Word of God is to be regulated
according to their Prescription; and besides all this, before they enter upon
their Papal Dignity, they take an Oath that they will maintain the Faith of
many late Councils (in which all things are most fearfully depraved) and they
promise most religiously, that they will not change any thing: and therefore
what wonder is it, that no good is done by Councils, that Errors and Abuses are
not taken away; that the Ambassadors of Princes are to no purpose called
together, from such distant places, out of all Lands? and yet I hear that there
are some good men at this time, who not well considering what they say, tho
they condemn the Pride of the Pope and his Persian State and Magnificence, and
his Epicurean Contempt of all Religion, yet they would preserve for all that,
his Authority safe and entire; and tho sometimes they confess him to be
Antichrist, yet for all that, as soon as he ascends that Chair, they do not
question but he is the universal Bishop, and the Head of the universal Church
of Christ; and here they please themselves, as if the Holy Ghost were
necessarily fixed to the Pope Court in the Adrian Mole; but there is a Proverb,
that the Place does not sanctify the Man, but the Man the Place. And St.
Jerome, as he is cited by them, says, they are not the Children of the Saints,
who hold their Places, but those who imitate their good Actions; for otherwise,
as Christ said, the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses his Chair, and he
commanded his Disciples to acknowledge and submit to their Authority, so far as
they answered out of the Word of God. What (says St. Augustine) has Christ
said more here, than that the Voice of the Shepherd was heard out of the Mouth
of a mercenary Servant? for sitting in that Chair, they teach the Law of God,
therefore God teaches by them; but if they will teach their own things, do not
hear them, do not do them; for St. Paul says, Antichrist the Man of Sin shall
sit in the Holy Place; and therefore St. Jerome does well admonish us, thou
do attend St. Peter, but then consider Judas; thou submitest to Stephen, but
cast an Eye toward Nicholas as the same time; Church Dignity does not make a
Christian. Thus St. Jerome, and certainly it is said that Marcellinus the Pope
did sacrifice to Idols: Pope Liberius was an Arrian, Pope John the XXII. was a
Heretic, in the point of the immortality of the Soul; Pope John the VIII. was
a Woman, and in her Popedom, by a lewd Lust, committed Adultery, and in a
Procession, in the midst of the Pomp, before the Eyes of the Bishops and
Cardinals, she brought forth a Child; and Liranus says, that many Roman Popes
apostized from the Faith of Christ; and therefore we must not trust too much to
Places, Successions, and vain Titles of Dignity. The impious Nero was descended
from Metellus the Pious, and Annas and Caiaphas succeeded to Aaron, and an Idol
has often been put in the place of God.

26. BUT Sir, I beseech you, what is that vast Power and Authority that they so
very insolently boast of? Or from whence had they it? from Heaven or from Men?
Christ (say they) said to Peter, upon this Rock will I build my Church: in
these words the Papal Power is confirmed, for the Church of Christ is placed
upon Peter as upon its Foundation; but Christ in these words gave nothing to
St. Peter apart from the rest of the Apostles, neither did he here make any
mention of the Pope or City of Rome. Christ* is that Rock, Christ, is that
Foundation: No man (says St. Paul) can lay another Foundation, than that which
is already laid, which is Jesus Christ.

27. And St. Augustine, upon this Rock ( says he) I will build my Church: by
the Words, upon this Rock ( says he) is understood the Confession made by
Peter, saying, thou art Christ the Son of the living God; for (says he) it is
not said thou art a Rock, but thou art Peter, but the Rock was Christ. And St.
Basil, upon these words, upon this Rock, that is ( says he upon this Faith I
will build my Church. And the most ancient Father Origin, the Rock ( says he)
is every Disciple of Christ, after he has drunk of the Spiritual Rock which
follows; and upon every such Rock is all the Churches Doctrine built. Now (Sir)
if you will suppose that the whole Church is built only upon Peter, what will
you say of John the Son of Thunder, and all the rest of the Apostles? Or shall
we dare to say that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against Peter only,
but against the rest of the Apostles and Heads of the Church those Gates may
prevail? or rather is that Saying, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail, to
be understood of all and every one of them of whom it was spoken? and so is
that other Expression to be taken too, upon this Rock will I build my Church.
And are the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven given only to Peter by Christ, or was
no other of the blessed (Apostles) to receive them? But if that Expression, to
thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, be to be understood as
spoken to all the rest as well as to Peter, why then should not all that was
spoken, as well what went before, as what follows after, tho spoken to St.
Peter, yet be common to all the Apostles? There is ( says Hillary) one happy
Rock of Faith, which Peter confessed with his Mouth; and again, upon this
Confession of Peter's is the Church built; and not much after, this Faith is
the Foundation of the Church. And after the same manner the other Fathers also
Jerome, Cyril and Bid say, the Church is built not upon Peter, but upon the
Faith of Peter, that is, on Jesus Christ the Son of God, whom Peter, by an
Heavenly instinct, confessed, Peter ( says St. Augustine) was so called from
the Rock, not the Rock from Peter; nor did Christ say, I will build my self
upon thee, but I will build thee upon me. And Nicholas Liranus, tho he is not
always a good Author, for you know in what Age he lived, yet he rightly took
this; upon this Rock ( says he) that is, upon Christ: and therefore the Church
cannot depend upon any man, by reason of his Dignity and Ecclesiastical Power,
for many Popes have proved Apostates.

28. IN what then is this Papal Authority placed? In Teaching, but they teach
nothing; in administering the Sacraments, but they do not administer them; in
feeding, but they feed none. Now this is all the Power which Christ bestowed
upon the Apostles; Go ye (said he) into all the World and preach the Gospel,
etc. hence forward ye shall be Fishers of Men; and as the living Father sent
me, so I send you. But as to these, whither go they? what do they teach? what
do they preach? what do they fish for? from whence go they? or by whom are they
sent? their's is nor Apostolic Authority, but Pride, and an intolerable
Lordship usurped by Force and Tyranny. None of us (says Cyprian) calls himself
Bishop of Bishops, or compells his Partners to a necessitated Obedience by a
Tyrannical Terror. Seeing every Bishop may use his Liberty and Power according
to his own Discretion, as he cannot be judged by another, so neither can he
judge another. And as the other Apostles (says he) were the same which Peter
was; All Bishops equal.
so all Bishops are endowed with this equal Partnership both of Honor and
Power. And St. Jerome (says, greater is the Authority of the World, than that
of any City. Why then do you produce to me the Custom of one City? Why do you
vindicate that Paucity, from which this Pride arose against the Laws of the
Church? Wherever a Bishop is settled, whether at Rome, or Eugubium, whether at
Constantinople or Rhegium, he is of the same Worth, and of the self same
Priesthood; the greatness of Riches, and the Humility of Poverty makes not one
Bishop superior or inferior to another. And St. Gregory (says, Peter was a
principal Member in the Body; John, Andrew, and James were the Heads of
particular People, and yet all of them are Members of the Church in one Head;
yea, the Saints before the Law, those under the Law, and those under Grace, and
all those who make up the Body of our Lord (the Church) are to be accounted
Members, and no man ever yet desired to be called an UNIVERSAL.

29. THIS is that Power which some men defend so stoutly in this Age; so that
whatever they think of the Popes Life or Religion, yet they would have this
Authority Sacred and untouched, as if the Church of God could not be safe
without it: or as if, without the Popes Will and Consent, a Council could be no
Council; and that if the whole World should think contrary to what he does, it
would be nothing. And therefore when you see (Sir) that these things are thus
ill managed, you ought not to wonder; that when nothing is now sincerely and
truly acted in Councils, our Men had rather stay at home, than travail so far
to no purpose, to a Place where they are sure to lose their Labor and their
Cause too.

30. BUT Sir, you say in the next place, it is a Sin to change any thing in
Religion, without the Consent of the Pope and a Council. Why Sir? the very
Popes themselves have changed almost the whole State of the Primitive Church
without any Council; and tho this is indeed a very specious and winning
Proposition, yet it is made a Cover and Defense for most foul Errors; for they
only seek to delay the Minds of Men with a tedious Expectation, that by
lingering and weariness, they may take off their Edge and Keenness, and so by
degrees, make them cast off all Hopes of a Reformation. For, what would they
have the People of God be deceived, err, be deluded and involved in Error, and
in the Ignorance of God, and be led into eternal Ruin and Destruction, whilst
the Pope calls a Council, and the Abbots and Bishops ( meet, debate, settle
things) and then return home? Is it not lawful for any of us to believe in
Christ, to prosess the Gospel, to worship God rightly and truly, to fly from
Superstitions and Worship of Idols, except these men please to give us leave?
In truth, the state of the Church of God were very deplorable, if in the midst
of so many far spread, gross, blind, foul, apparent and manifest, Errors, so
that our very Enemies themselves cannot deny them; nothing could be done for
her Relief, without the Concourse of the whole World and a General Council, or
at least, of such a Council as we cannot hope for with any certainty, and the
event of which, if we now had it, is much more uncertain. When of old, the
Persians invaded Greece, and began to destroy all before them, and the
Lacedaemonians whose valor was then much famed amongst the Grecians, and
therefore it was but reasonable they should have been the first in the defense
of their Country; yet because they had an ancient Custom and a Superstitious
conceit that had possessed them from the time of Lycurgus, that it was ominous
and unfortunate to begin a Martial Expedition at any other time than that of
the full Moon, therefore they sat still and suffered their Enemies to plunder
and burn their Country, whilst they were foolishly expecting that period of the
Moon, which was most opportune and fitting to begin their defense in. But at
last they bethought themselves and cried, There is equal danger in the delay.
The safety of the Church is in danger, the Devil like a ramping and a roaring
Lion goes about seeking whom he may devour; simple men are easily drawn into
the snare, and tho they are very often touched with a Zeal for God, yet out of
Ignorance and Misperswasion, they persecute the Son of God: And as Nazianzen
(says, When they think they are in Arms for Christ, they do really fight
against him. And the Bishops who ought in the first place to take care of these
things, either like vain Night-Spirits throw every things into Disorder and
Confusion; or (that I may tell the truth without disguise) increase the Errors,
and double the darkness. Now Sir, after all this should we have sit still and
expected the determination of these Fathers with our Arms folded together, and
doing nothing? No, St. Cyprian (says, There is but one Episcopacy (in the
whole Church) a solid and entire part of which, is enjoyed by every Bishop: and
every one shall surely give an account to the Lord for his own part. Their
blood will I require at thy hand, says the Lord. And if any man puts his hand
to the Plough, and looks back, and is solicitous what others may think of
him, and expects the Authority of a General Council; and in the mean time hides
his Lords Treasure he shall hear, thou sloathful and wicked Servant: Take him
and cast him into outer darkness. Suffer (says Christ) the dead to bury their
dead, but come thou and follow me. The truth of God depends not upon men. In
Humane Counsels it is the part of a wise man to stay for the judgment and
consent of men; but in the Affairs of Religion, the voice of God ought to
supercede the need of all others; which as soon as a devout Soul has heard, he
yields presently, submits, and neither stands off, nor expects any other; for
he knows that then he ought neither to believe the Pope nor Council, but the
Will of God thus revealed. And this voice is to be obeyed, tho opposed by all
men. The Prophet Elija immediately obeyed God, tho he did believe that he was
alone. Abraham upon the Admonition of God went out of Caldea, Lot went out of
Sodom, and the three Children made a public Confession of their Religion, and
openly detested Idolatry, without expecting a General Council. Go out of her
(says the Angel) and be not partakers of her sins, that ye partake not of her
Plagues; he does not say stay for a Synod of the Bishops. Thus the true
Religion was at first published, and so it must be now restored. The Apostles
at first taught the Gospel without any public Council, and without any such
Council it may now be called back, and reinstated. But if Christ himself or his
Apostles in the beginning would have delayed and put off the whole business
till a future Council. When should the (...) of them have gone out into all
Lands? How should the Kingdom of God have suffered force, and the violent have
taken it by a kind of Invasion? Where had the Gospel now been? Where would the
Church of God have been? In truth we neither fear nor fly from a Council, but
rather wish for and desire it, so it may be free, genuine, and Christian, and
may be convened after the pattern of that of the Apostles: provided that the
Abbots and Bishops may be discharged of their Oath, by which they are now bound
to the Popes of Rome; and that whole Combination now on foot may be dissolved;
provided those of our Party may be freely and modestly heard, provided they be
not condemned before they are heard: And lastly upon condition that if any
thing be done, no one man may weaken or rescind all again. But now whilst we
saw that the present manners and times would not allow us thus much; and that
the most absurd, silly, ridiculous, superstitious, and wicked things were most
stiffly defended, only because they had been heretofore received, and purely for
custom sake. We judged it to be our duty to provide for, and take care of our
own Churches in a National Council.

31. FOR we know that the Spirit of God is neither bound to any place or number
of men. Tell it (said Christ) to the Church: To wit, not to the universal
Church which is spread all over the World, but to the particular, which may
meet in some one place. Wheresoever (says he) two or three of you are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of you. So St. Paul, that he might
reform the Churches of Corinth and Galatia, did not command them to stay for a
General Council, but wrote to them that they would forthwith cut off all Errors
and Disorders: And so heretofore whilst the Bishops slept and did nothing, or
rather defiled and polluted the Temple of God, God by extraordinary ways
excited others who were great men, and of generous minds, to reform whatever
was amiss.

32. BUT then, Sir, we have done nothing rashly, nor without very great reason,
nothing but what we saw was lawful at all times to be done; and which had often
been done by the Holy Fathers without any blame. And thus calling together the
Bishops, and a very full Synod, by the common consent of all our States, We
cleansed the Church of those Dregs and Corruptions which either the carelessness
or malice of Men had brought in, and purged it as the Augean Stable: And as far
as it was possible, we have reduced all things to their ancient Splendour, and
the resemblance of the Apostolical times, and Primitive Church. And all this,
as we might lawfully do it, so for that cause have we done it confidently.

33. THAT which Pope Gregory the First wrote about these Affairs please me; and
the more because he wrote about the Institution of the English Churches to
Augustine Bishop of the English. He exhorts him then, not that he should refer
things to a Council, but that according to his Discretion, he should appoint
such things as he saw did most tend to the increase of Piety. You know (says
he) my Brother, the Custom of the Church of Rome, in which you were brought up;
but I am best pleased with this Course, that wherever you find any thing
which is most pleasing to Almighty God, whether it be in the Church of Rome, or
that of France, or in any other Church, you would carefully pick and choose the
principal things, and settle them in the Church of England, which is yet new
and to be settled in the Faith, and that in the Constitution thereof, you should
instill those things which you have thus collected from many several Churches ^
for Customs are not to be loved for the sake of the Places, but the Places for
their Sakes.

34. After the same manner the Fathers in the Council of Constantinople wrote
to Damasus Pope of Rome, and the rest of the Western Bishops. Ye know the
ancient Sanction and Definition of the Council of Nice, was ever in force; that
as to the Care of the Administration of particular Churches, the Clergy in
every Province taking their Neighbors, if they thought fit, should confer
Ecclesiastical Dignities upon those they believed would manage them profitably.
And the Affrican Fathers wrote thus to Pope Celestinus. Your Holiness may be
pleased to reject the unjust Appeals or Recourses of our Presbyters, and the
inferior Clerks of our Church, as becomes you; for this was never denied to the
Church of Africa by any Definition of the Fathers; and the Decrees of the
Nicene Council have most plainly committed both all inferior Clerks, and also
all the Bishops to their own Metropolitans: for all Affairs may be most
prudently and justly ended in those places where they began, nor will the Grace
and Assistance of the Holy Ghost be wanting to any Province. Let this Equity be
^ver of great esteem with all Christian Priests, which has been constantly
retained.

35. BUT Elutherius Bishop of Rome wrote much better, and more pertinently to
the thing we have now in hand in his Epistle to Lucius, a King in Britain. You
have (says he) desired I would send you the Roman and Caesarean Laws, which
you have a desire to settle in your Kingdom of Britain: We may abrogate the
Roman and Imperial Laws when we will, but not the Law of God; for you have, by
the Mercy of God, received the Law and Faith of Christ in your Kingdom of
Britain; and you have with you in your Kingdom both Testaments; compile out of
them, by the Assistance of God, and the Counsel of your Kingdom, a Law, and
then by it, with Gods permission, govern your said Kingdom, for you are the
VICAR OF GOD in that Kingdom, according to that of the Psalmist, the Earth is
the Lords.

36. IN short, Victor Bishop of Rome, held a Provincial Synod at Rome, and
Justinianus the Emperor commands, that if need require, Synods should be held
in each Province, and threatened, that if this were neglected, he would punish
those that made default. Every Province (says St. Jerome) has its particular
Manners, Rites and Opinions, which cannot easily be removed or changed without
a very great disturbance. And why should I commemorate the most ancient
Municipal Councils, that of Eliberis, Gangra, Laodicea, Ancyra, Anti^ch, T^urs,
Carthage, Milevis, Toledo, and Bourd^aux, for this is no new thing. So was the
Church of God governed before the Fathers met in the Council of Nice; for they
had not presently recourse to a General Council. Theophilus held a Provincial
Synod in Palestin^, Palmas in Pontus, Irenaeus in Gaul, Bachilus in Achaia,
Origin against Beryllus in Arabia; and I omit many other Provincial Synods
which were kept in Africa, Asia, Greece and Egypt, which were most ^ious,
Orthodox and Christian, tho the Pope had nothing to do with them. For the
Bishops then, as necessity required, and as things fell out, presently
consulted the Welfare of their Churches in Domestic Councils, and sometimes
implored the Assistance of their neighbor Bishops, at other, they frankly
aided each other without asking, and if need were, did by turns help one the
other. Nor did only the Bishops, but Princes of those times, think that the
Concerns of the Church pertain'd to their O^^ice; for to omit Nebuchadnezar,
who published a Capital Edict against all that should blaspheme the God of
Israel; and David, Solomon, Ezechias, and Josias, who did partly build, and
partly reform the Temple of God. Constantius the Emperor, without any Council,
took away the Worship of Idols, and put forth a most severe Edict, by which he
made it capital for any man to offer Sacrifice to any Idol. Theodosius the
Emperor, commanded all the Temples of the Pagan Gods to be razed to the Ground.
Jovinianus, another of them, so soon as ever he was declared Emperor, made his
first Law for the restitution of the Christian Exiles. Justinianus was wont to
say, that his Care of the Christian Religion was as great as that of his Life.
Joshua, so soon as ever he was made the Governor of the People, had Precepts
concerning Religion and the Worship of God given him; for Princes are the
nursing Fathers of the Church, and the Keepers of both Tables; nor was there
any one Cause why God settled Governments in the World greater than this, viz.
That there might be some to preserve Religion and Pi^ty in safety.

37. AND therefore many Princes in this Age do sin the more grievously, who
being called Christians, sit idely and enjoy their Pleasures, and tamely suffer
wicked Rites of Worship, and the Contempt of the Deity; and turn over all this
Care to the Bishops, and those very Bishops whom they know to have all Religion
in the utmost degree of scorn; as if the Care of the Churches and People of God
did not at all belong to them, or as if they were mere Herds-men of Cattle, and
to take care of Bodies, but not in the least of men's Souls; they remember not
in the mean time, that they are the Ministers of God, and chosen for that
purpose, that they might serve the Lord. Ezechias the King would not go up to
his own House until he saw the Temple of God thoroughly purged. And David said,
I will not give Sleep to my Eyes, no Slumber to my Eyelids, until I find out a
Place for the Lord, a Tabernacle for the God of Jacob. O that Christian Princes
would hear the Voice of their Lord and Sovereign. Psalm. 2. 11.
Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be learned, O ye that are Judges of the
Earth. I have said (says he) that ye are Gods, that is, men divinely chosen,
who should take care of my Name. Think thou whom I have raised from the
Dunghill, and placed in the highest degree of Dignity and Honor, and set over
my People, when thou so studiously buildst and adornest thy own House, how thou
can despise and neglect my House; or how thou can every day petition me,
that I would confirm thy Kingdom to thee and thy Posterity. What, that my Name
may for ever be treated unworthily? that the Gospel of my Christ may be
extinguished? that my Servants may, for my Sake, he butchered before thy Eyes,
and in thy View? that this Tyranny may rage the longer? that my People may be
imposed upon for ever? that the Scandal may be confirmed by thee? Woe to him by
whom Scandals come; and woe to him by whom they are confirmed. Thou tremblest at
the Blood of Bodies, how much more should thou abhor the Blood of Souls?
remember what I did to Antiochus, Herod, and Julian, I will translate thy
Kingdom unto thy Enemy, because thou have sinned against me. I change Times and
Seasons, I reject Kings, and I set them up, that thou may understand that I
am the most highest, and that I rule in the Kingdoms of men, and give them to
whom I will; I bring down and I lift up; I glorify those that glorify me, and
they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

FIFIS.

