THE KNOWLEDGE OF MEDALS: OR, INSTRUCTIONS FOR Those who apply themselves to
the Study of MEDALS both Ancient and Modern

From the French.

LONDON, Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1697.

PREFACE.
I Do not design here to make an elaborate Discourse in the Praise of the
Knowledge of Medals; nor to extol the great Advantages which may be drawn from
so Noble a Science. This would be only a Repetition of the Speeches which so
many Writers, and those of the first Rank, have made of this Matter in their
Works. I will therefore only say, that it meriteth from Persons of Ingenuity,
the same Esteem and Application that they pay to History, which indeed has no
Testimony more solid than that of Medals, to justify the Truth of its Facts.
However, this Science which establishes the Certainty of History, is not
without its Troubles and Difficulties; and she has also this Misfortune
attending her, that Men of Ability and Skill make no better Use of the Light
they have acquired by her, than to abuse the Credulity of Novices in this
Curiosity.

Such sort of Men as these, without real regard to any Honesty, employ all
their little Tricks and Artifices to deceive and overreach them, and by this
Means make an honorable as well as pleasant Employment, become a mighty
Business of Interest and Knavery. But I could not suffer such an Injury to be
offered to this most Noble Curiosity: And seeing that in most Books of Medals
there is little to be found, tending to the true understanding of them, I have
therefore set down here in this Treatise what I have acquired by Experience and
Application, in Order to furnish an Instruction for a complete Knowledge in
this Subject. I have made it public for the Service of those that are but
Beginners. Here they will find the Means to preserve themselves from Imposture,
and also gain without much Trouble both Judgment and Insight. This is the End
for which I composed these twelve Chapters following.

A Table of the Instructions and Subjects treated of in this Book.
INSTRUCTION I. OF the Age of Medals, and the Time that augments their Rarity
and Value. 1 II. Of the several Metals whereof Medals are made. 15 III. Of the
different Sizes that form the several Series's in the same Metals, of Gold,
Silver and Copper. 25 IV. Of the several Heads found upon Medals, and how they
form Sets. 33 V. Of the several Reverses that render Medals more or less
Beautiful and Curious. 48 VI. Of the Inscriptions called the Legend of Medals.
78 VII. Of the several Languages that compose the Inscriptions and Legends of
Medals according to the several Countries where they were coined. 113 VIII. Of
the Preservation of Medals, on which their Beauty and Value particularly
depend. 128 IX. Of the Knowledge of the Ornaments and Symbols wherewith Medals
are charged. 136 X. Of Counterfeit Medals: Of the different Ways to counterfeit
them; and the Way easily to discover the Cheat. 171 XI. Some Principles that
pass for Axioms with the Curious, and do much facilitate the Knowledge of
Medals. 183 XII. Of the Course he ought to take that will engage himself in the
Study of Medals. 204
The End of the TABLE.
ERRATA.
Page 2. 7. read f^ler. p. 13, 18. moun^ed. p. 30. 16. mis^rable. 51. 24.
(...). 54. 25. Constantinople. 56. 25. Seg^briga. 73. 27. Process. 74. 4.
Providentia. l. 17. -- (...). 83. 9. -- (...). 50. 11 set. 83. 22. (...). 87.
12. (...). l. 19. -- ni^. 32. ea. 91. 17, -- niaenum. 102. 1* Autarichius. 111.
31. his. 43. 11. (...). 145. 7. -- ninus. l. 29. Medaiilons. 147. 1. Nartheco,
l. 18. -- ta^ius. 157. 27. -- minus p. 158. 18. Hygeia. 163. 17. Erinnyes. 166.
31. (...) 167. 30. 1r. of H^rse. 170. 4. infula. 190. 25. Ae^. 191. l. 20.
(...). 193. Dert^sa. l. 30. Apamia. 197. 2. disple. 206. 20. Briets. 212. 25.
larly. 214. l. 14. r. Pla^ser. l. ^0. him. r. One. In the first Table, after
Deniers ^. Victoriati. In L^tte^ L. for Ar^a's r. are as.

Testimonium de hoc Libello, ex Actis Erudit. Lipsien. Anno 1694. Mense Maio.
SCitus hic atque elegans libellus est, arguta ac erudita simul brevitate
complectens omnia, quae quoquo modo illos, qui animum ad Rei Nummariae studium
applicant scire convenit; nec poterat in hoc genere fingi quid elegantius.
Dolendum, Authorem Nomen suum nos ignorare, nec inire gratiam voluisse quam
publicitus promeruit.

Marius Gratidianus, Cicerone and Plinio testibus, cum primus Artem reperisset,
Denarios probandi, multitudini apud Romanos tam charus fuit, ut omnibus Vicis
Statuas, and ad eas Thus, and Cereos illi dicarent. His paria facere cum
disciplina temporum non permittat, nec si permitteret, (...) ea praestari
que^nt; habendus igitur in pretio magno liber est, gestandusque in sinu.

A TESTIMONIAL concerning this Treatise, taken from the Transactions of the
LEARNED at Leipsick in the Year 1694. for the Month of May.
THis is both a very ingenious and polite Treatise, containing all Matters that
are any ways fit for Persons to be instructed in, who will studiously apply
themselves to the Knowledge of Coins and Medals; and that with such a close and
learned Brevity that nothing in this kind can be better performed. It Is much to
be lamented, this Author would not favor us with the Knowledge of his Name,
that so we might return him the Thanks he has so worthily deserved.

Marius Gratidianus (as Cicero and Pliny both affirm) when he had first
discovered the Art of assaying Money, was so highly honored by the Roman
People, that in all their Streets they erected Statues, and at them offered up
Incense and Tapers to him. But the Custom of our Times will not allow us to pay
such Observances; nor, if it did, could we tell how to pay them to The Unknown
Man: All therefore that we can do, is, to give this Treatise its due Value, by
carrying it always about us, even in our Bosom.

THE KNOWLEDGE OF MEDALS.
INSTRUCTION I.
Of the Age of Medals; and the time that augments their Rarity and Value.
IF it were with Sciences as it is with Nobility, which draws its principal
glory from its Antiquity; the Science of Medals, without dispute, would be the
most considerable and esteemed, since it is possible to demonstrate very
clearly from the Holy Scriptures, That the employment of Metals for the use of
Men is almost as Ancient as the World. The Use of Metals.
Nevertheless, it will require a very strong Imagination to believe that Money
coined and stamped was the Invention of Tubal Cain, as Villalpandus pretends,
believing, that otherwise what is said of him in Genesis, cannot be well enough
allowed; Qui fuit malleator, and fabor in cuncta opera aeris and ferri. An
Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron.

It is very probable that Commerce and Society were carried on for several Ages
by the simple Commutation of those things which each one wanted; and the
difficulty of coining Metals was the hindrance of employing them in Money for a
great while; since even at this day we find whole Nations that never used
Metals made into Money, and amongst those that have, they went a long time by
weight, before they bethought themselves of giving them the shape of Money,
whose value has been fixed by the Will of Man only, and by the convenience which
has been found in Pieces of a small size.

The use of Money.
Some have said that Moses was the first that stamped Money, and introduced the
Use of it. Others have pretended to prove from that holy Lawgiver's own words,
that it was used in the Land of Canaan in Abraham's time, since in relating of
the manner of his buying a Sepulcher for his Wife, who dyed in that Country, he
speaks of Current Money, and uses the word Shekels: Which word has served ever
since to express certain Pieces of Money preserved by the Hebrews. All this,
without doubt, is more curious than necessary for the instruction of one that
begins to love Medals, and searches no farther than to understand them.

It suffices then, to inform him of the Age of Medals we treat of, to let him
know they must be divided into two sorts, that is, into Ancient and Modern, for
this is the first Notion of the Art, on which depends their esteem and value.
The Ancient are all those that were coined within the Third and Ninth Age of
Jesus Christ; the Modern which have been made within these last Three hundred
Years: For, as for those we have after Charlemagne till that time, the Curious
will not vouchsafe to collect them, unless they be such as end the Succession
of the Greek Empire; and of which it may be said, with one of our Critics,
That they form a base sort betwixt the Ancient and Modern, in which neither the
Eyes, nor the Mind are entertained with any thing that satisfies, or is
agreeable; so that to follow one's gusto, the Ancient at farthest must be
brought down but until Theodosius his time, which is the end of the Fourth
Century.

Greek Medals.
Amongst the Ancient (I mean those that compose our common Cabinets) some are
Greek, some Latin; the Greek are the first, and Ancientest. For the Grecian
Kings and Cities, a great while before the foundation of Rome, coined very neat
Money of all three Metals, and that with so much Art, that in the most
flourishing State of the Roman Republic and Empire, they could scarcely equal
them. This may be judged of by the Greek small Medals now extant. And as there
are some of Kings, and others of Cities; the latter seem to me the Ancientest,
though they are not always so handsome or valuable. It must even be confessed, in
what relates to their Figures, generally speaking, the Greek Medals have a
design, a posture, a force, a delicacy, that expresses the very Muscles and
Veins, which being supported by a very great Relievo, infinitely surpass the
Roman.

I reserve for another place the Medals of other Countries, which compose a new
set both amongst the Ancients and Modern. Such are the Hebrew, Phoenician,
Arabic, and the several others that different Nations have coined, every one
in its own Language. There are few Ancient, and the Modern are well enough
known.

Ancient Latin Medals. Consular.
The Consular Medals are the most Ancient of the Latin; for in the time of the
Kings they knew not what coining of Money (especially Gold or Silver) was: So
that the series of Families claims the first rank of Antiquity amongst the
Roman Medals.

Imperial.
The Imperial are distinguished into those of the Higher and Lower Empire: And
although, in regard of what we call Modern, all the Medals of the Emperors,
down to the Paleologi, pass for Ancient, albeit they fall in the 15th Age, yet
the Curious only esteem those of the Higher Empire, The Higher Empire.
or when it was in its height, which ended, as they reckon, at the Thirty
Tyrants, and began with Julius Caesar, or Augustus, that is, from about 700
years from the building of Rome, or 54 before the Birth of Christ, to 1010 from
the building of Rome, or thereabouts, and from the Birth of Christ 260.

The Lower Empire.
The Lower Empire comprehends near 1200 years, if one goes as far as the Ruin
of the Empire of Constantinople, which happened about the Year of Our Lord
1450. when the Turks made themselves masters of it; so that afterward only the
Western Empire was acknowledged in the Christian World. Thus one may find two
different Ages; The first after the Empire of Aurelian, or Claudius Gothicus,
to the time of Anastasius, which is above 200 years; the second from Anastasius
to the Paleologi, which is above a thousand.

Modern Medals.
Whatever follows of Roman Medals within these three last Ages, is called
Modern by the Curious; be it of what Nation soever; and composes the Cabinets
of those that regard not the Ancient. For since by his The French King.
Majesty's Example private Persons have begun to collect these sorts of Medals,
the study of them is become so much the more agreeable, as we are more
concerned, by reason they are nearer us, and present us with the Image of our
own Times.

It is by this sort of Curiosity we may collect the greatest numbers of the
several Successions of Popes, Emperors, Kings, Princes, Cities, and particular
private Persons: For both Money and Counters having place here, there is hardly
any singular Event wherewith one shall not meet; especially since in these
latter years we have taken a pleasure in the glory of public Monuments, and
believed it was as much the concern of Nations, as the Honor of Princes, to
deliver the Records of great Actions, and considerable Events, to Posterity.

Modern use.
To give Lessons upon this to Masters themselves, the Ability of the Abbot
Bizot is required, who is at present almost the only person that thoroughly
understands them: Whatever is most valuable of this nature having past through
his hands, and no body knowing how to explain them with more perspicuity,
facility, and grace, than himself.

Nevertheless I shall not omit teaching Young beginners the use of modern
Medals, which are neither less agreeable nor profitable than the Ancient, but
much easier so soon as they have some knowledge in History. As they were first
made for pleasure, so the Figures are much more considerable. On them are to be
seen Battles by Sea and Land, Sieges, Entries, Coronations, Funeral Pomps, and
other Ceremonies; Alliances, Marriages, Families, and all that relate either to
Policy or Religion. The Epocha's are seldom wanting; and we never find a false
merit honored, as on the Ancient. In fine, We are not subject to that deceit
the Ancient impose upon us, nothing being more easy than to distinguish what is
Cast in a Mould, from what is stamped, and it never yet entered into any man's
head to counterfeit them in hopes of gain.

Popes.
The series of the Popes may be very well completed out of Silver and Copper:
Not indeed ever since St. Peter, but only from about 250 years ago; that is,
from Martin the Fifth's time, about the year of our Lord 1430. For from that
time till Alexander the Eighth, we have Medals of every Pope, either Cast or
Stamped, to the number of between Five or Six hundred, which is easily proved
by Father Moulinet's Book, who had caused all he could meet with to be engraved
there, with a brief explanation of each of them.

It is not without reason he maintains, That, before the time by me assigned,
there is no Medal to be found coined during their Pontificat, but are only
restored; for it is certain that the Dies or Stamps of Martin the Fifth's
Medals, and others down to Julius the Second, were made in the Pontificat of
Alexander the Seventh, by the care of the Abbot Bizot, supported by the favor
of Cardinal Francis Barbarini, who would have caused a far greater number to
have been restored, if the Pope's Death had not spoiled the design he had laid
to have had the rest engraved, whose Heads he hoped to have got from their
Statues, Tombs, Seals, and other Monuments of the Vatican. In lieu whereof,
this Series at present can only be made out from the Leaden Seals of their
Bulls, where the Name of the Pope is only to be had, and not their
Representations; it being then the Custom to give you but St. Peter's, and St.
Paul's. Sixtus the Fourth is the first that fets his Bust upon his Money, which
he caused to be stamped with this Inscription, Vtilitati publicae, in Memory of
his beginning to Pave the Streets of Rome. With this help a complete Succession
of the Eighth Age may be begun.

As for the Eugenius IV. of Gold coined during the Council of Florence, it is
only a piece of Money in the King's Cabinet. Notwithstanding what I have said,
it must be confessed the design of restoring the Medals of all the Popes since
St. Peter has been already thought upon, and may be performed by some Body,
though only with Cast Medals; for I my self have several of all Ages, for the
most part with two or three Reverses, as some with two large Keys in Pale, and
these Words, Claves Regni Coelorum. Others with the Bust of St. Peter, and two
small Keys in Saltire, with the same Legend. Others again with a Veronica, or
other particular Reverses.

Scandalous Medals of the Popes.
It will not be amiss to warn you in this place, that you confound not, with
the true Medals of the Popes, certain Pieces which the Enemies of the Holy See
have coined, either to insult, or render it odious. Such is that of Julius the
Third, with this Inscription instead of a Reverse, Gens and Regnum quod non
servierit tibi, peribit. Such that of Paul the Third, PHEPN NO EYPAINEI, which
must never be ranked amongst Genuine Medals. Lastly, such are certain
ridiculous Medals cast, I believe, either in Germany, Holland, or at Geneva;
some of which represent the Head of a Pope joined with that of a Devil, and on
the Reverse, a Cardinal's with a Fool's. The Legend is as impertinent as the
Type; on one side, Johannes Calvinus Haeresiarcha pessimus; on the other, and
Stulti aliquando sapite. I desire you to tell me what Gust or Learning there is
in this?

There is yet another sort as foolish as this, which gives you the head of a
Pope joined to that of an Emperor, and on the Reverse that of a Cardinal with a
Bishop's. Theodosius Imperator, and Celestinus Pontifex, the Reverse is so
defaced, that no more than these words are legible; Episcopus Anno CCCCXXIII.
Who can guess what is meant by these pleasant conjunctions? I should not have
designed to mention them, if it were not that these simple pieces fall easily
into the hands of beginners, who torment themselves to no purpose in seeking
out their meaning; as if we could attribute good sense to the Fantastic Dreams
of some ill-contrived heads, when they never had any. The Series of the Popes
may be augmented with all the Ecclesiastical Court, as Cardinals, Bishops, and
other distinguished Churchmen, whose Medals may be found.

Emperors.
After the set of Popes, may be made a very complete one of the Emperors of the
West, from Charlemagne, provided you admit into it some Moneys. Oct. Strada has
given us a Model, having brought his work from Julius Caesar down to the
Emperor Matthias, who Reigned at the finishing of his Book: But that Author
must not be much relied upon, since the Medals he gives us are almost all
false; that is, either invented by himself to complete his Series, or taken
from those which Maximilian made, to augment the Idea of the House of Austria's
Grandeur.

Therefore to speak strictly, one cannot begin sooner than at Frederick the
Third, in 1463. who Coined a Medal upon his Entrance into Rome: Since which
time we can hardly collect Thirty, unless those of the Kings of Spain are taken
in; which set begins but at Philip the First, King of Spain, and Archduke of
Austria, Father of Charles the Fifth.

Kings of France.
As the Kingdom is the most Noble and Ancient, so the Series of the Kings of
France is the most numerous and considerable of all the Modern. It Is true, for
the two first Families one must be contented with Moneys. Of which M. Bouteroue
has composed a very curious Book; in which he has caused a very large quantity
of them to be Engraved; but from the third we begin to find not only pieces of
Money, but also some Medals. Not to insist too much upon that of Charlemagne,
with this Inscription, Renovatio Regni Franciae (which very probably belonged
to a later Charles) on a piece of Lead which served instead of a Seal. M. Bizot
affirms none were Coined with the Effigies of the Prince before Charles the
VIIth's time: And the first on which we see any Bust, is that which was Coined
by the City of Lions, for Charles the VIIIth, and Anne of Brittany. But the
true glory of the Nation is, That she can prove by Coins an uninterrupted
Succession of her Monarchs ever since Clodoveus for 1200 years, which no
Kingdom in the World besides can do. M. Harlay at this time first President, M.
Harlay.
has made a curious Collection of them; and he has been pleased to enrich his
Majesty's Cabinet: He making it his business to Sacrifice all that he has to
the Service and Glory of his August Monarch. It is all that can be hoped for in
this sort of curiosity; for it would be lost labor to pretend to collect all
that are Engraved in the le France Metalique, they being all made at Will till
Charlemagne, after whose time also a great many are the Invention of Jaques de
Bie, and his Associate Du Val.

The Life o^ Lewis the Great.
There is now a design on Foot, which may yet have a more glorious success, and
it is to Collect all the Medals of Lewis the Great, in order to compose a
complete History. His Reign is so singular, and we meet with such a perpetual
concatenation of wonders, that Posterity will scarcely believe those
Representations, that cannot be explained in it, without admiration. Father
Menestrier, Father Menestrier's History.
well known by the extent of his Learning, and by that generous goodness which
will not let him be reserved to any one, and by the many curious pieces he
every day obliges the Public with, has composed the King's Life from these
Eternal Monuments of his glory, with a succinct explanation to every Medal;
from his most wonderful Birth, to that high pitch of Honor, on which his late
Conquests have since amounted him.

The Cabinet of M. Seignelay.
The Abbot Bizot, whom we have already often mentioned, has made a most curious
and magnificent Collection of the same Medals, in which part of M. Seignelay's
Cabinet consisted, for the whole contained above Three thousand. The Order in
which he had disposed them still raised the value, and gave a mavelous
satisfaction. For, to give you an Idea of it, after the Series of our Kings,
were to be seen all the Princes of the Royal Family; the Dignitaries of the
Church, Cardinals and Bishops; the Officers of the Crown, all Magistrates, and
those that administer Justice, in fine all Eminent Persons in Letters and Arts.
A little after were to be seen Foreign Kingdoms and States, of which we have an
excellent specimen in the Histoire Metallique of Holland, which cannot be
mentioned without the praise of the Author, since never was any thing better
contrived, or more happily performed than that work.

The Medals of Illustrious Men.
It is easy to judge by this how considerable those sets would be, that should
contain all Persons Eminent either for their Birth, or Abilities, their Offices
or Employs; there being very few within these two hundred years, whose Memory
is not preserved by some Medals, or at least by Counters, which are part of the
Curiosities of those that love the Modern. M. de Ganiere had a Collection of
above Three thousand since Philip the Sixth, who began to Reign in 1328. I
believe he is the best provided of all the Curious in that sort; tho he be no
less in his Merit, and those good qualities which gain him the love and esteem
of all that have the happiness to be acquainted with him.

INSTRUCTION II.
Of the several Metals whereof Medals are made.
THE Value of Medals must not be chiefly estimated from their Materials: For it
often happens that a Gold Medal shall be common, when a Copper one of the same
Stamp shall be very rare: And again, some of Gold very much prized, when the
same of Silver, or Copper shall be but of small account. As, for instance; the
Latin Otho of the large size in Copper is inestimable, when the Golden one is
worth but Three or Four Pistoles more than its weight, which is about Thirteen
Livres. And the same Otho of Silver is valued but about 40 or 50 Sols above
what it weighs, except it chance to have some extraordinary Reverse which may
augment the price of it: And if we could be so happy as to recover some of the
first money that was in use with Men, and was nothing but Leather Stamped; as
that was which King Numa distributed amongst the people of Rome, and Historians
call Asses Scorteos, no cost would be spared to put it in the highest and most
conspicuous place of our Cabinets.

You must not fail to be acquainted with the Ancient Metals that you may not be
deceived, and that you may know how the several Series's of them are formed, in
which you must never mix Metals, unless sometimes to render a Silver Series
more ample and complete; some Gold Medals that are not extant in Silver are
allowed to be inserted; for this is called enriching a Series.

Golden Medals.
Some Medals are of a fine Gold, much purer, and of a better color than ours;
some of a mixed, paler, and of a baser allay, which were current in the time of
Alexander Severus, who permitted them to have one part in five allay. Lastly,
some of a Gold notoriously adulterated, and such as we discover in certain
Gothic Medals: Nevertheless it must be observed, That that permission of using
that allay, has not hindered the Medals of Severus, and those Princes that
succeeded him, even in the lower Empire, to be commonly of a Gold as pure and
fine as that in the time of Augustus, the Standard being not properly
adulterated, but in those Gothic pieces.

The Gold of the Old Greek Medals is extreme pure, which may be judged of by
Philip of Macedon's, and Alexander the Great's, which is of 23 Carats and 16
Grains, as M. Patin, (one of the most famous Antiquaries of our Age) tells us.
He has laid an Eternal Obligation upon the World, for having inspired anew
into the Learned, the Esteem and Love of Medals, and facilitating the
understanding them, by the many brave Discourses he has published in order to
unfold their Mysteries.

The Gold of the Upper Empire is also very fine, and of the same alloy with
that of the Greeks; that is, of as high a Standard as it can admit, and be
tractable. For our present Refiners prefer it to the Gold of Sequins and
Ducats: And in the time of Bodinus, some Goldsmiths of Paris having melted down
a Golden Vespasian, found but a 788th part of Embasement; so small was the
proportion of alloy in it.

It must be remembered also, that the Romans used no Gold before the 546th year
of Rome, that so you may not be deceived, when you meet with any before that
time: And so likewise when you meet with any Medal of the Kings or Consuls
before that time, all you have to do, is to conclude it a Counterfeit.

Silver Medals.
Silver Medals came into use in the 448th year of Rome; there is a far greater
quantity of them than of the Gold; but their Silver is not so fine, especially
the Ancient ones, till Septimius Severus his time. For the Curious have
observed by melting them, that the Romans coined all their Gold Medals of what
was pure, but their Silver is one degree inferior to our Money, since in the
very times of the Consuls the best were worth but 25 Franks the Mark, and that
too at the highest price, which if it had been fine, would have been at above
Thirty: Notwithstanding which, the Silver of those Medals that were coined
before Septimius Severus, is accounted fine, in comparison of them which we
have from thence till the Reign of Constantine, which is but coarse and mixed.
It is commonly called Potin.
Leton, and is found from the beginning of the Upper Empire; witness certain
Medals of Nero, and the like.

Medals of a base Metal.
Some are to be seen of a Billon.
base Metal that have little or no Silver in them, as since Gallienus: Not that
one shall meet with no good Silver after that time, for it is easy to prove the
contrary till Theodosius his time, or thereabouts; but after Gallienus, there
is more of this base Metal than of right Silver.

Medals washed over with Silver.
Some are stamped upon mere Copper, and afterward washed over with Silver,
such are found after the Posthumi: And such also are purposely made to complete
a Silver series with some Heads that are hard to be procured in that Metal.

Plated.
Lastly, there are some that are plated and their Copper is only covered with a
thin leaf of Silver, but very exactly stamped together, so that it cannot be
discovered but by cutting it. This is a sort of false Money that had its Rise
in the Triumvirate of Augustus, and is an infallible proof of the Antiquity of
the Medal, as also of the Rarity: Since as M. Morel, whom we shall have
occasion to make Honorable mention of very often in this Work, tells us, That
so soon as the Cheat was discovered, their Stamps were broke, and the sort
cried down.

Copper Med.
All Copper Medals in the distinction of sets which compose Cabinets, have the
honor to be called Brass: Nevertheless a difference is made between these two
Metals by them that speak exactly, as it is done by Savot. 2. p. chapter 17.


Several Medals of Red Copper are to be seen in Augustus his time, especially
amongst those we call the Middle Copper.

Medals of red and yellow Copper.
Also several of Yellow Copper of the same time, amongst the Great Copper as
well as the Middle.

Some true Brass may be seen, whose color is incomparably finer than that of
the others.

Medals of Corinthian Brass.
Some there are which pass for Corinthian Brass, which is a mixture of Gold and
Silver, with Brass in much greater proportion; so because at the taking of
Corinth, the City being fired, and given over to Plunder, the several Metals
that were melted there, running in low places, formed a casual mixture, which
has retained the name of that sacked City: And the Medals of it obtain the same
Beauty and Price, as the Corinthian Vessels among those of common Copper.

I have a Livia under the Image of Piety, an Antonia, and an Hadrian, which
seem to me to be of it. But our Masters pretend, that this was never used for
Medals; and I have not Authority enough to form a new Tradition: Though it seems
to agree with Reason, That what was cast into Vessels, might as well serve to
make Medals, since they Engraved the Images of their Princes even upon Precious
Stones.

Savot, 2. p. chapter 17.
who, beyond all other Antiquaries, has treated most curiously of the
distribution of Metals in Money, has a Chapter expressly concerning Corinthian
Brass, of which he makes three sorts; the first is, in which the Gold
predominates; the second in which the Silver; the third in which the Gold,
Silver, and Brass are in equal quantities. He pretends to prove from the words
of Pliny, That the true Corinthian Brass was imitated by mixing those three
Metals, because he mentions a certain melting which he calls Rationem fundendi
aris pretiosi; at the same time he owns what Experience has taught us, That
after diverse Essays made upon Medals, thought to be of that Brass, in
dissolving them it was never possible to separate one single grain of Gold,
either by Fire, or Aquafortis.

Medals of two different Coppers.
Lastly, there are Medals of two different Coppers, that are not at all mixed;
but one enchases only the other, and are both stamped with the same Dye: Such
are some Ancient Medaillons of Commodus, and Hadrian, and some which otherwise
would be but of the great or middle Copper. It may be observed, That the
Letters of the Legend are sometimes on both the Medals, and sometimes only on
the innermost, to which the first Circle serves but for a Border.

Medals of Lead.
Some Leaden Medals are to be met with, in which you must take great care you be
not imposed upon, they being for the most part Modern, and of no value; whereas
the Ancient Leaden ones are the most Curious. I have seen some at Avignon of M.
Rostagny's, who prized them at a high rate: And the other day was shown me a
Tigranes, which was undoubtedly Ancient, and whiter, and harder than our Lead.

I know that several of our Antiquaries will hardly agree we have any old Lead
Medals; but if they will absolutely deny the Romans ever used such, they will
find a great difficulty in Answering those Authors that speak of them; as
Plautus, Martial, and others. If they pretend that the Money called by them,
Nummi Plumbei, was Brass mixed with Lead, Savot will make it appear, That that
mixture is not found before the Reign of Septimius Severus; for in the Essays
he has made of the most Ancient Medals, he never found one grain of Lead in any
before that time: And the Authors we quote concerning this sort of Money, lived
a great while before Septimius Severus.

I have nothing at all to say of certain Copper Medals gilt over, which may be
found in Cabinets, and are but Medals spoiled by some Young Novices, who
understand not the value of things; like those that make an Estimate of the
person by his Habit, and the Man by his good Fortune.

Medals of Iron.
Neither will I speak of Iron amongst the Metals we find Medals of: Not that I
am ignorant of what Caesar tells us of some people in Great Britain, that made
use of such Money, and that the same thing happened in some Cities of Greece:
Besides I know, Savot has reported, That Roman Money has been found which was
attracted by the Magnet: But it is easy to see, these were only plated Medals,
and such as we have a great many of at this day, both of the time of the
Commonwealth, and the Empire; that is, they were either of Iron, or Brass laid
over with a thin Silver Plate, which the craft of the false Coiners in those
Ages passed off for Good money. Of this I shall yet farther speak in another
place, where shall be shown the way endeavored to remedy it.

These several Metals form but Three sorts of series's in Cabinets: That of
Gold, which is the least numerous, not exceeding a Thousand or Twelve hundred
in Imperials: That of Silver, which is much more Numerous, having above Three
thousand in Imperial Medals only: And that of Copper, which yet goes farther;
for, comprehending the Three different sizes, it amounts to more than Six or
Seven Thousand: I only reckon the Imperial; for should I take in those of Kings
and Cities, they might almost be Numberless: It Is well known that Wolfangus
Lazius, a German Physician, who had framed a vast design of giving us all the
Medals he had ever seen, raised the Number of them so high, that he made it
incredible; so that from the 700000 he talks of, some would not only cut off
the last Cipher; but think they ought to be yet more favorable to him; the
first Table he has caused to be Engraven, not promising to go on to 7000.

For my part, I doubt not, but by separating the Metals and Sizes, and taking
in all we can find of Ancient and Modern, both in Money and Counters, we may go
much beyond what is commonly imagined, if an estimate may be made by what we
find in the furnished Cabinets.

All that has been said concerning the matter of Medals, is only to be
understood of the ordinary Medals that were current amongst the Greeks and
Romans; who reduced their Money to Three principal Metals, Gold, Silver, and
Brass; from whence it was that the Mint-masters only made use of those to
denote the power their Office gave them; and expressed them after this manner.
III. VIR. A. A. A. F. F. That is, Triumvir Auro, argento, aere, flando,
feriundo.

And if, upon some extraordinary occasions, necessity obliged them for want of
Metal to use some baser matter, as Earth Baked, Bark of Trees, Pastboard, small
Stones, and the like, on which they imprinted some mark, it must be rather
looked upon as a pledge of payment, than current Money. The Curious will find
enough in Savo^ to give them satisfaction in this matter, and may learn there,
Quid distent era Lupinis.

INSTRUCTION III.
Of the Different Sizes that form the several series's in the same Metals, of
Gold, Silver, and Copper.
IT does not appear the Ancients Coined any Medals that came near to some of
the Modern, especially of this Age, either in Thickness or Circumference; the
Size and Relief it self of their small Medals, being for the most part much
less, whereas that of their Money is much larger than ours. The size therefore
of all Medals, is commonly from three Inches Diameter, to a quarter of an Inch,
whether of Gold, Silver, or Brass, which were the principal Metals to which the
Mintmasters confined themselves, being called from thence, III. VIRI aere,
argento, auro flando feriundo, as has been said already.

Medaillons.
I call those small Medals, that were not current Money, but were Coined as
public Monuments to be scattered among the people in Ceremonies, Plays, or
Triumphs; or to present Ambassadors and Foreign Princes with. These Pieces were
called by the Romans, Missilia; and the Italians at this day call them
Medaglioni, a name that we have borrowed for our Medals when they are above the
common bigness. They might as well be divided into different Orders as the
Copper, if the series's could be completed; but that can never be
accomplished, even by mixing of Metals and Sizes: Therefore they are placed in
the chief place of Cabinets, and no one was ever known to contain above five or
six hundred, not even his Majesty's, or any other Princes in Europe. Yet M.
Morel, Mr. Morel.
in the Project he has given us of his great Work (of which we shall speak in
another place) promises to Engrave us above a thousand that he has procured
from several Cabinets he has seen. This extraordinary person is now the glory
of Antiquaries, and deserves to be as greatly beloved for his Probity, Candor,
and Integrity, as to be admired for his Genius, Industry, and Application,
which exceeds all we can imagine as to what relates to Medals. In fine, He is a
person in whom nothing will be wanting when God shall give him the Right Faith,
and make him truly to understand the Catholic Religion.

Conturniate.
There is a sort of Medaillons called Conturniate, from an Italian word showing
the manner after which they are Coined; to wit, with a certain depression all
about, which forms a ring on each side, and with Figures that have scarce any
Relief in comparison of true Medaillons. I believe this sort of work had its
beginning in Greece, where it was chiefly used to honor great men's Memory, and
the Victors in their public Exercises. Such are those that remain of Homer,
Solon, Euclid, Pythagoras, Socrates, Apollonius Tyaneus, and several Champions,
whose Victories are signified by Palms, and Chariots, and sometimes by two or
four Horses.

It is not very certain when they first began to be Coined: For though some
Learned Antiquaries say, not till after Theodosius; yet the Work, and the
Effigies of the first Emperors stamped upon them, seem to convince us, that
they were made in the Upper Empire. For there are some of Nero, Trajan,
Alexander Severus, and some others, whose Memory it was no body's interest to
renew in the Lower Empire, and under Christian Princes. And this appears yet
more probable in relation to those Champions, whose names signified very little
to Posterity to be preserved by so solemn a restoration.

Silver Medaillons.
Silver Medaillons are more easy to be found, and very handsome Sets may be
composed of them; not indeed of Emperors, but of Kings and Cities; as the Kings
of Syria, which M. Vailant has given us, and the Kings of Egypt he is now
about; those of Macedonia, and others. Nevertheless private persons must not
hope to have them complete, the greatest Princes being scarce able to come at
them.

Medaillons of Gold.
Gold Medaillons are so rare, that it is impossible to collect any number of
them: It is sufficient to place them in the Front of a Gold or Silver series of
Medals to grace the Cabinet. I have formerly seen at Mr. Carcavi's, who then
was Keeper of the Medals, two extraordinary fine ones of Commodus in his
Majesty's Cabinet, ranked with other Medaillons of a different Metal.

Medals of Copper, and their different sizes.
But it is not so with Medals of Copper: For there is so large a quantity of
them, they are divided into three different bignesses, which form the three
different series's that adorn Cabinets, the great, the middle, and the little
Copper. The Rank that every one is to hold, is judged of by its size, which
comprehends the close ness and extension of the Medal, the bulkiness and relief
of the head: So that that Medal which has the thickness of the large Copper,
and but the head of the middle, shall be of the second size. Such another that
is but thin, if its head be large enough, shall be ranked among those of the
first magnitude. The inclination of the Curious goes a great way in it; for
those that are given to the great, admit of several Medals into that order,
when indeed they are but of the middle Copper; and those that love the middle,
rank some amongst them that belong to the large, especially to supply some
heads that are hard to be found. Thus Otho, Antonia, Drusus, and Germanicus of
the middle Copper, are placed among the great; and those of the little size
with the middle Copper.

Each of these Degrees has its Commendation; the first, which is the great size
excels in neatness, strong Relief, and the fine Historical Monuments wherewith
the Reverses are charged, and shine in all their beauty. The second, which is
the middle Copper, is considerable for its Multitude, and rarity of its
Reverses, and particularly by reason of the infinite number of Greek and Latin
Colonies which are scarce ever found on the larger Copper. The third, which is
the small Copper, is esteemed from the great necessity of it in the Lower
Empire, where the other two sizes fail, and whenever found are counted
Medaillons.

Order of the great Copper.
For you must know, to save a great deal of useless trouble, that the complete
set of the large Copper goes not below the Posthumi, Medals of this size being
very rarely found in the Lower Empire. Those that we have after Anastasius,
have neither a sufficient thickness, relief, or bulkiness of the head. But
without passing beyond the Posthumi, the set, as I have told you, may be
carried on to above two thousand.

Of the middle Copper.
The order of the middle Copper is the most easy to be found of any; and is the
compleatest, because it not only reaches the Posthumi, but goes on to the
destruction of the Roman Empire in the West, and in that of the East even to
the Paleologi. It is hard indeed to find all after Heraclius's time, without
some interruptions of the Set now and then. But I believe this happens from the
small care that has been taken to preserve them, by reason of their bad make.
Nothing shows the desolation of the Empire more than the Universal loss of all
good Arts, which appears in this of Engraving, which is no more than a miseble
scratching of the Metal.

Order of the little Copper.
The order of the little Copper is also very easy to be formed in the Lower
Empire, for they are to be had from the P^sthumi quite down to the Paleologi,
with whom the Empire of the Greeks ended. But from Julius to the Posthumi, it
is very hard to supply them; and from Theodosius to the Paleologi it is
absolutely impossible without the aid of Gold and Silver, and even of some of
the middle Copper. For this series is but like that of M. Du Cange, Mr. du
Cange.
the greatest Historian of the Age, who has given us that admirable succession
after Constantine, in his Book of the Families he calls Byzantine, because they
came not to the Empire till after the Foundation of Constantinople, of which
Constantine made a new Rome.

A complete series then ought not to be expected, either in any particular
Metal or bigness; neither for that end to spoil them should different Metals be
intermixed; but however, it is permitted, for the satisfaction of those who
desire to have the compleatest Sets, to mix the small Copper with the Middle,
thereby to see the Occurrences from the ruin of the Roman Commonwealth, which
lost its liberty under Julius Caesar, almost without any considerable
interruption, to the last Greek Emperors, who were dethroned by the Turks in
the Year 1450. so that this series of Medals traces out to us the History of
Sixteen Ages, that is to say, Sixteen hundred years.

Medals of the Low Emp.
The small care the Emperors took of their Medals after the three first
Centuries, may be very well admired. For after that time, we find not one
footstep of the Roman Majesty; there being none but little Medals without
Relief, or Thickness, till Theodosius's time; and after the Division of the
Empire when he died, nothing but Misery and Poverty. No more curious Heads or
Reverses, the Characters, Language, Figures, and Legend all barbarous; so that
no body troubled themselves to collect them, and they are thereby become almost
as scarce, as they are deformed.

The Curiosity of Medals, as well as that of Pictures, was not revived till the
Fifteenth Age; that is to say, since 1400. having been buried with the Sad
Remains of the Roman Majesty near 1000 years: And then it was only by the care
of certain Painters, Opus pisani pictoris, Opus Bolducis.
of whom were Pisani, and Bolduc, that e're it appeared again with any
considerable design and relief: Such as that of Ferdinand King of Arragon in
1449. and that of John Emperor of Constantinople, ten years before it. After
this they began to Coin the same in Gold; such is that of the Council of
Florence, which is in his Majesty's Cabinet: And that of Paul the Second's
public Consistory, where the Curious begin the Modern; no Modern Medal being
Coined in the preceding Ages.

INSTRUCTION IV.
Of the several Heads found upon Medals, and how they form Sets.
IN all perfect Medals there are two sides to be considered, that contribute to
their Beauty and Rarity; that which is called the Head, and the Other the
Reverse. That of the Head determines the sets, whether it be a Head of a
person; as a God's, a King's, a Hero's, a Philosopher's, a Champion's, or any
other thing taking up that place, which is still called the Head; be it an
Image, a Name, or any public Monument, whose Inscription is on the other side.

Medals without Reverses.
I have said, that these two sides are to be found in imperfect Medals, because
there are some that have no Reverse at all; But it is an infallible mark that
those are modern, unless they were not stamped, as some such we meet with. Such
is a Caesario which I have seen, the Son of Julius Caesar and Cleopatra. Such a
certain Medaillon of Julius Caesar, which I have also seen in the chiefest
place of a Cabinet, that showed the Master of it to be more Rich than he was
Skilful, and very fit to be made the Property of some selfish Antiquary. There
are some also that have no Head (that is to say) of Persons, which yet for all
that are very Good and Ancient. Such are those of the Mint masters of Augustus,
where there is nothing but his name, Augustus Tribun. Pot. Those of Vitellius,
where there is but of One side only, Fides exercituum, with two Hands joined;
and on the Other, Concordia Praetorianorum, with a Figure in Reverse, and the
like.

Of these several Heads are formed Five Different Orders of Medals, whereof may
be composed very curious Series's. In the first we may put the Series of Kings.
In the second that of Cities, either Greek or Latin, before or since the
Foundation of the Roman Empire. In the third may be ranged the Roman Consular
Families. In the fourth the Imperial, and all that relate to them. In the fifth
the Deities, of which we may have very agreeable Series's, either in simple
Bust, or else in their full proportion, and clothed with all their qualities
and symbols. Some Heroes and Illustrious Persons are seen yet preserved on
Medals, as Homer, Pythagoras, and certain Greek and Roman Captains, etc.

1st. Order of the Kings.
In the first Order, which is that of Kings, the Series's may be made very fine,
and numerous, by mixing of Metals among them; for we have a great many Greek
Medals of this kind. M. Vaillant, The Kings of Mons^^. Vaillant.
One of the most Understanding men of our Age in the knowledge of Ancient
Medals, has published some few years ago the Kings of Syria, whereof he has
composed a History, embellished with a thousand Curious Remarks. He has
collected an Entire Succession from Seleucus the First, called Nicator, down to
Antiochus XIII. of that Name, called Epiphanes, Philopater, Callinicus, and
known by the Title of Asiaticus, and Comagenus. That is, he has included the
Reigns of 27 Kings, which amount to above 250 years. For Seleucus began his
Reign about the Year 312. and the last Antiochus finished his about the Year
75. be-before the Birth of our Savior. There are near 120 Medals in this
Series engraven, and explained with a great deal of Acuracy, of which there is
now a considerable number in our King's Cabinet.

The same M. Vaillant is ready to give us the Egyptian Kings, of whom he has
made a most Admirable Collection. He has besides these a considerable number of
particular Kings Heads, whose Medals he has found, and designs to make a
separate Work of them, which will be very entertaining.

Grecian Kings.
The Macedonian Kings have coined Medals yielding in nothing to the most
Excellent Workmanship of the Romans. There are a good number of them in the
King's Cabinet. The Kings of Pontus, Bithynia, Cappadocia, Thracia, Parthia,
Numidia, Armenia, Judea, etc. joined all together, without doubt would compose
a Set, giving us Notices of things most Rare and Historical.

Kings of the Goths.
Some Medals of the Gothic Kings are come down to us, that have good Reliefs,
and are beautiful both in Copper and Silver. As those of Athanarick, Theodate,
those of Wittiges, Totila, Baduela, Teia, Attila, and the like. There are also
some of Gold, but the Gold is very pale and base: M. Patin says there is not
above a fourth part pure in them: Some are called Gothic, whose Heads have
scarce a Human form, and bear no Inscription; or if they do, it is in such
Characters, that hitherto are unknown to Antiquaries: As are those likewise
that are called Phoenician, of which I shall say nothing here, nor of those
Spanish ones that are truly styled Medallas Desconnocidas, whereof no body yet
has thought fit to compose a Series.

Kings of France.
We also find some of our Ancient Kings of France, that the Eastern Emperors
permitted to make Money after their Coin and Name; on which, as an
acknowledgment, they set the Head of the Emperor, into whose Alliance or
Adoption they were entered. These Medals are particularly of the times of
Justin, and Justiniau, in the Sixth Century. M. Du Cange has caused some of
Theodobert, Childerick, and Clothair, to be engraven, on which he has made a
Learned Dissertation in his Joinville. Dissert 23.


2. Order. Cities.
In the second Order, which is that of Cities, there are enough found to make
considerable Series's; for of Greek Cities only may be collected above 200.

Goltzius his Medals.
Goltzius, who seems to have done it with a great deal of Application, and
Acuracy, (for he looked upon them not only as an Embellishment, but as proofs
of his History) has composed a large Volume of them, wherein is a world of
useful Matters to be learnt, as also the means laid down how to understand the
different Representations of those Medals, insomuch that he seems as if he was
unwilling to give himself the further trouble of explaining them more
distinctly. We have them in the Year 1618. engraven by Goltzius himself, and
repaired, and printed by James de Bie at Antwerp, in above 100 Tables, and
placed before the two Tomes of the same Goltzius's Greek History. The first
contains Magna Graecia, and Sicily; the second Greece, and the Isles thereof,
with part of Asia. The greatest grief of the Antiquaries is, that they have
lost the best part of Goltzius's Medals, and that of the 30 Provinces, into
which he had divided the whole Series, there remains but five of them, and
those too are the least, viz. Colcis, Capadocia, Galatia, P^ntus and Bithynia.
Nevertheless there are still enough to make a Series of above 250 Medals, if we
will intermix different Metals with them, besides what has been discovered
since that time.

His Reputation among the Antiquaries.
I think my self obliged here in this place to speak somewhat very briefly
touching the Reputation of Goltzius among the Antiquaries, with whom he passes
for a man not very Exact, nor very Faithful, and that pretends to Medals which
never yet had a being. So that his destiny is much-what the same with that of
Pliny's among the Naturalists, whom all the World admires, and yet no body
believes. But at the same time to justify both, I hope it will be sufficient to
tell you, first, That this Learned Engraver could gain nothing by imposing
either upon his own, or succeeding Ages. Secondly, That we discover every day
some of those Medals, pretended to have been made designedly by Goltzius, as we
daily discover those Wonders of Nature, which were looked upon but as pleasant
Fancies and Imaginations, related by Pliny upon the Credit of some People, to
whom he had paid too great a deference.

Colonies.
Those that are lovers of the Ancient Geoography, may compose with the Medals of
Colonies, a different Set from the former, very copious, pleasant and easy, by
the means of those assistances we now have both to form, and thoroughly
understand it. I speak of those Cities to which the Romans sent their own
Citizens, either to people them by easing their Mother-City, and recompencing
the old Soldiers belonging to it; or else in building them anew, and endowing
them with the Privileges of Roman Citizens, or of the Latin Country, called jus
Civitatis, or jus Latii. These Towns still kept the name of Colonia, or
Municipium, were they either in Greece, or elsewhere; for the Greeks looked on
the word (...) as Sacred, adopting it through respect into their Language.

The number of them would be yet more considerable, if all the Cities that have
coined Medals in their name were added to these, without minding whether they
were Imperial or no; Greek or Latin: But then, to satisfy one's Curiosity, the
Reverse of the Imperial Medals must be the Head in this Series, and the Head of
the Emperor only considered as it were by Accident.

F. Hartiouin's Book.
Father Hardouin has mightily pleased himself in laboring upon Pliny; he has
put out a New Edition of it, which is a Masterpiece, and the Effect of a
Genius born for the Sciences, with a penetration as easy, as it is quick and
profound; and a most happy gift of Conjecture, with a Reading that exceeds
imagination, and the fidelity of a surprising Memory that represents at the
Critical time whatever it had been entrusted with. This Learned Father, I say,
has compiled a separate Volume of those People, and Cities, whose memory is
preserved upon Medals. He has collected several thousands of them, which he
touches so ingeniously, that I cannot refuse giving him a Testimony, which mere
truth extorts from me; and that is, That there is not one Page in his Treatise
wherein we find not Erudition, and some Curious matter worthy to be learned,
which is not easily to be met with in any other place, and which gives occasion
to a great many fine discoveries that create a wonderful pleasure to the
Learned. Nothing would have been wanting in this Work, could he have found time
to have seen all those Medals he makes mention of, and had taken the pains to
explain the Symbols and Reverses of All, as he has of a great many.

M. Vaillant's Colonies.
This M. Vaillant has done in the Two Volumes he has printed of the Latin
Colonies, with a Success that has answered his Labor. Nothing can be more
useful for the understanding of Medals, since he has scarce omitted any thing
that can be said on the several Figures of the Colonies he has given us, and
caused them to be engraven with the utmost care, which gives them clear another
Grace than Simple Descriptions. Without doubt it will be an Immortal Work, if
he will vouchsafe to give us the Greek Colonies with the same Acuracy, of which
he has made a most admirable and ample Collection. The Count Mezza Barba has
desired it of him for his Second Tome of Occo augmented, which in all
likelihood, will never be published, at least in its perfection, unless he find
some such equal Assistance from a Man that like him has knowledge of all the
best Cabinets in France, Italy, and other Countries, where these noble
Monuments of Antiquity are preserved.

We must not forget to tell you, that the Heads of Medals belonging to Cities,
are most commonly the Genius of the Place it self, or else of some other Deity
there adored, as is easy to be seen by those of Goltzius.

3. Order. Families.
The Consular Medals make a large Series in the Third Order, and amount to
twelve or fifteen Hundred. There is little of Curiosity in it, either for the
Legend or Figures, unless in those that were Coined after the Declension of the
Republic, which naturally ought to begin the Imperial Series. Before that time
this sort of Medals was only Stamped with the Armed Head of Rome, or with some
Deity; and the Reverse was a Triumphal Chariot drawn by two or four Horses.

Heads upon the Consular Medals.
Indeed toward the Sixth Century of Rome, Mint-masters took the liberty to
place the Heads of Famous Persons that had been in their own Families upon
Medals, either under their proper Figures, or that of some Deity, to whose
protection the Family was committed. This they did till the Fall of the
Commonwealth, and then they began to put on the Heads of Julius Caesar, the
Conspirators that killed him, the Triumvirs that invaded the Sovereign Power,
and all those that had afterward any share in the Government. For till those
unhappy times no Man was suffered to set his own Head upon the Money, that
privilege being accounted an Attendant upon Royalty, which was before that
time, infinitely odious to them.

Therefore when you find upon the Consular Medals, the Heads of Romulus and
Remus, and the first Roman Kings, those of Scipio, Metellus, Lucullus, Regulus,
Caldus, or the like, you must not conclude that they were Coined in their
Reigns; since in the time of the Kings, for instance, Silver Money was not in
use; but some of their Descendants, being in the Office of Mint-masters, caused
them to be Coined in honor to themselves, and to be Eternal Monuments of their
Nobility.

You are further to be informed, before we have done with Consular Medals; that
although they are almost All of Silver, and of the third Size, because they
were the Roman Deniers, Quinarii or Sesterces; yet there are some of all
Metals, and Copper ones of all the three Sizes; but with this difference, that
we scarce know above 50 or 60 in Gold, and about 250 in Copper, whereas we have
near 1000 in Silver. The first Collection of which, Fulvius Vrsinus has
engraven, and it has been considerably increased by M. Patin; and since him a
great many more have been discovered, that deserve very well a new Edition to
be made of them.

All this presupposed, the Series of Families may be made two ways. The first
way of forming the Series of Consular Families.
The first, so as Vrsinus has done it, by placing the Names of the several
Families found upon Medals in Alphabetical Order; setting all those that seem
to be of the same House together. This way indeed may not be so pleasing, but
it is the real and true way. The second way.
The second, as Goltzius has done it, by the Fasti of the Consuls, placing
under every Year the Medals of the Consuls. This second way is very handsome
and learned; but the misfortune is, it has nothing but Show and Appearance, and
in truth can never be performed. First, because we have no Medals of the first
Consuls from the Year 244 to 484. which forced Goltzius to give you only their
Names, as they are found in the Fasti. Secondly, From that time down to the
Empire of Augustus, those Medals that he has put, were never Coined either by
the Consuls, or for those Consuls whose Names they bear; but only by the
Mint-masters, who being of the same Family, were desirous to preserve their
own, or their Ancestor's Names.

Why called Consular.
in orderIt was necessary to observe this, to correct the Error of young
beginners, who imagine that they are called Consular Medals, because they were
Coined by the Consuls themselves, who yearly entered into that Office; when in
truth this Name was only given them, because they were Coined in the time when
the Commonwealth was governed by Consuls.

4. Order. The Imperial.
We will now speak of the Imperial Medals which compose our fourth Order, and
where we may find all the Heads that are necessary to make the Series of the
Emperors complete till our time. The Ancient are the most esteemed; and among
the Ancient, those of the Higher Empire, which are from between Julius Caesar,
and the Thirty Tyrants inclusively. Yet there are some, and those not a few,
that are very well stamped, and likewise very scarce, down to the Family of
Constantine the Great, when that was all rare and curiously ended, as we shall
observe more particularly in another place. Occo, Occo's Work.
a German Physician of Ausbourg, has given us the first Description of them
from the Year 1580, or 81, printed at Antwerp; and the number of Medals he
collected increasing every day upon his hands, caused him to put out a Second
Edition at Ausbourg in the Year 1601. which is the best. The Count Mezza Barba
de Birague, That of Mezza Barba, at Milan, 1683.
a Gentleman of Pavia, has put out a Third Edition, wherein he has added
several thousands: We should have been very happy, had he seen and described
the Medals themselves, and not been obliged to trust to Catalogues and
Descriptions that were sent him, and are not often very faithful.

M. Patin has not only been at the trouble of collecting a great many of them,
M. Patin's Work.
but has engraven all his middle Copper ones, and has endeavored to explain
them more amply and successfully than all that have gone before him. He brings
them down as low as the Emperor Heraclius, having undertaken this noble Work at
the importunity of the Count de Brienne, Secretary of State, of whom he
afterward bought the Cabinet, which Monsieur Colbert re-purchased for the
King, who had till that time no Other than what was left him by the last Duke
of Orleans. We have already said, That by joining the Remains of the Lower
Empire, and the Greek Emperors to these, a Series of Copper ones may be carried
on even to the Emperors of the West, and down to our Days, by the help of
Modern Medals, of which we shall speak further somewhere else.

5. Order. The Deities.
We have made a fifth Order of Deities, because the World begins to have a value
for the Series of them, by reason of the great Satisfaction that is found in
observing their different Names, Symbols, Temples, Altars, and Countries where
they were worshipped. A good Copper Series may be formed of them, by means of
the Grecian Cities, which furnish us with very large quantities of them; but
the noblest and most pleasing, is that of Silver, which the Medals of Families
supply us with; and there are a great many of them in the King's Cabinet. Now
both Metals might be carried on much further if we would but borrow Imperial
Reverses, where the Deities are much better represented than on those of
Families, not only because they have their several Titles there, but also
because they are commonly represented at their full Length, so that we may see
their Arms, Accoutrements, Symbols, and the Cities where they have been more
particularly worshipped. It was after this manner I had formerly begun, and had
collected above four hundred of them, but I found I had not stock enough at the
same time to maintain my Imperial Series, which was thereby much weakened.

6. Order. Illustrious Persons.
I have thought upon a sixth Order to be composed, and that should be of all the
Illustrious Persons, whose Medals we have; such as the Founders of Cities and
Republics, Bizas, Tomus, Nemausus, Taras, etc. Smyrna, Amastris, etc. Of
Queens, Cleopatra, Zenobia, etc. Of the most famous Lawgivers, Lycurgus,
Zeleucus, Pittacus, Pythagoras, Archimedes, Euclid, Hipocrates, Chrysippus,
Homer, and the like, Wise and Learned Men; for most certainly, it would be a
great satisfaction to see a good Series of these Heroes, which would needs
reach very far.

Medals with several Heads.
I will conclude this Instruction with saying, That when several Heads are found
on the same side of the Medal, it becomes then much more Rare and Curious, be
they either placed Face to Face, as those of M. Aurelius and Verus, Adversa.
of Macrinus and Diadumenianus, and the like; or be they joined Neck to Neck,
Jugata.
as that of Nero and Agrippina; Mark Antony and Cleopatra, etc. But they are
yet much Rarer when they have three Heads on them, as those of Valerian betwixt
his two Sons, Gallienus, and Valerian the younger. That of Otacilla with her
Husband and Son, etc.

INSTRUCTION V.
Of the several Reverses that render Medals more or less Beautiful and Curious.
IF I had not tied my self up by professing to instruct a young Beginner, (to
whom every thing is new) in the History of Medals; I would not have concerned
my self about explaining to him the several States of them, before they
attained to that perfection in which we find them in the Age of Augustus, and
almost down as low as to that of Constantine. But since, I ought to instruct a
Person that is desirous to learn, he ought also to be told, That among the
Romans, and all over Italy, (for now we only pretend to speak of that Country)
their Medals, or rather their Moneys, were a long time not only without
Reverses, The first Medals how marked.
but also without any mark at all; so that the first Money used in Rome, was
but of plain Copper, and without any Impression upon it till the time of King
Servius Tullus, Is primus signavit Aes. Plin.
who caused them first to be stamped with the Image of an Ox, a Sheep, or Hog;
at which time it began to be called Pecunia a pecude.

I don't design by this Discourse to strike at the Ancient Tradition, which
tells us, That Janus reigning in Italy 700 Years before the Foundation of Rome,
stamped the first Money, putting upon it a Crown, a Bridge, or a Boat; of which
three he was the Inventer, and introduced their use into his Country. However I
know very well, that this Tradition is not absolutely certain, since several
People in Europe affirm we are beholden to Saturn for the use of Money, and
that it was he who retiring to Janus into Latium, taught him to put a Stamp
upon it, as also to Till the Ground; and that in acknowledgment of this
kindness, -- Bona posteritas puppim signavit in Aere, Hospitis adventum
testificata Dei. But however it happened, in these first dark times, as there
was no other Head than that of Janus upon the Latin Money; or as others say,
That of Janus and Saturn joined together by the hinder Parts; so also was there
no other Reverse than the Prow of a Ship. This continued till the Romans, who
had made themselves Masters of all Italy, near five hundred Years after the
building of Rome, began to Coin Money of Gold and Silver, under the Consulate
of C. Fabius Pictor, and Quintus Ogulnius Gallus, five years before the first
Punick War, and CDXXCIV from the building of the City. This is the first Year
they Coined Silver, for Gold they did not till 62 years after.

In those happy times when the Commonwealth flourished, they began to beautify
and perfect their Medals, both as to the Head and the Reverse.

How marked in the Consuls time.
The Head of Rome, and the Deities succeeded Janus's, and the first Reverses
were either Castor and Pollux on Horseback, or a Victory driving a Chariot with
two or four Horses; from whence the Roman Deniers were called Victoriati,
Bigati, Quadrigati, according to the Reverses, as they were before named Ratiti
from the Ship Ratis.

Soon after, the Mint-masters, who by their Employments were become Masters of
the Money, began to Stamp it with their own Names and Titles, and to grave
thereon the Monuments of their own Families; insomuch, that we find Medals
stuffed with the marks of Magistracies, Priesthoods, and Triumphs of their
Ancestors, and even with some of their most glorious Actions; such is that of
the Aemilian Families, inscribed M. Lepidus Pont. Max. Tutor Regis. On which is
to be seen Lepidus in a Consular Habit, putting a Crown upon the Head of young
Ptolomy, whom the King his Father had left under the Guardianship of the City
of Rome: And on the other side is the Head of Alexandria, the Capital City of
the Kingdom, where the Ceremony Alexandria was performed. Such was another of
the same Family, on which is the young Lepidus represented on Horseback bearing
a Trophy with this Inscription, M. Lepidus annorum XV. Praetextatus, hostem
occidit, Civem servavit. Such, that in the Julian Family, when Julius Caesar
being as then but a private Man, and not daring to engrave his own Head, found
out this devise, on one side to set the Image of an Elephant with the word
Caesar, which equivocally signifies either that Beast's Name in the Phoenician
Language, or his Own: and on the Reverse, in quality of Augur and Pontifex, he
caused to be engraven the Symbols of his Dignities, The Sympulum was a small
Vessel used for Libations.
viz. the Sympulum, the Sprinkler, the Axe of the Victims, and Priest's
Bonnets; as upon that which has the Head of Ceres, there is the Augur's Staff
and Vessel. Such, lastly, is the Reverse in the Aquilian Family, where M.
Aquilius, who defeated the Rebellious Slaves in Sicily, is represented in
Armor, with a Shield on his Arm, trampling under-foot a Slave, with this word,
Sicilia; and this by the careful ingenuity of some Mint-master of his Family.

How stamped in the time of the Empire.
After this manner Medals became not only considerable for their Value as they
were Money, but Curious by the Monuments of which they were the Depositories;
until Julius Caesar making himself Master of the Republic, whereby, though
under the disguised Name only of Perpetual Dictator, he obtained all the Marks
of Grandeur and Power, and amongst others the privilege of Coining Money with
his own Effigies and Name, and of giving it what Reverse he thought fit. By
this means Medals became loaded in time with all that Ambition on one side, and
Flattery on the other, were capable of inventing to Immortalize the Glory of
the Princes, and the Acknowledgments of their Subjects. It Is this that makes
them at this day Rare and Curious, because in them we meet with a thousand
noble Events, whose Memory very often is not preserved by History, which
therefore is obliged to borrow from these undeniable Witnesses what she
relates, and gives their Testimony in those matters that cannot be otherwise
cleared up, but by the light she furnishes us with. As, for instance, we should
never have known that the Son of Antoninus by Faustina, was called Marcus
Annius Galerius Antoninus, if we had not had a Greek Medal of that Princess,
Middle Copper of Monsieur Patia.
THEA PHAYTEINA, and on the Reverse a Boy's head of 12 or 15 years old,. ANNIO
GALEPIO ANTONINO AYTOKPATOPO ANTONINOY YIO Who would have known there had been
a Tyrant named Pacatianus, F. Chamillard brought it upon his return from his
Voyage to the Pyrenees.
if his fine Medal did not tell us so? Or that Barbia Orbiana had been the Wife
of Alexander Severus, or a hundred other things, for which we are obliged to
the Curiosity of Antiquaries.

The beauty of the Reverse, whence it is.
That a Person beginning to love Medals, may the better understand the Beauty
and Value of Reverses, he must know, that there are several sorts of them. Some
are charged with Figures or Personages, Others with Public Monuments; Others
have only Inscriptions, Inscriptions.
I mean on the Field of the Medal, not to confound them with the Inscriptions
that go round about, which we shall distinguish by the Name of Legends, and on
which we shall bestow a particular Instruction. Several Greek and Latin
Imperial Medals are found of this sort, which instead of a Reverse have only
these Letters, S. C. Senatus Consulto; or D. E. (...), enclosed with a Crown.
Others bear a sort of Epoch, Epocha's.
as primi Decennales. Cos. III. in M. Aurelius's time. In Augustus his, Imp.
Caes. Aug. Ludi saecularis Votis V.X.XX, etc. in the Lower Empire. Others set
forth great Occurences, Great Occurrences.
as Victoria Germanica Imp. VI. Cos. III. in M. Aurelius. In Augustus, Signis
Parthicis receptis, S. P. Q. R. Victoria Parthica maxima, in Sept. Severus.
Others bear Titles of Honor granted to the Prince, Titles of Honor.
as S. P. Q. R. Optimo Principi in Trajan; and in Antoninus Pius. Assertori
publicae Libertatis in Vespasian. Others bear Marks of Acknowledgement, as to
Vespasian Liberate P. R. restituta ex S. C. within a Crown. In the Cabinet of
the Duke of Arschot.
To Galba S. P. Q. R. Ob Cives servatos. To Augustus, Salus generis humani, etc.

Particular benefits.
Some have a regard only to particular Benefits at certain times, or in certain
places, with Vows made out of Gratitude, or for preservation of the Health of
Princes that are most dear to the State. For instance, under Augustus, Jovi
Optimo Maximo S. P Q. R. vota suscepta pro salute Imperat. Caesaris Aug. quod
per eum Resp. in ampliore, atque tranquilliore statu est. Jovi vota suscepta
pro salute Caes. Aug. S. P. Q. R. Imperatori Caesari quod viae munitae sint, ex
ea pecunia quam is ad aerarium detulit.

After the time that the Emperors of Constantine had quitted the Latin Language
for the Greek in their Inscriptions, there is often found enough to puzzle a
young Beginner; such is the IX NIKA, JOY XPITO NIKAI and the KYPIE OTHEIA
LEXIOIOI. DEPOTI POPPHYPOGEN NTOI. Deus adjuta Romany is found upon the Medals
of Heraclius, which is what they would express by the OTHEI, and would hardly
be guest when wrote only by the Initial Letters. For the means to have known
that C. LEON RAMVLTH on the Medal of Constantinus Copronymus, signifies
Constantinus Leoni perpetuo Augusto multos annos, would never have been
discovered, had not Mons. Du Cange happily imagined it. The skilfullest have
been at a stand at the KEO DVLOOV, by being unacquainted with the Inscriptions
we speak of. These sorts of Inscriptions may be called Acclamations or
Benedictions consisting in wishing the Emperor Life, Health, and Victory. Such
is that of Constantine, Plura Natalitia feliciter. Such that of Constans,
Felicia Decennalia. Such that of Theophilus, THEOPHILE AYGOYSTE TY NIKA. That
of Baduela, BADVELA FLUREAS ZEMPER. This puts me in mind of a fine Medal of
Antoninus Pius, which may well be placed amongst these Acclamations. Senatus
Populusque Romanus annum novum, faustum, felicem Optimo Principi Pio; after
this manner must the Initial Letters S. P. Q. R. A. N. F. F. Optimo Principi
Pio be explained.

I believe by this little I have here given you, That the different Gusts of
the Ancient and Modern Medals may be well-enough discerned I mean, as to
Inscriptions. The Ancients thought Medals were not proper to bear Inscriptions,
unless they were extremely Short and Expressive, reserving them that were long,
for Public Edifices, Columns, Triumphal Arches, Tombs. Whereas, the modern
Ones, particularly the Germans and Dutch, fullcharge the Reverses of their
Medals with tedious Inscriptions that have nothing of the Roman Majesty,
Purity, or Brevity.

Sometimes indeed the Names only of Magistrates are to be found upon them, as
in the Julian, Q. Aemilius. Qu. Fabius Bucca IIII. vir. A. A. A. F. F. And in
that of Agrippa, M. Agrippa Cos. designatus.

The Names of Mint-masters, of which we have a great Number, are found upon
several Medals; to which may be added all the Duumvirs of Colonies. The other
Magistracies are oftener upon the Consular Medals, than upon the Imperial.

Single Names only.
Sometimes there is only the Name of some City or People, as Sego Briga. Caesar
Augusta, Obulco. KOINON KYPPION.

In Monsieur du Cange, t. 5.
Sometimes only the Name of the Emperor, as Constantinus Aug. Constantinus
Caesar, to his Son. Constantinus Nob. Caesar, etc. sometimes the Name only of
Augustus.

I have seen on the Reverse of a Constantius Chlorus the single Ciphre VI XC.
of which Monsieur Du Cange has only given us the simple Description, Ib. t. 1.
Ib. t. 10.
as he has in Constantius only the Monogramme of (...).

Monogrammes.
M. I. K. are commonly found in the Lower Empire, which, I believe, are the
Monogrammes of Maria, Jesus, and Constantine; which may be presumed by the that
accompany those Letters, and are Marks of the Piety of Constantine the Great
his Successors, who had consecrated his New Rome to the Mother of God, and was
himself honored as a Saint all over the Empire.

We have also, at the same time, the Monogrammes of Cities, as that of Ravenna,
and some others, as may be seen in M. Du Cange. And on the Modern also are
Monogrammes of Names, as Strada shows us since the time of Charlemain.

Figures.
The Number, Action, and Subject of the Figures or Personages on the Reverse,
render them more or less Valuable and Rare. For as for the Ordinary Heads,
which have only some single Figure on the Reverse, setting forth either some
particular Virtue, for which the Person was commendable; or else some
particular Deity, to whom he paid his chiefest Devotions; these ought to be put
amongst the number of Common Medals, because they carry nothing of History in
them that deserves to be enquired after.

Heads.
These single Figures we speak of, are to be distinguished from Heads, whose
Reverses are sometimes crowded. For they being commonly the Heads either of
Children, Wives, Colleagues of the Empire, or Confederate Kings, it is a general
Rule among all the Skilful in this Science, that Medals with two Heads are
almost always Choice; as for instance, that of Augustus on the Reverse of
Julius; Vespasian on the Reverse of Titus; Antoninus on the Reverse of
Faustina; M. Aurelius on that of Lucius, etc. From whence it is easy to infer,
that the more Heads are on it, the more Choice is the Medal. Such is a Nero on
the Reverse of a Nero and Octavia; such a Severus on the Reverse of his two
Sons, Geta and Caracalla; Philip on the Reverse of his Son and Wife; and
Hadrian on that of Trajan and Plotina.

Therefore it is true, generally speaking, that the more Reverses are charged
with Figures, the more they are to be valued, especially if they illustrate any
Memorable Action. To give you some Instances hereof, The Medal of Trajan, Regna
adsignata, where three Kings appear at the foot of a Theater, on which is seen
the Emperor crowning them. In the Cabinet of the Duke of Arj^^ot.
The Largest of Nerva has five Figures, Congiar. P. R. S. C. An Allocation of
Trajan, where are Seven Figures. Another of Hadrian to the People, which has
Eight Figures without a Legend. Another to the Soldiers, where there are Ten. A
Medal of Faustina, Puellae Faustinianae, where there are 12, or 13, etc. An
Allocution of Probus, which has a dozen Figures. * The Medals of Monsieur
Pamiez.
Vota Publica of Commodus, on which is Ten.

Public Monuments.
As for Public Monuments, without doubt they give a particular Grace and Beauty
to the Reverses of Medals, especially when they declare to us some Historical
Event. Thus the Temple of Janus in Nero, and the Port of Ostia are much Rarer
than the Macellum, though the Structure of them is not so Noble; for one
signifies the Universal Peace he gave to the Empire, Pace Pop. Romans terra
marique parta Janum clausit. Whereas the other teaches us nothing, unless it
be, that he caused Shambles to be built for the Convenience and Service of the
Public.

Among these Curious and Noble Monuments we ought to place the Amphitheatre of
Titus, his Naval Column, the Temple which was built Romae and Augusto; the
Trophies of M. Aurelius and Commodus, etc. which are the first things known to
the Curious.

Animals.
The different Animals that we find upon Reverses have also their Valuation,
when they are extraordinary. Such are those that were brought to Rome from
Strange Countries to divert the People, principally in their Secular Games; or
when they represent the Ensigns of the Legions that bore them. Leg. XXX. Ulpi^
III. Italica. II. Adju^rix.
Thus we see the Legions of Gallienus, some of them that carried a Porcupine.
Others an Ibis, and others again a Pegasus. And the Medals of Philip, and
Otacilla, Saeculares Augg. have on their Reverses the Beasts they exhibited in
their Ludi Saeculares, and caused to be slain, to display their Magnificence,
In the Thousandth Year from the foundation of Rome.
and to regain the Peoples Affections, which were extremely sowr'd and
alienated by the Death of Gordian. Never were so many sorts of them seen
before; there was one Rhinoceros, 32 Elephants, 10 Tigres, 10 Elks, 60 tamed
Lions, 30 Leopards, 20 Hyaena's, 1 Hippopotamos, 40 Wild Horses, 20 Wild Asses,
Archole^as.
20 Wild Lions, and 10 Camelopards. The Figure of some of them is to be seen
upon the Medals of the Father, Mother, and Son, and amongst others of the
Hippopotamos, and the Strepsikeros, sent from Africa.

As for the Eagles that are found on the Reverses of the Egyptian Kings, and at
the Consecrations of Emperors, they have nothing but what is very common. No
more than the Wolf of Remus and Romulus to be met with both in the Higher and
Lower Empire. Elephants in Trappings are found upon an Antoninus Pius, a
Severus, and some other Emperors, that procured them to embellish and decorate
their Shows; and besides these, there are other Uncommon Animals, which shall
scarce ever be met with, unless upon Medals. Witness the Phoenix upon the
Medals of Constantine and his Sons, after the Example of the Princes and
Princesses of the Higher Empire; to denote by that Immortal Bird, either the
Eternity of the Empire, or else the Consecration of the Princes that are
admitted into the number of the Gods. Mademoiselle Patin has lately published a
very Curious Latin Dissertation thereon, which is a great honor to both the
Father, and Daughter.

Other Animals are also found upon Medals, as Birds, Fishes, and Fabulous
Monsters; and likewise Extraordinary Plants, which are the produce only of some
particular Countries, as may be learnt more at large in the Famous Spanheimius
his Third Dissertation de Praestantia and Vsu numismatum. The Works of Monsieur
Spanhe^mius.
A Work worthy of its Author, in which is to be seen the vast Extent of his
Knowledge, Penetration and Judgment, and a certain Air and Character of the
Honneste homme, that is so often wanting in other Learned Men, and which
particularly appears by the Respect wherewith he treats those whose Sentiments
he cannot approve, which gains him Esteem and Veneration from all Authors For
Study and Retirement are apt commonly to make Learned Men morose; their
Continual Conversing with the Dead disposing them to be forgetful of the
Affability, and just Decorum that is due to the Living.

Princes and Princesses upon the Reverse.
It must also be observed, That oftentimes the Prince, or Princess, whose Heads
are set large upon the Medal on one side, are seen placed on the Reverse at
their full height, or sitting under the Representation of some God, or Genius;
and engraven with such Art and Delicacy, that tho the Size is very small, and
fine, yet one may perfectly discern it to be the same Visage that is in Relief
on the other side. So Nero appears on his Medal DECURSIO. Hadrian, M. Aurelius,
Severus, Decius, etc. under the form of Deities, conferred upon them as a
Reward to their Civil and Military Virtues.

Two ways of ranking them according to their Reverses.
There remains yet for us to show the manner how Medals may be placed according
to their Different Reverses, to render Cabinets more exact and curious. And
this may be done two ways, either by a simple Series, which has no other
Affinity than what belongs to the same Emperor; or else by an Historical
Series, according to the Order of Times and Years, which may be discovered by
the Consulates, and the Power of the Tribunes. This is the way which Occo and
Mezza Barba have taken in ranging the Medals that they have described. Indeed,
tha^ which is disagreable in this way, is, that the same Reverse must be very
often repeated, because that in Different Years the same Figures are found,
especially those that are the most common.

There is another way more Learned, I must needs say, which Oiselius has
followed, who without troubling himself about placing them separately, as they
belonged to every Emperor, only has taken care to reunite every Reverse to
certain Pieces of Curiosity, by which means we methodically learn whatsoever
can be drawn from the Knowledge of Medals. Thus has he performed his Design,
which seems to me to be borrowed from Goltzius, and formed almost in the same
Order he has given to the 24 Titles of his Thesaurus Rei Antiquariae; Printed
at Antwerp. 100 CXV^^.
or rather it appears to come originally from the Dialogues of the Learned
Archbishop of Tarragone.

First, Antonius Augustinus. Book of Oiselius.
he has placed a Series of Imperial Heads, the compleatest he could; after that
he has collected all the Reverses that carried any thing of Geography in them;
that is to say, Such as did set forth any People, Cities, Rivers, Mountains, or
Provinces, of which he has made Eight Tables, either with a design of giving
the Curious a Model, or else having really no more but those Medals he shows
us, and upon which he speaks what he knows.

Then he has collected whatsoever relates to the Deities of both Sexes, joining
the Virtues with them, which are as so many Deities of the Second Order. As
Constancy, Clemency, Moderation, and the like, which makes up for him a pretty
large Series.

After this we find in four Tables all the Monuments of Peace, Games, Theaters,
Cirques, Liberalities, Doles, Magistracies, Adoptions, Marriages, Arrivals into
Provinces or Cities, etc.

In the following Tables is placed whatever concerns War, Legions, Armies,
Victories, Trophies, Allocutions, Camps, Arms, Ensigns, etc.

In a Single Table is to be seen what belongs to Religion, Temples, Altars,
Priests, Sacrifices, Instruments, and Ornaments of Augurs, and Prelates: To
which may very well be referred the Apotheoses, or Consecrations, which he has
placed by themselves, and are distinguished by Eagles, and Peacocks for
Princesses, by Altars, Temples, and Chariots drawn by two or four Elephants, or
two Mules, or four Horses.

Lastly, He has collected all Public Monuments and Edifices built to eternize
the Memory of Princes; as, Triumphal Arches, Columns, Equestrial Statues,
Gates, Highways, Bridges, Palaces, and other Structures.

There is but one Defect, methinks, in placing Me^als this way, which is, that
Heads, Met^^ls and Sizes must needs here be mixed, and consequently the Tables
made after such a ^ashion as is impracticable.

Reverses of Medaillons.
As Medail^ons were only coined for Public Ceremonies, Shows, or to make
Presents of, either to the People or Strangers; so their Reverses are much more
Curious than those of Ordinary Medals, because they commonly represent
Triumphs, Games, Buildings, or some other Noble Monument relating to some point
of History, which is that that is sought after with greatest Solicitude; and
when found, gives the greatest satisfaction. L'Erizzo has begun to show, and
give us his Advice upon these sorts of Medals. Monsieur Tristan, a Person of
great Reading, and fine Erudition, has caused several of them to be engraven;
and M. Patin has given us very Noble ones in his Treasury: In M. Carcavi's time
those of the King's Cabinet were engraven; and the Bishop of Pamiez is about
bestowing his on the Public; and he promises also the Explanation of them;
than which nothing will be finer, nor better deserve the Curiosity of the
Learned and Ingenious.

The Reverses are often charged with different Epocha's of Times, with marks of
the Public Authority, of the Senate, People, and the Prince: With the Value of
the Money; the Place where they were coined; or, lastly, with the different
marks of the Mint-masters, and Cities.

It Is true, This might have been left to the next Instruction, which will be
concerning Inscriptions, and of which they seem to be as parts; but yet since
they are very rarely to be seen round the Medals, but only in the Field, or at
least in the The Exergue is a part of the Field divided from the rest in this
manner.
Exergue, and that even sometimes the Reverses have no other Figures than these
sorts of Characters, I have thought ^t more fit to speak of them in this place,
than to refer them to another.

Different Epocha's of Cities.
The Eopcha's set forth the Years of Princes, and Cities, and give Medals an
Extraordinary Beauty, because they rectify Chronology, which is mighty
serviceable to the clearing up Historical Affairs. It Is by this way that M.
Vaillant happily acquitted himself in unfolding to us the History of the Syrian
Kings, where several Princes of the same Name have caused so great a Confusion;
And by this means Father Noris, the Great Duke's famous Antiquary, has
discovered a thousand Noble Secrets, which he has now given us in his Book de
Epochis Syromacedonum. Printed at Florence, 1690.


Indeed as to this, the Greeks have been more Careful and Successful than the
Romans, and the Later Ages more exact than the Former; because the Roman Medals
have set out no other Epoch than that of the Consulate, Of Offices.
and Power of the Tribunes; and neither the one nor the other is certain, because
they do not always go according to the Year of their Reign, and but very rarely
does That of the Power of the Tribunes agree with That of the Consulate. For
That of the Power of the Tribunes proceeded regularly from Year to Year,
whereas the Emperor not being always Consul, the whole Interval from One
Consulate to the Other, which was frequently of several Years, kept always the
Epoch of the last. As to give you an Instance, The Emperor Hadrian's Medals
for several years had Cos. III. so that by this way no Certain Order can be
made of the Different Medals which have been coined since the 872. Year of
Rome, in which he entered upon his Third Consulate, to his Death, which was not
till Twenty years after.

Of Re^gns.
The Greeks, on the contrary, have affected to mark the Years of every Prince's
Reign exactly, and that even in the Lowest Empire, where the Reverses scarce
bear any thing else than these sorts of Epocha's, more especially since
Justinian. I speak here of Imperial Medals only; for I know well enough,
excepting some Cities, all the Others which Goltzius has given us, have no
Epocha's at all; and this is that which perplexes Chronology extremely. The
Epocha's of the Reigns of Kings, I confess, are oftener found in them. Father
Hardouin in his Antirrhetique, Page 72.
gives us that of King Juba, upon Medals, of which one shows the 32d Year;
others the 36th, 40th, 42d, and 45th.

Colonies.
Colonies also marked their Epocha's, a^ may be seen in that of In Maesia.
Viminacium, which under Gordian, when she began, sets An. I. II. etc. under
Philip, An. VII. etc. under Decius, An. XI.

Age.
M. Toynard discovers to us a new Secret, worthy of his profound Diligence, and
the great Assistance which that has given him in all matters he undertakes to
treat of. It is, that sometimes not only the Years of the Emperors Reigns,
Dissertation of Monsieur Toynard.
but also those of their Age, is to be found upon Medals, which no body before
him eve^ took care to observe. He has proved it to admiration by the Medals of
Commodus, a^ may be seen by a particular Dissertation h^ affords us upon this
Subject. And it may be this is not the sole Example, though n^ other has yet
been discovered besides.

The Greek Cities subject to the Roman Empire were fond of a particular Epoch^^
from the honor they had of being Neocore^ that is, Neocores.
of having Temples where Solem^ Sacrifices of the whole Province were performed
for their Princes, and of havin^ Amphitheaters, wherein public Plays and
Combats were represented with the permission of the Prince, or the Senate,
which they importunately demanded, being overjoyed when they could obtain it
above once, and very careful to record the Memory of it upon their Medals. DI.
TPI. TETPAKI NEOKOPON.

The way of setting down their Epocha's.
The Epocha's are almost always set down on the Reverse after one of these two
ways; either by expressing Entire words, ETOY DEATOY. etc. or oftener by Single
Ciphers, and the word abridg'd, E. or E T. A.. etc. almost always by the old
Lambda, L. which signifies, according to the Tradition of the Antiquaries,
(...), a Poetical word, and not used in Common Language, and signifies Anno,
and probably was more used in Egypt than in Greece, seeing it is upon all the
Medals that are found of that Country. We have nevertheless a very Handsome
Canopus on the Reverse of an Antoninus, ETOY.. as we have likewise of the same
Emperor a Reverse L. ENNATOY, and Several Others with Single Ciphers L.. L.. L.
IG. Monsieur Patin.
charged with the Figures of Justice, with the Head of Serapis, and a Dolphin
twisted about a Trident.

The Epocha's of Cities are commonly denoted by a Single Cipher, without either
the E, or the L. and the Lowest Number is commonly placed First. On the Medal
of Antiochia you have D.. and not 44.
. D. On one of Pompeiopolis, that has the Head of Aratus on one side, and on
the other that of Chrysippus, is TH. K.. instead of 229.
. K. TH. etc.

In the Lower Greek Empire the Epocha's are marked in Latin, Anno III. V. VI.
etc. From Justin down to Theophilus they fill the Field of the Medal in two
Lines from top to bottom; as on that of Justin, ANNO K.X

that of Justinian. ANNO IXXIII

and so upon others.

Nevertheless some have the Anno in that position of usual writing, on the top
of the Field, as Phocas, and Heraclius. After Theophilus we do not meet with
any Epocha's, either Greek or Latin.

Indictions.
I find too that even Indictions are marked; for upon a Medal of Mauricius,
there is IND. II. which makes me believe that the INDVT. III. upon a small
Medal of Germanicus's, may be the same thing, since no body has been able to
understand it as yet, and it may well mean Indictione VIII. or XIIII. the T.
being a fault of the Minter, as there are several of them, and also it not
being well stamped. But because our Greatest Masters will have it, that by its
Fabric and Make it appears to be of the Higher Empire, which will not at all
agree with what I propose, we must wait for a better Explanation.

The signification of S. C. and D. E.
The Marks of the public Authority, that appear on the Reverses, when there are
none in the Legend or Inscriptions, are S. C. or D. E. or Populi jussu, or the
like words, which we shall explain; but it is not so easy to guess what they
signify with Respect to Medals.

History of Medals.
To begin with S. C. some say it was to give Authority to the Metal, and to show
that it was of a good Alloy, and such as the Current Money ought to be of.
Others, that it was to fix the Price, or Weight of it; and others again, that
it was to testify that the Senate had ordered the Reverse with respect to the
Emperor, whom they had a mind to honor; and for that reason the S. C. is
always upon the Reverse; but yet all this is much questioned.

For if it be true that the S. C. is the Mark of true Money, how comes it to
pass that it is scarce ever to be found upon Gold and Silver, and is often also
wanting on the small Copper, and that even in the Higher Empire, and during the
time of the Republic, when the Authority of the Senate should have been most
regarded.

I said, scarce ever, because the S. C. is found upon some Consular Medals, as
in the Families Norbana, Mincia, Mescinia, Maria, Terentia, etc. not to mention
those that have Ex S. C. which may rather relate to the Figure than the Medal:
For example, in the Family Calpurnia, Ad frumentum emendum ex S. C. which is as
much as to say, The Senate had ordered the Aediles to buy Corn. There are some
amongst the Silver Imperials with ex S. C. But never with S. C. as upon the
Copper; which makes me to conclude, that it is not the Mark which ought to be
upon the Current Money.

The same Reason makes me forbear to say that S. C. is the Sign of the Good
Alloy, or Value, since there are other unquestionable Marks for them, of which
we shall speak in its proper place.

Nor is it more reasonable to say, that it is the Mark of those Medals the
Senate caused to be coined out of Respect and Acknowledgment; for if it were
so, the Senate must have ordered None but Copper to be made, which is not at
all probable. And certainly Medaillons, which were always coined for that
intent, would have the S. C. yet it is scarce ever found upon them, at least I
never saw it, In his Treasure, p. 127. Tribun. Potestat.
as I remember, except upon the Medaillon of Trajanus Decius, and that of
Philip the Son, which M. Patin tells us of.

A young Beginner need not presently neither to pin his Faith upon what M.
Vaillant and F. Hardouin, have said touching the D. E. DAPXIKS EXOYIA, or other
words implying the Name or Authority of the People. It is enough for him to
know, that when he meets with Populi jussu, or S. P. Q. R. or Consensu Senatus
and Equestris Ordinis populique Romani, that these words relate to Statues, or
other Monuments erected to the Honor of Princes, the Medals whereof were
Coined at Rome. But when he finds upon those of Cities or Colonies, Permissu
Augusti, it declares the Permission and Privilege which that City had to Coin
Money. A very particular favor granted by the Emperors to them, which they
testified by such their Acknowledgements, as appears upon the curious Medal of
Patras, that M. Seguin has given us, Indulgentia Augusti moneta impetrata. We
oftener find upon these Medals of Colonies, Vaillant, Tom. 1.
permission given by Ordinary Magistrates, witness Permissu Dolabellae
Proconsulis; Tiberius.
and on another, Permissu Aproni Process. III. Drusus.
which signifies either the Privilege of Coining Money, or else that of taking
the Name of Colony, or of erecting some Edifice, as the Altar that was built in
Spain to the Providence of Augustus, which is to be found upon One of the same
Emperor's Reverses, Municipium Italica, providentiae permissu Augusti.

The Names of Cities.
Nothing is more common than to find the Names of Cities where Medals have been
Coined, both in the Upper and Lower Empire, with this difference, that in the
Upper Empire they are often in the Legend or Inscription; and in the Lower,
after Constantine, it is always in the Exergue. So is the P.T


P. T. Percussa Triviris. S. M. A. Signata moneta Antiochiae. CON. OB.
Constantinopoli obsignata, etc. whereas in the Upper Empire the Names are found
all at length. Lugduni on that of M. Antony, (...), upon Greek Medals, and
those of all Colonies.

Mint-master's Marks.
In a word, Reverses are often charged with the particular Marks of the
Mintmasters, which they put on on their own Heads to distinguish their Money,
and the place where they worked. By this means are explained an infinite number
of Characters, or little Figures, which are found not only in the Lower Empire
after Gallus and Volusian, but even in the Consular Times.

Mons. Morell has told me, he had found above two Hundred of these different
Marks of Mint-masters upon Medals, which cannot possibly be otherwise
explained; to which, if we should join them of the Lower Empire, the number
would be much greater.

However I would not have this become a Refuge to the Ignorance and Sloth of
those, who to spare themselves the pains of searching, have Recourse presently
to the Mint-master's Mark. For we see Mons. Vaillant by great Study and
Application, has instructed us in the Mysteries of I know not how many little
Symbols: And F. Hardouin has discovered, That the Letters, AGD, found upon
Imperial Medals, are only so many Marks of different Mint-masters, in the same
City, which we meet with marked by their Names upon the ancienter Medals, as on
a Julian the Apostate, Officina Lugdunensis. On a Mauricius, Vienna de Officina
Laurenti. On a Valentinian, Officina III. Constantinopolitana. And that
therefore the Figures never amount to Ten, F. Hardouin in his Antirrhetique, p.
16, 17.
unless in the Cities of Constantinople and Antioch, where more Money was
Coined than in all the other Cities of the Empire, and where by consequence
there must be in the Mint more different Workhouses.

This is so clearly demonstrated, that none can with any Color of Reason deny
it. And it is One of the happy discoveries, for which we are beholden to this
Learned Man, by which several of these Characters are easily deciphered, that
could not have been explained, but by calling all of this sort Arbitrary Marks.
As for instance, on a Julian, B. S. L. C. Signata Lugduni; the B, which they do
not explain, signifies, In Officina Secunda. On a Valens, SISCPZ, Sisciae
percussa; the Z that was not explained before, denotes In Officina Septima. And
so in many others, whose Ciphers are sometimes in Greek, and sometimes in Latin
Characters.

Marks of the Value of Money.
There remain yet some Marks to be understood, which are apparently those of the
Value of the Money, and are almost only found upon the Consular; These Marks
are X. V. Q. S. L.-L. S. The Denarius is meant by X. which is worth Denos
Aeris, ten brass Asses. The V. signifies Quinarius, five Asses, Quinos Aeris.
The S Semissis, Half an Ass. The L-L-S a Sesterce, or two Asses and an half.
The Q. also signifies Quinarius.

None of these Marks are found upon the Copper Ones, unless it be the S. upon
some of the Consular Medals. A certain number of Points are most commonly seen
on each side, but never above four, which signifies the Third part of an Ass,
as it is divided into Twelve parts, called Vncia, Sextans, Dodrans, Quadrans,
Triens; the Sextans is marked.., the Triens...., the Quadrans..., etc. the
whole Ass by O or L, Libra, which denotes the weight of it.

The altering of the Value.
The altering of the Value, which happened sometimes, was expressed upon the
Silver by new Ciphers. As we see, for instance, when the Denarius was raised
from ten to sixteen Asses, they set upon it XVI. and so proportionably upon the
Quinarius VIII. and upon the Sesterce IIII. we have the XVI. plainly marked in
the Families Titinia and Valeria. Antonius Augustinus says, he has seen some
Quinarii with the VIII. but he never could any Sesterces with the IIII.

I wish I could certainly determine what those Ciphers meant that are found
upon the Medals of the Family Tarquitia, where we see XXXI. and upon those of
Maria, One of which has on the Reverse, a Labourer leading two Oxen, and above
XXVIII. S. C. and the Other upon the same Type XXXXIII. These perhaps would be
useful in clearing up those of M. Antony, that bear a Lion passant, Lugduni A.
XL. A. XLI, etc. As also those of the Lower Empire, Tiberius. Constant. Phocas.
where we find XXIII. XXX. XXXX. XXXXIIII. XXXXV. For they are not the Epocha's
of Years, they are joined with ANNO. I. II. III. But since the greatest Masters
hitherto confess that they have not been able to come at their meaning, a
Learner may very well comfort himself, that herein he knows as much as they do.

INSTRUCTION VI.
Of the Inscriptions, called the Legend of Medals.
IT seems as if the Ancients had designed to make Images and Emblems of their
Medals; the One for the Common People, and those of duller Apprehensions; the
Other for People of Quality, and the more refined Wits. Images to represent the
Faces and Heads of Princes; Emblems, their Virtues and Great Achievements.
Thus the Legend is to be looked upon as the Soul of the Medal, and the Figures
as the Body; and just so it is in the Emblem, where the Device has the place of
the Soul, without which we could never understand what the Figures were
designed to teach us. As for instance, we see on a Medal of Augustus two Hands
joined, clasping a Caduceus betwixt two Cornucopia's; this is the Body: The
word Pax there engraven, is to denote the Peace which that Prince had given to
the State, by reconciling it to M. Antony, which had restored Felicity and
Plenty to it. Whereas those very two Hands on the Medals of Balbinus and
Pupienus have this Legend, Amor mutuus Augustorum, expressing thereby the good
Understanding between the two Colleagues in governing the Empire. And upon a
Nerva by the words Concordia Exercituum, the Hands are declared to signify the
Agreement of the Soldiers for their New Prince.

But for the more perfect Understanding of this Mystery, I think it will be
necessary to recollect the difference we have made betwixt the Legend and the
Inscription, The difference betwixt the Legend and the Inscription.
by calling properly nothing Inscription, but the words which are in lieu of a
Reverse, and takes up the Field of the Medal instead of Figures. Therefore we
shall call only those words the Legend which go round the Medal, and which
serve to explain the Figures that are upon the Field.

Two Legends to every Medal.
In this Sense every Medal is said to have two Legends, viz. that of the Head,
and that of the Reverse. The first for the most part serves only to make the
Person known by his proper Name, his Offices, or by certain Sir-names which
their Virtues have gained them. The second is designed to declare their
Virtues, their Noble and Generous Actions, the Glorious Monuments that serve to
Eternize their Names, and the Benefits the Empire has received by their means.
Thus we find Antoninus's Medal bears on the Head-side, Antoninus Augustus,
Pius, Pater Patriae, Trib. Pot. Cos. IIII. these are his Names and Titles: On
the Reverse are three Figures; One of the Emperor seated on a Throne; the
Second; a Woman standing with a Horn of Plenty, and a Square Chart, with a
certain number of Points upon it. The Third is a Figure presenting it self, and
holding out its Gown as to receive something; which is explained to us by the
Legend, Liberalitas quarta, telling us, That that Emperor gave a fourth
Donative to the People, by distributing to them so many measures of Corn, as
every Family had need of.

Nevertheless, this is neither so Universal, nor so indispensable, but that the
Dignities and Offices of Persons may be imparted sometimes, either in whole, or
in part, on the Reverse-side, as well as on the Head, or may sometimes not be
put upon the Reverse side only, where likewise (though I confess it is very
seldom) the Name it self may be found. For example, That of Augustus, of
Constantine and his Sons, as we have said already. We have a thousand Examples
of the dividing of Dignities, Offices, and Titles of Honor: On the Head-side
of a Medal of Julius is to be seen Caesar Imper quartum; on the Reverse, Augur,
Pont. Max. Cos. quartum, Dictator quartum. On the Head of an Antoninus,
Antoninus Aug. Pius, Pater patriae, Trib. Pot. XV. On the Reverse, Cos. IIII.
and nothing more. On another of his Reverses, Trib. Pot. XXI. Cos. IIII. On the
Head of an Hadrian, Hadrianus Aug. P. P. On the Reverse, Trib. Pot. Cos. II.
the Title of Pater Patriae, is commonly on the Head-side, as is the Office of
Censor. Those of Pontifex, Augur, and the like, are always upon the Reverses,
when the Symbols of those Dignities are there engraven. For Instance, the
Pontifical Instruments on the Reverse of Vespasian and Vitellius, where we see
the Tripod, the Dolphin, and the Crow, XV. VIR. Sacr. fac.

Offices.
These Offices are different on the Medals of Families, and on Imperial ones.
For in the Families are found only particular Offices, as that of the IIIVIRS
for the Mint, Fam. Aeb^tia.
A. A. A. F. F. and of IVVIRS under Julius. Fam. Caeli^.
That of the IIIVIRS of Health, Acilius IIIVIR Valetudinarius. Fam. Cornelia.
Of the IIVIRS, or IIIVIRS for Colonies. Fam. Aemilia.
Of the VIIVIRS for Banquets. Curator Denariorum ^landorum. Fam. Aliena.
Of the Aediles, Questors, Lieutenants, etc. Fam. Antonia.
Whereas upon the Imperial we meet with none but the most considerable Offices,
Augur, Pontifex Maximus, which made them Masters of every thing that was
Sacred, and which the Emperors kept from the time of Augustus till Gratian,
that is to say, till the Heathen Religion was utterly abolished. Tribunitia
potestate, Consul, and sometimes Proconsul, a Title never assumed, but when the
Emperor was out of Rome, and was looked upon as contained in the Name of
Imperator, during the Higher Empire; for after Trajan, it is only found on the
Medals of Dioclesian, Maximian, and Constantine. It is fit to be observed, That
the Emperors affected to preserve the Name and Dignity of Consul, as a
Remainder of Liberty, although it was nothing more than a fine Name without any
real Authority, except when the Emperor himself was pleased to make use of it,
either solely, or with a Colleague. In a word, it was lost insensibly in the
time of Justinian, who united that Dignity to the Imperial; so that after him,
no Emperor ever created any Consuls, or took that Name to himself, or bestowed
it upon any Other.

Brave and Noble Actions.
Indeed, when Medals have no Head, the Brave and Noble Actions, represented
thereon, take up that place, and then the Legend of the Reverse is a kind of
Inscription: For instance, Tiberius on his Medal, coined in Acknowledgment of
the Care he took in Rebuilding the Cities of Asia, that were destroyed by an
Earthquake, is represented sitting in a Curul^ Chair, with Civitatibus Asiae
restitutis, and on the Reverse, a Legend only, Tiberius Caesar Divi Aug. Filius
Augustus, Pont. Max. Trib. Pot. XXI.

It appears by what I have said, That I only speak of Emperors or Kings Medals.
For, as for the Medals belonging to Cities or Provinces, the Head of those is
commonly the Genius of the Place, or some other Deity there worshipped; and the
Legend also is the Name of the City, or Province, or Deity, or both together,
(...), etc. (...), etc. either the Name of the City sit on the Reverse, and the
Name of the Deity kept on the Headside, or the Name of the City serving as a
Legend to the Deity, as (...) to Jupiter Hammon, (...) to Hercules, etc.

The Reverses of these Medals are always some Symbol of those Cities, often
without any Legend, oftener with the Name of the City; and sometimes with that
of some Magistrate, as (...), etc. So that we may truly say, The Legends of
those sorts of Medals are only Expressions of the Country.

On all others, the Noble Actions are expressed upon the Reverses, either
Naturally, or by Symbols, which the Legend explains. Naturally, as when Trajan
is represented crowning the Parthian King, Rex Parthis datus. Symbolically, as
when the Victory of Julius and Augustus is signified by a Crocodile, Aegypto
capta. We have in Hadrian, all the Provinces that acknowledged him for their
Restorer; and those that understand it not by the Symbols, may learn it by the
Legend; Restitutori Galliae, Restitutori Hispaniae, etc. Thus the several
Victories signified by Crowns, Palms, Trophies, and the like Marks, that are
indifferent in themselves, are determined by the Legend. On one of Augustus's
is, Asia Subacta. Of Constantine the younger, Alemannia Devicta. Of Vespasian,
Judaea Capta. Of Trajan, Armenia and Mesopotamia in potestatem populi Romani
redactae. Or else Simply, De Germanis, De Sarmatis, as on M. Aurelius's; for
the plainest Legends are sometimes the most dignified.

The Essential Relation of the Legend to the Type.
Leaving then the Legends of the Head designed to express the Name, either
alone, as Brutus, Ahala, Caesar, or with the Titles, as we have said already;
the other Legends are only Explanations of the Symbols that appear upon Medals;
by which are declared the Virtues of Princes, certain particular Events of
their Lives, the Honors that have been paid them, the great Benefits they
procured to the State, the Monuments of their Glory, the Deities they most
worshipped, and by whom they believed they were particularly protected. Because
the Reverses, as we have said, not being charged but with these sorts of
Matters, the Legends have an Essential Relation to them, being as it were the
Key of the Representations, which it would be very difficult to understand
without these helps, especially in the more remote Ages and Countries, where
the Customs are wholly different.

It is in this that the Medals of the Higher Empire excel, their Figures being
always applied for some very good Reason; whereas on those of the Lower Empire,
they are both given indifferently to all the Emperors, more by Custom than from
Merit, witness the Gloria Exercitus. Faelicitas temporum renovata, etc.

Virtues.
As the Virtues which gained Princes the greatest Affection and Esteem of their
People, are the most common Reverses; so likewise the most common Legends are
those that declare them, sometimes by their Single Name, as on a Tiberius,
Moderationi, Clementiae, Justitiae; and sometimes by applying them to the
Princes in the Nominative or Genitive Case, as Spes Augusta, On Cla^dius.
or Spes Augusti. Constantia Augusta, or Constantia Augusti. The same Regimen
is also indifferently observed, as to the Virtue it self, Virtus Aug. or
Virtuti Aug. Clementia, or Clementiae, etc.

Honors.
The Honors bestowed on Princes consist chiefly in Pompous Sirnames, given them
to set forth either the most considerable Actions they have performed, or some
of the most Eminent Qualities they have been endued with: For after this manner
must they be distinguished by the Public Monuments, that remain as perpetual
Witnesses of their Glory. In this Sense they can only be expressed by the Legend,
either on the Head-side, or on the Reverse. As, for instance, Trajan's famous
Title, Optimo Principi, is found on both Sides. In Commodus, that of Foelix,
which he first added to Pius, and his Successors retained, is always on the
Head-side. Those that show the Conquered Provinces, as Britannicus, Armeniacus,
Dacicus, Parthicus, Parthicus Maximus, Germanicus, Adiabenicus, etc. are
sometimes found on the Head-side, sometimes on the Reverse; whereas the Titles
that display their Grandeur or Power, are always on the Reverse. Antoninus.
Decius. Hadrianus. Constantinus. Hadrianus. Faustina the younger. Julia Pia.
Genio Senatus, Genio Exercitus, Genio Populi Romani, Restitutor^ Orbis
terrarum, Debellatori Gentium Barbararum, Locupletatori Orbis terrarum.
Nevertheless, the Genitrix Orbis, Matter Castrorum, Matter Senatus, Matter
Patriae, are found on the Head-side, as is most commonly Pater Patriae.

As for the Honors bestowed on them after their Deaths, which consisted in
admitting them into the number of the Gods, they are explained by the word
Consecratio, Consecrations.
by that of Pater, Divus, and Deus. Divo Pio, Divus Augustus Pater. Deo and
Domino Caro. Sometimes they inscribed round their Temples and Altars, Memoria
^oelix, or Memoriae Aeternae. Sometimes for Princesses, Aeternitas, or
Sideribus recepta; and on the Head side, Diva; and the Greeks, (...).

General Favors.
Legends expressing Benefits conferred on Cities, Provinces, and the Empire, are
commonly very Short and Plain, but yet mighty Pompous and Magnificent. As for
instance, Ma^entius. Sept. Severus. Aurelian. Hadrian. Augustus. Constantine
Theodosius, the younger. Victor.
Conservator Vrbis suae, Fundator Pacis. Rector Orbis. Restitutor Vrbis
Hispania; Galliae, etc. Pacator Orbis. Salus generis humani. Gaudium
Reipublicae. Gloria Romans Hilaritas pop. Romans Laetitia fundata. Tellus
stabilita. Exuperator omnium Gentium. Gloria Orbis terrarum. Bono Reipublicae
natus. Gloria novi Saeculi.

Galba.
Sometimes the manner of it is yet more sprightly and moving, as Roma renascens.
Roma resurgens. Libertas restituta, etc.

Particular Favors.
Benefits that were more particular, were expressed more distinctly. Al. Severus.
As Restitutor monetae, Remissa a ducentesima, Quadragesima remissa. Caligula.
Nerva. Domitian. S. Severus. Hadrian. Nerva.
Vehiculatione Italiae remissa. Fisci Judaici Calumnia sublata. Congiarium pop.
Romans datum. Puellae Faustinianae. Via Trajana. Indulgentia in Cart aginenses.
Reliqu^ vetera H. S. novies millies abolita, that is to say, 22000000. Plebi
Vrbanae frumento constituto.

Certain p^^uliar Events.
Certain Events that are peculiar to every Province, are also known by the
Legends, being not to be expressed but by common Symbols. As for Example, a
Victory with a Trophy, a Palm, or a Crown, cannot be determined but by the
word, ^^spasian. M. Aurelius
Victoria Germanica, Victoria Navalis, Victoria Parthica, Praetoriani recepti,
and Imperatore recepto. Which denotes the welcome Reception that Claudius met
with from the Soldiers. The favor Nero obtained of being received into all the
Sacerdotal Colleges, Sacerdos co-optatus in omnibus Conlegiis supra numerum.
Pax fundata cum Persis. The Miracle that happened at Tarragon, after the Death
of Gordian, when a Palm was seen to spring out of the Altar of Augustus, upon
which occasion they coined a Medal with the Representation of the Wonder, and
these four Letters, C. V. T. T. Colonia victrix Togata Tarraco, Philip.
and upon which the Emperor made a very pleasant piece of Raillery.

Public Monuments.
Public Monuments are also known and distinguished by the Legend; for those
that were built by the Prince himself, are put in the Nominative, or Genitive
Case, or else expressed by a Verb: But those that are built or consecrated to the
Prince, have his Name in the Dative. Macellum Augusti. Basilica Vlpia. Aqua
Marcia. Portus Ostiensis. Forum Trajani. Templum Divi Augusti restitutum;
because these Edifices were built by Nero, Trajan, and Antoninus. Whereas on
the contrary we see, that Romae and Augusto, Jovi Deo, Divo Pio, Optimo
Principi, signify Temples built to the Honor of Augustus, and Columns erected
to Antoninus and Trajan.

Deities honored by Princes.
The particular Affection Princes had to certain Deities, and the Several Titles
under which they honored them, in acknowledgment of their Protection in
general, or of some particular Graces and Favors they had received from them,
are discovered to us by the different Ways of the Legend. We know Numerianus
chiefly honored Mercury, because we find him on the Reverse of his Medals,
with these words Pietas Aug. We know also that Diocletian honored Jupiter as
his Protector, because we see on his Medals Jovi Conservatori, Jovi
Propugnatori: And that Gordian attributed to Him the Success of a Battle,
wherein his Soldiers behaved themselves with Great Bravery and Resolution, by
Jovi Statori.

Medals of Princesses.
On the Medals of Princesses were coined the Images and Names of the Deities of
their Sex. Ceres, Juno, Vesta, Venus, Diana. The happiness of their Marriage was
noted by Venus Foelix. Their Gratitude for a Safe Deliverance, by Junoni
Lucinae. That of their Fruitfulness, by Veneri Genetrici. The Good Fortune of
Princes, which was always their Chief Deity, is found very frequently on their
Medals, in all manner of ways; as Fortuna Augusta, Perpetua; Fortunae Foelici,
muliebri. Fortuna manens. Fortuna obsequens. Fortuna redux: Expressing the Name
indifferently either by the Nominative, Dative, or the Accusative Case. For we
equally find Mars Victor, Marti Vltori, Martem propugnatorem, and even Martis
ultoris; but it is belonging to the Temple that is built to him to revenge the
Death of Julius, which makes a Notable Difference. It must not be forgot here,
That Legends declaring Names, do it either by the Nominative, as Caesar
Augustus; or by the Genitive, as Divi Julii; or by the Dative, as Imp. Nervae,
Trajano, Germanico, etc. or by the Accusative Case, as. AYPA. ALEXANDPON,
Thesaurus Goltzii.
etc. But yet I have not found any Latin Examples of the Accusative, besides
that of Gallienus, In the King's Cabinet.
Gallienum Augustum, on the Reverse, Ob Conservationem Salutis.

We will now speak no more of Persons, but of Things that appear upon Medals,
and have no Other Legend than their Names or their Qualities, which I shall
rank in this Order.

Legends of Cities, Provinces and Rivers.
1. Cities, Provinces, Rivers. Some whereof we find have only their bare Names.
Tiberis, Danuvius, Rhenus Nilus; Aegyptus, Hispania, Italia, Dacia, Africa;
Roma, Alexandria, Obulco, Valentia, Italica, Bilbilis: Others are clothed with
their Qualities, and Prerogatives. Colonia Julia Augusta. Foelix Berytus.
Colonia immunis, Illice Augusta. Colonia Aurelia Metropolis Sidon. Colonia
prima, Flavia, Augusta Caesariensis. Elagab^lus.
Municipium Ilerda. Aelium municipium Coillut anum Antonianum.

The Greek Cities coined their Privileges on them, IERA, AYLOY, AYTONOOY,
ELEYTHEPA, NAYAPXIDO, KOLONIA, to declare the Honor they had of being
inviolable, that is to say, that no Criminals could be taken from thence, who
had fled thither, IEPA. AYL. having the Privilege of observing their own, and
not the Roman Laws, AYT. the Privilege of Latium, or Roman Citizens, KOLONIA.
That of having a Seaport, wherein their Ships rode, NAYAPXIDO. That of being
Exempt from Tributes, and Imposts. ELEYTH. with the other particular Privileges
of Colonies which they had obtained. They were very careful to mark those of
the Neocores, DI. TPI. TETPAKI NEOKOPON. And to conclude, The Alliances they
had with other Cities were expressed by the word, O 'ONOIA

Military Ensigns, Legions, etc.
2. Military Ensigns, and whole Armies have their Names told us by the Legend,
as also the particular Legions that composed them. We know M. Antony had Thirty
Legions, M. Antony's Legions.
by the numbers Legio I. II. III. etc. and so on to XXX. We find the several
Names of these Legions, and the Distinction of those that served by Sea, from
them that served by Land, by the words Legionis primae Antiquae, Legionis XVII.
Classicae. Legionis XX. Hispanicae. Legionis XXII. Primigeniae, etc. the Titles
of Honor they had merited by their Valor and Fidelity are expressed in these
words, Legio I. Legions of Gallien.
Augusta sextum Pia, sextum Fedelis. Legio II. Adjutrix. VII. Pia. VII.
Fidelis. Legio Aug. X. Gem. Pia, Victrix. We find also the Cohorts there, as in
Antony's. Cohors Speculatorum. Cohortes Praetorianorum septem, in Gallien's.
Coh. Praetorianae Philippis, in Augustus's.

Armies. Hadrian. Tr^jan.
The Names of Armies are also found there, with the Countries where they fought;
witness Exercitus Dacicus; Exerc. Rhaeticus; Exercitus Syriacus; Exercitus
Britanni^us, etc. witness Expeditio Judaica, Parthica, Hadrian.
etc. We have likewise the Emperor's Marches, when they went to put themselves
at the Head of their Armies, expressed by these words, Profectio Augusti.
Adventus Augusti, when they came into any City. Trajectus Augusti, when they
had happily past any Great River, or Arm of the Sea. There is a noble Medal of
Gordian the younger on Shipboard, the Reverse of which has Ten Figures. The
care they took to exercise their Soldiers, by Disciplina, or Disciplina Aug.
Caracalla. Amonini^. Hadri^n.
The Speeches made to them, by Adlocutio Cohortium; the Oath of Fidelity they
gave to them, Fides Exercitus. I have seen a Medaillon of Commodus with
Thirteen Figures.

Public Plays.
3. Public Plays, which are commonly expressed only by Palms springing out of a
Vessel, or Crowns; and are distinguished by the Legend, which for the most part
contains either the Name of Him that instituted them, or the Person, in honor
of whom they were performed. Thus we find that Nero was the Author of the Plays
that were celebrated every fifth Year at Rome, by the Medal that bears Certamen
quinquennale Romae constitutum. By the Legend of Caracalla's Reverse, TPOPOL.
ANKYPA AKLPIA OTPIA ITH PYTHIA. We learn that at Ancyra, in Galatia, the same
Plays were celebrated to the Honor of Aesculapius, called the Savior, as
those in the Isthmus of Corinth to the Honor of Apollo. It Is but seeing what
M. Morel has related of it in the Project he has given us of the Noblest
Design that ever was formed for the Satisfaction of the Curious. M. Morel's
Project.


Specimen universae rei nummariae.
You will find in that Project the Legend of the Principal Plays of the
Ancients, and the Learned Discourse which M. Spanheimius has made upon this
Subject. KABEIPIA are those made in Thessaly, held in honor of the Cabiri.
THEOGAIA, Those that were chiefly celebrated in Sicily in honor of Pluto's and
Proserpina's Marriage. EOYPEIA. Those instituted by Septimius Severus. KOODEIA,
Those made by the Appointment of Commodus, etc.

Public Vows.
4. Public Vows made for the Emperor every five or ten years, may be placed as
well among the Legends, as among the Inscriptions, since they are oftener found
wrote round the Medal, than in the Field, at least in the Higher Empire; for in
the Lower it is not so. Witness the Medal of M. Aurelius the Younger, where the
Reverse represents the Vows made at his Marriage* Vota publica. Gevartius. tab.
45.
Witness the Medal of Antoninus, Vota suscepta Decennalia, and in the other ten
years after, Vota Decennalium. In the Lower Empire we find nothing else but
these sorts of Vows, which they endeavored still to carry on further than the
term, and express it by the word Multis; as for instance, Vota X. multis XX. or
by That of Sic; as Sic X. Sic XX. Indeed I never found any beyond XXXX. which
shows that None of those Princes reigned forty years, All of them contributing
to verify that Oracle of the Philosopher, Omnis potentatus vita brevis.

M. Du Cange has extremely well explained whatever relates to Votive Medals, as
he calls them. He tells us, That when Augustus, (pretending to be willing to
quit the Empire) at the Request of the Senate, had twice consented to continue
his Government for Ten years, they began at every ten years to make public
Prayers, Sacrifices and Plays for the preservation of the Emperor. And, in the
Lower Empire, this was done every Five years; and from thence it is, that after
Dioclesian, we find upon Medals, Votis V. XV. etc. And this Custom lasted till
Theodosius, after whom no such Epoch is to be found. It seems that
Christianity being then thoroughly established, Those Ceremonies that retained
any thing of Heathenism were not thought fit to be allowed. So that the Votis
multis found upon Majorianus's Medal, is not certainly the same thing, but a
Sort of Acclamation like the Plura Natalia feliciter.

5. Titles assumed by Princes.
One of the most Curious things which Medals teach us by their Legends, is, the
Different Titles the Emperors assumed, as they found their Power more or less
established. Julius Caesar never durst take upon him the Name of King, or Lord,
but was content with that of Imperator, Dictator perpetuus, Pater patriae;
Imperator. Dictator. perp. Pater patria.
His Successors drew to themselves by degrees, as it were infensibly, the Power
of all Offices. We see them Sovereign Pontiffs, Tribunes, Consuls, Proconsuls,
Censors, Augurs, etc. I only speak of Magistracies; for as for Titles, they
became Arbitrary, and the People being by little and little accustomed to
Servitude, they suffered their Sovereign to take what Names he thought fit,
even those of the Gods; witness Hercules Romanus, for Commodus. Sol Dominus
Imperii Romani, for Aurelian. Augustus at first called himself only Caesar Divi
filius, Augustus III. Vir Reip. C.
then Imperator, next Triumvir Reip. constituendae, afterward Augustus, and
last of all he added to it the Tribunitial Power which made him Sovereign.
Caligula kept the three Names Imp. Caes. Aug. Claudius joined to it Censor.
Censor.
Vitellius would never take That of Caesar, nor did he assume that of Augustus
till at last, being contented with Imperator. Censor perpetuus.
Domitian made himself Censor perpetuus: But after him that Title cannot be
found upon any Medals. In the Lower Empire is found Perpetuus Augustus,
Perpetuus Augustus.
but it is not till after Anastasius. I know no body that durst venture on the
name of Lord before Aemilian, Dommus.
a Medal of whom Goltzius cites D. N. C. Domino Nostro Caesari Aemiliano,
Fortissimo Principi.

M. Morel has told me that this Medal is false and counterfeit, and that it is
a Maximian disguised into an Aemilian; so that this Title must be referred to
Aurelian, for whom was coined a Medal Deo and Domino nato Aureliano. But from
that time we find none till we come to Deo and Domino Caro. At last it became
common to all the Emperors, till toward the End of the Empire, when the Eastern
Emperors took upon them the Name of Kings of the Romans, AILEY POAION. except
those whose Piety would neither let them set their Heads nor their Names upon
their Medals, but only that of JESUS CHRIST, with this Legend Jesus Christus
Basileus Basileon; and Zemisces was the first that did so. Some of his
Successors followed him. But Several of them would have no other Reverse than
the Image of the Virgin Mary, St. George, or some other Saint.

Despota.
I must not forget here the name of DEPOT. Which the Latter Emperors of
Constantinople were very fond of. It Is a Greek word, and in its original
signifies the Same as the Latin word Herus, and in our Language, Master, with
Respect to Servants. It was in a little time made to signify the same thing the
Latins expressd by the name of Caesar compared to that of Augustus; AILEY
answering Augustus, and DEPOT, Caesar. Thus Nicephorus having caused his Son
Stauracius to be crowned, he would only take the name DEPOT, leaving to his
Father, through respect, That of AILEY. This happened exactly at the time when
the Greek Emperors left off using Latin Inscriptions. However, this Niceness
did not last long, for the Succeeding Emperors preferring the Title of DEPOT to
that of AILEY, as Constantine and Michael Ducas, Nicephoru^ Botaniates,
Romanus, Diogenes, the Comneni, and some Others. And in Imitation of the
Princes, the Princesses took the name also of DEPOINA, as Theodora, the Wife of
Theophilus.

And now while we are speaking of the Emperors of Constantinople, we must not
omit mentioning a Title often met with on the Medals of that time of the Family
of the Comneni, and their Successors, viz. POPPHYPOGENNTO. This word had its
Rise from an Apartment of the Palace built by Constantine, that was paved and
covered over with a most Delicate Sort of Marble, spotted with White upon a Red
ground, and was designed for the Lying in of the Empresses, whose Children,
born in that honor, were so called.

It might easily be said here, that the Greeks gave sometimes the Name of AILEY
to the Caesar's, tho in Latin they would never suffer That of Rex. Witness the
Medal of Caracalla the Younger, Monsic^r^ Vaillant has the Medal.
ANTONEINO AILEY. Nevertheless we have an Hanniballianus that Constantine
caused to be called Rex. M. Spanhemius tells us of some Medals of the Gre^ian
Kings, on which are found both together AILEO AYTOKPATOPO. One of Triphon, and
another of Tigranes. He cites also among the Emperors, one of Caius, GAIO KAIAP
THEO AYTOKPATOP, which is a most Shameful piece of Flattery. Goltzius mentions
Two Medals where Nero is styled Patron, PATPON.
NEPON PATPON NEPONI PATPONI. The Samians honored Severus's Two Sons with the
Name of the New Suns, NEOI LIOI. Looking upon them as favorable Stars that
promised the Empire a New Luster. It is the Same Medal that was so ill
described to Occo, that he has put it down NEOGLEO.

Senio^.
The name Senior is found in the Lower Empire with that of Dominus, in the Sense
that we say Lord and Master. But without concerning my self with the Question,
Whether the French Seigneur comes from the Latin Senior, I am obliged to tell
you, That on the Medals of Dioclesian, and Maximian, which are the only Ones
upon which I have seen it, it seems to me to signify the same thing as Pater;
and this Respectful Term was made use of by the Caesar's, whom they had so
raised to govern the Empire; and so much the rather, because we always find it
in the Dative Case. D. N. Diocletiano F^licissimo Seniori Augusto. A Title
which they retained to themselves even after they had quitted the Empire;
witness the Second Law of the Theodosian Code de Censu, when Constantine and
Licinius speaking of Di^cletian, call him Dominum and Parentem nostrum Seniorem
Augustum.

Nobilis Caesar.
Philip the Younger, before he was called Augustus, had the Title of Nobilis
Caesar, which was continued after him on the Emperor's Sons that were not
associated to the Empire; or on Those to whom the Emperor committed the
Government of the Empire; As Diocletian, who create^ Four Caesar's, Constantius,
Maximin, Seven and Maximian, whose Medals bear Nobil^ Caesar; for, as for the
Princeps Juventutis. Princeps Juventutis.
That was a Title given ^ the Emperor'^ Sons from the time of Augustus. Caius
and Lucius Caesares, Principes Juventutis.

As for the name of Caesar alone, Caesar.
Distinct from that of Augustus, We find it after Geta, and Caracalla, the Sons
of Severus, and his Adopted Sons Aelius and Aurelius. Aelius seems to be
absolutely the First in whom the Name of Caesar was divided from that of
Augustus. Flavius
And as the Names of Caesar and Augustus in the Higher Empire were continued to
the Emperors for some Ages after, to flatter and indulge their Ambition, as if
they had been Heirs of the Grandeur, and Noble Qualities of those two former
Emperors, as well as of their Names; so in the Constantinopolitan Empire all
Princes were ambitious of the Name of Flavius after Constantine, who could not
be more highly flattered than by being called New Constantine, Novus
Constantinus. And to make this Name more Famous, it was always presupposed to
have descended from the Family of Vespasian in a Right Line unto Constantine,
It is to be seen upon a Medal of Titus.
by this means making good that happy Presage of the Temple dedicated by
Domitian, Aeternitati Flaviorum.

But however, it is very true, that the Name of Flavius seemed, as it were,
entirely forgotten after that time, and did not begin to revive till in the
Family of Constantine; which being extinct, Joseph was resolved to keep up the
Name, and his Successors followed his Example. Even some Kings of the Lombards
honored themselves themselves with it, as Autharitus; as likewise some of the
Goths, as Reccaredus. But it appears to have lasted no longer than Heraclius,
and his Son Constantine, at least it is not to be found upon any Medals after
that time; I mean Original Medals, and not those made according to the Fancy of
Strada, who has given this name even to the Comneni, and Angeli.

The Ambition of the Grecian Princes, and the Servile Flattery of their
Subjects, decorate their Medals with a Great number of Titles unknown to the
Emperors; such as AILEY AILEON, Nicator, Nicephorus, Euergetes, Eupater, Soter,
Epiphanes; Ceraunus, Callinicus, Dionysius, Theopater. They were also much less
scrupulous than the Latins in usurping the Name of the most High God: Demetriu^
causing himself to be called THEO NIKATOP. Antiochus, THEO EPIPHAN, NIKPHOPO.
Another Demetrius, THEO PHILOPATOP, SOTP. They made likewise as little Scruple
in usurping the Symbols, viz. the Thunder, Horns of Jupiter Hammon, and the
Lions Skin of Hercules. All Alexander's Successors made a very great point of
Honor of This.

But being at last subjected to the Romans, they gave Them the same Title;
whence it happens that we seldom find it any where else but upon their Medals;
For very Few of the Latins have the word Deus, in comparison of the Greeks,
upon which we find THEA POA, THEA SYNKLTO. THEO NEPON. THEO KAIAP SEATO. AIO
KAIAP THEO. They likewise stuck not to call Hadrian ADPIANO. OLYPIO, having
built a Temple at Athens common to them Both; Commodus had the same name, OLPIO
KOODO; and the Empresses were flattered with the like Titles, being called
Juno, Venus, etc. whom commonly they only resembled by their Galantries. Our
Roman Princes, though they were much more modest, yet gave themselves the Names
of Great, Pious, Invincible, Just, Wise, Provident, etc. Antoninus was the
first that was called Pius; Pius Felix.
Commodus had the vanity to add Foelix to it, for which a thousand Abuses
passed upon him. Sept. Severus having affected the Name of Pertinax, which
Helvins had taken to denote his Constancy, he forsook That to be called Severus
Pius. Pescennius took upon him the Surname of Justus. And Diocletian That of
Beatissimus and Foelicissimus; and his Colleague in the Empire took upon him
the same also in his new Titles, which the Sons of Constantine had Ambition
enough not to let them be lost; witness the Medaillon of Constantius, Victoria
Beatissimorum Caesarum. Mons. Patin tells us of a Probus in Gold with these
words, Victorioso ^emper. Constantine called himself Maximus, after the Example
of those Emperors who had added it to their Sirnames. Armeniacus Maximus,
Parthicus Maximus; and Victorinus had that of Invictus. For I am willing to
believe they did not without some difficulty suffer the Names of the Gods to be
given them, as Jovi Crescenti, Jovi Juveni, Jovi Fulguratori, etc. and that
they looked upon them only as Expressions of Respect, and the Affections of
their Subjects. The extraordinary Merits of Balbinus and Pupienus, joined to
the mildness of their Government, gained them the Name of Patres Senatus;
Patres Senatus.
a Title that was afterward in Flattery bestowed upon some Empresses, as we
shall show anon. These two Princes seemed always so friendly to each other, and
lived in such good Correspondence, that they were not contented to fignify it
by a Reverse that was common to their Predecessors, Concordia Augg. but their
Hands were joined together upon their Medals, as the Mark of a strict united
Friendship, expressed by these words, Amor mutuus Augg. Charitas mutua Augg.
Fides mutua. Pietas mutua.

Augusta.
Princesses in the Higher Empire received also the Title of Augusta, as Julia
Augusta, Antonia Augusta, Agrippina Augusta, etc. even those that never were
the Wives of Emperors, as Julia Titi, Marciana, Matidia, etc. Others added to
this the Titles that had been given them merely in Flattery, as Julia, Genitrix
Orbis; Faustina, Matter Castrorum, etc.
Matter Castrorum, Matter Senatus, Matter patriae, Julia Domna, who was the only
Woman that durst call her self Pia, Faelix, Augusta; the Romans not having
granted to the Ladies the Quality of the Devout Sex, so liberally as we do.

M. Du Cange shows, That in the Lower Empire, the Emperor's Mothers had the
Title of Venerabilis; by this Curious Inscription he relates, Piissimae, and
Veneraebili Dominae nostrae Helenae Augustae, Matri Domini nostri Victoris
semper Augusti Constantini, and Aviae beatissimorum Dominorum nostrorum
Caesarum, Ordo and populus Neapolitanus. By which it is easy to explain the
Reverse of the Medal of Constantine the Great's Consecration, performed by the
Heathens, the Figure upon it being Helena, and the UN. MR. signifying
Venerabilis nostra Matter.

Alliances. Adoptions.
Alliances also were admitted into the Legend of Names, not only that of
Adoptions which gave them the Names of Sons, but also those of Nephews and
Nieces. To which must be reduced all Alliances of Blood, to avoid making
different Titles of them; nor must we forget those also of pure Friendship,
Friendships.
or mere Consideration. Such is that upon the Medal of Ariobarzanes, King of
Cappadociae, called (...), to mark out to us the great Affection he had for the
Romans. And such were the Medals of the Arsacidae, who call themselves (...).
Such also that of Herod Agrippa, called (...), to show the steadiness of his
Love to the Person of the Emperor Claudius. As the Ptolemy's were called
Philopater, Philometer, Philadelphus. After the Emperors became Christians,
Nicephorus Botaniates in pure Devotion assumed the Name of (...).

In the next place, we find upon Medals the Titles of Father, Mother,
Grandmother, Son, Grandson, and Great Grandson. Caius Caesar Divi Julii filius;
Caius, and Lucius Caesaris Augusti filii. Drusus Caesar, Tiberii Augusti
filius. Germanicus Caesar, Tiberii Augusti filius, Divi Augusti Nepos. Medals
of Maxentius.
Caius Caesar Divi Augusti pronepos. Divo Maximiano Patri. On another, Divo
Max. Socero. Divo Romulo Filio. Divo Constantino Cognato. Agrippina Matter Caii
Caesaris Aug. Agrippina Aug. Hadrian. Trajan, and Plotina.
Divi Claudii Caesaris Neronis Matter. Diva Domitilla, Divi Vespasiani Augusti
filia. Ptolemey, Philadelphus, and Arsinoe.
Divis Parentibus THEON ADELPHON IOYLIA OLIIA E. TP. E. Marciana Augusta Soror
Imp. Trajani. Sabina Hadriani Aug. Vxor. Imperator Maxentius Divo Constantio
adfini.

These same Legends also discover to us how short a time the Acknowledgments of
those lasted, who having been adopted, or whose Obligations for the Empire were
owing either to their Father or Mother, after they had first taken upon them
the Quality of Sons, quitted that soon after as well as the Name. Trajan at
first took upon him the Name of Nerva, who had adopted him, which a little
while after he left off, and retained only that of Trajan. So Hadrian did the
like. First it was Nerva Trajanus Hadrianus; presently after it was only
Hadrianus. So the good Antoninus once called himself, Titus Aelius Hadrianus
Antoninus, but a little after changed it for Antoninus Augustus Pius; on the
contrary, their Vanity and Ambition made them to keep up Names to which they
had no Right, either by Blood or Desert. Thus, for instance, that of Antoninus
is found joined to Six Emperors, as low as Caracalla and Elagabalus; that of
Trajan to Decius, etc.

These Proper Names being become common to a great many, have exceedingly
embroiled the Roman History of Antiquaries, because the Latin Medals have no
Epocha's, whereas the Greek Medals being much more exact in giving the
Sirnames, and setting forth the Years, have wonderfully facilitated the
Knowledge of certain Kings, which would otherwise have been very perplexed and
intricate; such as the Antiochi, Ptolemy's, and the rest.

We must likewise not forget here to take notice that the Name of the
Magistrate under whom they were Coined, is often found in the Legend of the
Medals. On the Greek it is expressed by EPI TPATGOY, Praetore. Proconsule Pont.
Max. Praefecto. Scriba gubernante. Urbem Ephesians. Legato.
or simply, (...), or else (...). (...). (...). The Titles GEON, and PPEEYT,
are also to be seen. In the Latin Colonies the Names of the Duumvirs are found
in the Ablative Case.

The Position of the Legend.
However this Instruction would be Lame and Imperfect, if I should say nothing
concerning the Position of the Legend. The natural Order which distinguishes it
from an Inscription, is, that it should be round the Medal within the
Engrailment or Ring, beginning from the Left Hand to the Right, and this is
generally on All since Nerva. But on the Twelve Caesar's we commonly find them
from the Right to the Left, or even partly One way, and partly the Other. Some
are only in the Exergue, as DE GERMANIS, DE SARMATIS, etc. There are Others in
a Parallel Line, the One above, the Other below the Representation, as on a
Julius. Some of the same Emperor are posited Croswise, and as it were in
Saltire; some of his too are in Pale on the Headside, and on the Reverse the
Head Marc. Antony. There are others of them in the middle of the Field cut off
by the Figure, as on one of Antony's Reverses by a very noble Trophy. There is
another of his, where a fine Palm Tree in the middle of a Crown of Ivy, cuts
these words, Alexandr. Egypt. In a word, there are some upon the Border, as in
that of Julius, which shows that this matter has always depended on the Fancy
of the Workman. But one may be deceived by some Medals, whose Legends are wrote
after the Hebrew manner from the Right to the Left. That of King Gelas is after
this manner, SALEG. Some also of Palermus NATIPONAP, and that of Caesarea has
instead of Flavia, ALPH, which occasioned some to think it was formerly called
Alphaea. As that of Lipara was also unknown by being wrote PIL for LIPAP.

The Letters REST, what they signify.
I must not forget to inform a young Beginner of the meaning of these Letters,
REST, which he will find upon several Medals, and are the Mark of them that
Succeeding Emperors restored to revive the Memory of their Predecessors.
Claudius is the first, who restored some of Augustus's Medals; Nero did the
like. Titus after his Father's Example, restored almost all his Predecessors.
But Gallienus without adding the REST, caused the Consecrations of all the
Preceding Emperors to be Coined anew on two Medals, One of which bore an Altar,
the Other an Eagle; they are known by their Size and Metal, which is but Billen.
base.

We will shut up this Instruction with observing, that no certain Rule can be
given how to place Legends upon Medals. For although it be true, that the
Legend is the Soul of the Medal, yet there are some Bodies to be found without
a Soul; that is to say, Some Medals without a Legend, either on the Head, or
Reverse-side, not only among the Consular, but those of the Imperial also. As
for instance, in the Julian Family the Head of Julius is often without a
Legend; there are also Reverses that want Legends, In the Cabinet of the Duke
of Arschot. Tab. 14. Ursin Fam. Caecilia.
especially in that same Family, which has a Medal that bears on one side the
Head of Piety with a Stork; and on the other, an Augur's Staff enclosed in a
Crown, and a Vessel for Sacrifices, without any Legend.

There are some that have but half a Soul, if I may so say, because one of
their sides (sometimes that of the Head, sometimes that of the Reverse) has no
Legend. We have several Heads of Augustus without any Inscription, as that
whose Reverse bears the Equestral Statue decreed him by the Senate, with the
words, Caesar Divi Filius. There are a world of Reverses without Legends, and
sometimes too even when they are considerable for the Body of the
Representation, and Number of Figures.

To these I think we may add those that have only the Name of the Mint-master,
or the bare S. C. since neither of them contribute any thing to the explaining
the Type. Such are Three or Four handsome Medals of Pompey, that have very fine
Reverses, and only the Name of M. Minatius Sabinus Proquaestor. Two fine ones
of Julius Caesar; one whereof is charged with a Globe, the Fasces, an Ax, a
Caduceus, and two Hands joined together, has only the Name, L. BVCA. the other
carrying a Military Eagle, a Figure that sits holding a Branch of Laurel, or
Olive, and Crowned from behind by a Victory on has foot, only ex S. C. One of
Galba's, whose Reverse is an Allocution with Six Figures, (which some take to
be the Adoption of Piso) is found also without any Legend. The Learned say the
Coin is but Modern, and that the true Medal bears Allocutio.

INSTRUCTION VII.
Of the several Languages that compose the Inscriptions, and Legends of Medals,
according to the several Countries where they were coined.
IF we should give this Instruction its whole Extent, that the Knowledge of
both Modern and Ancient Medals is capable of, we might very well say, there
were as many different Languages upon them as there are Countries that have
coined Medals and Money; and must admit the German, French, Flemish, Italian,
Dutch, and all other States where Money is made; and so much the more, because
there be some that are curious of Money as well as of Medals, and have
considerable Collections, not only of all sorts that were current in Europe,
but also in Asia and Africa.

But because our Enquiry is after such only as are called Medals in Cabinets,
whether they were formerly Money or no, we shall only confine our selves to the
principal Languages, known to us that composed Legends. Latin.
First, presupposing that the Language does not always agree with the Country,
since we see a great many Imperial Medals coined in Greece, or Gaul, with Latin
Legends: For Latin was always the reigning Language in every Country where the
Romans were Masters; and after the Latin became a Dead Language by the
Destruction of the Roman Monarchy, it was still preserved for all public
Monuments, and considerable Pieces of Moneys in all States of the Christian
Empire.

Greek.
Greek is the other Learned Tongue used most universally for Medals; the Romans
having always a Respect for it, and glorying in the Understanding, and speaking
it well. Wherefore they were not displeased, that not only the Cities of the
East, but even that all others, where there lived any Number of Greeks, should
preserve their Language upon their Medals. So the Medals of Sicily and several
Cities in Italy, those of Provence, and all the Country called Magna Graecia,
used the Greek Tongue upon their Medals. Which makes so considerable a Part in
this Science of Antiquaries, that it is impossible ever to be perfect in it,
without understanding the Greek as well as Latin, and the Ancient Geography as
well as the Modern.

But in Honor of Antiquity, before I speak for good and all of the Latin and
Greek Tongues, I intend to speak something of the Arabic and Hebrew, because
we find Medals in both these Languages, which may unluckily perplex a young
Enquirer, if he has not the necessary Light beforehand to guide him therein.

Hebrew.
As soon as ever he shall have reflected on the Jewish Religion, which, to take
away all Occasions of Idolatry, would not suffer any Image either Carved or
Engraven, keeping most strictly to that Precept of the Decalogue; he will soon
judge all those Hebrew Medals that have the Heads of Moses, or any other Person
upon them, to be Counterfeit and Modern: Besides he will observe at first sight
that they are almost all of them cast.

I would have said peremptorily that not one has been stamped, but that I know
some body did think fit to stamp a few in Germany, and that within this little
while; but a small Skill will serve to discover the Coin of them to be Modern.
Thus the Medal of Jesus Christ, though perhaps made by some Converted Jew, is
one of these Medals done on purpose in these last Days; and therefore the
Curious ought to have no Value for them.

At that time when the Jews were obliged to use Roman Money, stamped with the
Prince's Image, their own Money was never altered, nor did they ever coin the
Emperor's Head upon it.

But this hinders not but that some true Money of Silver and Brass which was
really current in Judea, may yet be left us, whose Legends are either Hebrew or
Samaritan. Samaritan.
I say of Silver or Brass, because I never saw any of Gold; and the Learned
tell us, the Jews never coined such. Of this sort are the Shekles,
Half-Shekles, Quarter-Shekles, Double-Shekles, and other Pieces, which they
make ignorant People believe, are some of the thirty Pieces that Judas received
for betraying our Savior.

I do not see why Hebrew Money should not be preserved as well as Roman, that
fill our Cabinets. The Legend is the same for all, great or small; on one side,
Schekel Israel, the Shekle of Israel; on the other Jerouschalaim Hakedoscha,
Jerusalem the Holy. The Representation indeed is not always the same, yet
however it is commonly on one side a Branch of a Tree spread, which is called
Aaron's Rod; and on the Other a Vessel to burn Perfumes, out of which a Smoke
ascends, and is called by some not over-skilful in these Matters, the Pot that
contained the Manna in the Tabernacle, against the apparent Testimony to the
contrary both of their own Eyes and Reason. This is undoubtedly so as to those
from which the Smoke comes out; But as to those that bear Samaritan Characters,
and are almost all of Brass, no Judgment can be made of them, but by Analogy,
because the Vessel is not altogether of the same Form, neither does any Smoke
come from thence, but above it some Letters are placed, to signify the Name of
God, as Upon Ezekiel.
Villalpandus believes, who has most accurately treated of this matter; and
maintains that there were never any Figures of Man or Beast, but only of Shrubs
and Palm Trees, or Bunches of Grapes upon the Hebrew Money. He gives us also
some, on which is a kind of an Epoch, viz. Tempus Circumcisionis, or some such
thing, which causes him to make Conjectures, that I believe have more of
Imagination than Reality in them. The Characters of all these are Samaritan, or
(as others say) Assyrian and Chaldean. M. Morell tells us he has seen some of
them of the Times of the Maccabees, with the Name of Simon.

Talismans.
These truly ancient Medals ought not to be confounded with Talismans, and
Pieces composed of Numeral Hebrew Letters called Sigilla Planetarum, which
Calculators of Nativities and Fortune Tellers use, any more than with other
strange Figures, whose Models are found in Cor. Agrippa; and that their
Mysteries may be the more valued, they make use of Hebrew Names and Characters.
All this, to speak properly, should not come in with Medals, but only have
place with Curiosities spoken of in the Acts of the Apostles; the Superstition
whereof the Gentiles converted to Christ, soon discovered, and burnt them at
the Feet of the Apostles. It is enough therefore that we have given this
Cursory Knowledge of them, that so no body may be deceived.

Arabic.
But not to separate the strange Languages, I shall give the second Place to
Arabic Medals. There is a great Quantity of them, which nevertheless few
People are curious of, because they are all Modern, their make very pitiful,
few understand the Language and Character, and they can do nothing in Series's,
there being only some few Heads of Mohammedan Princes upon them. But yet he that
has the Skill of M. de Court, M. de Court.
may give himself the same Satisfaction as he has done, in having almost a
complete Succession of Arabian Princes, which he has known not only how to
collect, Father Moulinet.
but also to decypher. F. Moulinet, whose Loss all young Antiquaries lament, by
reason of his Goodness, out of a certain Natural Temper of Obliging all the
World in seeking how to divert and please them, had also collected about sixty
of them. Besides these, I have seen a good Number at the late M. Carcavy's,
which his Son the Abbot had described and got decypher'd by an Arabian: both
the one and the other, are at present in his Majesty's Cabinet. M. Morell has
caused to be engraven, the best that remain of Saladin's, or, as they call him,
Salahoddin, the Christian's great Enemy. On one side is to be seen his Head,
with that of the young Almelek Ismael, the Son of Nurodin, which is about the
End of the 12th. Century. The Legend is in Arabic, Joseph Filius Job, as
Saladin called himself; and on the Reverse, Rex Imperator, Princeps fidelium.

Phoenician.
The Medals, whose Legend is in the Phoenician Language, shall have the third
Place, the greatest Part of which seem to be coined in Spain and Africa by the
Saracens; at least the Character comes very near to that of the Saracen
Alphabet.

I am not skilful enough to determine whether the greatest Part of them we call
Phoenician, are not purely Spanish, as Ant. Augustinus thinks, who will have it
to be Latin expressed by Characters formerly used in that Country.

There be some of 'em also in the Ancient Spanish Tongue, as there be some
certainly African, Coined in the Times of the Syrian Kings, and after Julius
Caesar. That of King Juba, the Legend of which on the Head-side is in Latin,
Rex Juba, and that on the Reverse is in unknown Characters. Some have no
Legends, Others have them only upon one side in Phoenician Letters, as that
which is said to bear the Head of Dido, and on the Reverse a Horse, or at least
a Horse's Head; and sometimes a Palm Tree. The Fabric is handsomer than the
Arabian, but of a less Size and Relief than the Spanish. It Is Pity we have lost
this Alphabet; and we should be very happy could we at length retrieve it, as
the Bishop of Pamiers has given us Hopes of. In examining those that John
Baptist Palatin printed in 1545. I find that which he calls the Saracen, to
have a great deal of affinity with the Character that is upon these Medals, and
by it formed some Words that had a Sense conformable enough for Medals coined
in a Country where the Saracens were a long time Masters.

The Reason, that makes me say these Characters are not true Phoenician
Letters, is, because they have not the Resemblance they ought to have of the
Hebrew, as M. Bochart has proved in his Phaleg, where he has very learnedly
decypher'd that Scene of Paenulus in Plautus, which has so much exercised the
Wits of the Learned.

It is in this Place that we must take in all the rest of the Barbarous
Languages found upon Medals, whose Fabric is very rude both in Figures and
Legends. Common Enquirers call them Gothic; but they abuse the Name, and wrong
the Kings of the Goths, at least some of them whose Medals we have, that
preserve something both of the Roman Language and Majesty. Such are those of
Theodoric, Athanaric, Theodatus, Baduela, Wittiges, and Teias, whose Make is
handsome, Relief considerable, and Character wholly Roman. Such seem to be also
those of some Vandal and Gothic Kings, Dialog. 6. and 7.
that Ant. Augustinus gives us, as of Gunthamundus the third King of the
Vandals in Africa; of Chindaswindus King of the Goths in Gallia Narbonensis, of
Egica, Ervigius, Wittizanes; such are those of Reccaredus, Witteric, Swinthila,
Reccessuinthus and Wamba, that reigned in Spain, whose Medals the same Author
gives us. On the contrary, those Medals we call Gothic, either Gold, Silver or
Brass, are very pitiful, the Heads having scarcely a Humane shape, and the
greatest Part of the Legends being absolutely unknown; such is that which
carries the Name of Ateyla, and some others that were probably of the Huns,
Gauls, or Saracens.

Let us now speak of the two mistress-Tongues that composed the Legends and
Inscriptions of Medals, viz. the Greek and the Latin, which appear in all their
Beauty, either for Purity of Expression, or Exactness of Character. I mean in
the first Ages; for by little and little in the declining of the Empire is also
seen the declining of the Languages and Characters.

Greek Char.
I will begin with the Greek, not only because what remains amongst the Imperial
Medals almost equals the Latin, and even surpasses them in Beauty in some
Emperors; but also because, generally speaking, before the Foudation of Rome,
and before the Romans ever coined Money, the Grecian Kings and Cities had
carried the Art of Coining to that Height of Perfection, to which the Romans
could hardly ever arrive, in their most happy and flourishing times.

The larger Greek Character has preserved it self the same upon all Medals,
without any Appearance of Alteration or Change in the Form of the Letters, though
there was in the Use and Pronunciation. There is only the Letter S that could
not continue longer than Domitian's Time; for afterward we find it always
changed into C, or ^, be it either in the Beginning, Middle, or End of a Word.
We find also and X marked by ^; ^ by G; G by C; O by ^; ^ by ^^. We find
likewise a Mixture of Greek and Latin, not only in the lower Empire, where
barbarity reigned, but even in the Colonies of the higher Empire, the Latin
S.R.F. being put for the Greek C. P. PH. Dissert. 2.
M. Spanhemius gives us Examples of it.

Therefore great care must be taken not too readily to condemn one Letter when
put for another; for it is the part of a Novice in this Trade, to be ignorant
that E is often put for, ATHENAION. O for O, HPO. H in the form of a pure
Aspiration, as HIEPAION. Z for S, ZYPNAION. and S for, SEY, or even SDEY for
SEY. A for O at the end of People's Names, AGOLLONIATAN, KYLONIATAN for TON,
and the like.

Nevertheless the Character retained its Beauty till after Galienus, after
which time it appears less round, and more pinched, especially upon the Medals
coined in Egypt, where the Greek was least cultivated. After the Reign of
Constantine the Great, to Michael Rhangabes, that is, almost five hundred
Years, I find the Latin Tongue only upon Medals, though for the most part they
were coined at Constantinople, except some Greek Characters that may be seen on
the Reverses, being the marks of different Mint-masters, as we have said in
another place, or Monogrammes, as we see PHK for Phocas, and LK for Leo
Isauricus.

Michael is the first therefore where the Legend begins to be Greek, and the
Word (...) is found, which the former Emperors would never take upon them.
It Is there the Character begins to be altered as well as the Language, which
till the Paleologi is nothing but a mixture of Latin and Greek, as may be seen
by M. du Cange's Byzantine Families, M. Du Cange's Book.
to whom we are obliged for what we know of the most curious Medals of the
lower Empire: I should do him wrong if I should pass him by without the
Elogium, his profound Knowledge, and thousand good Qualities, deserve from the
Learned, since he never refused to communicate with an unconceivable Bounty, to
any Body that addressed themselves to him, whatever his Pains had acquired; his
greatest Pleasure being to help those whom he judged capable of any Improvement.

Latin Characters
Latin Medals are the most known, and have preserved their Language best, as
also their Character, till the barbarity of Constantinople which we have
already mentioned. However its true that about the time of Decius, the
Alteration of the Character begins to be perceived, which then lost its
Roundness and Neatness; so that it became difficult to read, the N being made
like the M, as may be seen on the Reverse Pannoniae, and the like. What is most
remarkable, is, that the Character sometime after recovered it self again, and
continued handsome enough till Justin's time, when it began again to change,
and at last fell into the utmost barbarity under Michael, of which we have
spoken. The young Enquirer must be here advised, not to take the Ancient manner
of Writing upon Medals for Faults in Orthography, Ancient Orthography.
nor be offended when he finds V for B Danuvius; O for V, Volcanus, Divos; EE
for an E long, FEELIX; nor two II's, VIIRTUS; S and M cut off at the end of
Words, ALBINV. CAPTV; XS for X, MAXSVMUS; F for PH, TRIUMFUS; and the like; in
which the Ancient Grammarians will instruct him.

But it is time to speak of the Modern Medals, and Money, which every Nation has
begun to coin since the Ruin of the Roman Empire, and upon which is to be seen
the different Language and Character of every Nation. The French, English,
Germans, Dutch, Swedes, Poles, etc. have at present not only Money, but Medals
also that may conduce much to History. The Abbot Bizot, Holland by Abbot Byzot.
who perfectly understands the Modern, has shown the Advantage the Learned may
draw from them, both to their own Glory, and public Utility, by his curious
and most pleasing History of Holland, the most accomplished Work of its kind,
both for the Invention and Performance of it. We have already spoke of it in
another place; but I cannot forbear to say, it is very strange that for so
noble and so excellent a Treatise he has gained nothing but the Honor of it;
and for his Reward has had only the Applauses which indeed have been given him
both at Home and Abroad.

Modern Latin Characters.
Upon all these sorts of Medals, Money, and Counters, is to be seen the Language
of their Countries in its proper Characters, especially on the German and
Dutch, where the Legends are sometimes of a length unknown to Antiquity. Yet it
must be observed, that the greatest part retain the Latin Tongue and Character;
all the World agreeing by a tacit consent, that that Language is the properest
for Public Monuments. It may be perceived at first Sight, that the Latin
Character is altered upon several, and degenerated into Gothic, as well as in
the Inscriptions and Manuscripts. It may suffice here to remark, that that is
so far from being a Sign of Antiquity either in the one or the other, that on
the contrary it is a certain Mark of the Latter Ages, since the nearer it comes
to the Golden one, (which is Augustus's, when the Roman Language was in its
highest Perfection,) the rounder and better shaped is the Character. I shall
say no more, since he that would be thoroughly instructed in this matter, may
consult the most excellent of our Learned Men, Don John Mabillon, Don John
Mabillon.
who has published a Work, intitutled, de re Diplomatica, where nothing is
wanting to make it a Masterpiece, and to maintain the Reputation the Author
has acquired to himself amongst Strangers, as well as our selves.

INSTRUCTION VIII.
Of the Preservation of Medals, on which their Beauty and Value particularly
depend.
WE have little to say upon this Subject, but what we do, shall be very
necessary for young Beginners, and hinder them from being imposed on by
Traders, who endeavor to persuade them, that the Older and more dis^igured any
Medals appear, the more considerable they are. These People that are only
sollicitous for their own Interest, would fain have us believe, that it is with
Medals as it is with Colors, and Military Ensigns, which are the more
Honorable, the more they are Tattered, and Old. Quanto lacera piu, tanto piu
bella, says the Devise of a witty Book, called, La Poverta Contenta.

The true Preserv.
But it is not so with Medals, the most Ancient are neither so Handsome nor so
Valuable as when they are preserved perfect; so that the Round of the Medal,
and the Engrailment be entire, the Figures on both sides to be understood, and
the Legend to be read.

Preservation suspected.
Indeed, this perfect Preservation sometimes gives just grounds for suspecting
the Medals, and it is by this means the Paduan and Parmesan have lost their
Credit. Nevertheless it is no infallible Proof that they are Modern; for we
have a great many of all Metals and Sizes, that are unquestionable, and are
called the Flower of Coin, because they are as handsome, as neat, and as
entire, as if they but just came out of the Workman's Hands.

Several sorts of Varnish.
The value of the Medal is yet augmented by another Beauty, that Nature has only
given, and Art hitherto cannot counterfeit: It Is a Varnish that a certain Earth
gives the Metal, and covers some with an Azure almost as fine as that of the
Turkish Stone; others with a true Vermilion, and others with a certain bright
and polisht Brown, excelling that of our Copper-Figures beyond comparison, and
never deceiving the Eye even of those that do but moderately understand it,
extremely surpassing all that Sal-Armoniack mixed with Vinegar is able to give.
The common Varnish is of a curious Green, that fixes it self upon the
delicatest Strokes without defacing them, and more exactly than the finest
Enamel upon the Metals to which we apply it. The Copper only is susceptible of
it: For the green Rust upon Silver Medals only spoils it, and must be taken off
with Vinegar, or Juice of Lemons, if you would have the Medal valuable.

Broken Medals to be rejected.
Therefore when you find a broken Medal, that is, which has any of the following
Defects, viz. the Metal ragged or rusty, the Engrailment smoothed, the Figures
erased, the Legend defaced, and the Head not to be known, give it no room in
your Cabinet, but lamenting the unhappy Fate of Human Grandeur, suffer those
Princes that formerly made the World to tremble, to soften upon a Goldsmith's
Anvil, or under a Coppersmith's Hammer.

Broken Medals to be preserved.
orYet if some of these Medals are so scarce that they pass for the only ones
Extant, if one side be still entire, and the Legend singular and legible, they
deserve to be kept, and want not their Price: For there be but very few
Cabinets that have not some of this kind; and we are happy enough if we can
have some rare Heads, though scarcely to be known: But especially we must take
Care not to throw them away for a defaced Legend, when the Representation is
well preserved: For several Learned Men will decypher them to a Miracle; as M.
Vaillant and M. Morell, who with a little Industry are able to recall the most
Unintelligible Words, and to revive the Characters that seem to be most dead.

Bursten, Medal.
You must take Notice that the Edg^es of Medals, burst by the Force of the Coin,
is not a Fault that diminishes their Value so long as the Figures are not hurt.
On the other hand it is one of the most certain Signs that the Medals is not
cast, but undoubtedly Ancient. Yet even this Sign is sometimes equivocal,
especially as to those that have been stamped upon Ancient Medals, as we shall
show in the following Instruction: For this will not prove either the Head or
Reverse to be Counterfeit, or of a Modern Coin, or perhaps either.

You also must take care not to reject Silver Medals, whose Edges are indented,
and are called Numismata serrata; Numismata serrata.
for that is also a Proof of their Goodness and Antiquity. They are common
among the Consular till the time of Augustus, but after then I never saw any.
There are some such of Copper belonging to the Syrian Kings, but there it seems
to be only for Ornament, and not from any Necessity, as in the Silver ones,
where the Knavery of false Coiners obliged them to use this Precaution in the
time of the Commonwealth: For in Counterfeiting the Coins of the Mint-masters,
they re-melted the Money, and only covering the Copper with a thin Leaf of
Silver, stamped it again with much Cunning, which is called by the Curious
Plating of Medals, as we have said already.

Therefore to remedy this Inconvenience, and discover the Cheat, they invented
this way of Indenting Medals, and decryed all those Coins which they found
Plated; from whence ensue these two things at present: The First is, that
Plated Medals are undoubtedly Ancient and Stamped, it being no Profit for any
one to Counterfeit Money that was cried down, and out of Use; the Second is,
that when Plated Medals have a curious Head or Reverse, they are most commonly
very rare and of a greater Price than those of a good Alloy; because their
Stamps having been broken, and the Sort decryed, their Number must certainly be
much less. The Relief and Thickness giving Occasion to these Plated Medals,
they took Care in the lower Empire to make them so thin, that it was impossible
to plate them; and this second Way seems more effectual than the former, to
hinder the Cheats of false Coiners.

Diverse sorts of Broken Medals.
There are other Imperfections in the Preserving of Medals, which proceed from
the Carelessness of the Minters. For Example; when two Heads, two Rings, or
Engrailments, or two Legends are formed instead of one, by the slipping of the
Dye or Stamp; when the Letters of the Legend are mixed, defaced, or misplaced,
as several are on the Medals of Claudius Gothicus, and the thirty Tyrants.
Those are Monsters of which we must not make Miracles, nor build any thing
upon; For though that is no Hindrance, but that the Medal may be Ancient, yet it
greatly diminishes its Value. As for those that have the Head of an Emperor,
with some Fantastical Reverses, or else not belonging to him whose Head they
bear, they ought not to be regarded, being only the Effect of the Knavery, or
Ignorance of the Counterfeiter.

Medals half stamped.
Lastly, it happens sometimes that the Minter has forgot to use both Dies, so
that the Medal wants a Reverse: This is very common on the Modern Medals after
Otho and Henry the Fowler. There are some of these found among the ancient
Consular, and a few in Copper Imperials: We call them half stamped. Their Make
may indeed surprise a young Beginner; for instead of a Reverse, they have only
the same Figure as is on the Head-Side, stamped as it were to make a Mould.

I must confess I could hardly ever believe this happened for want of applying
the other Dye, Ab. Bizot.
and rather chose to feign other Reasons to my self, till I learnt from one who
understands Coining the best in all France, that this fell out from the
Minter's over-Haste, who before he had taken the Medal out, that he had already
stamped, put a new Piece in, which having on one side the Dye, and on the other
the foregoing Medal, was marked on both sides with the same Head on one in
Relief, on the other in hollow, but always more imperfect, the Effort being
weaker on the side of the Medal than on that of the Stamp.

Medals Countermarked.
We must not forget here to speak something of Countermarks, which young
Learners may take for Faults; because they seem a disgrace to Medals, whose
Field they sometimes traverse on the Head-Side, and sometimes on the Reverse,
especially in the great and middle Copper. Nevertheless the Skilful esteem them
Beauties, and enquire very much after those Medals that have them, by which
they know the Alteration of the Value, which is shown by these Countermarks, as
we see on our Sous, that the People call Tappez, from the Stroke which makes
the Hole in them. The Misfortune is, Antiquaries cannot agree upon the
Signification of the Characters that are found on them. On some is N. PROB.
Nota probatae Monetae. Upon others, N. CAPR. Nota cusa a Populo Romano. That
which I have seen upon a middle Copper one of Augustus may well be a Monogramme
CAR. Cusa a Pop. Romano. I have a Tiberius Countermarked RM, which may be
explained Restitutum Monetae Pretium; But I cannot tell what to think of a
little Copper Medal Countermarked in two Places NT.

There are some of them also whose Countermark is an Emperor's Head; I have
one of Bithynia whereon is three: I have seen others with a Horn of Plenty. As
for those whereon we find SC. they labor under no Difficulty.

INSTRUCTION IX.
Of the Knowledge of the Ornaments and Symbols wherewith Medals are charged.
NOthing is more apt to discourage him that begins a Collection of Medals, than
the Difficulty he meets, with not only in explaining, but even in knowing what
is represented upon them: The Heads are presently known by their Legends: But
the Ornaments that are about them, and the Symbols on the Reverses are as so
many Aenigma's enough to confound one with their Obscurity, who has not at
least the first Notions of what is present to his View: For this Reason I have
designed the present Instruction.

And to render it the more Methodical, I shall begin with demonstrating first
what is found upon the Head-side, and afterward treat of the Reverse.

The Heads upon Medals are sometimes mere Heads, ending at the Neck; sometimes
they are Bust's with Shoulders and Arms; sometimes Figures with half a Body.
Each of these Positions has its particular Ornaments.

Different Ornaments of the Head.
The mere Heads are sometimes naked, other times covered in several Manners. I
speak not of the Princesses, because we can give no proper Names to their
different Head-Dresses: They may better be known by the Eye, Women's Dresses.
and expressed by Names that bear some Analogy to our present Dresses.

Naked Heads.
When the Head is wholly naked among the Imperial Medals, it is commonly a Sign
that it is not an Emperor's, but some of his Sons, either Natural or Adopted,
or some presumptive Heir of the Empire. Such is the young Nero, Aelius adopted
by Hadrian, Aurelius by Antoninus, etc. or else these are Persons that never
reigned, as Drusus, Germanicus, Antoninus, etc. However, a general Rule must
not be taken from hence; for if we should say, that no body put on the Crown
before he reigned, simple Caesar's might be shown us, that were crowned with
Laurel, or adorned with a Diadem, as Constantine the younger, and Constantius
in the Constantine Family: and if we should say that all the reigning Emperors
put on Crowns or Diadems, several Medals might easily be shown of Augustus,
Nero, Galba, Otho, Hadrian, etc. that had been Emperors, whose Heads are quite
bare.

Covered Heads.
Heads covered are either with a Diadem or a Crown; a Headpiece, some Foreign
Habiliment, or a Veil.

The Diadem.
The Diadem is Ancienter than the Crown: it is the proper Ornament of Kings, and
did not belong to Emperors but in the lower Empire. It is a Fillet, sometimes
more, sometimes less broad, whose Extremities tied in a Knot behind the Head,
fall upon the Neck. The Roman Emperors used it not till after Constantine,
setting it off with Pearls and Diamonds, either single or in two Rows,
permitting the Empresses to wear it, which was not seen in the higher Empire,
where the Woman's Head was never crowned.

Crowns.
The Crowns of Emperors after Julius Caesar are for the most part of Laurel, the
Right of wearing such an one being granted him by the Senate, and was
afterward continued to his Successors.

Justinian is the first that used a sort of a closed Crown, which is sometimes
deeper like a Cap, sometimes flatter, like the Mortier of our Presidents; but
surmounted with a Cross, and is often bordered with a double Row of Pearls.
It Is this that M. du Cange calls Camelaucium, and is often confounded with the
Mantle named Camail, by the Likeness of the Words, though One is to cover the
Shoulders, and the Other the Head.

Crowns with Rays are bestowed on Princes when translated into the Number of
the Gods, either before or after their Deaths: that sort of Crown being only
proper to the the Gods, says Casaubon. However I will not make this a constant
Maxim, for I know how many Exceptions there may be against it, especially
after the Twelve Caesar's. We find no Emperor assumed it whilst living, before
Nero, who deserved it the least of all; Augustus himself not having that Honor
till after he was dead.

Several other fashioned Crowns are found upon Medals, that ought to be
explained: One sort is called Rostral, composed of the Prows of Ships
interlaced one with another, and were given after Naval Victories. Agrippa
received one from Augustus, after his Victories over S. Pompey's, and M.
Antony's Fleets.

Another is called Mural, and is composed of Towers: It was the Reward of them
that had taken Cities; as also the Ornament of their Genii, and Tutelar
Deities: Therefore Cybele, the Goddess of the Earth, and the particular Genii
of Provinces and Cities, wore these Tower'd Crowns.

Those of Oak were given to them that had saved a Citizen's Life: Such are
those that enclose the Inscription, Ob Cives servatos; and are sometimes found
upon the Heads of Princes.

Some are designed to Crown them that carried the Prize in Public Games; The
Author seems to be mistaken here, for the Reward of the Isthmian Games was a
Crown of Pine; and that of the Nemean Games was Par^ley. Nero's Medal he
mentions, represents Pine rather than Parsley. Vid. Patini Sueton.
as at the Games held in the Isthmus of Corinth, called Isthmia, where the
Victorious were crowned with Apium, a sort of Parsley, larger and bigger than
ours. The Form is to be seen upon a Medal of Nero.

Hadrian in honor of Antinous, caused one to be made of the Lotus, to which he
gave his Name ANTINOEIA, as it is found upon Medals.

The Priests to distinguish their Office, used the Sculls of Oxen, intermixed
with the Dishes that were to receive the Victim's Entrails, and with the
Ribbons that adorned them when they were led to the Altar. They are to be seen
upon the Medals of Augustus. That which M. Patin gives us with the Word
APXIEPATIKON, Table 1 ^. in the Cabinet of the Duke of Arschot.
is of a Matter unknown to me; but it is visibly a Pontifical Crown. Neither is
it necessary to make the Word an Adjective, and understand STEPHANON, since
being a Substantive, it signifies the Highpriests Dignity, which was deferred
to Augustus.

Head-pieces.
The difference of the Roman and Greek Head-Pieces may be easily discerned at
first sight: It Is the Ancientest Habit for Heads that appears upon Medals, and
the most Universal; Kings, Emperors, and the Gods themselves wearing it. That
which commonly covers the Head of Rome has frequently two Wings, like the
Petasus of Mercury. Some Kings have it adorned with Jupiter Hammon's-Horns, or
a Bulls only, or a Ram's, to denote their extraordinary Strength.

Foreign Habil^ments.
The foreign Habiliments are the Mitres of the Armenian and Syrian Kings, and
are almost like to those of our Bishops; but sometimes are squared, and
sometimes indented upon the Top; such is that upon the Medals of Abgarus King
of Edessa.

The Tyara, very like the Pope's, was used by the Persian and Parthian Kings.

Some Kings wore the Phrygian or Armenian Bonnet, as it is upon the Medals of
Mydas, Atys, and that of Zemisces, whose Reverse contains the Adoration of the
Magi, and represents those three Princes in such Bonnets.

Several Grecian Kings affected to cover their Heads with a Lyon's Skin, in
Imitation of Hercules, as Philip the Father of Alexander. And after their
Example some Roman Emperors clothed themselves, as Commodus, Alexander
Severus, etc.

The Veil.
The Veil that often covers the Head of Princes and Princesses, denotes either
their Sacerdotal Functions, as Sacrificing; or their Admission into the Rank of
the Gods; an Honor that was given them by the Heathens, till Constantine,
whose Apotheosis was suffered upon the Money, the Christian Emperors not
thinking themselves able enough to banish all Pagan Ceremonies at once. But a
little after, the Princes and Princesses affected out of Devotion, to make a
Hand appear coming from Heaven, that placed their Crowns upon their Heads; this
way acknowledging that they held the Crown they wore from God. Such is that of
Eudoxia and her Husband Arcadius; Honorius, Galla, Placidia, etc.

The Nimbus.
This seems enough to me to gain belief, that it was not through any Impiety
they used in the Lower Empire, a Circle that went round the Head of the
Emperor, and was called Nimbus, like the Circle of Light that is placed about
the Images of Saints. It is very plain to be seen upon the Medals of Mauritius
and Phocas, and some others. This puts me in mind of certain Medals of the
Higher Empire, that have the Prince's Head environed with Rays like the Sun. On
the contrary, the Piety of the Princes that reigned after Zemisces, and
Justinian Rhinotmetus, very often caused them to set the Heads of our Lord and
his Holy Mother, upon their Medals, with the Nimbus we have mentioned.

Heads of the Gods.
The Heads of the Gods, like those of Princes, were either a Crown, a
Headpiece, a Veil, a Cap, or some other Symbol to distinguish them.

The Crown of Laurel distinguishes Apollo, and the Genius of the Senate called
THEA SYNKLTO, and IEPOYIA.

A Crown of Ears of Corn is the Symbol of Ceres.

A Crown of Flowers denotes Flora.

A Crown of Vine-Leaves, or Ivy, shows Bacchus, and the Bacchanals.

A Crown of Rays parted from the Head, and not joined by a Circle, sets forth
the Sun.

The Headpiece belongs to Mars and Minerva; but when it is surmounted by an
Owl, it is certainly Minerva's.

The Hat with two Wings, called Petasus by the Latins, is Mercury's.

A Cap without Brims, like our Night-Caps, is the Mark of Vulcan; and the
Cyclops, or the Cabiri and Smiths.

The like Cap surmounted by a Star, shows Castor and Pollux.

The Phrygian Bonnet bent at the Point, is given to the God Lunus.

The Bushel upon the Head of Serapis, and all Genii, denotes Providence, that
does every thing by Measure, and nourishes both Man and Beast.

Telesphorus the God of Health, wears a Coat exactly like that of our Saylors
or Soldiers, that are upon Duty in the Winter.

Juno is often veiled; but when she presides over Marriages, under the Name of
Juno Pronuba, almost half her Body is wrapped up in a great Veil called the
Flammeum. Juno Sospita's Head is dressed with a Goat's-Skin, the Horns being on.

There are other Deities that have their Heads bare, with a Symbol, especially
among the Egyptians. Apis is a Bull that carries the Flower of a Lotus betwixt
his Horns, a White Spot on the middle of his Forehead, and a Silver Crescent
upon his Head. Osiris has the same Symbol. Isis and Canopus have on the
forepart of their Heads a sort of Flower, larger and more blown than a Lilly;
some say it is the Flower of the Southern-Wood, or (...), as it is called by
the Greeks. It Is common to the Canopi, of both Sexes, as may be seen upon some
Medals; the God retaining the Name of Canopus, and the Goddess taking that of
Eumenythis. The Goddess Spes has the same Flower, but coming nearer the Lilly.

Pantheons.
I cannot forbear saying something of the Pantheons, which are Heads adorned
with the Symbols of several different Deities; such is that upon the Medal of
Antonius Pius, and the younger Faustina, which represents at the same time
Serapis by the Bushel it bears; the Sun by the Crown of Rays; Jupiter Hammon by
the two Ram's-Horns; Pluto by the great Beard; Neptune by the Trident;
Aesculapius by the Serpent wreathed upon his Sleeve.

M. Baudelot, in his Learned Dissertation concerning the Dii Lares, which
contains a great many fine things that show much Erudition, would have these
Pantheons to come from the Superstition of them, that took several Deities for
the Protectors of their Families, and joined them altogether in one Statue,
which they adorned with the several Symbols proper to each Deity. He has caused
several to be engraven, as Examples and Proofs thereof.

Busts.
The Busts upon Medals are accompanied with Symbols which are peculiar to them,
when both Arms appear, as they do commonly upon Medaillon, and upon the
smallest Medals of the Lower Empire; for then they are put into their Hands.

The Globe.
A Globe, to signify they are Masters of the World. This Globe is sometimes
surmounted by a winged Victory, presenting a Crown, to show the Prince owes the
Empire of the World to her Favor; and sometimes by a Cross after Constantine;
by which the Christian Princes acknowledged they held their Empire from Jesus
Christ, whom therefore they named the King of Kings.

The Scepter.
The Scepter which they hold in their Hands when clothed in the Consular Habit,
(as are almost always the Emperors of Constantinople) is surmounted by a Globe
charged with an Eagle; showing by these Marks of the Sovereign Power, that the
Prince governed by himself. The Consular Scepter of which we speak, is to be
seen from the time of Augustus.

The Cross.
Phocas is the first that set a Cross upon the Scepter; and by his Example
others quitted the Scepter, to hold only Crosses of different shapes and sizes.

When they are armed with a Headpiece and Shield, they have commonly a Javelin
in their Hand, or upon their Shoulder.

The Ferula.
When they are in their Robes in the Lower Empire, their Scepter is a Ferula,
called NAPTHX, which is a long Stick, with a Top squared and flat. The Use of
this is very ancient among the Greeks, who called their Princes
Narthiticophores, bearers of Ferula's.

The Labarum.
In the Family of Constantine, and some others, the Princes are often seen
bearing a sort of Standard called Labarum; it is a Square, whereon is figured
the Monogramme of the Name of Christ, which was Constantine the Great's Ensign,
after he had embraced Christianity. It has an A and O on the sides, which
signify the Divinity of Jesus, who says of himself in the Revelations, Ego sum
A and O, principium and finis.

Thunder.
The Thunder that sometimes accompanies the Heads of Princes, as Augustus's, is
the Mark of a Sovereign Authority, and a Power equal to that of the Gods.

The Acacia
After Anastatius is to be seen in the Hands of the Emperors, a sort of little
Bag, or a long and strait Roll, the Mystery of which is not easily found out.
Some say it is only a folded Handkerchief, that he who presided over the Plays,
threw out of his Box, as a Sign for them to begin; and that for this reason,
the Consuls, whose Figures we have, hold the like. Others that it is the Bag of
Ashes and Dust, presented to the Emperor at the Ceremony of his Consecration,
and is called AKAKIA, as much as to say, a means to preserve him in Innocence,
by the Remembrance of his Death, renewed to him by this Dust. Perhaps those who
say it is only a Roll of Papers and Memoirs presented to the Princes and
Consuls, and which they held in their Hands, in order to give them an Answer,
have as good grounds for their Conjectures, as the others; and so much the
rather, because when their Statues are entire, we commonly see a little Box at
their Feet, made, as it seems, to keep these Papers in.

The Crescent.
The Crescent is often employed to sustain the Busts of Princesses, who hold the
same Place in the State, (of which the Emperor is the Sun,) that the Moon does
in the Heavens. The God Lunus carries it upon his Shoulders as his Natural
Symbol, by the Superstitious Fancies of some who thought the Moon a Male Deity;
and that those who adored it as a Goddess were always unfortunate in their
Marriages, and never were Masters of the House.

Arms.
The Busts of Amazons are commonly armed with a little Battle-Ax, which they
carry upon their Shoulder, with a small Shield in the shape of a Half Moon,
called by the Latins, Pelta.

Cabiri.
The Cabiri carry a great Mallet with two Heads; and Vulcan a pair of Pinchers
and a Hammer, which are often found upon the Reverses, together with an Anvil.

Anubis.
The Bust of Anubis is known by the Dog's-Head, and the Sistrum of Isis that he
holds in his Hand.

Club and Lion's Skin.
The Club and Lion's Skin are the Symbol of Hercules; and of those Princes that
pretended to be his Descendants, or the Imitators of his Valor, as the
Macedonian Kings.

I will conclude with a sort of Busts that go as low as the middle of the Body;
such as these are found upon Medaillons, or upon the large Copper; where may
also be seen with them, the Headpiece, Buckler, and Horse held by the Bridle,
to signify Victories gained either in real Fights, or in Games.

Reverses.
As Symbols are principally placed upon the Reverses, without the Knowledge of
which we can neither derive from Medals that Pleasure or Instruction the
Curious pretend to; so it behooves us to treat of them here with somewhat more
of Application and Method.

I observe then, that some Symbols are joined to the Figures, others are found
either alone, by themselves, or separated; and others where the Figures
themselves serve for Symbols, be they either of Men, Beasts, or Insensible
things.

Of Symbols joined to Figures, some are common to several, and only
distinguished by the Legend; others stand alone by themselves, and are instead
of a Legend when there happens to be none. For there is no need of a Legend to
declare that a Figure with Thunder in its Hand, and an Eagle at his Feet, is
Jupiter; and that another which holds a Harp, and a Branch of Laurel, is Apollo.

The Hasta.
The Hasta, which is a Javelin without Iron, or rather an Ancient Scepter,
longer than ordinary, belongs to all the Deities, signifying the Bounty of the
Gods, and their Conduct equally kind and efficacious. Justin expressly takes
notice, that the Custom of giving it to all the Gods, proceeded from the
Superstition of the Ancients, who from the Beginning of the World adored the
Scepter even as the Gods themselves: Without doubt it was because their Statues
were very rare, Nam ab origin rerum, pro Di^^ r^mortalibus veteres ^a^tas
coluere. Just. lib. 43. cap. 3.
and difficult to be seen; for I cannot persuade my self, though the Words seem
to carry it, that they worshipped them as real Deities.

The Patera.
The Patera used in Sacrifices, is likewise placed in the Hands of all the
Deities, and often in the Hands of Princes. Of Princes, to denote the
Sacerdotal Power united with the Imperial, by the Title of Pontifex Maximus. Of
Deities, both of the first and second Order, to signify they had Divine
Honors paid them, the principal of which is Sacrifice. Wherefore there is also
an Altar by them sometimes, upon which they seem to pour out the Patera.

Horn of Plenty.
The Cornucopia, or Horn of Plenty, belongs to all Deities, Genii, and Hero's,
to signify Felicity, Riches, and Plenty of all Goods procured by the Bounty of
some, and by the Care and Valor of others. Sometimes there be two of them, to
denote an extraordinary Abundance.

Caduceus.
The Caduceus is also a common Symbol, though attributed to Mercury. It signifies
good Conduct, Peace, and Happiness: It is composed of a Staff, which denotes
Power; two Serpents, to signify Prudence; and two Wings, to show Diligence:
All requisite Qualities to render Men successful in their Undertakings.

The Symbols which I called single and alone, that stand by themselves, are
innumerable; it will be sufficient here to take Notice of the Commonest of them.

Thyrsus.
The Thyrsus, which is a Spear twisted about with Ivy and Vine-Branches, is the
Symbol of Bacchus, and his Company, and signifies the Fury that is inspired by
Wine.

Thunder.
Thunder in the Hand of a Bust, either on the side, or underneath it, shows the
Head of Vejovis, that is, Jupiter thundering and in wrath. This is when it is
not an Emperor's; for some of them as well as the Gods, were flattered with
Thunder.

Laurel Branch.
A Branch of Laurel in an Emperor's Hand signifies his Victories, Conquests,
and Triumphs; as that of Olive signifies the Peace he has given or preserved to
the State. Other particular Plants signify the Country where they grow; as the
Rose the Isle of Rhodes, etc.

Hands joined.
Two Hands joined together show the Concord of particular Persons, or their
Alliances and Friendship.

Mil. Ensigns.
Military Ensigns placed upon Altars signify a new Colony, whose Success is to
depend upon the Protection of the Gods: I mean a Colony made up of old
Soldiers; for this is it the Ensign intends: And when there are several of
them, it shows that they were drawn out of different Legions.

A Rudder.
A Rudder placed upon a Globe, accompanied with the Fasces, represents a
Sovereign Power. And upon the Medal of Julius, where the Caduceus, Horn of
Plenty, and the Pontifical Cap are joined to it, it signifies that Caesar
governing the Republic, Peace, Prosperity, and Religion flourished.

Shields.
A Shield signifies either public Vows made to the Gods for the Preservation of
the Emperor; or an Acknowledgment that the Prince is the Security and
Protection of his People. They are called Clypei votivi, and were hanged upon
Altars or Pillars of Temples.

Two of an extraordinary Shape are to be seen upon a Medal of Antonius Pius,
with the Word Ancilia; which by Allusion to the fatal Buckler sent from Heaven,
and confounded with twelve others exactly alike, shows, that this good Prince
was Master of the Empire's Destiny.

Games.
Boxes or Urns, out of which spring Palms placed upon a Table; Crowns set on
each side with the Sympulum, which is a small Vessel used in Libations, denote
public Games, to which Sacrifices were commonly joined.

A Ship.
A Ship under Sail signifies Joy, Felicity, good Success and Security. When it
is seen at the Foot of a Figure, with a Tower'd Head, it denotes a Maritime
City, where there is a Port and Commerce: And when it is at the Foot of a
winged Victory, it signifies a Sea Fight, where the Enemy's Fleet was beaten.

Grapes.
A Bunch of Grapes signifies Plenty, Joy, and a Country of good Wine.

Harps.
One or two Harps are the Signatures of Cities where Apollo was worshipped, as
Chief of the Muses.

Bushel.
A Bushel with Ears of Corn, and Poppies, is a Symbol of great Abundance, and of
Corn provided for the People's Subsistence in time of Famine.

Mil. Standards.
Military Standards, which sometimes amount to four, signify Victories obtained
by the Legions; or the Oath of Fidelity given to the Emperor; or Colonies that
they established; and sometimes Colors taken by the Enemy, and sent back or
taken again by Force. The Eagle is the principal Standard of every Legion; the
others are Ensigns of Cohorts: The Guidon belongs to the Cavalry.

Staff.
A Staff turned at the Top like a Hook, is the Mark of the Augurs, and is called
in Latin Lituus. They used it to quarter out the Heavens when they made their
Observations: sometimes Chickens are added to it with Meat to feed them; or
Birds in the Air, whose Flying they observed: The Augurs thought they could
foretell things to come by either of these Ways.

The Pontifical Cap and Instruments.
A Cap surmounted by a Point crossed at the Bottom, with two Pendants, the Point
called Apex, the Pendants Filamina, by the Romans, be it alone, or joined to
the Instruments used in Sacrifices; as a Pot, a shallow Basin, a Sprinkler, an
Axe with the Head of some Animal, a Knife, a Trencher and a Sympulum, signifies
the Pontifical and Sacerdotal Dignity: The Head denotes the Victim, the Axe is
to knock it down, the Basin to receive its Intrails and Flesh that is to be
offered, the Knife is to cut them, the Pot is to contain the Holy Water, and
the Sprinkler to scatter it upon the Assistants to purify them, the Sympulum
to make the Libations, and as it were an Essay of the Liquors to be poured upon
the Victim's Head.

Curule Chair.
The Curule Chair is a Mark of Magistracy, either that of the Aediles, Praetors
or Consuls; for all these had a Right to an Ivory Chair, made after the Fashion
of those that fold together: When it is traversed by the Hasta, it is the
Symbol of Juno, used to denote the Consecration of Princesses.

A crooked Ornament of a Ship, named by the Greeks (...), (...).
or (...), signifies Naval Victories, and Ships taken or sunk, sometimes also
Seaports, as Sidon, etc.

Chariot.
A Chariot drawn by Horses, Lions or Elephants, signifies either a Triumph, or
an Apotheosis of some Prince: The covered Chariot drawn by Mules only belongs
to Princesses, and denotes only their Consecrations, and the Honor done them
in carrying their Images to the Games of the Circus.

Tower.
A sort of City Gate or Tower, found after Constantine with the Words
Providentia Augusti, denotes Magazines laid up for the People's Uses: Or, as
others say, it is the City of Constantinople, whose Symbol is the Star above it.

Basket of Flowers.
A Basket of Flowers and Fruits show the Beauty and Fertility of the Country.

Cheval de frise.
A sort of Cheval de frise, composed of Stakes joined together, as in the Medal
of Licinius, is the Mark of a Camp fortified and Pallisadoed for security of
the Troops.

Tripod.
The Tripod covered or uncovered with a Crow or a Dolphin, is the Symbol of
XVvirs, deputed to keep the Sibylline Oracles, and to consult them upon
Occasion. They were laid up at the Feet of the Statue of Apollo Palatinus, to
whom the Crow was consecrated; and the Dolphin was used for his Ensign in the
Ceremonies of the XVvirs.

Zodiac.
The Zodiac with all its Signs, and the Sun, and the Moon in the middle, as on
Alexander Severus, marks the happy Stars of Princes, and the Conservation of
all the Members of the Empire, which the Prince sustains; as the Zodiac does
the Constellations.

Parazonium.
A Scepter rounded at both Ends like a Commander's Staff, is called by common
Antiquaries Parazonium, which is a Poniard, or short Sword wore at the Girdle,
though the shape and manner of holding it, shows nothing less. It Is but looking
on Galba's Medal Honor and Virtus, where Honor holds the pretended Parazonium
in the Air, resting, one End of it upon her Knee. That of Titus and Domitian,
where both of them hold it against their Sides, and no way fastened to their
Girdle. I find a Medal of Antonius Pius in M. Patin, p. 228.
where the Parazonium, which he calls in that Place Scipio, traverses the
Shoulders like a Quiver. Even upon the Reverse of Vespasian, where Rome armed
carries the Parazonium; Tab. 25.
it is fastened no way to the Belt, nor is it of a shape that can be. It is not
to be seen bigger than may easily be handled, neither has it that Part of a
Sword we call the Guard, and the Latins Capulus.

Besides, I know not what use such a Weapon should have, if, as they say, it is
a short Sword without a Point: For notwithstanding the grave Morality drawn
from thence, viz. that the Prince should be moderate in his Punishments, and
not put them in Force with the utmost Rigor, the Sword is given him to pierce
and kill. Tab. 41. Tab. 55. in the Cabinet of the Duke of Arschot.
Besides what becomes of this fine Thought if they put into their Hands extreme
sharp Spears, and sometimes pointed at both Ends, as in the Medal of Antonius
Pius, and in that of Elagabalus.

Wheels.
A Wheel is the Mark of public Ways mended by the Prince's Order for
Convenience of Carriage; as Via Trajana. At the Feet of Fortune it signifies
Inconstancy. At the Feet of Nemesis, Punishment of Malefactors.

The Deities.
The Deities are almost all known by particular Symbols, of which I will only
give you the chief.

Jupiter is known by the Thunder and Eagle; Neptune, by the Trident and Dolphin.

The Sea-Gods, Melicerta, Palaemon and Portunus, be they all the same Deity
under these three Names, or, be they really three Gods, have but the same
Symbol; for they are represented by a Boy sitting upon a Dolphin, and denote
the Isthmian Games, instituted by Sisyphus in Honor of the first.

Juno, by the Peacock, after she had changed her faithful Argus into that Bird.

Aesculapius, Hygeus and Salus, by the Serpent, the first Inventer of what is
sought for to no purpose in Medecin, viz. the way to make himself young again.

Bacchus is crowned with Vine-Leaves, a mark of the Joy inspired by Wine. He
has a Pot in his Hand, always ready to drink, and to make others drink: A
Panther at his Foot; because Wine makes Men furious: A Thyrsus in his Hand, and
his Chariot is drawn by Tigers.

Canopus an Egyptian God, is represented by an Earthen Pot, out of which rises
a Head bearing the Flower of Isis. This Pot pierced all-about, and the Holes
stopped with Wax, was filled with Water, and extinguished the Persian Fire that
consumed all other Deities.

Astarte, the Goddess of the Sidonians, is seated upon a Chariot, with two
Wheels: After this manner they carried her about the Country, to get Money.
Neither her Name or Shape is agreed upon.

Cybele wears a Crown of Towers, because the Earth bears Cities. The Lions at
her Feet denote the furious Love she had for Atys. The Crotalum, a sort of
Tabor, is the Instrument her Priests used, as those of Isis the Sistrum.

Ceres is known by her Crown of Ears of Corn, a Chariot drawn by Dragons, and
Torches lighted at Mount Aetna, to look for Proserpina.

Diana by the Crescent, Bow, and Quiver, Hunting-habit, and Chariot drawn by
Stags.

Diana of Ephesus has a Figure wholly singular: She has an infinite Number of
Nipples, because they looked upon her as the Mother of all things: She is
upheld by two Supporters, sometimes having two Stags under her Feet, sometimes
two Oxen; upon her Head a Basket of Fruit. All this is mysterious, but is
explained in the Learned Work of M. Menestrier, De Diana Ephesia.

Venus is known by the Apple Paris adjudged to her; by her Son Cupid, that
often stands by her; and the Rudder given her to show the Power of Love.
Sometimes she has a Headpiece and Shield, to signify her Force.

Peace is known by an Olive Branch, or Flambeau, with which she fires a Pile of
Arms.

Providence carries a Rod, with which she seems to touch a Globe, to show that
she governs the World.

Plenty holds Ears of Corn in her Hand; at her Feet are Poppies amongst Ears,
coming out of a Bushel, in acknowledgment of the Care the Prince had taken to
provide Victuals for the People. Sometimes a Ship is seen with it, which
signifies Corn brought from Foreign Countries.

Piety is commonly covered with a great Veil, either stretching out her Hands
in manner of a Suppliant, or holding a Temple in them, or a Vessel of Incense
to be thrown upon an Altar. At her Feet is a Stork; the reason whereof is, that
this Bird appears in public and private Prayers; and in Duty paid to Parents,
whom the Storks nourish, and are called therefore by the Hebrews and Latins,
Aves Piae.

Liberty holds in one Hand a Cap, because Slaves were always bare-headed. In
the other she has a Wand, called Vindicta, with which the Praetor touched
them, to show he took them out of Servitude, and out of the power of their
Master.

Vesta has a Torch in her Hand, as a Mark of the Eternal Fire, under which she
was worshipped.

Liberality holds a square Tablet with a Handle, and marked with a certain
Number of Points; which show how much Corn and Money the Prince had bestowed.
She presides over all Congiaries.

Chastity is covered with a large Veil, with her Finger upon her Mouth, to
govern her Habit, Looks, and Speech.

Security is negligently seated upon a Chair, resting her Head upon her Hand,
to show she has nothing to fear.

Fortune sometimes sits, sometimes stands, holding a Rudder; because the
Heathens believed Chance governed every thing. She has a Wheel by her side, the
Mark of her Inconstancy; and a Horn of Plenty, because she blindly distributes
all Goods.

We find Figures without Arms and Legs, which we call Terms; and if we will
believe Polybius, this Superstition came from the Quarrels People had about
their Bounds; which being appeased, they set up Statues to those Gods they
thought presided over their Accord. And hence we have Jovis Terminalis of the
Crotonians and Sybarites.

Equity and Money carry both a Balance. Sometimes Money is represented by three
Figures, whereof each has a Furnace at its Feet for Gold, Silver, and Brass;
which are the Metals Money is made of.

The Word OMONOIA betwixt two Figures, signifies the Alliances that some Cities
made with others, of which they would have their Gods Witnesses and Guarantees.

Two Figures with a Wheel at their Feet, and holding their Finger upon their
Mouth, are the Goddesses called Nemesis, that avenge Crimes. The Wheel shows
their Severity; and the Finger upon their Mouth teaches us not to complain of
the God's Justice, as if they spared the Guilty, and only afflicted the
Innocent. Lento enim gradu ad sui vindictam Divina procedit ira, sed tarditatem
supplicii gravitate compensat, says Val. Max.

Three Figures holding one another by the Hand, as in Dancing, are the three
Graces.

Three Figures holding a great Veil over their Heads, in form of an Arch,
signifies Eternity; where the three differences of Time, the past, present, and
to come, are confounded together at the same instant; which is incomprehensible
to Humane Understanding. It Is also marked by the Heads of the Sun and Moon in
the Hands of a Figure, because these are the two Gods the Egyptians thought
Eternal.

Three other Figures armed with Torches, Ponyards, and Serpents, are the Furies
called Eumenides and Erinnies, which scatter Discord, Sword, and Fire all over
the World.

Four little Figures signify the Four Seasons of the Year. But only one of
them is clothed, which is Winter, for then we arm our selves against the Cold.
Autumn has a Hare, because that is the Season for Hunting. The Spring carries a
Basket of Flowers. The Summer a Sickle for Harvest.

A sort of great Stone like a Mountain, drawn upon a Chariot, represents the
Sun, such as Elagabalus worshipped, according to the Opinion of those who said
it was a burning Stone. The Star which appears above it is Phosphorus, which
precedes the Sun, and serves to distinguish this Prince's Medals from those of
Caracalla.

The Rising Sun is represented by a naked Figure crowned with Rays, and having
a Whip in his Hand, because of the Rapidity of his Course.

Another Stone like a Pyramid, placed in a Temple, with two Pigeons, represents
Venus as she was adored at Paphot.

Jupiter was also worshipped under the shape of a Mountain, and was called
Jupiter Lapis. Therefore he that was called by the Greeks ZEYC KACIOC, was
expressed by a Mountain in a Temple: And for this reason it is thought Mount Argos
in Cappadocia appears so often upon Medals.

Rivers.
Figures lying along, and leaning upon Urns, are the Marks of Rivers.
Nevertheless Rivers sometimes appear like Figures with Half Bodies swimming in
the Water.

Figures lying in Beds denote a particular Ceremony of the Heathens called
Lectisternium, who in great necessities, as (for instance) to stop contagious
Diseases, put the Images of certain Deities into magnificent Beds, as those of
Apollo, Diana, Latona, Ceres, Fortune, Neptune, Hercules, and Mercury. Titus
Livius will have this Superstition wherewith Arnobius reproaches them, to have
began in the Year 356 of Rome.

Provinces.
Provinces have always had Marks by which they were distinguished, either in
their Habit, or the Symbols that encompass them.

Africa has her Head covered with an Elephant, and by her a Scorpion, or
Serpent, or a Lion, all which are bred in that Country.

Asia is represented by a Serpent, and a Rudder; which shows it to be a
Country, whither they could not come but by Sea.

Europe has no particular Symbol. For the Medals, whereon we see Europa carried
away by Jupiter in the shape of a Bull, are Medals of Sidon.

Macedonia is attired like a Coachman, with Whip in Hand, either because they
had excellent Horses for Carriage, or else because they particularly honored
the Sun. The Medals of this Country also bear the Club of Hercules, from whom
the Kings boasted their Descent.

Mauritania is known by a Horse and a Switch, for the swiftness of its
Coursers, to whom they never used the Spur, nor ever put the Bit into their
Mouths.

Egypt is represented by the Sistrum, Ibis, and Crocodile. And,

Achaia by a Flower-pot.

Spain by a Rabbit, which Creature she breeds in great numbers; and for that
reason is called Cuniculosa by Catullus. She appears in a Soldier's Habit, with
a little Buckler and two Spears, because of the People's Valor. She holds Ears
of Corn, because of her Fertility.

Gallia has a sort of Spear called by Virgil, Gaesum, and is attired in a
Cassock, as also at this Day in a Justaucorps, or close Coat, which is a
Military Habit.

Judaea is dressed in a Gown, and is known by the Palm she carries, because she
is part of Phoenicia, to which the Palm properly belongs, and whose Name
PHOINIX she has taken.

Arabia is marked by a Camel, which in that Country is swifter than a Horse, as
Aristotle says; as also by the Calamus Odoratus, and the Frankincense, Tree.

Dacia in the Habit of a Woman, carrying a Spear, with an Ass's Head, is a Mark
of her Valor; the Ancients having honored that Beast with the Title of (...);
it being also rode upon in the East by Princes.

Sicily is represented by a Head betwixt three Legs, which are her three
Promontories. Sometimes she has a Sickle and Ears of Corn, to denote her
Fertility.

Pannonia is distinguished by two Figures of Women, clothed, to show the
coldness of the Country; with Military Ensigns in their Hands, to declare the
Valor of the Inhabitants.

Italy, as the Queen of the World, is represented sitting upon a Globe, with a
Scepter in her Hand, a Towered Crown upon her Head, because of the Number of
Cities she contains, and a Cornucopia, to signify her Fertility.

Germany is like a large Woman with a Spear and Shield, longer and narrower
than those of the Romans.

Armenia wears a Cap like a Monk's Hood, with a Bow and Arrows.

The Kingdom of Parthia is represented by a Woman habited after the manner of
the Country, with a Bow and Quiver; by reason of the Parthian's Activity, in
shooting even whilst they fly.

Cappadocia wears a Tower'd Crown, and carries a Guidon of a Horse, which
signifies the Troops that the Romans drew thence. She is also often accompanied
with Mount Argos, having it either in her Hand, or at her Feet.

Mesopotamia is represented between two Rivers, the Tigris and Euphrates, with
a sort of Mitre on her Head, says Ant. Augustinus; but if the Medal of Trajan
he cites is Armenia and Mesopotamia in potestatem P. R. redactae, it is very
likely he has taken One of the Two Rivers that represent Mesopotamia, for the
Province it self.

Great Britain, which is an Isle, is known by the Rudder upon which she leans;
and by the Prow of a Ship, that appears at her Feet.

Particular Cities have also their Symbols, upon which I will not enlarge,
since they are commonly explained by the Legend, and besides because I design
to finish this Instruction in treating of Animals, by which the principal of
them may be known.

Animals.
A winged Pegasus is the Symbol of Corinth, where Minerva gave him to
Bellerophon to fight the Chimaera.

The Phoenix sometimes signifies Eternity, and sometimes hope of better Times,
because it revives out of its Ashes.

The Peacock and the Eagle denote the Consecrations of Princes admitted into
the number of the Gods.

Capricorn, either single or double, signifies the Horoscope of Augustus, from
which the Empire was predicted to him at Apollonia, by Theogenes, a famous
Astrologer, to whom Agrippa carried him. This is the Ancient Opinion of
Medalists, but contradicted lately by the Learned, who maintain that Augustus
was not born under Capricorn.

The Fishes called Pelamydes, which are our Tunnies, signify the Cities where
that Fish was taken in greatest plenty, as Constantinople, where they took an
innumerable quantity of them.

A Dolphin twisted about a Trident, signifies the Liberty of Commerce, and
Empire of the Sea.

A Dog spotted with Red, and a Shellfish, is the Symbol of the City Tire,
where the Fish is found that is used in dying Purple. The reason of this is,
what happened to Hercules's Dog, which having eaten some of them, returned with
his Muzzle dyed Red.

The Shellfish is commonly upon the Tyrian Medals, the Dog is found but upon a
very few.

The Heart is the mark of Ephesus, and other Cities consecrated to Diana.

The Ox signifies Strength and Patience; Peace, favorable to the Labourer;
Colonies, whose Circuit they formed, being led by a Priest veiled. Sacrifices,
where they served as Victims, having their Horns then dressed with Woollen
Ribbons called Vittae or Insulae.

The Crocodile and Hippopotamus signify Egypt and Nile, where they are bred.

The Serpent is sometimes an Aesculapius, sometimes Glycon, or the Second
Aesculapius; commonly the Goddess Salus or Hygeia.

The Cock is the Symbol of the God Lunus; sometimes it is attributed to Mercury.

The Sphinx and Harpy denote the City Gabala in Coelo-syria: One of them is the
Symbol of Prudence, the Other of Valor.

The Horse upon the Phoenician Medals is a Symbol of Carthage.

Horses feeding signify Peace and Liberty: or simply a Country abounding in
Pasturage.

The Elephant denotes Eternity, because, as it is said, he is very long-lived.
It is more certain to say he signifies Games, or sometimes Africa, where there
are a great many of them.

Certain extraordinary Animals found upon Reverses, with Munificentia Aug. or
Saeculares Aug. signify nothing, but that the Princes on whose Medals they
are, procured them from foreign Countries, to divert the People, and make their
Spectacula more agreeable.

With these general Notices we have here given, there is no body but may apply
himself to the collecting of Medals with a great deal of Pleasure and Delight;
staying till Reading and Use discover the more hidden Mysteries of some
singular Reverses to him, that are reserved for the most consummate in the
Knowledge of Medals.

INSTRUCTION X.
Of Counterfeit Medals: Of the different ways to counterfeit them; and the way
easily to discover the Cheat.
OF all the Instructions we have given, none is more necessary for young
Beginners than this; for if they study it not with Attention, they will be very
easily caught, especially when their Passion for Medals is in its first heat,
and they are rich enough not to value any cost: They see themselves given up
every Day to the Fraud and Avarice of the selling Merchants, for want of due
understanding their Tricks and Arti^ices: They are also the more easily
cheated, by reason that those who understand them best, are often divided in
their Sentiments upon certain Medals, which some of them think Ancient, and
others Modern; some cast, others stamped; just as in Pictures, where the most
skilful Eye sometimes takes an Original for a Copy, and a Copy for an Original;
especially since there has been amongst the Medalists, a Paduan and Parmesan in
Italy, and a Carteron in Holland, who have known how to hit the Ancient
exactly; as there is found among the Painters an Anthony de la Corn at Rome,
and a Cany at Paris, who copy so justly and truly that they deceive one every
Day.

To unfold then the whole Mystery, we must begin with taking Notice of the
different ways of counterfeiting Medals, and the means to avoid them, that so
this Evil may not be without a Remedy: The first and grossest is of making
Medals that never were; as those of Priam, Aeneas, Cicero, Medals made by
Fancy, which never were.
Virgil, the Grecian Sages and other Famous Persons, of whom the Parmesan and
other modern Workmen have made Coins purposely to deceive the young Beginners
when they take a Fancy to have singular Medals.

It Is with the same Knavery and Interest that some extraordinary Reverses, and
those which are capable of raising a Curiosity, have been formed. For Instance;
a Julius Caesar with Veni, Vidi, Vici, upon the Reverse; a Reverse of Augustus,
Festina lent, which indeed was one of his good Sayings; but he never thought
of preserving its Memory upon the Metal.

This Cheat is easily perceived by all that are not Novices in the Knowledge of
Cabinets; for the infallible mark is, that all these Medals are cast or stamped
with a Coin and a Metal which presently appears what they are, that is to say
modern, they having neither the Boldness nor the Delicacy of the Ancient.

Cast Medals.
The Second Cheat is of moulding Ancient Medals, or casting them in Sand, and
afterward repairing them so neatly that they appear to be stamped. They may be
discovered either by the Grains of Sand which always leave their Impressions in
such a manner as may be perceived upon the Field of the Medal; or else by
certain little Hollows, or by the Edges, that are not smooth, round, or so
bordered as when stamped; or by the Characters which are not free, but thick
and broad; or by the Strokes that are neither so lively nor so deep; They are
also known by their Weight, which is always less; because Metal melted by Fire
rarifies: When on the contrary, that which is beaten condenses, and
consequently becomes heavier. Lastly, when a Medal is cast in a Mould, the mark
of the Place where it ran in commonly remains, and cannot cleverly be taken off
with a File, the Edges that must be rounded, retaining the marks of the File,
which is an Essential Proof of its Falseness.

As People grow every Day more expert, some in cheating, others in discovering
the Cheats, so there is a means found out to hinder the perceiving in the Field
of the Medal the Hollows, that the Grains of Sand leave there by their
Inequality, which is unavoidable. It Is by covering them with a certain dark
Varnish, which fills the little Hollows, and they rub the Edges to make them
rough. If they can polish the Field with a Graver without Varnish, the Cheat is
then too cunning. Therefore to discover them, the Varnish must be scratched if
there be any upon them, and it will be found much softer than the Ancient: But
if there be none, you must study the Medal with Attention, and the Field will
infallibly appear more depressed, and by a Touch that is something delicate the
Metal will be discovered to be too much polished, whereas the Ancient has
something that is stronger and rougher. Those that understand not this Nicety
and the Difference of the Weight we have already mentioned, admire how such
counterfeit Medals are discovered by the bare handling them.

Nevertheless we must not be deceived by some Medals that have their Edges
filed, being set in Metal, Horn, or Wood; they being forced to round them that
way: For that hinders not their being good and Ancient: For this reason, those
that understand them, commonly say, that sometimes, the Edges justify the
Field of the Medal and that the Field also sometimes witnesses for the Edges,
which by Chance have received some Damage.

Repaired Medals.
The Third Cheat is of repairing neatly Ancient Medals, so that though they are
broken and defaced, they shall appear handsome and legible. I know some that do
this in Perfection, and are able with a Graver to take off the Rust, renew the
Letters, polish the Field, and revive the Figures that scarcely before appeared.

When the Figures are in part eaten away, they fix a sort of Mastick or Cement
upon the Metal, which they afterward carve very properly, and being covered
with Varnish, make the Figures appear entire and well preserved.

To discover this Cheat, you must take a Graver, to scratch some little Places;
and if you perceive it to stick more upon one Place than another, it is a Proof
that that Piece is added.

In the mean while, when the Eye is used to it, you will find some Strokes of
the Graver going too deep, the Edges too much raised, and the Lineaments too
rough, and ill polished, by which it may be guest they have been re-handled.

Medals restored with Modern Stamps.
The Fourth Cheat is, (because cast Medals are easily known) to make Dies or
Stamps, purposely of the rarest and most Ancient Medals, which they restore
anew, and make to pass for Genuine with so much the more Probability, as it is
evident they are neither cast nor rehandled.

It was in this the Paduan, Giov. Cauvino. Laurent. Parmesan. Carteron.
Parmesan, and Hollander so well succeeded, that their Counterfeit Medals are
become a Piece of Curiosity. The Paduan has more of strength, the Parmesan more
of Sweetness. The greatest Part of the former Stamps are fallen into the Hands
of Father Moulinet, and are kept in the Cabinet of St. Genivieve. It is certain
no Man can come nearer the Ancient than these two have done: And yet for all
this their finest and most delicate Manner cannot compare with the bold Air of
the Ancient, which has something of much more Greatness in it. They are known
also by their too great Preservation, which renders them suspected, by the
Color of the Metal, and chiefly by their Weight, which is less than that of
the old Metal.

Medals stamped upon Anent ones.
The Fifth Cheat consists in stamping upon the Old ones themselves; that is to
say, in using Modern Coins, and taking Ancient Medals, which they reform with a
Hammer, that so they may give them a new Impression, almost after the same way
as we do our Money.

Although this is hard to be discovered by a Young Beginner, because he has none
of the Common Indications; yet if he will but carefully mind the Relief, he
shall generally find it either too strong or too weak; the Cutting too clean
and new, and the Edges not preserved equally with the Field and Figures.

Counterfeit Reverses.
The Sixth Cheat is committed upon Reverses by razing a Common, to put another
that is more scarce in its room, which augments the Price of the Medal
considerably. As for Instance; an Otacilla is set upon the Reverse of a Philip;
a Titus on the Reverse of a Vespasian. This way one spoiled me a Helvius
Pertinax of the large Copper, by putting upon the Reverse a Milo Crotoniates
laden with his Ox; a Domitian, by putting an Allocution of eight Soldiers on
it; and a Medaillon of Decius, by graving upon it an Inscription Deciana
Caesarum Decennalia feliciter.

Reverses inserted or clapped together.
They have gone yet farther: For that nothing might seem repaired, they have cut
two Medals, and afterward with a certain Mastick have solder'd the Reverse of
one Prince to the Head of another, to make single Medals and such as were never
seen. They are so cunning in repairing the Edges, that those who are not very
Nice indeed are commonly deceived by them.

I saw something more Artificial in M. de Seves's Cabinet, which had imposed
upon a great many Inquisitive Persons: It was a Domitian of the large Copper
excellently preserved; its Reverse was erased, to insert into its Place the
noble Amphitheatre, which was also taken from a Medal of Titus: This was so
admirably fixed under the Engrailment, that it was imperceptible, till an
Ingenious Gentleman got leave to put the Point of a Graver to it, which made it
fly off.

These false Reverses are known, either by the difference that is found in the
Lineaments of an Ancient Head, and a Modern Reverse, be it made never so
exactly; or else when they are clapped together; and they are discovered by
examining the Edges which are never so perfectly united, but something may be
discerned, of their being joined by the two Marks.

Legends altered and counterfeited,
The Seventh Cheat is in the Legends, either on the Head side or Reverse; but it
is most commonly attempted upon the Head side, from their Interest in finding
Heads that are Rare, and those that are commonly wanting in Series's: And this
is done in artificially substituting one Name for another, especially when
there are but few Letters to be changed or added. I have a Lucilia thus changed
into Domitia, of the large Copper; and a Young Gordian transformed into the
African Gordian, by giving him a little Beard, and altering the PF. into AF^.

This Deceit is discovered by the Resemblance of the Faces, which is never
exact enough; but better yet, by the Quality of the Characters, that are either
less neat, or more depressed, or unequal.

Counterfeit Varnish.
The Eighth Cheat is Counterfeiting the Ancient Varnish, which serves to prevent
cast Medals from being detected, and to hide the Faults of the Edges and
Characters. There are some that put their Medals under Ground to make them
contract, if not a Varnish, yet at least a certain Rust, that imposes upon them
that understand it not, very well. Others use Sal Armoniack mixed with Vinegar,
Others only burnt Paper, which is the easiest way of all.

This Deceit is the soonest avoided, because neither the Color, the Luster,
nor Gloss of the Ancient Varnish, which depends upon the Earth, can be given
the Modern. Besides, none can have the Patience to leave a Medal in the Earth
long enough to take that beautiful Rust which is esteemed above the richest
Metal. Lastly, the Modern Varnish is soft and easily scratched, when on the
contrary the Ancient is as hard as the Metal it self.

Cracked Medals.
The Ninth Cheat arises from an Accident that sometimes befalls stamped Medals,
and which has made Antiquaries say, that every Medal with burst Edges, is
infallibly stamped: For those that make false Medals the better to pass them
off, and raise their Credit to their own Advantage, endeavor to burst them on
purpose, when they stamp them; or else to crack them designedly when they are
well cast.

But that you may not be over-reached, you must examine these Cracks with some
particular Care; for when they are not deep enough, or the breaking of them is
not free, or that they end not with almost imperceptible Filaments, it is a
great Proof that it happened not by the Force of the Stamp, but by Artifice.

Let us conclude with two Principles that are laid down whereby to know
Counterfeit Medals. The first is almost general with all Antiquaries, If every
Medal had a different Matrix.
who unanimously say, that when we meet with two Medals of the same Coin,
without any difference, it is a certain Sign that one of them is false, if not
both.

I must confess that this startles me much, because it is to maintain that
every Medal had a different Matrix, and different Stamps, which seems neither
probable, nor practicable. I am very glad M. Baudelot has began to declare
himself against this Opinion, which seems only grounded upon a pretended
Experience, that is not yet fully agreed upon; and which he encounters with
good reasons in his Work concerning the benefit of Travel, Monsieur Baudelot' s
Treatise.
at the end of which he has given us a very fine Dissertation upon Medals: The
curious Learning he makes to shine in all matters he handles in that Book, with
a Warmth and Beauty which is the Character of his Style, as the good Humor,
Civility, and Wit is of his Conversation; I say, that Warmth and Beauty makes
him extremely agreeable. Nevertheless he seems so much devoted to his own happy
Genius, that he heeds not how he destroys by his Example, what he would prove
in the beginning of his Book; for having in his first Dissertation undertaken
to prove, That long Voyages give the greatest Benefits, he justifies, before he
is aware, that without ever going out of his Study, a Person may come to the
knowledge of whatever is attainable, by great and long Travels into foreign
Countries: And that therefore Travel is not absolutely necessary to a Man of
Parts, who has the skill, like him, to apprehend in his Closet that which
lesser Genius's would never meet with, let them run out of one World into the
other, all the Days of their Lives.

If all base Gold, is modern.
The second Principle is laid down by M. Patin, whose bare Authority, in the
Republic of Medals, goes farther than a probable Opinion. He says, That all
Roman Medals of base Gold, are Counterfeit. If he means all Imperial Medals
that are of a baser Gold than the fine, ought to be suspected of Falsehood, I am
of his Opinion; since even in the Lower Empire it is very rare to find Ancient
ones whose Gold is adulterated; though after the time of Alexander Severus, it
was permitted to be Alloyed. However, it might be wished that M. Patin had
explained himself a little more distinctly; for this seems to me as if it were
to be understood of the Greek as well as of the Roman, which are all truly of
Ducat-Gold. As for the Gothic and Phoenician, I have some that are certainly
Ancient, whose Gold, nevertheless, is very base, and mixed with much Alloy.

It cannot also be denied, but that after Alexander Severus, Medals of a base
Gold are found, which are truly Ancient; so that this Principle proposed as
Universal, is liable indeed to many Exceptions.

INSTRUCTION XI.
Some Principles that pass for Axioms with the Curious, and do much facilitate
the Knowledge of Medals.
THE sight of different Cabinets causes the same thing in the knowledge of
Medals, as Experience does in Arts. Arts are not perfected without several
Observations raised by those that know how to make an Advantage of what Use had
taught them. And the Reflections of the Curious have established diverse
Notions, which we must not pretend to subject either to Reason or Parity, but
must be received with Submission and Faith: I mean such Faith as reasonable
Persons owe to the Learned, which Theodoret calls the Entrance into all Humane
Knowledge, where the Word of the Masters ought to be instead of a Rule, and to
be credited without Examination.

Yet we would not require a blind Submission from People upon the subject of
Medals. It is lawful in this Science for every one sometimes to oppose his own
Sentiments, even against those of the most Skilful: For as yet the most Curious
have not agreed upon an infallible Judge in their Controversies; and the most
knowing are obliged almost every Day to submit at the sight of certain Medals
which they knew not before, and which destroy upon the first view, those
Principles they had formerly so advanced as indisputable. Thus the belief of
the last Age, that there were no true Otho's of Copper, is at present quite
overthrown by the number of them that come to us from the East, and appear in
Cabinets, whose Antiquity cannot be now in the least questioned.

Wherefore nothing must be esteemed so dangerous, as advancing general
Propositions in the concern of Medals, and establishing them as Principles,
when the least skilful that way, sometimes are able to baffle them in a moment,
by the bare showing of some Medals that Chance may have put into their Hands.

When therefore I speak of fixed Principles, I do not mean an infallible
Certainty, but only a Common one, which the Authority of the skilful may
prescribe; and we may believe, and affirm upon their Word, without being
charged either with Presumption, or Ignorance. Such are a great many Maxims
scattered through this Book, to which the following must be added, that could
not have Place in their Natural Order.

Of MEDALS in general.
1. It is neither the Metal nor the Size that renders Medals valuable, but the
Rarity either of the Head, Reverse, or Legend. A Medal that is common in Gold
shall be scarce in Copper: Another shall be very rare in Silver that is common
in Copper and Gold.

Such a Reverse shall be common, when its Head is put alone; such a Head
common, when its Reverse being very Rare, shall give the Medal a vast Price. It
is not needful to give Examples of it in this Place. M. Vaillant in his last
Work has given so exact an Account of them, that nothing more can be desired
for the perfect Instruction of the Curious.

2. Some Medals are only Rare in certain Series's, and very common in Others:
Some very scarce in all; some very common in all.

Lastly, some are found in certain Series's only, and never in others. For
Example, no Antonia is found for the Series of large Copper, and therefore that
of the middle, must of necessity supply its Place. On the contrary, there is no
Agrippina the Wife of Germanicus, in the middle Copper, but only in the Great.
Otho is Rare in all Copper Series's, but common in Silver: Augustus is common
in all. There is neither an Orbiana, Paulina, Tranquillina, Mariniana, nor
Corn. Supera for the Series in Gold, yet they are common in Copper and Silver:
Colonies are found in the middle Copper, scarce in the large. All this is
learned from M. Vaillant, who has given himself the trouble to mark it upon the
particular Medals.

3. It is with Medals as with Pictures, Diamonds and the like Curiosities: when
they exceed such a certain Price, they have no Other to be put upon them than
what the Desire and Ability of the Purchaser gives them: So when a Medal
exceeds ten or twelve Pistols, it is worth whatsoever you please: By this means
the Otho's of large Copper, are raised to an Extravagant Rate. Those of the
middle Copper are not thought too dear; when they cost 30 or 40 Pistols. Almost
the same Value is set upon the Greek Gordians of Africa (though they be of the
Egyptian Make) because there is none of this sort but in the middle Copper.

4. Single Medals can never be valued enough: Those are called single which
Antiquaries have never seen in the Cabinets, even of Princes; and the Curious
of the first Rank, though perhaps they may be in some private unknown Cabinets,
where Chance has only placed them. So the Otho of the true large Copper which
M. Vaillant saw in Italy, is what we call a single Medal. The Greek Medaillon
in Silver of Pescennius, which the same M. Vaillant discovered in England in
the Hands of Mr. Falkner, and which is at present in the King's Cabinet. The
Herodes Antipas fallen into the Hands of M. Rigord, upon which he has made a
learned Dissertation: The Agrippa Caesar, third Son of M. Agrippa, and Julia,
adopted by Augustus, together with Tiberius, which is in M. Seignelay's
Cabinet, is a single Medal, and consequently worth whatsoever he pleases: There
is a Greek one to be seen in the King's Cabinet.

5. Although Medals are continually discovered, that were unknown before, and at
first pass for single ones; yet speaking strictly, those Medals whose Figures
are extraordinary; and which Antiquaries have never talked of, may be
suspected, and the rather, since it cannot be presumed they could have lain so
long hid from the Knowledge of Antiquaries: Therefore the Metal and Fabric
ought to be carefully examined, that so you may not fall easily into the Snare
which those that trade in Medals know how to lay for Young Beginners.

6. The manner of ordering Cabinets depends upon the Fancy as well as upon the
Number of Medals, which every person possesses: Princes only can have complete
Cabinets; that is to say, which contain all the different Series's we have
mentioned in the first and third Instructions: Therefore you ought to confine
your self to some one of them, and especially to take care neither to mix
Metals nor Sizes.

Of Medaillons.
1. It is agreed on all hands, that Medaillons never served for Money, the Work
being too exquisite, and the Business too cumbersome: Therefore what Suetonius
said of Augustus, must be understood of this sort of Medals; who during the
Saturnalia was pleased to make Presents to his Friends, and amongst other
things, to give them Nummos omnis notae, etiam Veteres, Regios and Peregrinos:
And from thence it comes to pass, that being never used in Commerce, they have
commonly happened to be better preserved than ordinary Medals.

2. It is pretended that the Senate till Hadrian's time had the Power of
coining^ Medaillons of Copper, as well as Money; and for that reason till then
we see S. C. upon them: But Hadrian being curious in these sorts of Monuments,
attributed to himself the sole power of coining them, to make them the more
considerable; and to maintain this Opinion which is opposed by certain
Medaillons, that since hadrian's time bear the S C. as that of M. Aurelius
mentioned by M. Vaillant; T. 204.
and those of Decius, known to all the World; we must tell you that these are
but Medals of the large Copper, something bigger than the common ones; and that
Decius having been so kind as to restore to the Senate the Tribunitial Power,
that of Censor, Proconsul, and some Others which the Emperors had united in
their own Persons, might possibly also allow it the Privilege of coining
Medaillons, which Hadrian had deprived it of. But this unluckily presupposes as
an indisputable Principle, that the Emperors had left to the Senate the Power
of coining all the Copper Money, and only reserved that of Gold and Silver to
themselves. Now the Difficulties that must be solved to make good this
Principle, show how dangerous it is, as we have said, to advance general
Propositions in this Matter; for besides what we have said in the fifth
Instruction, which I will not repeat here, if it were true, that the Senate
caused all the Copper Money to be coined, and marked with S. C. how comes it to
pass that the little Copper for the most part wants this Mark? There is no good
Reason can be given for it: For it will always conclude either too much, or too
little: Too much, if we would infer from thence that the S. C. ought to be upon
all; and too little, if we would thence conclude, that it ought to be upon
none. And what can be said of the Title that the Mint-masters took, Auro,
Argento, Aere, FF. Those of the Senate, nor even those of the Emperors, durst
assume it: It ought therefore to be shown, that they did actually change their
Style, and to be able to set down distinctly the time and reason thereof, is
what, I Am afraid will not be very easily performed.

3. Medaillons are known by their Size, I mean by their Thickness, Extent,
Relief and Largeness of the Head; so that if any of these Qualities be wanting,
it will only be a Medal of the large Copper. This is to be understood of the
Higher Empire: For in the Lower, when the Medal has either more Breadth, or
more Relief than the common middle Copper, it is made to pass for a Medaillon.

4. Very few Medaillons of Silver are found coined in Italy, that weigh four
Drachms. None but the Greeks, generally speaking, have given us Medaillons of
that Bigness, be they either of their Cities, Kings or Emperors. M. Vaillant in
his last Work tells us of an Hadrian, of this same Weight. We have Vespasian's
with the Epoch, (...): and M. Patin gives us Medaillons of Constantius and
Constans, of a much larger Size, though of a far less Thickness. In our King's
Cabinet is a very fine Verus of Silver.

5. We do not find that the Colonies ever coined Medaillons: And it is also
very rare to find any of their large Copper, till the Reign of Septimius
Severus; but an Infinite Number of the middle and little Copper are found,
which make up the Beauty of those Series's.

Of the Medals of Colonies.
1. All Colonies are Rare in comparison of ordinary Medals, though some of them
are much more so than others, both Greek and Latin.

Their Beauty consists either in their Figures, when they are Historical and
Extraordinary; or in the Country, when they are of some Cities that are but
little known, and by which some Piece of the Ancient Geography may be learned;
or else when the Dignities and Offices of them that coined them are particular.

2. When there is but one Ox or two Oxen, on the Reverse, with a Priest guiding
the Plough, or only Military Ensigns, the Medal passes for common. However,
those that founded the Colony, may be known by it: For if there be but a
Plough, then it is a Sign that only some of the People were sent thither: If
only Ensigns, it shows that it was Peopled by Veteran Soldiers: If both Ensigns
and Oxen are found together, then it is as much as to say, both Soldiers and
People were sent thither. The Difference of the Standards also teaches us
whether they were Horse or Foot; and sometimes even the Legion to which they
belonged, is known by the Name found wrote thereon. Examples may be seen at the
first opening of M. Vaillant's Book of Colonies.

3. Colonies do most an end bear the Name of him that founded them; and of him
also that either fortified, or re-established them. All that were called
Juliae, were founded by Julius Caesar, Colonia Julia Berytus: Those that are
named Augustae by Augustus, Municipium Augusta Bilbilis: When they take both
these Names together, Julius founded them, and Augustus either reinforced or
repaired them with new Recruits, Colonia Julia Augusta Detrosa: When the Name
of Augusta is before That of Julia, then it is a sign that Augustus repaired
that Colony when it was in an ill State and Condition. Yet this must not be
understood so, unless when the two Names follow one another immediately: For
when any other Word comes between, it is another thing. This is one of the
Curiosities of the Art that we learn from M. Vaillant, Tom. 2. p. 24.
when he explains Colonia Julia Concordia, Augusta Apamaea. We farther learn
from him, that the Colonies sent abroad in the times of the Consuls, before the
Sovereign Power fell into the Hands of the Emperors, were called Roman;
witness Sinope in Pontus in Asia, that coined a Medal to Gordian the younger
with these Letters C. R. I. F. S. Colonia Romana Julia, Foelix Sinope, Anno
CCCVIII. The Epoch marks the time when Lucullus, after he had beaten
Mithridates, gave that City its Liberty, and made it a Colony, which Julius
Caesar afterward considerably augmented.

4. Although there were Colonies in Italy, yet not one of them ever set the
Prince's Head upon their Medals. I have heard talk indeed of the Medal of
Beneventum with the Emperor's Head upon it, but never saw it. Besides, it seems
to be an Honor reserved to Cities that had a Right to coin Money, and which
the Emperors would never grant to any City in this Country. This Privilege of
coining Money was granted either by a Permission from the Senate alone, or else
by the Senate and People together, or by the Emperors. When it was obtained
from the Emperors, they set upon their Medals, Permissu Caesaris. After this
manner Sevill and Corduba testified the Favor Augustus had done them, Colonia
Romulea permissu Divi Augusti: Colonia Patricia permissu Augusti. Several
others have done the like. When it was only from the Senate, they put S. C.
even upon Greek ones: And when it was from the Roman People, they also put D.
E. This is the Opinion of M. Vaillant: He adds, that S. R. found upon some
Medals of Antiochia in Pisidia, signifies the same as S. C. In effect, Senatus
Rescripto meant the same thing; or simply, Senatus Romanus. However, it is to
be wished we had some Examples for our entire Satisfaction; for what F.
Hardouin has said in his Discourse called Antirrhetique, to oppose this
Opinion, seems to me to carry great Weight: Nevertheless these Singularities
are not without Examples: for without going from Antioch we mentioned, that is,
the only City of that Name (there being sixteen others) which has always
affected to use a Latin Legend. Colonia Caesarea Antiochensis.

5. It is a common thing to find upon Greek Medals the Names of Cities that
entered into Alliance one with another, and marked their Confederacy with the
Word OMONOIA, as Sardis and Ephesus; Smyrna and Pergamus; Perga and Sida in
Pamphylia. This is not met with in other Nations; at least we see none of their
Medals.

6. Among the Colonies those may be distinguished that had the Right of Roman
Citizens from those that only had the right of Latium, as all Italy. The Right
of Citizens, amongst other things, consisted in a Capacity to stand for Offices
of the State, and to hold them as Roman Citizens. The Right of Latium consisted
in paying no Tribute, and a Power to serve in the Roman Legions. The Cities
that coined Romulus and Remus upon their Medals, sucking the Wolf, had always
the Right of Roman Citizens, and were called Roman Colonies. Those that had
only the Right of Latium, durst not make use of this Type. F. Hardouin, to whom
we owe this learned Remark, will have it, that they took the Sow and thirty
little Pigs, mentioned by Virgil, which indeed served for an Ensign to those of
the Latin Country; but I know not whether Examples of it can be found upon
Medals.

7. After Caligula, not one Medal coined in the Spanish Colonies is to be
found, but there we have great Quantities of them under Augustus and Tiberius.
It is said that That Emperor took away their Privilege, out of spite, because
they had coined some in Honor to Agrippa, his Grandfather, whose Grandson he
was pleased they should remember him to be, thinking it a Disgrace to him. This
is what Suetonius reports.

8. After Galienus we scarcely find any more Medals of the Emperors coined
either in the Greek Cities or Colonies, it may be thought that in the Confusion
of the Empire, scarcely knowing to what Master they belonged, they took little
care to coin Medals of any; or else that the Privilege was taken away either by
Galienus himself, or Claudius Gothicus, or Aurelian. But it is certain we have
not one after Aurelian.

9. Not only particular Cities coined Medals in their own Names, to the
Emperors, but Provinces did the like: So we see Syria has coined some to
Trajan; Dacia to Philip; to whom she acknowledged she owed her Liberty.
Provincia Dacia Anno 1. A. 11. bearing a Standard, marked with the Title D. F.
Dacia Felix.

Of particular Medals.
1. It must not be taken for a general Maxim, that only rare and very valuable
Medals are counterfeited, as those whose Stamps the Paduan has taken the pains
to make. Several that are very common, are nevertheless false, especially Cast
ones.

2. The Quality of the Metal, and Size, is enough sometimes for the Skilful to
judge particular Medals by: So the Golden Gordian of Africa, the Pescennius, or
the Maximus, are never regarded, because it is known there are no old ones of
that Metal; those that are found thereof being made by the abovementioned
Carteron. A Plotina of the middle Copper will be rejected as well as a
Marciana, Matidia, and Didia Clara, because it is known that none of them are
found of that Size: Those with the Mint-master's Mark of the middle Copper,
shall be looked upon as common; and those of the large Copper may pass for rare
ones.

3. Some Medals are very scarce in one Country, that are common in another.
Such are those of the Posthumi, of which France is full; but very few are to be
found in Italy: Such are the Aelii of the large Copper, that are reckoned
scarce in Italy, and yet abound in France. The Knowledge of this is necessary
in making advantageous Changes.

4. Julius Caesar was certainly the first that obtained the Privilege of
setting his Head upon Money, and consequently should have been the most
desirous of so doing: Nevertheless his Head is not once found upon any large
Copper Medal. Those whereon it is found with the Head of Augustus upon the
Reverse, were coined since his Death: Therefore all those that are of that Size
ought to be looked on as Counterfeit.

5. There is only one Medal of Agrippa coined during his Life, by the Order of
the Senate, expressed by the S. C. whilst yet he had neither the Title of
Augustus, nor that of Caesar: For that of Drusus Nero, the Son of Tiberius, was
not coined till after his Death, by Order of his Son Claudius, and again
restored by Titus.

6. We must not suffer our selves to be deceived by certain Reverses of the
middle Copper, sometimes disguised into an Otho, by which several have been
abused: Neither must we regard the Perriwig that appears so neatly upon the
Silver and Golden Ones, and condemn all Medals that want it for false: For
though it be not found upon the Medals coined out of Italy, however they are
not the less Genuine; and although the Paduan has taken Pains to make it very
exact upon the large Copper, yet they are not the less Counterfeit.

7. M. Vaillant maintains, that Lucilla the Wife of Aelius never had any
Medals, nor was she ever called Augusta. Angeloni and others hold the contrary:
They ground their Opinion upon this, that Lucilla the Wife of Verus had never
any Children; whereas three are found upon the Medals of Lucilla the Wife of
Aelius; and yet these Medals bear Foecundit. Aug. Moreover it appears, that the
second Lucilla had the Title of Lucilla Antonini Augusti F. to distinguish her
from the former, which is never found upon those Medals that have the Children.
But to decide this Difference, we stand in need of a good Author, who says,
that Lucilla the Wife of Aelius was never called Augusta; or else, that the
Wife of Verus had three Children: For the Negative Argument decides nothing in
this matter: And hitherto Angeloni's Opinion has seemed most reasonable to me,
and Mezzabarba was in the right to follow it.

8. The Antonines ought not to be confounded by the multitude of those that
bore the same Name. The two that are hardest to be distingushed, are Caracalla
and Elagabalus, who both called themselves M. Aurel. Antoninus. The Skilful
indeed do easily know the Difference of their Faces, and the thick Lip of
Elagabalus from the fierce Mien of Caracalla: But those that are less knowing
ought to have Recourse to the Star that marks Elagabalus, and the Title of
Germanicus, which is only found with Caracalla, though neither the One nor the
Other, are always to be seen. The Skilful are every Day puzzled by the Greek
ones, on which the Heads are less like the Persons; because they have exactly
the same Legend. AVP. ANTONEINO.

9. A Way has been found out to disguise some Medals of Gordian the Third, into
Gordian the African, by altering the Legend of the Head, putting AFR in the
Place of PIUS, and making a little Beard upon his Chin: So that some have taken
Occasion from thence, to maintain, that this was a Third African, and Son or
Nephew to the other Two: But one may easily be undeceived by remembering that
all Reverses whereon is AUG can by no means agree with the two Africans, who
always have AUGG. So the Aeternitas Augg. Aequitas Augg. Allocutio; Securitas
Augg. belong certainly to the African Gordians.

10. It is no longer doubted that Etruscilla was the Wife of Trajanus Decius,
and not of Volusian, as was believed till M. Seguin's Time; who has proved it
evidently by Medals.

11: You should know also how to distinguish the Medals of the two Valerians,
the Son of Galienus and Salonina, called Cornelius Saloninus, from the Son of
Valerian and Mariniana, Gallien's Mother's Brother, named Licinius. When there
is only the Word Valerianus, it is very hard to know them, but when there is
either a Cor, a Sal, or Divus, or a Consecration, it is most certainly the Son
of Salonina; because the Son of Mariniana was never admitted into the Number of
the Gods. On the contrary, when there is a Lic. it is always the Son of
Valerian.

12. The Aemilians of large Copper being much valued, a Way has been found to
disguise the Philips, whose Face is very like, and to make Aemilians of them,
and so enhance their Price to 40 or 50 Franks.

13. But we are not to reject some Medals, whose Reverses manifestly disagree
with the Heads, as it often happens in the Lower Empire: I mean about the time
of Gallus and Volusian, and during that of the Thirty Tyrants, who parted the
Empire under Gallien. Every thing was then in so great a Confusion, that
without ever giving themselves the Trouble of making New Coins, as soon as they
heard they had changed their Master, they stamped a New Head upon an Old
Reverse: And it is without doubt by such a like Accident, that we find upon the
Reverse of an Aemilian, Concordia Augg. Aeternitas Augg. which had served for
Hostilianus, Gallus, and Volusian.

INSTRUCTION XII.
Of the Course he ought to take that will engage himself in the Study of Medals.
THat this Work may not swell too big, and grow tiresome to young Beginners by
its Length, who often are more desirous to amuse and divert themselves, than to
make a close and serious Study of it, I shall shut up in this last Instruction
all that I have to say upon this Subject, of which I might yet very easily make
three or four more, viz. what Medals are Rare; and what are the Books that can
instruct us and give the Explication of them; and the Way that is to be used in
reading Legends without other Helps, they being commonly composed of
abbreviated Words, which are to be understood by the Initial Letters only.
Wherefore it is necessary to give some Instructions concerning this, as also
about the Course he ought to take, that will apply himself to this kind of
Study.

A Young Beginner ought to understand History in some measure.
First, He ought to have a moderate Knowledge in History, both Greek and Latin;
and that to be drawn from the Springs and not the Epitomies, which will never
sufficiently instruct a Person: For he will stand in need of a thousand petty
Circumstances, that particularly relate to Medals, but which are little
regarded by those that have not a Genius somewhat bent to this sort of
Learning: The more forward he is in this reading, the greater Ease and Pleasure
will he find in Medals, which he then will begin to explain by himself, and be
able every Day to make some New Discoveries; not but that he shall find, when
he first begins with Medals, without having studied them before, the same
Assistance for History, that we should have in reading the Life and Memoirs of
a Prince whom we have already seen and known.

Geography.
Moreover he ought to have studied with some Application both the Ancient and
New Geography, that so he may be able to make a Parallel between them. Without
this he will never understand with any Pleasure the finest Medals, which are
those of Cities and Colonies, the Figures whereof are for the most part very
Instructive and Learned.

Chronology.
He must also more than indifferently understand Chronology; and not only by the
general and common Epocha's; but (if possible) by the particular ones of
Nations and Cities, which in time he will make out upon Medals with good
Satisfaction.

Mythology.
I say nothing of the Mythology and Theology of the Heathens, which yet is
absolutely necessary for the understanding of Reverses of Medals, that are
commonly charged only with it. This is the Noviciate of a young Beginner, who,
for want of this Knowledge, will find himself pulled back as it were at every
Step, by the Symbols that there would explain the Figures to him.

What Books necessary for him.
If he has not as yet made any Progress in these Sciences, he would do well to
begin with Petavius's Chronological Tables, which are the easiest; and study at
the same time F. Briest's Geography, who has made the most methodical
Comparison between the Ancient and Modern; for these are the necessary
Preliminaries to History.

This ought, as we have said, to be his principal Study, in Relation to Medals.
Herodotus, Dion, Dionysius, Hallicarnasseus, Polybius, Livius, Tacitus,
Velleius Paterculus, etc. should be diligently read over and over again.

In Proportion to his Progress in the Collection of Medals, he ought to read
the Latin and Greek Antiquaries; Suidas, Pausanias, Rosinus, Philostratus,
Rhodiginus, Gyraldus, and the like; which will give him very extraordinary
Assistances for the Explanation of the Types and Symbols.

But if of himself he has not any great Inclination to study, or that his
Business will not give him Leisure enough, yet to encourage and set him forward
a little, I should advise him to read the curious Treatise of M. Spanheimius,
de Praestantia and Vsu Numismatum. It Is there he will learn to value this kind
of Curiosity, and gain to himself an Esteem, when Occasion shall offer to
disco^rse thereof in Company.

But if he will neither give himself this Trouble, nor be at the Pains to
understand the Languages, he may content himself at first with reading the
Instructions we have given him here in this little Treatise, which may make him
seem learned at a very small Cost; and afterward he may examine those Books
wherein Medals are engraven and explained, which will facilitate their
Knowledge to him, without spending too much of his time. I will tell him some
of the most necessary.

Goltzius for Greek Cities.
To understand the Greek Medals of Cities, he should read Goltzius in his
Sicily, in his greater Greece, and the Isles. The Knowledge necessary for those
sorts of Medals will be found there.

Vrsinus for the Consular.
For the Roman Families he should get Fulvius Vrsinus, enlarged by M. Patin: For
sure nothing is better performed upon this Subject.

Occo and Mezzabarba for the Imperial.
For the Imperial, he must needs have an Occo of the last Edition; because
Mezzabarba is imperfect, having reserved the Greek Medals for a second Tome,
which very likely may never be published. From his Descriptions may be learned
the first Notions of Medals, and at the same time an Idea how to rank the
Series's in a Chronological Order.

M. Patin.
Though M. Patin in his great Work of the Imperial Coins, has only engraven those
of the middle Copper, yet much may be gathered from it, for all Metals and
Sizes, by reason of the great Resemblance of his Figures.

Gevartius.
But for want of this, he must endeavor to procure the Cabinet of the Duke of
Arschot, published by Gevartius, with Explanations. Almost all common Medals
may be found there.

Oiselius.
If Oiselius be added to it, his Explanations are better still.

Hemelatius.
It Is true, these Authors, properly speaking, have only treated of Copper
Medals, yet there are some for Gold ones, as Hemelatius, Canon of Antwerp, who
has wrote a particular Volume concerning them. M. Patin in his Treasure has
given us a very fine Collection of Silver ones; to which he has also added some
Medaillons, and large Copper ones: But a far greater Number will be found in
the last Edition of M. Vaillant, which is just now published, and will be of
great help in explaining both Gold and Silver Medals.

Du Cange.
M. du Cange in his Bizantine Families has engraven very exactly all the Lower
Empire, and has facilitated their Explanation by the learned Dissertation,
printed at the End of his Latin Glossary.

Tristan.
The very scarce Medals have been fully explained by Tristan de St. Amand, in
three Volumes, which shows the Industry that learned Man used in a Work where
no body could serve him as a Guide, no Traveller having gone that Way before
him.

Vaillant.
M. Vaillant has collected whatever can be said upon Colonies; and there are no
Figures but what may be happily explained, by studying his Book with Attention.

But the Curious will never be perfectly instructed, till the wonderful Work of
M. Morell is published, Morell.
a Specimen whereof he has already afforded us. It Is therein, whilst he employs
his extraordinary Genius in designing Medals most admirably, that he promises
to give us whatsoever he has seen; that is, all that can be wished for in this
matter; together with such Explanations as ought to be expected from a Person
so accomplished as he is in this kind of Study.

But whilst we are waiting for this great Masterpiece, which all the learned
that are curious in this Way do so earnestly wish and long for; because most of
the rare Medals cannot be explained but by the Ancient Geography, there must be
some Pains taken in studying diligently F. F. Hardouin.
Hardouin's Book Nummi antiqui Populorum and Vrbium illustrati, and his
Antirrhetique, which contains a World of useful matters to be instructed in;
and so much the rather, because no body besides himself has undertaken to
explain all the Greek Medals. Mezzabarba not having touched upon them; and M.
Vaillant having only given us the Latin Colonies.

A great many things do embarass and hinder a young Beginner, if he has not at
first a general Knowledge of Medals. Let him therefore begin with the Dialogues
of Antonius Augustinus, Antonius Augustinus.
which are as so many Lessons capable to instruct him. Next he will find great
Help from Goltzius his Thesaurus, Thesaurus Goltzii.
where Things are reduced to certain Heads, which will teach him the Elements
of this Science.

He will there find the commonest Abbreviations, without which nothing of the
Legends can be understood; he will there meet with the Names and Sirnames of
all the Emperors which are for the most Part expressed only by the Initial
Letters. The Names of Offices and Magistracies, which are never found but in
Breviature. That will be enough to put him into the Way, till he can get
Vrsatus, Vrsatus.
that great Repertory of the Latin Abbreviations.

Rare Medals.
Medals that are very rare and scarce, ought to be known, that so we may not let
them escape us when ever we meet with them; and that we may know how to esteem
those that deserve it. M. Vaillant has published a most curious Piece, which
contains the Rarity of every one in particular. Tom. 2.
M. Baudelot has also taken the Pains to mark those that are rare as Heads.

The Price of Medals.
It is not easy to determine any thing concerning the Price and Value of
Medals: For to speak properly, it only depends upon the Disposition of the
Seller and Buyer. For this being a noble Curiosity, belonging only to Gentlemen
that are fond this way, an eager Buyer never considers the excessive Price of a
Medal, which he finds very scarce and fine, well preserved, and necessary to
complete one of his Series's. It likewise depends upon the Courtesy of the
Seller, who often prefers the Satisfaction of an Excellent Person before his
own Interest; and is over joyed he can accommodate him with a Medal he sees he
is fond of, without taking all the Advantages of him he might.

Praise of the Modern.
The Curious Enquirers after the modern Medals may perhaps complain that I have
said so little of them in the first Instruction. It is not because I do not
esteem this study so much as I ought, which may be easily judged of by the
manner I have explained my self upon this Subject. Whatever I have said of the
Greatness and Majesty of Ancient Medals, I will always do Justice to the
Modern, when they deserve it, either by the Beauty of the Figures, or the
Rarity of the Events, which they take Notice of more particularly: The
Singularity of the Design; or by some just and happy Devises, the Art of
expressing which, we have found out, sometimes in a serious Air, sometimes in
an ingenious Raillery, Med. of Gold in the King's Cabinets.
whereof I never observed the least touch in any of the Ancient, unless on that
of Gallien, Gallienae Augustae, Pax ubique: When by his Carelessness and
Insensibility the Empire was torn to pieces by the thirty Tyrants.

The Order in modern Series's is Arbitrary.

Order the Modern.
After those of the Popes, Emperors and German Princes, the Kings of France; of
which we have already spoken, and other Illustrious Persons of that Kingdom, we
generally place the Medals of the Kings of Spain, Portugal, and the Spanish
Netherlands.

The Northern Crowns come next, England, Swedeland, Denmark, Poland, whose
Medals for the most part, are but of our Age. Italy has the sixth Place: The
most Ancient are those of Sicily, Milan and Florence, and are all cast. Such
are the Medals of Renatus and Alphonsus, Kings of Sicily; of Francis Sforza,
Duke of Milan; and of the Great Cosmo de Medicis: There be also some of Venice,
Genoua and other States.

Lastly, Holland deserves, by the great Number of Medals she has coined, to
make one Alone of the Seven Parts, which compose Cabinets: She begins with the
famous Medal, coined in 1566, whereon the Chief of the Revolters caused a Bag
to be stamped, by Reason of the Name of Beggars.
Gueux, given them in Scorn, and which they affected to preserve.

Books that treat of modern Medals.
Hitherto we have very few Books that treat of the modern, there being not so
much Occasion for these, as for the Ancient, because they are easily to be
learned, by a small Insight into their Histories. However, to understand them,
one may make use of Lukius, Typotius and la France Metallique, with the
Precautions we have already mentioned, because most of these Medals, are made,
as we say, a Plasir of F. du Moulinet for the Popes; and the Abbot Bizot for
Holland.

These are the Instructions which seem most necessary, to acquire in a short
time the Knowledge of Medals, to teach him the Tricks and Artifices of those
that sell them, and to put him into a way of making a Cabinet: But this Science
is of Extent enough to furnish matter still for several useful and excellent
Observations; but my Design was only to lay down the first Principles of it,
which, if they were not short and easy, would discourage young Beginners.
Their Success cannot but be happy, because they neither clog the Understanding
nor the Memory; and if they cannot gain the Esteem that great Works draw to
themselves, they may yet be read over, without Wearisomeness and Disgust.

I dare even hope I shall have some Thanks for having first published these
Elements in some Order, and Perspicuity; and for having advanced nothing but
what is conformable to the Sentiments of the most Learned Masters, both in the
Ancient and Modern Medals.

FINIS.
The first Table of the Contents of this Book.
A.
AAron's Rod, 116 (...), 144 AGD, upon Imperial Medals, 75 Actions Brave and
Noble instead of a Head, and when, 82 -- expressed upon the Reverse, and how, 83
Adlocu^io, 93. 112 Adoptions, 105 Adventus Augusti, 93 Aemilian, the Medal
false, 97 Aeternitas Flaviorum, 101 African Medals, 119, 120 Age of Medals, 1
Emperors on them as well as their Reigns, 68
Ages, two different ones, 5 Agrippa's Medal, 199 Agrippina, 105 AKAKIA, a
Symbol, 147 (...), a Symbol, 155 Amazons, the Arms of their Busts, 148
Alliances, 105 Altering the Value of Money, how expressed, 77 Amor mutuus
Augustorum, Ancilia, 153 Angeloni, 200 Animals on the Reverses of Medals, 59,
60, 61. 170 made use of for Symbols, 168.
Antioch always affected a Latin Legend, 195. Antirrhetique of F. Hardouin, 39.
68. 75. Antonia, 20. 29. 105. Antonius Augustinus, 63; 77. 119. 121. 168. 210
Anubis, his Bust by what known, 149 Apium, what, 140 Apothecsis, 142 Arabic
Language on Medals, 4. 145 Archoleons or Arcoleons, 60 Asinus, (...), 166 Asses
Scortei, Page 15 Aves piae, 161 Augur's Staff, 51. 110. 154 Augusta, a Title
received by Princesses in the Higher Empire, 105 Augustus perpetuus, 97.
Tribun. Potestatis, 34 Aurelian with the Title of Dominus. 97
B.
(...), the Eastern Emperor, 97 Basket of Flowers, a Symbol, 156. 163 Bolduc's
Work, 32 Books necessary for the Knowledge of Ancient Medals, 206 -- Modern
Ones, 214
The Bushel, a Symbol, Bust, who set his first on his Money, 8 The first of the
Kings of France, 12 Accompanied with Symbols, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149 Of
Amazons, 148

C.
CAduceus, a Symbol, 78 151 Caesar, this Name first divided by Aelius from that
of Augustus, 101 Caesar (Julius) his cunning Devise in setting his Name on
Medals at first, 51. 52 Camelaucinm, 138 Canopus, a Symbol, 69. 144. 158
Capricorn, what it signifies, 169 Carteron, an Engraver in Holland, 172. 176.
198 Censor perpetuus, 96 Certamen-Quinquennale, 93 F. Chamillard's fine Medal,
53 Chariot, a Symbol, 155 Charitas mutua Augg. 104 Cheval de frise, a Symbol,
156 Chronology necessary for the Knowledge of Medals, 205 Claves Regni
coelorum, 9 Clipei Votivi, 153 Colonies, Medals of them, 38. 193, etc. Commerce
how probably at first carried on, 2 Comneni, the Medals of this Family, 98
Concordia Augg. 104 Concordiae Praetorianorum, 34. exercit. 79 Consecration,
87. 110. 168 Consul, a Name and Dignity taken by the Emperors, and why, Page
82 Consular Medals, etc. of the third Size, 43 Constantinople, made New-Rome by
Constantine, 31. by him consecrated to the Mother of God, 57 Conturniate
Medaillons, 26 Copper Medals, 19 -- how numerous in Imperials, 21 Their
different Sizes and particular Commendations, 28, 29, 30
Copper, scarce in the large, 186 Corinthian Brass, Medals thereof, 19, 20 The
Crescent, a Symbol, 148 The Cross, a Symbol, 146 Crowns of several sorts, 138,
etc. Curule Chair, a Symbol, 155 Ciphers, 57. 75
D.
DEcurio, 62 DEPOT, 97. 68 DESPOINA, a Name the Princesses assumed, 98 D. E.
what these Letters signify, 53. 7^. 73. 195 Deities, almost all known by
particular Symbols, 158 Deities honored by Princes, 89 Deniers, Victoratii,
Bigati, Quadrigati, and Ratiti, 50 Deus, this Name usurped by the Grecian
Princes and their Flatterers, 102, 103 Diadem, what, and by whom used, 138
Dictator perpetuus, 96 Disciplina Aug. 93 Dominus, Aemilian first ventured upon
this Name, 97 Drusus of the middle Copper placed among the great, and why, 23
E.
EMperors of the West, how their Series may be completed, 11 -- last Greek
Ones, when ended by the Turks, 31 -- of Constantinople, their Inscriptions, 54
-- Years of their Age as well as Reign upon Medals, 68
Emperors affected the Dignity of Consul, 82 Empire Higher and Lower, 5. 31
Ensigns, Military Symbols, 152 -- how denoted, 69, 70 -- Greeks more careful
herein than the Romans, 66 -- Of Offices, Page 67 -- Of Reigns, ibid. -- Of
Colonies, 68 -- the Way of setting them down, 69 -- None among the Latin
Medals, 110
Etruscilla the Wife of Trajanus Decius, 202 P. Eugenius IV. of Gold; it is
only a Piece of Money, 9 Eumenythis, -- 144 Exergue, what, 66. 74. 109
F.
Families in their Medals, are found only particular Offices, 81 The Fasti of
the Consuls, 43, 44 Foecunditas Aug. 200 Felicitas temporum renovata, 85
Feru^a, a Symbol, 146 Fides Exercituum, 34. 93 Fides mutua, 104 Figures on
Reverses, how valuable, 57, 58. 93 -- the Body of the Medal, 78 -- without Arms
and Legs, called Termini, 162 -- Several Figures, their Significations, 162,
163, 164
Fishes their Significations, 169 Flavius, the Name of a Family, 101 Flower of
Coin, what, 129 Fortuna Augusta, etc. 90 France, the Series of her Kings, 11,
12. 214 Friendships, etc. 105, 106
G.
GAlba's Medal, 112 Gallienus caused the Consecrations of all the Emperors to
be coined anew, 47. 110 Games, their Symbols, 153 Monsieur de Ganieres's
Collection, 14 Geography necessary for the Knowledge of Medals, 205 Germanicus
of the middle Copper placed among the great, and why, 29 The Globe, its
Signification, 146 Gloria Exercitus, 85 Gold Medals of the Upper Empire, 17. 23
Golden Age was that of Augustus, 127 Gordian his Medals disguised, 201
Goltzius, 210 Gothic Language, 121 Grapes, a Symbol, 153 Greek a Language
respected by the Romans, Page 114 -- The Countries that preserved it on their
Medals, 114 -- Characters on imperial Medals, 122, 123

H.
HAbiliments Foreign, 137. 141 Hadrian, 20. 103 Hands joined, their
Signification 152 Monsieur Harlay's Collection of the Kings of France, 12 The
Harp, a Symbol, 153 The Hasta, a Symbol, 150 Heads on the Consular Medals 42 --
The more on it, the choicer the Medal, 58 are known by their Leg^nds, 136 Heads
upon Medals of diverse sorts, 136, 137. -- Naked, 137 -- Covered, ibid. --
Head-pieces, 140, 141, 142 -- Of the Gods, 143 -- When accounted common, when
not, 185
Heads of Medals, what meant thereby, 33 -- belonging to Cities, most commonly
the Genius of the Place, or else some other Deity there adored, 41. 83
Hebrew Language, 4. 115 Hercules's Symbols, 149. 165 History necessary to the
Knowledge of Medals, 205 History of Holland, by Abbot Bizot, 125, 126 History
Metallic of Holland, 14 Honors bestowed on Princes, for what, 86 after their
Deaths, 87 Horn of Plenty, a Symbol, 151
I.
JAnus, the Tradition of his being the first Inventour of Money, 49 JESUS
CHRIST, 97. 115 A and O, Principium and Finis, 147 Imperial Medals, on them are
found only the most considerable Offices, 81 Inscriptions, several on the
Pope's Medals instead of a Reverse, 9, 10 Inscrpitions on the Field of the
Medal, 53 -- Greek instead of Latin Ones by the Emperors of Constantinople, 54
-- Very short and expressive among the Ancients, Page 56 -- Called the Legend
of Medals, 78 -- Difference betwixt this and that Legend, 78. 108 -- When the
Legend of the Reverse is a kind of Inscription, 82 -- The Tongues that compose
them, 122, 123
Indictions are marked on Medals, 70 Jovis Terminalis, 162 Juba, King of Africa
his Medal, 120 Julius Caesar, the first that set his Head upon Money, 199 Juno
Lucina, 90 -- Pronuba, 144 -- Sospita, ibid.
Justinian, the first that used a sort of closed Crown, 138
K.
KIngs of France, the Series of them the most numerous of all the Modern, 11,
12. 34. 36
L.
LAbarum, what, 147 Latin Language, 126 Laurel Branch, a Symbol, 152
Lectisternium, 164 Legends, what called so, 53 -- called Inscr^ptions, 78 --
Area's, the Soul of the Medal, 78. 110 -- Difference betwixt this and that
Inscription, 79 -- Where they are only Expressions of their Country, 83 --
Relation of the Legend to the Type, 84 -- the most common declare the Virtues
of the Princes, 85 -- expressing general and particular Benefits, 87 -- Certain
peculiar Events, 88 -- Public Monuments, 89 -- Deities honored by Princes, 89
Legends declaring Names of Persons, 90 -- Of Cities, Provinces and Rivers, 91
-- Of military Ensigns, whole Armies and Legions, 92 -- Of public Plays, how
distinguished, 93, 94 -- Of public Vows, 94, 95 -- With the different Titles
the Emperors assumed, 96 -- With Adoptions, Alliances, Page 105, 106 -- With
the Names of the Magistrates, under whom Medals were coined, 108 -- Their
Position, 108, 109, 110 -- Though defaced, Medals not to be thrown away, 130 --
Commonly explain particular Cities, 168 -- Altered and Counterfeited, 178 -- Of
the Head of Gordian, 111 -- altered, 201 The Way to know how to read them, 204
Legions, 92 Leton, what, 18 Liberalitas, IV. 80 Lituus, what, 154 Livia, 20
Ludi Seculares, 53. 60
M.
MEdals stuffed with the Marks of Magistracies, Priesthoods and Triumphs of the
Ancestors of the Mintmasters, 50, 51, 52 -- How stamped in the time of the
Empire, 51 -- Single Names only upon them, 56 -- With two Heads almost always
choice, 58 -- With Plants, 61 -- The ways how to place them, 62, 63, 64 --
Every Medal to have two Legends, 79 -- Some without any Legend, 110, 120 --
Paraicular Offices upon them, 81 -- Belonging to Cities and Provinces, what the
Head of those is, 41. 83 -- Of Princesses, with the Names of the Deities of
their Sex, 90 -- Votive, 94, 95 -- Samaritan, are almost all of Brass, 117 --
Barbarous Languages upon some, 121 -- Their Preservation, 128, 129 -- Broken,
some to be preserved, 130 -- Diverse sorts of them, 133 -- Bursten in the Edges,
131. 180 -- Plated, 132 -- Indenting of them, 131, 132 -- Half stamped, 133,
134 -- With Busts, 145 -- Fanciful, 172 -- Counterfeits, cast or stamped, how
discoverable, Page 173, 174, 175, 176 -- Repaired, by what Cheat, 175, 176, 177
-- Whether all base Gold are Counterfeit, 182 -- Principles upon Medals in
general, 184, 185, etc. -- Single Ones, what and how valuable, 187 -- The
Praise of the modern Ones, 212, 213 -- Of Colonies mostly, bear the Name of
their Founder, 193, 194 -- Principles upon particular Medals, 197, etc. -- Some
scarce in one Country, and common in another, 198 -- Rare Ones, how to be
known, 211 -- Value of them, ibid. -- Medals Greek, 4. 114. 122, 123 -- Latin,
4. 114. 123, 124, 125 -- Hebrew, 4. 115 -- Phoenician, 4. 119, 120. 182 --
Gothic, 121. 182 -- Arabic, 4. 115. 118 -- African 119, 120 -- Consular, most
Ancient, 5 -- Numerous, 41 -- Imperial of Higher and Lower Empire, 5. 31 --
Modern, 6. 125 -- Their Use, 6, 7
Medals of Illustrious Men, 14. 34. 47 With several Heads, 47
-- Golden Ones, the several sorts of them, 16 -- Silver Ones, 17 -- Of a base
Metal, 18 -- Washed over with Silver, ibid. -- Plated, 19. 22 -- Copper Ones,
19 -- Of Red and Yellow Copper, ibid. -- Of Corinthian Brass, ibid. -- Of two
different Coppers, 21. 28 -- Of the middle Copper, 29. 184. 186, 187. 199 -- Of
Lead, 21, 22 -- Of Iron, 22, 23 -- The Size of all Medals, what, 25 -- Revived
not till the 15th Century, 32 -- The Head, what meant thereby, 33 -- Some
without Reverses, ibid. -- Some have no Heads of Persons, 34 -- Medallas
Desconnocidas, Page 93 -- Of Colonies, 38, 39. 192, 193 -- Of Greece, 35 -- Of
the Goths both in Copper and Silver, with good Reliefs, 36 -- Of Syria, a Set
of them given us by M. Vaillant, 27. 35 Medaillons, what, 25 -- What coined
for, 65 -- Called by the Romans, Missilia, 25 -- Set in the chiefest Place of
Cabinets, 26 -- Some called Conturniate, 26 -- Begun in Greece, 27 -- Of
Silver, ibid. -- Of Gold, very scarce, 28 known by their Size and Weight, 191
Reverses of them, 65
-- S. C. these Letters scarce ever found upon them, 72 -- Greek One in Silver,
of Pescennius, a single Medal, 187 -- Never made use of for Money, 188 -- The
Senate's Power in coining those of Copper, 189 -- Never Coined by Colonies, 191
Metals, 1, 2 -- Various sorts, 15, etc. for Imperial Medals, 208

Mint-masters among the Romans, 42 -- Their Names upon several Medals, 56. 7 --
Reverses often charged with their marks, 74, 75, 76. 123 -- Called Triumviri
Auro, Argento, Aeri, flando, feriundo, 24, 25. 190
Money current among the Greeks and Romans, 24 -- The first used at Rome, 48 --
Who first introduced it, 2. 49 -- Marks of the Value of it, 76 -- Altering the
Value, 77 -- Of Leather stamped, 15
Monogrammes of several sorts, 57, 123, 135 Moses, said to be the first that
introduced the Use of Money, 2 -- His Head upon Medals Counterfeit, 115
F. Moulinet's Book, 8. 118. 176. 215
N.
NAmes, Emperors assumed on their Medals, 96 to 105 -- Of Cities where Medals
have been coined, 74
Narthecophori, 147 Natalia plura feliciter, Page 95 Neocori, 68. 92 Nimbus, by
whom used, 142 Nobilis Caesar, 100 Numismata Serrata, 131 Nammi plumbei, what,
22
O
OFfices of the Ancients found upon their Medals, 81 Oiselius, an Antiquary,
63, 64. 208 OONOIA, 92. 162. 195 Orders of Medals, five different ones, from
Heads, 34 -- 1st. of Kings, 34, 35 -- 2d. of Cities, 37 -- 3d. of Families, 41
-- 4th. The Imperial, 44 -- 5th. Of ^eities, 46 To which may be added, -- 6th.
That of illustrious Persons, 47
Ornaments belonging to Medals, 136, 137, 138 Otho, the Latin One of the large
Size, in Copper is inestimable, and why, 15. 186
P.
PAduan, Engraver, 129, etc. -- his Coins in the Ab. of St. Geniv. 176
Painters, modern Imitatours of the ancient, 172 Pantheons, 145 Parazonium,
what, 156 Parmesan Engraver, 129. 172. 176 Pater Patriae, 81. 86, 96 Patera a
Symbol, 150 Pecunia, a Pecude, 48 Pegas^s, a Symbol, 61. 168 Permissions by
ordinary Magistrates, what, 73, 74 Permissu Augusti, 73 194, 195 Phoenix, a
Symbol, 61. 168 Pietas Aug. 89 Pietas mutua, 132 The Pisans Work, 4 Pius Felix,
104 Plini's Reputation among the Naturalists, 38 Pontifical Symbols, etc. 154
Pope's Series of them how to be completed, 7, 8 -- Scandalous Medals of them, 9
Populi jussu, 71. 73 Potentatus omnis vita brevis, 95 Princeps juventutis, 100
Princesses, their Names on Medals, 90. 98. 103. 105 -- Their Head-dresses Page
137
Proconsul, a Title when the Emperor was out of Rome, 81 Profectio Augusti, 93
Providentia Augusti, 155, 156 Provinces, how signified 165, etc. -- Coined
Medals in their own Names, 197
Puellae Faustinianae, 59
Q.
QVinarii, 43 -- Some marked with the Figure VIII. 77
Quinarius, Signified by V. five Asses, Quinos Aeris, 76 and also by Q. ibid.
Quanto Lacera Piu, tanto Piu Bel^a. 128
R.
REgna assignata, 58 Renovatio Regni Fr. 12 Rest, what, 110 Reverses, the first
on Medals what, 50 Their Beauty, whence it is, 53 Several sorts of them, 53,
54, 55 Valued by their Figures, 57, 58 With public Monuments, 59
Reverses, with Animals, 59, 60, 61 with Princes and Princess^s, 62 two ways
how to dispose them so as to render Cabinets more exact and curious, 62, 63, 64
Of Medaillons, Page 65 often charged with Mint-masters Marks, 74
Reverses of Medals belonging to Cities or Provinces, what, 83 The most common
are the Virtues of Princes, 85 Belonging to some Saint, 93 Some that want
Legends, 110, 111 Some only with the Name of the Mint-master, or the bare S. C.
111. 123 One of Galba's is an Allocution with six Figures, 112 Symbols
principally placed on them, 149
Reverses, extraordinary, formed Modernly, 172, 173 Counterfeit Ones, how done,
177 Inserted or clapped together, ibid. The way how to know them to be false,
178 When said to be common, when otherwise, 185 Oxen on Medals of Colonies,
what they signify, 192 Some of the Middle Copper disguised into an Otho, 199
Mythology necessary for the Understanding of them.
Rivers, how signified, Page 164 Roman Deniers, 50 Romans, when they first
coined Silver and Gold, 50 Rudder of a Ship, a Symbol, 152
S.
S. The Mark of the Value of Money signifies Semissis, 76 S. C. what these
Letters signify, 53. 71, 72. 111. 135. 195. 199 S. R. What these Letters
signify, 195 Saculares Augg. 60. 170 Samaritan Language, 119, 120 Saturn
supposed the Inventor of Money, 49 Scandalous Medals, 9 Scepter, a Symbol, 146
M. Seignelay's Cabinet, 13. 187 Senior, 99, 100 Series of Families claims the
first Rank among the Roman Medals, 5 May be made two ways, 43 Of Popes, how to
be completed, 7, 8 May be augmented with all the Ecclesiastical Court, 10 Of
the Emperors of the West, 11 Of the Kings of France, 11, 12 Of Cities either
Greek or Latin, 34 What is called, enriching a Series, 16 Curious Ones may be
composed from several Heads, which form five different Orders of Medals, 34 Of
Dei^ies either in simple Bust, or in full Proportion, and clothed with all
their Qualities and Symbols, 34
Se^terces, 43 -- The Mark L. L. S. 76
Shekles, how Ancient, 3. 116 -- The several Sorts of them 116, 117
Shield, a Symbol, 153 Silver Medals, 17. How numerous in Imperials only, 23
Sixtus IV. the first Pope that set his Bust on his Money, 8 Society, how
probably at first carried on, 2 Spanish Language, 119, 120 Standard Military, a
Symbol, 154. 193 Symbols upon Ancient Medals, 136, etc. upon Busts, 145 upon
Reverses, 149 Single, are innumerable, 151
Sympulum, what, 51, 153, 154, 155
T.
TAlismans, 117. Tempus Circumcisionis, a kind of Epoch on the Hebrew Money,
ibid. Terms, what, 162 Thunder, a Symbol, 104. 147. 152 Thyrsus, a Symbol, 151.
158 Tigranes, 21 Titles of Honor on Reverses, 54 Titles which the Emperors
assumed in the second Legend of their Medals, 96 Tower, a Symbol, 155 Tradition
of Janus first introducing the Use of Money, 49 Trajectus Augusti, 93 Tripod, a
Symbol, 156 Tubal Cain the first Coiner of Money, 2
U.
UTilitas Publica, 8 Vrsatus, his Repertory of the Latin Abbreviations, 211
Varnish, several sorts thereof, 129, 130 -- Upon Counterfeit Medals, 174, 175.
178, 180
Vejovis, 52 Veil on the Head, what it signifies, 142 Venus felix Genetrix, 96
Veronica, 9 Virtues of Princes the most common Reverses, 85 Vows (public) 94,
95
W.
WHeel, a Symbol, 157
Z.
ZEmisces, the first that used this Legend, Jesus Christus, Basileus, Basileon,
97. 141 (...), 83. 164 The Zodiac, a Symbol, 156
The End of the first Table.
The second Table of the Contents of this Book, viz. Of Names and Authors.
A.
ABgarus. 141 Achaia, 165 Egypt, 166 Ael^i, 198 Aelius. 137. 200 Aesculapius,
145, 158, etc. Africa, 165 Corn. Agrippa, 118 (...), 83 Alemannia Devicta, 84
Alexander the Great, 16 -- Severus, 16 Alexandr. Egypt. 109 ALPH, 109
Anaphlystii, 108 Antinous, 110 (...) 74. 83 Antiochus XIII. 35 Antiechus, 102
ANTONEINO AILEV 99 Antoninus, 137 Apis, 144 Apollo. 143 -- Diana, etc. 164
Arabia, 165 APXIEPATIKON 140, Pont, Corona. Aricbarzanes, 106 Armenia, 167 --
and Mesopstamia, 84 Armeniacus, 86 Arschot Duke. 208 Asia, 165 -- Subacta, 84
Asiaticus, 85 Astarte, 159 Ant. Augustinus, 168 Aurelian. 97 Aucelius, 137
B.
AILEV 98, 99. 124 -- AILEON 10^ -- AYTOKPATOP, 98 Bacchus, 143. 158 (...), 108
John Baptist Palatin, 120 Busili^a Vlpia, 89 De Bic, 12. 37 Biz^t, 6. 8. 12,
13. 125. 134. 214 Bata^iates, 98 Boudelot, 141. 181. 211 M. Bouteroiie, 11
Count de Brienne, 45 F. Bri^t, 20 Great Britain, 16 Britannicus. 86 L. BUCCA,
111 Qu. Fab. Buc. IV. vir A. A. Ae. FF. 56 By^as, 47
C
CAesario, 33 Cains, 99 Callinicus, 35 Canopus, 144. 158 Cappadocia, 167
Caracal^a, 58 Carcavie, 28. 65. 119 Castor and Pol^ux, 50. 148. Casauben, 138
Ca^ulius, 165 Ceres, 90. 143. 159 Du Cange, 30. 36. 55. 95. 105. 124. 138. 209
Charles VIII. 12 Chastity, 161 (...) 57 Clodoveus, 13 M. Colbert, 45 Comagenus,
35 Commedus, 103. 21. 28 Comneni, 98 Constantine, 98, 99 -- the Younger, 137
Novus Constantinus, 101 Constantius, 137 -- Chlerus, 57 M. de Court, 113
Cybele. 159
D.
DAcia, 165 D. E. (...), p. 53. 1. Trib. ^ot. Demetrius, 192 D. F. Dacta Felix,
197 Diana, 90. 159. 164 DI. TPI. TETPAKI. NEOKOPON. 69 Didia Clara, 168
Dioclesiau* 100 Diogenes, 98 Dion. 206 Dionysius Halicarnasseus, 206 D. M. not
M. D. 70 D. N. Dioclesiano, etc. 100 D. N. C. Domino nostro Caesari, 96 Dnusus.
137
E.
ELagabalus, 164. 201 L. ENNAYOY, 69. an. no. Ephesus, 195 E^ITPAT^OY, 108
Epiphanes, 3 (...), etc. 83 Eromys, 163 L. Erizao, 65 EYOY. B. 6 9. 1. Anni
secundi -- DEAYOY. 69. Decimi (...) 191 I Anni novi Sacri -- Eumenides, 163
Eumenythis, 144 Europe. 165
F.
FAtius Pictor, 49 M. Falkner, 87 Ferdinand; 32 F^ora, 143 Fortune, 161
Frederick III. 11
G.
GAIO KAIAP TH^O AYTOKPATOP 99, C Caes^de^s Irap.. ANNIO GALEPIO ANTONINO^
AYTOKPATOPO YIO. A^n Gal, Ant. Imp. Fill. 52 Gallia, 165 G^l^^^nus, 18. 60
Gallus, 203 Q. Og^l^ius Gallus. 49 G^las, 109 Germanicus, 137 Germany, 107
(...), 143. 1. Senatus G^^a, 57 Gevartius, 208 Golizius, 37. 207, etc. G^.
Gothicus, 133. 197. Gyraldus, 207
H.
HAl^carnesses, 108 Hardomn, 39. 68. 7^, etc. Helena, etc. 105 Hemelatius, 208
Herodes Agrippa, 106 -- Antipas, 187 Herodotus, 206 Homerus, 47 H^sti^ianus,
203
I.
IBis, 60 Jesus Christus, Basi^eus Basileon, 97. J. Chapter Rex Regum. John,
Emperor of Constant. 32 Jovis Terminalis, 161 Isis, 144 Italy, 167 Juda^, 165
-- Capta, 84 Julia Antonina, 105 -- Agrippina, ibid. -- Titi, ibid. Jun^, 90.
144. 158 Jupiter, ibid. -- Lepis, 164 Justin, ^50, etc.
KAIPEA 93. Festivals of the Cabin, KOODEIA, 24. Festivals of Commodus,
L.
LAtium, 196 M. Lepidus, 50 Liberality, 161 Liberty, ibid. L^vius, 165. 206
Louis the Great, 13 Lo^cilla 260 Lugduni, ^4 (...), 69 i. Anni. Lunus. 143
Lycurgus, 47
M.
MAbillon, 127 Macedonia, 165 M. I. K. Maria Jesus, and Constantine, 57
Mariniana, 189 Mars, 90, 148 Martiel 22 Matidia, 198 Mauritania, 165
Maximi^ian, 37. 100 Maxim^s, 10^ Medaglioni, 25 Melicerta Palam^^, 158
Me^^^trier, 13. 160 Mercury. 143. 151 Mesc^nia Fam. 72 Mis^p^tamia, 108 Michael
Ducas, 98 -- Rhangabes, 123, 124 Milo Crotoniates, 177 Mincia Fam. 72 Minerva.
143 Morel, 19. 26. 74. 94. 97, etc. Moulinet 8. 118. 176. 214
NAPTHX 146. 1. Ferula. Nemausus, 47. Nemesis. 16^ Niocori, 6^ NEOS LEO, 99. 1.
novnt Sol. NEOI LIOI. 99. novi Solet Neptune, 15^ Nero, 99. 137 NEPON PATPON,
etc. 1. Neropatronus. 99 Nerva, 58 Nicator, 35 Nicephorus, 98 Norbana Fam. 72
Numerianus, 89
O.
OO, 45, 62. 99. 208 Oiselius, 208 Orbiana, 186 Osiris 144 Otacilla, 60 Oath.
186. 199
P.
PAetus, 108 Pamphylia, 195 Pannonia, 167 (...), 109 Paul the second; 32 Patin,
16, 17. 36. 43. 52. 53. 65, 69. 72, 104. 157. 182. 191. 208. 209 Paulina, 186
Pausanias, 207 Peace, 160 Perga, 195 Pergamus, ibid. Pescennius, 18, ^8
Petasus, 141 Petavius, 206 (...), 106. Amatores Graec. Philip of Maceden, 16 --
the Sixth, 14 (...), 106. Amat. Cl. Philopater, 35 (...), 106. Amat. Roman.
Philostratus, 207 (...), 106. Amat. Christi. Phocas, 146 Piety. 160 PIL. 109.
1. Lipara, Pittacus. 47 Plaut^s. 4. 22 Plenty. 160 Pletina, 5 Polybius, 162.
206 POPPHYPOGNNYO, 98 Portunus, 158 Posthums, 18. 28, 29. 198 Providence, 160
Provincia Dacia, 197 Pythagoras, 97
R.
RHodes, 152 Rhodiginus, 207 M. Rigord, 187 Romanus, 98 Roma renas^ens, 87
Rosinus, 207 Rostagny, 21
S.
SALEG. 109. Gelas. Salonina, 202 Sardis, 195 Savet. 19. 20. 22. 24 Security.
161 Selcucus, 35 S,EOYPEIA, 94 Festivals of Sev. Septimius Severus, 17. 18. 22
Seguin, 73. 202 Serapis, 144 Sicilia, 51, 167 Sida, 195 Smyrna, ibid.
Spanhemius, 61. 94. 69. 123. 207 Spet Dea, 145 Stauracius, 38 Strada, 11. 102
Stratodes, summus Sac. 108 Suesonius, 188. 197 Suidas, 207 The Sun, 143 Corn.
Supera 186 (...). 83. of Syracosians,
T.
TAcitus, 206 Taras, 47 Tellesphorus, 144 THEA PHAYTINA 52 1. Dea Faustina,
THEA SYNKL,GO, 1 Dea Senatus, 1^3 Theo. Archon, 105 Theodora, 98 Theodoret, 183
Theodosius, 10 (...), 94. Deorum nupt. Theogenes, 169 Theophilus, 98 THEO
EPIPHAN, 102 THEO NIKATOP, ibid, THEO PHILOPATOP, 102 Tiberius Caesar, 82
Tigranes. 99 Toynard, 68 Trojan, 163 Tranquillina, 186 Tomus, 47 Tristan, 65.
75. 209 Tryphon, 99
V.
VAL Du. 12 Vaillant, 27. 34, 35. 40 Vellcius Paterculus, 206 Venus, 160 Verus,
200 Vesta, 90. 161 Villalpandus, 2. 117 Vrsatus, 211 Vrsuius Fulvius, 43. 208
Vulcan, 143
W.
WOlfangus Lazius, 23
Z.
ZAleucus, 47 (...), 169 Animal indomitum.
The End.

