THE LIFE and DEATH OF S. LUKE: Delivered in A SERMON ON S. LVKES DAY, BEFORE
The University at Great S. Mary's IN CAMBRIDGE.

By David Jenner, B. D. and Fellow of Sidney-Sussex College.

LONDON: Printed for J. williams, in Cross-keys Court in Little Britains. 1676.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF S. LUKE.
2 TIMOTHY 4.11. Only Luke is with me.


IT is the great praise and perfection of the Sun (who is the prime and glory
of all the Celestial Bodies) that by his constant and indefatigable motion, he
does illuminate and refresh the several corners of the inferior Earth, with his
glorious Rays and Beams of Light; and that he never, like the fickle and
inconstant Moon, puts on diverse Faces. It is Recorded by the Poets, for the
perpetual honor and everlasting renown of Theseus, That he uncessantly attended
Hercules in all his Travels. Nor may we forget that no misfortune nor disaster
whatsoever, could unty the Gordian Knot of Amity, once knit between Aeneas and
his Faithful Achates. Not unlike, the Holy Ghost has in honor to S. Luke,
(whose acts and deeds this day is by the Church wisely set apart to
commemorate) The Holy Ghost (I say) has in an honorable remembrance of his
name, erected this Sacred Monument, even the Text, in which his Christian
Valor, his Unparalleled Constancy, his Mutual Correspondency with S. Paul,
whose ((...)) continual Associate he was, are all engraven in such Characters,
as that neither Time nor Envy will be ever able to obliterate; for (...), etc.
Only Luke is with me.

In the words we have Damon and Pythias, two Pythagorean Lovers. Luke and Paul
both cemented together by the Union of the Spirit, by the Bond of Peace; or
rather (if you please) the words are an entire Proposition, whereof S. Luke is
The Subject, S. Paul (who is understood in the Pronoun Me) The Predicate, The
Copula that unites both, is Constancy, included in the phrase, (...), Only Luke
is with me.

We shall begin with the subject S. Luke, as being most proper for this days
solemnity.

And here the things most material, and worthy our observation, are two.

1. His Life. 2. His Death.
As for his Life, we cannot but in the Map of his History set down 1. His
Native Country. 2. Give some account of his ominous Name. 3. Take notice of
his honorable Education. 4. Of his laudable Profession. 5. Of his happy
Conversion from Heathenism unto Christianity, with the various occurrences in
that his new Evangelical Life.


As to the first, Isidorus confidently calculates the place of his Nativity to
be Syria in Asia. when he writes that (Lucas Evangelista, Natione fuit Syrus)
Luke the Evangelist was a Syrian, etc. But he is altogether silent in what City
or Town this our Evangelist did first breathe; whereas Dorotheus (quoted by
Theophylact) reports him to be born at Antioch, ((...), etc.) and to this
Opinion Theophylact himself is pleased to subscribe in these words, (...), etc.
And to the same does S. Jerome give his Judgment. Nor does Irenaeus deny it,
when speaking of S. Luke, he thus expresses himself -- Ex Antiochia oriundus
fuit medicus, etc. By all which we may safely conclude, that Saint Luke was
born at Antioch, a City very eminently famous for many things, but especially
for three: As

1. Famous for their Loyalty, constantly paying their tribute of respect,
reverence, and homage (justly due by the Laws of God, Nature, and Men) unto
their Supreme Governors, always ascribing unto their Chief Magistrate, (whether
Emperor or King,) all his titles of Honor, which Divine Providence had
conferred upon him; as Johannes Antiochenus acquaints us out of his History,
concerning Augustus Caesar, who (says he) (...), etc. at Antioch was thus
styled, Caesar, Octavian, Trophaeal, Augustus, the Mighty Emperor, etc. A
president sufficient (one would think) for ever to silence and convince those
Sectarists who dare rebelliously deny unto our Dread Sovereign, those honorable
Titles which the Virtues and Prowess of His Noble Ancestors have merited in the
Field, and the which God of his special Grace has bestowed upon Him, and
affixed as so many radiant Diamonds on His Royal Crown.

2. Famous, for that Christ's Coronation Day on Earth, was first of all
celebrated at Antioch, Acts 11.26. the Disciples were first called Christians
at Antioch; whereas before Christ's Proselytes were commonly known by the
appellation of Nazareans and Galileans ((...), etc. as Suidas, and others,
etc.) But afterward, when the Gospel of Christ began to spread very much, and
daily thousands were added to the Church, then, that Believers might the better
be discriminated from Jews and Infidels, and that the World might plainly know,
who, and what they were; they did at Antioch very solemnly, and in a kind of
State, publicly assume unto themselves the glorious name of Christians; for so
the word (...), Acts 11.26 (which we translate Called) is usually taken in a
State sense, even as Kings at their Coronations do use ((...)) in State to be
called and proclaimed Kings by their Champions and Heralds at Arms, with all
their Titles. Not unlike, at Antioch Christ the King of Heaven and Earth, was
solemnly and magnificently proclaimed, Supreme Head and Governor of the
Christian Church, by Euodius, then Bishop of that place.

3. Famous, in that Antioch was (as by History does appear) the Second City (
Jerusalem being the First) which received the happy Government of Episcopacy;
the Constitution of which Government is so highly commended, and all due
obedience thereunto so necessarily and strongly urged by holy Ignatius, in
almost all his Epistles, as that he does little less than Anathematise all
those, who by their Schisms and Factions, plot to throw off the Yoke of that
kind of Primitive Government, which certainly must be Jure Divino, if any
thing, that has an Apostolical and Primitive Sanction and Practice for its
Foundation, can be so.

Hitherto we have traveled in our Discourse to find out S. Lukes Native
Country.

2. In the next place we are to take cognizance of his Name, the which, if well
considered, would afford (had we time) sufficient matter for a large Oration,
especially if we call to remembrance that Names are

Either for Indexes to declare the Nature and Essential properties of things;
as the three Names of God, Jehovah, (...)
Adonai, and Elohim; and so Adam taken from Adamah, his Mother Earth.

Or else other while Names are imposed to be as so many Remembrancers of
eminent Mercies and Deliverances already obtained. Thus Moses, so called from
Mashah, (...)
signifying his being drawn out of the Water by Pharaohs Daughter.

Or thirdly, Names do oft-times prognosticate the future eminency and worth of
the person, and that something extraordinarily remarkable, is to be
accomplished by him in the course of his life. Thus Joshuah and Jesus, the one
foretelling that he should be the Savior of the People of Israel from their
Enemies; the other, that he should be the Blessed Savior and Redeemer of the
World. In like manner Solomon (from (...)) a Prince of Peace. Both names, to
wit, that of Jesus, and this of Solomon portending, that by the first, sinners
should be redeemed and saved from the wrath of God, in and through the Death
and Passion, the Mediation and Merit of the Holy Jesu; and by the latter, that
the Jews should enjoy Halcyon days of peace and tranquillity under the Reign of
King Solomon.

Now it is not very certain, for which of these three Reasons this our
Evangelist was named Luke, though we find one of the Fathers to sit down
satisfied with the last, he concluding, That God by his wise providence had
ordered his name should be (...), thereby signifying that in process of time S.
Luke should become and Evangelist; and so with the Milk of the Gospel, feed
Christ's tender Babes, that they might grow thereby; for thus the word Luke
signifies ((...)) Milk, if any credit may be given unto the Authority of
Germanus, Archbishop of Constantinople, who giving a Reason why the Four
Evangelists were named Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, he thus bespeaks his
Reader. (...).

In the third place follows his Education, which was honorable and ingenuous,
not at all inferior to S. Paul's, who ((...)) was brought up at the Feet of
Gamaliel; and we read that S. Luke whilst he was in Ludi Literario, the place
of improvement amongst his (...) Competitors, beset with Examples, as with so
many Objects of Emulation, he did no way slacken his pace, but ever remembering
the Poets execration against Drones, scil. Occupet extremum scabies, mihi turpe
relinqui est, He so husbanded his time, as that like Saul, among the people he
soon surmounted his Fellows, and in a short while commenced Master of the Arts
and Sciences, and became Professor of the Languages, Hebrew only excepted; for
in that Language he was either wholy ignorant, or very much deficient, but
superlatively excellent in the Greek. Lucas Evangelista Natione Syrus, Graeco
eloquio eruditus, quem plerique tradunt Proselytum esse, and Hebraeas literas
ignorasse, etc. says Isidorus. Further, as he was an exact Linguist, so he
was also an acute Philosopher, and might well be reckoned (were he now
surviving) chief among the Virtuosi. We know that sometimes a Man of a
faithful tenacious memory, though of a very ordinary and shallow judgment, may
arrive unto a great perfection in the Tongues, and yet be a mere Ignoramus in
Philosophy, which in truth, is the chiefest and most noble part of Learning;
for it is Philosophy that rectifies the Judgment, improves Reason, regulates
the Affections, refines and sublimates the Intellectuals of a Man, as Hierodes
of old has well observed. (...), etc. That S. Luke was so great a Philosopher
as the premises speak him to be, we have two sure Foundations to bottom our
belief on: The first is the testimony of Theophylact, whose words are these.
(...), etc. which we may English thus, That Divine Luke, the Physician, was
born at Antioch, and was eminent in Philosophy; for who knows not that the
Philosophers at first were called (...), and Philosophy it self was (as here by
Theophylact) named (...), in which we see S. Luke had arrived unto a full
maturity, for he was ((...)) styled the Great Philosopher? The other Argument
to persuade us into a belief of his great experience and knowledge in all kind
of literature, especially that of Philosophy, is taken from his practice of
Medicks, unto the right management of which Art, is necessarily required the
highest attainment in Philosophy

4. And this leads us unto the fourth consideration, which was his laudable
Profession, to wit, Physic; an art so noble, so honorable and ingenuous, as
that your present Orator being at a nonplus, pleads an inability to express its
just encomiums; and therefore of necessity must pass it by with an and caetera.

But yet that we might not petere principia, it is granted on all hands and
backed with the ipse dixit of the holy Scripture, that Luke was (pardon the
expression) one of the College of Physicians, for Colos. 4.14. Luke the
Physician salutes you. So that what before he had learned in the Theory, that
he now makes good use of in the practice; and truly practice, is the end of
most (if not of all) Knowledge. The theoretical part of Learning being lodged
only in the Intellect, serves merely for the information of the Judgment;
whereas the practical has an influence on the whole life, and appears in every
individual action, and is sui Communicativa, and so promotes and advances, not
only the single persons own good; but also very generously the good of others.
Therefore what the Philosopher makes to be the end of Ethics, S. Luke here
makes the same of Physics, (...): And the Orator, Scientia virtutis non facit
virum bonum, sed actio secundum virtutem. The Reason is plain, because Omnis
laus virtutis in action consistit. It is not the knowledge, but the practice
of Virtue, that ennobles a Man with the title of Virtuous; for as the
Philosopher notes, (...). None merits the Appellation of Good, but he who does
Good; and therefore S. Luke knowing as much, no sooner has he attained unto a
maturity in the Theory, but (that he might lay forth his talent to the best
advantage) improves the same by his continual practice, especially of Physic.
And this might well be added further to complete our panegyric of him, That he
was no sour, crabbed, cruel-hearted Physician, who to make experiment, will
sometimes put a period to their Patients sojourning here on Earth, and send
them to Heaven sooner than Nature intended: But he was clothed with meekness,
love, candor, and humanity; all which gave him such footing and ground in the
hearts and affections of his Patients, that at length he is styled by way of
eminency ((...)) Luke the Beloved Physician, Col. 4.14.

5. In the last place, let us take notice of his Conversion unto Christianity,
with the various Appendixes of that his new Evangelical Life.

Happy Providence! Saul is Christened Paul; Luke the Physician, is by the Spirit
of Adoption, become S. Luke the Evangelist: He that cured others, is now in
mercy cured himself; and of an Heathen, made a Christian: But it is under
debate who was the happy instrument in Gods hand, of effecting so glorious a
work.

Some (as Epiphanius writes) attribute his Conversion immediately unto our
Savior himself, and affirm, That Luke was one of the Seventy Disciples sent
forth to Preach; but it is humbly conceived, Truth cannot consist with this
conjecture, in as much as it is evident, That either S. Luke did not exist in
our Saviors time; or if he did, yet that he never had the happiness to see him
in the Flesh, nor ever was he an eyewitness unto to any of his Miracles; the
which certainly he would have been, had he been one of the Seventy. But what
need we dispute this matter any further, seeing himself has decided it in the
Negative, in his Prologue to Theophilus? S. Luke 1.1.

Others ascribe his Conversion unto the powerful Ministry of S. Peter, who
whilst Bishop of Antioch, had Luke for one (say they) of his Catechumens,
which were some times adult, as well as young persons, and instructed him in
the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith. Hence it is that S. Basil, Orat. 25.
calls Luke the Disciple or Scholar of Peter, (...), etc.

But the third opinion seems to be the truest, and it is that of Tertullian, in
his Fourth Book against Marcion; which Heretic endeavored to invalidate the
Gospel of Saint Luke: There our Author maintains, That Luke was after our
Savior, and most of the Apostles, Certe tanto posterior, quanto posterioris
Apostoli sectator Pauli sine dubio, etc. Tertul. in Marcion. And in the
following words he intitles Paul to be Illuminator Lucae, The Converter of
Luke; for so Pammelius interprets that phrase, and seconds it with this reason,
Quod fidei lumen Lucae insinuerat, etc. because Paul instrumentally had
conveyed the light of Faith, and sound Religion, into the dark and blind
understanding of Luke, who before was alienated from the Life of God, by reason
of that Cimmerian darkness, ignorance and spiritual blindness that was in him
naturally; but now by the safe convoy of S. Paul's Doctrine, he is entered into
the mavelous Liberty of the Children of God. So then you may now behold S.
Luke as a Tree transplanted by Gods own hand into a better Soil; and therefore
let us go and see what Fruit he brings forth. Is he a barren fruitless
Fig Tree? Verily, no such matter; for, Plantae translatio est plantae
perfectio, according to the Herbalists Maxim. This our new Convert is as full
of Christian works as of words; do we but narrowly observe him, and we shall
ever find him, Remis incumbentem, diligent in the practice of Religion: As he
professes Christ, so he lives Christ. He is not like some late Enthusiasts,
who talk much of Religion, and have their mouths full of Divine, Seraphick
Discourses; but they are (vox and praeterea nihil) only an empty sound, little
or nothing of Works of Charity, and true Piety appearing in the whole current
of their lives. Such as these are the Trees full of Blossoms without Fruit,
that are reserved to cursing. These are they who pretend to a newer Light, than
is revealed in the Gospel; and to a new way of greater purity and sanctity than
ever yet was found out: But in their lives and actions, are as full of black
spots as others. These are they, who, as so many Drones, in the Hive of Gods
Church, only buz and make a noise, but bring in no Honey, nor bring forth any
Fruit meet for repentance; no ways beautifying and adorning the Gospel, which
they profess, with holy circumspect lives and conversations. Such as these open
the mouths of Turks and Pagans to blaspheme, and scandalize Christianity it
self.

But, God be praised, it is otherwise with our Evangelist S. Luke; for no
sooner does he know his duty, but does it, and adds double diligence to work
out his salvation with fear and trembling. We no where read that he ever was
idle; for whilst an Heathen he spent the Golden Sands of his fleeting time in
doing good to the Bodies of Men; and when a Christian, he is not come to a
quietus est; nor does he sue for a Writ of Ease, but moving in an higher
sphere, doubles his diligence, and spends his precious minutes in doing good,
not only to the Bodies, but also to the Souls of Men: So that with the one
hand, like the charitable and tenderhearted Samaritan, he pours Oil into the
wounds of the distressed Levites; and with the other, he applies the Balm of
Gilead, and many rich Evangelical Salvoes to the Plague-sores of Men's hearts.
He does not vainly boast of his Faith, as the Gnostics of old, saying, I have
Faith, but demonstrates the same by his good Works; for he well knows, that
although good Works are not a sufficient ground for Confidence, nor a sure
foundation for Faith; yet they are certain evidences of it. As S. Jam. 2.18. I
will show thee my faith by my works. And S. Bernard, Bona opera sunt spei
quaedam seminaria, charitatis incentiva, non fiduciae fundamenta, etc. Comfort
may be increased by good works, though not built upon them; they do manifest an
interest in Christ, though not merit any. Clemens Alexandrinus has noted well
that, (...), etc. By grace we are saved, but not without good works; and
therefore S. Luke does wisely join Faith and Works together; for Works without
Faith are of no value, and Faith without Works, is dead being alone, S. Jam.
2.20. He is well advised, that happiness is not intailed upon the knowledge of
our Masters will, but on the doing of the same. If ye know these things, happy
are ye, if ye do them, S. Joh. 13.17. Herein he directly treads in those
blessed steps, and walks in that narrow path of holiness which his Savior had
chalked out for him. And as Christ, so he, was famous for works of Piety, and
true Charity; nay, to raise our encomium of him a little higher, This our
Evangelist had by his holy exemplary life in his Christian station, acquired
unto himself such renown and honor, as that his fame ecchoed throughout the
Christian World: Witness Ignatius in his Epistle unto the Ephesians, (...), etc.

Further note we, that S. Luke spent his time after his Conversion chiefly in

1. The Ministry. 2. Or in Writing.
1. First in doing the work of an Evangelist, giving himself wholly to the
fulfilling that his Ministry which he had received. Though by the way we
cannot forget his modest unwillingness at the first, to take upon him so great,
so weighty an office, as is the Ministerial Function: Such was his Christian
humility, and self-denial, as that he was hardly persuaded to put his hand to
Gods Plough. But yet let none think that this his aversness did spring from a
desire to live in idleness, and to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof; for he was not ignorant, that the sloathful servant was to be
beaten with many stripes; but rather impute it unto an holy jealousy of his
own insufficiency, which, without doubt, was the only obstacle and remora in
his way to holy Orders. The same unwillingness we read in Isidorus, to have
been in S. Mark before his Ordination.

Nor secondly, may we (without injury to his pious memory) pass by his
uncessant pains-taking and diligence in the Ministry: For after once his
clouds of fear were dissipated, his doubts resolved, and his spirit animated
and steeled with courage, he enters the list, he fights the Lords Battles (more
Romano) undauntedly; and overlooking all worldly concerns, as of less moment,
he makes the Preaching of the Gospel to be his (...) his chiefest concernment.

And thirdly, most remarkable is his constancy. Neither the frowns of
adversity, nor the smiles of fortune, nor any Syrenical charms or allurements
of prosperity, could ever draw or court him off from his duty. He is not like
Lots Wife, that he should look back; nor to Demas, that he should, through an
inordinate love of the World, forsake Paul, whose Son he was in the Faith. No,
though all had forsaken him, yet not Luke, for, Only Luke is with me.

In the Verses antecedent to the Text, is laid down the apostasy and
backsliding of some who professed Christianity, and in particular, of Demas,
who had forsaken Paul, being (...), More a lover of Money, than of God. And as
for Titus, the necessitous affairs of the Church had caused him to hoise Sail,
and steer his Course unto Dalmatia: The like Summons had Crescens into Galatia,
or rather Gallia, (...), as Epiphanius supposes. So that only Luke is Paul's
constant associate and companion, forsaking all others, he adheres close to
Paul, Omnia postponens, Apostolum semper secutus est, says S. Ambrose. And the
Translator of Saint Jerome into Greek, affirms, That ((...)) Luke attended Paul
in all his voyages, until they both safely arrived at Rome, the then Metropolis
of the World; and whilst Paul sojourned at Rome (being detained there as a
prisoner) it is very probable (as may be gathered out of Epiphanius) that S.
Luke left him there for a while, and traveled with Crescens into France, where
(our Author says) he did make his chief residence, (...), and there Preached
the Gospel: But Gregory Nazianzen, allotting unto every Apostle and Evangelist
his several and proper Diocese, gives unto Luke Achaia; (...). But these things
are disputable, and therefore let us return back to Rome, where whilst S. Luke
was resident, he spends part of his time in Writing; for being commanded either
by Peter or Paul, or rather (as Chemnitius believes) by both, he compiles the
History of our Savior, which is called The Gospel of Luke; and another Book,
entitled, The Acts of the Holy Apostles. Both he wrote in opposition unto
those two grand Heretics and Forgers of Falsities, scil. Merinthus and
Cerinthus; which latter held Christ's Kingdom to be Earthly, and full of carnal
pleasures, consisting in ((...)) Meats, Drinks, and the like, after the mode of
the Turkish and Mohammedan Terrestrial Kingdom; yea, he was so notoriously
wicked, as that S. John seeing him come into the Bath when he was bathing,
hastily ran out, fearing lest he should tempt Providence, to cause the Roof to
fall down upon him, or the Earth to open and swallow him up, in case he should
presume to stay and be in the same place with such an Heretic and Blasphemer,
as then Cerinthus was accounted. Against these two ( Cerinthus and Merinthus)
it is said, that Saint Luke wrote, that so the Gospel, in its purity and verity
might be transmitted down to posterity; whereas, had Saint, Luke lived in
silence, the Christian World would have been imposed upon, and a false Gospel
ushered in by these Heretics, instead of the true one, as appears by a story
S. Jerome quotes out of Tertullian, in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastic Writers,
which is too long to be repeated here.

Moreover, it is worth our noting, that, if S. Luke had desisted from writing,
then many excellent truths necessary to be known, would have been concealed,
such as Peter's miraculous Releasment out of Prison, by the assistance of an
Angel: As also the Generation of John the Baptist; the Angels Advent unto the
Virgin Mary; Elizabeth's and Saint Mary's Hymns; the Angels appearing to the
Shepherds; the Doxology of the Heavenly Host; Anna and Symeons Testimony of
Christ; the Parable of Dives and Lazarus; of the Publican Zacheus; the Crooked
Woman; of the Ten Lepers: As also of the Pharisee and Publican going up to
pray; and of the unjust Judge, who feared neither God nor Man. Et alia multa
sunt quae inveniri possunt a solo Luca dieta esse, etc. Irenaeus adversus
Haereses. Nor is this the only commendation of S. Luke, That he has thus
communicated more to Posterity, than the rest of the Evangelists; but also we
may add one Flower more to the Garland of his praise, to wit, this, That he
has not only done all well, but also all so excellently, as that (Res gestas
non narrare, quam suis coloribus depictas omnium oculis praeponere videtur) he
has so exactly delineated, and (as it were) to the life painted out the
History of our Savior, and the Acts of the Apostles; as that (Apud multos
Pictoris nomen obtinuit) by many he was called The Painter. From whence some
did fancy, that the Images of our Blessed Savior, and of the Virgin Mary,
were by S. Luke first Limned and Painted out; the which two said Images, some
superstitious persons pretend to have kept unto the days of Irenaeus.

Hitherto we have beheld this Bright Planet running his race thorough the
Christian Orb, illuminating the dark corners of the Heathen World with those
Beams of Evangelical Light which he had borrowed from the great Luminary of
Heaven and Earth, even from Jesus Christ, the Fountain of Light. Hitherto we
have seen him shine gloriously, even as the Sun in his full Meridian.

But now to show the mutability of all created Beings, this shining Planet is
at length totally eclipsed by the interposition of the Opace, Dark Body of
Death. And no wonder; for when a Man has labored hard all day, and finished
his work, it is but reasonable that at night he should go to rest.

And this leads us to speak a word of his Death, which was 1. Timely. 2.
Natural.


1. Timely, for when the Sun had run his Annual course, Fourscore and four
times over his hoaryhead (as S. Jerome reports) he then, and not before, is
mowed down by the impartial Sithe of Death, and as a Sheaf of Corn fully
ripened, richly laden, he is carried by the Harvest-Men (the Good Angels) into
Christ's Barn.

2. Secondly, As his Death was timely in good old age, so it was kindly and
natural, not violent. Nothing but the multitude of years (a burden too heavy
for spent and fainting Nature) bows down his aged head. He is not carried up to
Heaven in the Fiery Chariot of Martyrdom, but rather the old cracked Vessel of
his Body, springing a Leak, suffers Shipwreck, and is lost in the midst of an
Ocean of Humors incident unto Old Age, where as his ever Blessed Soul (the
Passenger within) swims safe through the Waves and Billows of this troublesome
World, unto the happy Land of Canaan, and is lodged in Abraham's bosom for
evermore.

And what now remains, but that we attend the Corpse of this deceased Saint unto
his Grave, which is in Ephesus; for there he was buried. (...), as Theophylact
informs us. But S. Jerome makes Achaia, and Isidorus Bythinia, to be the Stage
on which Death acted this Tragedy, and cut asunder the Thread of his Life.
Whether this or that opinion be truest, we will no longer dispute, only in this
we are assured that they all agree, to wit, That S. Luke was twice Interred,
and had two honorable Funerals: The first was immediately after his Death; the
second was in the time of Constantine, who in the twentieth year of His Reign,
did out of honor to S. Luke, take up his Bones, together with the Bones of the
Apostle S. Andrew and Timothy, and caused them to be carried (as were Joseph's
unto Canaan, so theirs) unto Constantinople; (...), etc. Where (...) nobly
Interred them, and then left them to rest until the last Trumpet shall sound,
and summon all Flesh to appear at Gods Tribunal, where shall be rendered unto
every Man according unto the works of his own hands.

And now that we may be healed of all our Spiritual Diseases, and so live on
Earth, as that we may hereafter live in Glory; and there with S. Luke, and the
whole Quire of Heaven, sing forth to all Eternity, the Hallelujahs and Praises
of our Creator; let us devoutly pray in the words of our Church, and say,

Almighty God! who calledst S. Luke the Physician, whose praise is in the
Gospel, to be a Physician of the Soul; May it please Thee by the wholesome
Medicines of his Doctri^^ (...) of our Souls, through the (...) Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Gloria Deo.
FINIS

