AN EXAMINATION OF THE ESSAY: OR, AN ANSWER TO THE Fifth Monarchy.

Revel. Behold, He comes with Clouds and every Eye shall see Him; and they
also which peirced Him, and all Kindreds of the Earth shall wayl because of
Him; Even so, Amen.

Jam. 5. 8. Be ye also Patient, Establish your hearts; for the coming of the
Lord draws nigh.

By Edward Johnson, Gent.

London, Printed for W. Thomas, 1659.

AN EXAMINATION OF THE ESSAY, OR, An Answer to the Fifth Monarchy.
The Proof of the Essay, and the Essay-Masters pursuant to the Invitations;
Judge. 19. 30. Who having Considered of it, and taken Advice, Let me speak my
mind.
I Account it a great unhappiness this Nation groans under, not only that it
is broken into many Factions, but that whilst each of them Imposes the other
upon, All (or at least the most of them) pretend to Righteousness, (and
amongst those the late Essay). How much men (under this notion) have shrouded
their own Errors and Designs, by this means, exposing the name of the Lord to
Blasphemy; I leave every serious Christian to consider, I shall not censure the
Authors of this Paper, they being (in a great measure) strangers to me: but
wish that whilst we are Contending about (what least becomes one that ought to
be a Pilgrim in this World, viz.) the Civil-Government of this Nation, (to
which there are many pretended Titles on foot) we may not, as a House divided
against it self, fall into confusion; Nay, into the hands of the Common Enemy.
For preventing which, by moderating and helping the Considerations of these
Essay-Masters; I propose these following Queries.

I. Whether the late Single Person were not incited to the putting a force upon
this Parliament, and the set^ing up a Power contrary to Law, by you or some of
you? Or at least wise, whether you did not, or do not approve the Action, by
owning of, and contending for, the short Convention and turning out of this
Parliament; all but a few of which you Judge qualified for Trust and Rule, etc.
and if so, whether you are not accessory to his Evil, in taking the Government;
as an apt medium is, to a necessary consequence?

II. Whether your apprehensions of Christ's Kingdom had it is beginning in our
late Revolutions (without assigning, in which of them, and when, and where it
began) be a sufficient Ground to debarr the Nation from their share in
Government? And why our Revolutions of late years are more an evidence of
Christ's Kingdom, then those in former years; or the Revolutions in other
Nations, viz. Holland in the Change of their Government the troubles lately in
Poland, formerly in Germany and France, etc? And whether men had not as good
Grounds for such conclusions formerly, as you have now for yours? and whether
the Jews by the same Ground are not justified in their conclusions against
Christians; And the Pope in his pretended Infallibillity. They both having
their apprehensions to justify their Actions, as well as you yours for your
Conclusions?

III. In what special sense can it be said, that the Government of this
Nation, more then other Nations is given to Christ, since his Government,
whether considered Personal, or Spiritual, is to be Universal; And his
coming to his Government (when he takes it into his hands) being in respect of
certainty and speed, like lightning from the East to the West, or by what
Promise or Prophecy so inconsiderable a part of the World (as England), shall
be the seat of Christ's Kingdom, when all other Nations shall remain under the
Government of men, if not the worst of men?

IV. Whose work is it to take the Government from Men, and give it to Christ,
whether the Work of Men, or of God? If of God, what is Man that he should
interpose in it? If of Man or Men? At what time and times? and by what
Commission does he or they do it? that we may know how to obey: many having
formerly pretended to this Work, when designing only a Crown for themselves?

V. What Person or Persons are they, that in your sense are so qualified for
Government, and by what right do they so stand? If by the Law of the Land, by
what Law? If by God's Word, where, and how does it appear? since the reference
to the Laws of new- Haven in new England is no more binding then the Laws of
new- Boston there?

VI. Whether the Platform of the Commonwealth of Israel suited for the
Government of a select People, under a special Profession and Covenant, and for
the most part Typical and Allegorical; will, in all things suit England; and
whether the Scriptures does condemn all Civil Government in other Nations,
differing from that?

VII. If the Government of the Commonwealth of Israel (besides which we have no
Example of a Popular Government in Scripture) be to us only a Plat form for
our Government, what need then is there of any qualified Persons, for making
Laws, those Laws being already in the Word of God, which yet (not to derogate
from the Scripture) it is humbly conceived, will hardly extend to the
determination of Controversies in this Commonwealth, about titles of Land,
raising of Assessements, securing the Peace thereof from the Common Enemy, etc?

VIII. Whether at the same time, you say, you wirnesse against future Violence,
in the foundations of it you do not own the Violence; putt on part of this
Parliament; and impose on most of this Nation the greatest violence imaginable,
the being excluded (for ever as well as at the present) from all right of
Government? And whether, at what Instant it becomes practicable, are the
Governed any way beuer related to the Governors, than the Gibeonitcs were to
the Israelites?

IX. Whether the Debarring and Bereaving the Nation of their just Rights, in
matters Civil, as well for Future, as at Present, tends not to the provoking
them, to deprive you of both Civil and Spiritual; all men desiring (as lawfully
they may) to be delivered from those by whom they are Captivated: And thus
whilst you are pleading for the Freedom and Rule of Christians, you adventure
their utmost Vassallage, giving the Nation a just Plea for it; as also to
Blaspheme your holy Profession, and to say, that the Spirit of Munster has got
footing in England?

X. Whether you, or some of you, in former times were not forward Disciples of
John Lilburn, and Active in asserting the Freedom of the People, and promoting
their then intended Agreement; And if you run into so great Extremes about
Civil Government, what security can the Nation have of your Constancy to any
Government, though by your selves proposed?

XI. Whether seeing, as you say, this Parliament have been honored in God's
Work, the benefit of which we this Day reap; We may not hope God will honor
them further, in their cleaving to Him and His, seeing after six years
preparation, by affliction, and when under the height of Contempt, they were
unexpectedly brought together again; without any projection, or contrivance of
their own?

XII. Whether you, or the most of you, have not been as active as most men, in
supporting the Power of the late Single Person, by holding and executing Places
of special Trust and Profit for several years, until difference arose betwixt
Him and You, or till it fell in course to You to be Disbanded: and whether You,
or some of You have not received extraordinary Rewards under that Government;
and if so, whether you own your selves qualified for Government, the chief and
chargeable part of Repentance being yet wanting, viz. Restitution?

XIII. Since Obedience to the late Government is looked upon as so great a
Crime, that Repentance is required in the most godly, and best qualified that
acted under it; You are desired to show out of the Word of God, where ever any
People are required to Examine the Right and Legality of a Power, under which
they Live, and have Protection, before they yield obedience in things morally
lawful; and whether such being possessed with the seat of Government, are not to
be looked upon as the Powers that are; to which, the Apostle directs Obedience,
even under the Government of Caesar Augustus, who got the Empire by Blood,
Treachery, Rapine, and Oppression.

XIV. Whether, by the same ground, if your Government Essayed, were settled, we
ought not as well to dispute our obedience thereunto, as you, to former or
present Powers, since this has no more of the Suffrage of the People (if so
much) as that had: neither can you hold out more specious pretenses of Freedom
and Godliness than has been formerly pretended to; and the great Offense,
taken at the former Government, arose from subsequent Actions, and no man can
foresee what the best of men will be, till tried; and therefore, what security
shall the Nations have, that your Essayed Government and Governors shall be
better than the last form, surnamed the Apostasy?

XV. Whether, Since Repentance is required for former Obedience, Works will not
serve as well as Words, (especially, being joined with Words)? If so, Whether
our Chief Commanders in the Army, that adventured lives and all, (when you were
in a great measure secure,) to restore this Nation to its present freedom;
Whether these, I say, ought not to be looked on, as specily qualified for
Government, (God having been with them; and owned them,) and so to be the
Subject of Commendation, and not of Reproach?

XVI. That since in all Repentance some must judge the truth thereof, that you
would be pleased to assign your Judges, otherwise we are left without
Government, all (or almost all) being in your sense transgressors; And that
herein you would be pleased to consider, that if you pitch upon the baptized or
Independent Churches, As they (as such) have nothing to do to judge any thing
that is without, so it is to be feared they will judge favorably each for his
own party: And being your triers (you denying Communion each with other, and
therein differing) would hardly, by your own principles, find some of you, that
signed the Essay, qualified for Government. The Presby^er, you will hardly set
him up to judge, being biased also by contrary Principles and narrow spirit:
the Magistrate (if any there be in your account) cannot judge; they only by
your Essay, are to meddle with things merely Civil: so that it is humbly
conceived, your Essay is felo de se, and ought forthwith to be interred, and
the Testimony thereunto, since published, may serve for its Winding Sheet.

XVII. Whether there be not more of the Serpentine subtilty and craft, than of
the Simplicity and Innocence of the Dove, in so placing the names of the
Subscribers, that one John Owen is the first in the Paper, thereby misleading
the Reader to conceive it to be Dr. John Owen, in order to the giving
reputation to your Paper?

XVIII. Wherefore consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds, whether it
be not the Duty of all that meddle with Governments, seriously to weigh the
Apostle's words, Jud. 8, 9, 10. verses. And whether it be not better for you,
and all Christians, to study more their and your own duties, and how to obey,
and heartily pray for our Rulers, that God would spirit them for their great
work, and so fill them with Wisdom, to establish both our spiritual and civil
Liberty; that neither any Christlan be debarred in spiritual or civil Liberty;
and that no Profaneness, Atheism, or Injustice be in our Land; but Justice run
down as a stream, which; if the Lord have any pleasure in us, will be our
portion?

FINIS.

