Cain's Mark AND MURDER K. Charles the I. HIS MARTYRDOM Delivered in A SERMON ON
January the Thirtieth.

BY David Jenner, B. D. Prebendary of Sarum.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for John Williams at the Sign of the Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

To the Honorable MARMADUKE DARCY, Brother to the Right Honorable COGNIERS
DARCY Lord DARCY and MENIL.
SIR,
THe following Discourse, being Clad in a mean Country Dress, and wanting the
usual Ornaments of this Learned Age; High Strains of Oratory and Eloquence, and
the brave Flourishes of Rhetoric, was never by me thought Worthy of an
Imprimatur. But such has been the Importunity of some, and the Arguments of
others; pretending the Publication thereof may tend to the Public good, that
is, to the Confirmation of some in their Loyalty, and to the Reducing of others
from their Disobedience (which indeed ought to be, the (...), only Design of
all our Endeavors,) as that, at last it has free leave to Walk abroad; and if
it meets with any that are disaffected to the Present Government; I only
request, They would first Heartily peruse it, before they Censoriously Condemn
it: As for all others, I doubt not but their Charity will east a Veil over all
its Errata's.

And as for the reason of its Dedication unto your Honor, it is double.

First, Your High and Undeserved Favors bestowed upon my self:

Secondly, Your Eminent and Constant Loyalty, not only to His Present, but also
to His Late Majesty of Ever Blessed Memory.

For it is well known, that you did not only make it your Duty, but your
Delight (which is your Glory) to Serve His Late Majesty in the Extremity of His
Misfortunes: And you were ever found (in the very Front) among those many
Heroes and Worthies, which Fought and Suffered for Him.

And truly, were I not assured that your Modesty had rather your own Works,
than my Pen should express your High and Great Merits, I could easily enlarge
this short Epistle into a Vo^^me. And willingly Expatiate in your due Praises,
for venturing your Life and Fortunes in the Service of that Glorious Martyr
King CHARLES the I. Who was a Good Man; in Aristotle's strictest Definition, i.
e. (...), etc. Having in Him an happy Connection of all the Virtues (Gradu
Heroico) in the highest Degree.

And here, I cannot but admire, and be astonished, to read, that ANTONIUS
TRIUMVIR, a Roman Heathen should have such an High Valuation for Varro's
Learning; as, after Semence, to pardon Him and Subscribe

Vivat Varro, Vir Doctissimus. And that the most Exemplary Piety, the Universal
Learning, and the wonderful Acquirements of our Ever Blessed Sovereign CHARLES
the I. should not have the least Influence upon the Minds of his Murderers,
and should not have caused them to Retreive their own Unjust Sentence of Death,
which they most Barbarously had passed upon him; nor at last prevail with them
to Subscribe.

Vivat Rex, Vir Doctissimus, and Pientissimus. But the All-wise God designed a
better Life, and a more Glorious Kingdom for His Majesty; and therefore he
permitted them to open the Cage and Tabernacle of his Body, that so his
Immortal Soul might the sooner take Wing, and fly up unto the higher Regions of
endless happiness; and there take Possession of that Incorruptible Crown of
Glory, which the Holy JESUS (who was gone before) had prepared for Him.

Unto which place of Eternal Bliss, that your Honor, and all those, who have
faithfully served their Prince and Country; May in due time, arrive, shall be
the constant and daily Prayer of him, who is,

Noble Sir, Your Most Humble Servant DAVID JENNER.

Cain's Mark.
Genesis 4.15. The Lord set a Mark upon Cain, etc.


January the Thirtieth.
THE Day and the Text are (I hope) pertinently, though (I am sure) unhappily
met together; They making a sad and lamentable Report of a double Murder. The
one committed upon the Person of Innocent Abel, the other upon the Sacred
Majesty of King Charles the First of ever happy Memory. And you have the
Authors of both deservedly Marked and Branded for the same: The one by the Hand
of Justice, as in the Day: The other by God himself, as in the Text. The Lord
set a Mark upon Cain, etc.

For Methods sake we shall begin First with the Text, and then Conclude with
the Occasion and Matter of the Day. As for the Text, The Lord set a Mark upon
Cain, etc.

It is necessary we Inquire,

First, Into the Occasion of these Words. Secondly, What was this Mark.
Thirdly, What should be the End and purpose of it. Lastly, The Improvement of
the whole.
1. As to the Occasion of these Words. Vid. St. Aug. civ. Del. l. 15. c. 7, 8.
It was Cain's Barbarous and Malicious Murdering of his Dearest and only
Brother Abel: And his just fear of Gods Vengeance attending that his Crime: He
was in a Panick Fear and Dread, least his Fellow Creatures should become his
Executioners, and Revenge his Brothers Death; especially, seeing the chiefest
(if not the only) provocation he had for this his unheard of Fratricide, was
nothing else but his own inveterate emulation, and Serpentine Hatred, arising
only from Gods Approbation of his Brothers Offering, rather than of his. For
God was infinitely better pleased with Abels Oblation being accompanied with
honest simplicity, and sincere Heartedness, than with Cain's, notwithstanding
all his pompous shows, and specious pretenses of deep Devotion. And here by the
way, we cannot but take notice, how much Eva was deceived and disappointed in
her Expectations, (a sufficient Argument of Humane Frailty:) For after her
Fall, God having blessed the Conception of her Womb, and having Enriched her
with a Son, She presently ( Jonas-like) sondly sets her heart and affections
upon him, and Names this her Firstborn ((...)) Cain, that is, Possession and
Fullness. But her Second Son She calls ((...) or (...)) Abel, that is, Vanity
and Unprofitableness. By which diversity of Names evidently appears a diversity
of affection in the Mother, and it shows us the preposterous Love of lapsed
Mankind, as also the shallowness of our Judgments, in that we oftimes highly
esteem, and eagerly value that most, which in truth is worst, and make that the
object of our choice, which God refuses; and commonly place our joy and
Contentment in that which proves our greatest Cross, and occasion of Sorrow.
Further, this minds us of another Truth, to wit, that innocent good Men in this
World, many times (even like Christ and Abel from their Minority) are had in
less regard, Reputation, and esteem, then the Wicked and Debauched Bravado's of
the Age. Thus we find impartial Aristides Banished for his Virtues, Aemil.
Prob. vid.
Pious Socrates Aelian. Hist. l. 2. c. 13. p. 33.35.
Martyred for his Religion, whilst Atheistical and Scoffing Aristophanes has
the Euge and Applause of the People. Thus an Esau is preferred before a Jacob
by his Indulgent Father Isaac, and here, a Cain before an Abel by his fond
Mother Eva. Whereas God Almighty looks not at the outward Features and Beauty
of the Body, but at the inward accomplishments and Rectitude of Mind, at the
Sincerity, Uprightness, and Integrity of Heart. And upon this account it was
(as Justin Martyr well expresses it) that God rather accepted of Abel's than
Cain's Offering, Scil; Because Abel gave God of the Best, but Cain Offered the
very worst of his Flock and Fruits. Justin Martyr, ((...), etc.) And thought to
put God off with any small present, whereas Devout Abel thought nothing too
Good, too Rich, or too Costly for that God who had been the bountiful Doner and
Bestower of all that he enjoyed. Cain was willing to live upon, and (pardon the
expression) to Farm Gods Earth, but very unwilling to pay him the least
Moiety, Duty or Tyth justly due for the same. And therefore God (the searcher
of Hearts) does most righteously reject Cain's Person and Oblation, the which
unexpected accident Cain enviously observing, does immediately boil with anger,
and swell with indignation, for the Context, v. 5. assures us, that Cain was
exceeding wrath, and his Countenance fell: Where (by the way) we may again take
notice, that Hypocrites (such as was this Cain) cannot endure to be called,
reputed, or adjudged such; no, though they are truly conscious to themselves
that they are no other; nor are they willing to be served in their own kind,
nay, they will not give God himself leave to deal with them according to their
own Rule, nor as they deserve, for Cain will fret and fume, if his false heart,
and Hypocritical Sacrisice be detected, and rejected by God. Nor does his Rage
stop here, but presently in despite and Revenge to God (the Discoverer of his
Hypocrisy) he Plots the Felonious Murder and Slaughter of one of his Innocent
and chiefest Creatures: Nor is he ever satisfied, until he has imbrued his
Hands in his Brothers Vermilion Blood. And this should caution us all not to
Retain the least Envy and Malice in our Breasts against any Person whatever,
but especially not against our Brethren, Friends, and Relations, least that,
these Embers and Sparks break forth at last into an unquenchable Flame. It is
an Ancient but true saying, that Old Anger proves Cursed and irreconcilable
Malice. For Malice seldom gives over until it has effected the ruin and
destruction of the party it Opposes. Wherefore, as the Apostle advises, Let
not the Sun go down upon our Wrath, Ephesians. 4.26. But stop we evil beginnings in
a Pious Zeal, and prevent we such Malicious Designs and purposes by a Godly
Care. Thus much for the occasion of these Words, The Lord set a Mark upon Cain.

2. In the next place, we are to enquire into the nature of this Mark, which
God affixed upon Cain, and truly here we are at a loss, not having any certain
Rule to guide us, the Holy Scriptures (for Reasons best known to the Omniscient
Spirit) being wholly silent in this particular: So that, what we have
concerning it, we must borrow from Tradition, which at the best is but fallible
(in as much as it is humane:) But yet not to be despised, but rather owned and
reverenced, as long as such Traditions deliver nothing contrary to the revealed
Word of God, but are consistent with the same, as also with the Rule of Faith
and good manners. This being premised, I shall give you a brief Account of this
Mark, as we have it in the best and most Authentic Writers, for to name the
fancies of all Authors as to this matter, would be endless, and some of them
fruitless, being little else but the extravagant fancy, and incredible product
of a wild Brain, such as that which the great Antiquary Seldom mentions in his
Synedria veterum Hebraeorum, when speaking of Adams punishment for eating the
forbidden fruit, he tells us, that it was a Tradition, that Adam sat many years
(some say an 130) before he begat Seth, in Water up to his Nostrils ( in aqua
sederit usque ad nares, ob peccatum illud, quod de Arbare vitae comedendo
commisisset etc.) And from hence rose many Superstitious Customs and Ceremonies
used by the Jewish PENITENTIARIES, as Buxtorf. has noted to our hand. And it is
believed by some, that Cain, being accursed, Banished, or rather excommunicated
from the Society of the Church of God, for so (...): which we translate
Vagabond and Wanderer, do signify, (as hereafter more at large.) Did in the
like manner do Penance in Water for his notorious Fratricid.

But to let pass this fabulous Story, and to come nearer to the business in
hand, some affix this Mark unto Cain's whole Body. Others confine it only to
some particular part and Member thereof.

Of the first sort are those who make this Mark to consist in a Paralytical
fearful trembling of all his joints, Head, Hands and whole Body, especially at
the sight and occurrency of any living Creature, whether Man or Beast, such
being his dreadful reflections upon his horrid Guilt, as that he feared every
Creature he met with would prove the Harbinger of Death unto him,
notwithstanding God had (to the contrary) passed his word and promise for his
preservation: Fagius confirms this opinion with the following Reason, Scil.
Because God said to Cain. v. 12. Thou shall be a Fugitive and Vagabond in the
Earth, that is, as the Septuagint render it, (...) etc. Thou shall go sobbing
and sighing, trembling and quaking on the Earth. Which is the just reward of
Murder.

Others are of opinion, that God did not set on Cain any other visible (...),
Mark or Sign (for so the word (...), Oath, signifies) but what did appear unto
the view of every one, in his Physiognomy, frightful gashly look, and dejected
countenance. For that his Countenance did thus look strange and gashly is
evident from the question God put to him, when he was a Murderer only in
intention as v. 6. God said to Cain, why art thou wroth? and why is thy
Countenance fillen? if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou
do not well, sin lies at the door: I know by thy knitted Browe and frowning
Countenance, that thou have not done well, (...); thy mad hellish look
discovers the naughtiness of thy heart; thy very Forehead speaks thy guilt,
therefore tell me the truth, have thou not plotted some mischief, such as the
Murdering of thy dear Brother? Surely, if Cain looked thus rufully
discontented before he had Slain his innocent Brother, we may be consident,
that after the perpetration of so execrable a Fact, nothing but Horror and
Amazement seized upon him; well then might his Fore head wrinckle it self into
a Thousand Furrows, and his whole Face become the Scene; On which you might at
the first view behold the Prologue and Epilogue, the first and last part of so
direful a Tragedy. It is observable that the Hebrew Word (...) does not only
signify Anger, but also, and that very frequently, a Countenance and Face, and
sometimes an Angry Countenance, and next because the Countenance is, irae
index, as Buxtorf. notes, the Discoverer of a Man's inward wrath and Anger. And
it is believed by some that Cain looked thus, i. e. furiously, angrily, and
discontentedly; so that who ever saw him might easily conjecture him to be the
Murderer, none ever looking with such an unkind Aspect and frightful hugh as
did Cain, in so much as that his Murder might be read in his Eye, and by the
wretched forlorn cast thereof, Men might soon perceive the late Murtherous Act,
bad habit and intent of his Mind: For you know who says it, Animus habitat in
oculis, the Mind dwells in the Eye, and by the several Aspects and Casts of
the Eye, many intrinsecal Vices (as well as Virtues) are commonly discerned. In
Holy Scripture we read of an Evil, as well as of a good, Eye; Prove. 23.6. Eat
not the Bread of him that has an evil Eye. ((...)) that is, eat not the Bread
of him who has a Covetous Eye, and in 2. Pet. 2.14. We read of an Adulterous
Eye, as also in Deuteronomy. 15.9. of an Envious Eye. Take heed that thine Eye be not
evil against thy Brother. And in 1. Sam. 18.9. we read of a Murdering Eye, for
it is said, that Saul eyed David from that day forward. Montanus Arias renders
the words (malign aspiciens) Saul looked upon David with an Evil, Malicious,
Murdering Eye: So that, who ever had then beheld Saul's Eye, might easily have
perceived the Murtherous intent of his Mind against innocent David; and from
hence (I mean, from the Evil, Cruel, Envious, and Malicious Cast of the Eye,)
Murderers of old were usually called (...), i. e. Men Scur, Grimm, Fierce, and
Savage in Countenance. Much of this opinion was Nehemanides, only he was grossly
mistaken in making Cain's Countenance to look so dreadful and so frightful, as
that none of Mankind durst ever after associate with him; for the contrary
appears, in that Cain had Society with, and a plentiful issue by, a Wife, whom
(if he did not Marry) he knew after he was thus stigmatized by God. v. 17.

But to wave this, the generality of writers conclude, Vid. Critic.
that God did set some peculiar and visible Mark on Cain, and that from hence
after Ages (in imitation of the Divinity) did fix Marks on persons, as
Characteristical notes and signs, sometimes of their Honor and Renown, other
while, of their Shame and Naughtiness. And these Marks were either Divine,
Ecclesiastic, or Civil; Divine was that Mark which we read of in Ezekiel. 9.4.
When God Commanded the Angel to Mark the Foreheads of all the Men that sighed
and Mourned for the Abominatious that were done in the midst of the City.

As for Marks Ecclesiastic, Justin Martyr makes mention of them in his 118
Question, where he tells us, it was the Custom of the Church, that the Minister
((...) etc. with his right hand did set a Mark on those that were baptized, but
what was this Mark, he is not in that place pleased to tell us, though it is
more than probable, that it was the Sign of the Cross, which is now in use.

Civil Marks were such as the Supreme Authority did affix unto Men, either as
Demonstrations of their Worth and Renown, or else of their Guilt and
Punishment, and these latter had commonly a mixture of justice and Mercy, they
being inflicted not only as Signs of punishment, but also as Marks of favor,
and of Reprieve from that Death which those Malefactors by their Capital Crimes
had justly deserved, but were for certain wise politic Reasons Reprieved,
however Branded for Peccants. Of this nature was both the Grecian and Roman
Mark with which they were wont to Stigmatize Capital Malefactors, and usually
they set either Theta or the first Letter of the Malefactors name: In like
manner it is thought by some that Cain was Marked in the Forehead with ((...))
Coph, the first Letter of his Name. And it is probable from hence the Romans
borrowed their Custom of setting the Letter C: (which is equivalent with the
Hebrew Letter Coph) on the Foreheads of Notorious Transgressors: For with them
(I mean the Romans), was frequently termed Litera Condemnationis, as, A, was
Litera Salutaris. R. sin. Antiqu.
What ever Cain's Mark was, we may be assured, it poined out Gods Mercy and
Cain's guilt, and consequently did declare his disgrace and ignominy, like
those Stigmatici or Malefactors (for the terms are Synonimous) among the
Romans, whose lives indeed were spared but yet they were Branded with some
infamous Letter in the Hand or Forehead, whence Pliny called them Inscriptos:
and others called them Literatos, from the Letters set upon them, thus the
Athenians Branded their Enemies (the Samii) when they took them Captive, from
whence arose the Proverb.

Samiis Neminem esse Literatiorem. Rabbi Solomon (as quoted by P. Fagius and
other Critics) is of opinion that Cains Mark was either the first Letter of
Jehova or of his own Name, though others (and they of no small fame) Conclude,
that Cain's Mark was indeed in his Forehead, and that it resembled the figure
and aspect of one of the Seven Planets, and that in after ages the Sons of Men
(which were the Posterity of Cain) soon became Idolatrous and Worshipped the
Host of Heaven, to wit, the Sun, Moon and Stars: And they so for prevailed as
that afterward they tempted the Sons of God, that is, the Seed of Seth unto the
like Idolatry, For Acts 7.43. Ye, that is, ye Jews the Seed of Seth, Abraham
and of Isaac, ye have taken up the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of your
God Remphan, Figures which ye made to worship them etc. On which place
Occumenius writes, that this Remphan was a Star painted in the Forehead of
Moloch, and that it was usual for the Heathens of old thus to paint their Gods.
And our English Histories assure us, that here in Great Britain (whose Radix
signifies to paint,) about the time of the Trojan War, Men were wont to paint
and Mark not only their Idol-Gods but themselves also with a Star in their
Foreheads. The like we read of the Phaenicians and other Nations nearer the
place where Cain and his Progeny lived, and it is probable after Ages did this
in honor and in imitation of Old Cain, whom Tradition makes to be thus
Stigmatized and Marked, in the Forehead, with a Star: And thus Cain's
posterity made and accounted that Mark a Badge and Emblem of honor, which God
instituted to be not only a Token of future security and preservation, but also
a signal Mark of present Guilt, and of Divine displeasure.

There is one opinion more (the most probable of all) and it is that which the
Learned Gregory of Oxford mentions, to wit, that God did set some certain
Letter of the Hebrew Alphabet on Cain: And this his conjecture is borrowed from
that incomparable Critic Gerundensis, who tells us, that the Hebrew word
((...)) Oath, signifies an Alphabetical Letter, as well as signum, a Mark, and
that the Hebrew Text ((...)) which we translate, the Lord set a Mark upon Cain,
may as well be read thus, the Lord set a Letter upon Cain etc. Which Letter he
and others think probably to be the Hebrew Letter ((...)) Tau, which is the
first Letter of the word ((...)) Teshuvah, that is, Repentance, for God did
primarily design by this Mark, Cain's Repentance and conversion: And it is not
to be forgot, that the very same Letter ((...)) Tau, God Commanded the
destroying Angel to set on the Foreheads of all those good Men who repented,
and mourned for the Abominations and Sins committed in the City. For because
the above mentioned devout Persons, did seriously and after a godly manner,
sorrow and grieve for the Sins of the Land: God Almighty when he commissioned
his Angel to Kill and Destroy all the ungodly and wicked in the Land, gave to
the said Angel a special Charge first to Mark with the Letter Tau, all those
that truly Repented, and that were to be preserved from that common
Destruction; for Ezekiel. 9.4. what we translate, set a Mark upon the Foreheads
of the Men that sigh, etc. May thus be read, as Junius observes, etc. (...)
that is, And Tertulll. adversus judaeos c. 11. p. 104.10. says the same, super
quos est Tau signum ne accessetitis.
set a Tau upon the Foreheads of the Men that sigh, etc. And Vatablus quoting
the Hebrew Rabbis, says, they thus read the place, and so does Drusius
Tertullian and Grotius, but they do not make this Letter Tau to be the first
Letter of Teshuvah Repentance, but rather of ((...)) Torah, which signifies the
Law, and then the meaning of the place is this, go set a Tau on all them who
have conscientiously kept (the Torah) the Law of God, and have mourned and
sighed for others transgressing the same. After this manner they conceive Cain
was Marked in the Forehead with the Letter Letter Tau, which was to put him in
mind of Two things. First, of Torah the Law of God which he had wilfully
broke, in Murdering his Brother. Secondly, of Teshuvah, His indispensable Duty
of Repenting, and bewailing that his so diabolical Act.

And thus at large we have indeavored to give you the best account (we can) of
the Nature of this Mark which God set upon Cain.

Thirdly, It follows that we enquire out the end and final Cause for which God
was pleased to set a Mark on Cain, and in all likely hood, Gods end was Two
fold, either in respect to Cain himself, or else in regard to Posterity.

If in respect to Cain, then it was either a Mark of Punishment, or (Secondly)
a Token of great Favor and Mercy toward him.

First, It was a Mark of Punishment, In as much as it signified Cain's
Banishment and Excommunication out of the Glorious presence of God himself, and
from the Communion of his Holy Church. For as it is a great Solace to a Pious
and Devout Soul to enjoy God in the Society and Communion of his Church, so is
it on the other hand a great Judgment to be deprived of the same: Ignatius in
his Epistle to the Ephesians, excellently describes the Privileges of
Church Fellowship, when he says, that if the Prayers of One Holy Man (such as
Moses, David, or Jacob) have been so prevalent and powerful with God Almighty
as to divert immanent Judgments, and to bring in Personal and National
Blessings, if so, (...), etc. How much more persuasive then are the Prayers of
the Bishops and whole Church unanimously met togerher as in one Chorus to Laud
and Praise God. And what can these Universal Prayers be, but as a thick cloud
of Incense Ascending up from the Altar to the highest Heavens, and as the sweet
Harmony and Melodious Consort of Celestial Music, sounding in the Ears of the
Divine Goodness? And as it is Heaven upon Earth thus to enjoy the Rays and
Beams of the Glorious Sun of Righteousness, shining full bright within the pale
and Bounds of his Church; so on the other hand, it is the greatest punishment
imaginable; yea, verily Hell upon Earth (though Erroneous and Debauched Men do
not think so) to be deprived of the same, and swallowed up in worse than
Cimmerian Darkness, to be delivered up to Satan, and cut short of the fruition
of God and his Holy Ordinances: This (says that Ancient Father of the Primitive
Church) is one of the greatest punishments any Man on this side Hell is capable
of: And such was the punishment of Wicked Cain, employed and signified in his
being Stigmatized. Now that Cain was thus Excommunicated and Banished from the
Church of God, Paulus Fagius, Bonfrenus (as quoted in the Synops. Crit.) and
the Learned Bochartus proves.

First, from Gain's being a Vagabond and Wanderer upon the Earth: For the word
((...)) which we Translate Vagabond, Buxtorf enterprets to signify Extorrem,
that is, an Exile, a man Out-Lawd, one that is deprived of all Law
Ecclesiastic and Civil, for so the Extorres were Sentenced, and therefore
seeing Cain was such a one, he must necessarily be Excommunicated, and abridged
of all Church Privileges and Fellowship.

Secondly, In that Cain is said (in the Verse immediately following the Text)
to go out from the presence of the Lord, etc. Paulus Fagius.
Discessit ab co loco ubi Dominus illum convenerat, ubi tum erat Ecclesia and
Caetus piorum ad Cultum Dei Confluentium, etc. The sum whereof is this, that
Cain departed from the place where God met him, and where the Church of God at
that time was fixed, and went his way into Nod, that is, into a strange
Country, or rather (in terram Vagationis) into a Land of Banishment and Exile,
far remote from all Divine Worship, Ordinances, and true Religion; And there,
in that Land of his Banishment, his Sons and Posterity became Idolatrous and
extremely wicked; and welf they might, being given up to vileness of affection,
Reprobateness of Mind, and being shut up in Darkness and Spiritual Ignorance,
they might soon be alienated from the true Church, and pure Worship of the ever
living God: So then, as soon as Cain is become a Willful Murderer, God
Banishes him out of his Glorious presence, as also debars him from all
Communion with the Church of God: From which passage of Divine Providence, we
may (with the above mentioned Author) learn two special Truths.

First, That, Malos non esse ferendos in Ecclesia, etc. As soon as men are upon
sufficient Grounds discovered and proved to be notoriously wicked, and enormous
in their Actions and Conversations, they then ought to undergo the Churches
Censure in order to their Amendment! And therefore as soon as Cain's Murder is
Revealed and proved, God out of Hatred and Indignation to that his Sin, turns
him out of his Favor, and Churches Communion, and all because, Virtue and Vice,
Light and Darkness, God and Belial, may not cohabit, and dwell together. All
care then, is to be used for the preserving Gods Church pure and spotless,
without Wrinckle or Blemish: For as God Almighty at the Judgment Day will make
a Separation between the Sheep and the Goats: So does he Authorize his Bishops,
Pastors, and Governors of the Church Militant here upon Earth, to Separate the
Notoriously Bad from the Eminently Good. As for Hypocrites and such Wicked Men,
whose Naughtiness cannot be discovered nor proved, they being Masked over with
an outward Profession and Form of Religion, and so lying undiscovered, must be
tolerated in the Church, for they are the Tares which will grow up with the
wheat: But as for all Cain's who are openly wicked, whose Villainies may be read
in their Foreheads, they are not to be permitted to enjoy so transcendent a
Privilege as Church Fellowship, but ought to be presented in due Course of Law.

Secondly, From hence we may be informed of the many Dangers Ghostly and Bodily
all Excommunicated Persons are exposed unto: (Quantis in periculis versentur
illi, and quam expositi sint Satanae and omnibus Malis, Qui extra Ecclesiam
sunt constituti? etc.

A Wicked Man Excommunicated, like Cain, is from under the Protection and guard
of Divine Providence, he is exposed to Men's Malice, to the Beasts cruelty, and
lies open to all the fiery Darts of Satan's Temptations. His Sin and Guilt
subjects him to the vengeance and viols of Gods wrath, and he may well fear
that every Creature will take up Arms against him, and become the Executioner
of Gods Anger, and so pay unto him the Wages of his sin, which is Death; and
that which is worst of all, he being Excommunicated Gods Church and Favor, is
given up unto a Reprobate Mind, and unto all manner of Profaness, as was Cain
and his whole Generation. But Secondly, this Mark set on Cain, was not only for
a punishment to him as it denoted his rejectment and Excommunication out of
Gods Church and Favor, but also in that it was a perpetual Brand and Mark of
Infamy and Ignominy set upon him on purpose to discover unto all Persons his
foul fact, his horrid Murder and Guilt: Yea, briefly, it was as the
Handwriting on the wall, or as the Finger of God Pointing out and declaring to
the whole world, This, (...) S. Cbrys. Ho, 19. in Gen 3.
This is the Murderer, This is that cursed Cain who so maliciously slew his
pious and innocent Brother Abel.

As this Mark of Cain's was for his punishment, so likewise, was it for a
special Token and Sign of Gods clemency and Mercy toward him, and that first,
in as much as it was a Mark of Preservation, St. Chryl Tom. 3. in Psalm. 144. p.
5.20 c.
and the assurance of a Long Life. God might in his rigor and Justice have cut
him off, in the very Act of Sin, but ((...)!) unfathomable is the depth of Gods
love, unconceivable is the immensity of his Clemency, unsearchable are the
Riches of his Mercies toward the Sons of Apostolized Man; he saves a live when
he might justly have killed, and suffers them to tread upon his Earth, whose
heavy load of guilt and sin might well have pressed and sunked them down to the
center of it. Such is the Superlativeness of Gods Benignity, such are the
yearnings of his Bowels of Compassion toward Guilty-Cain, as that he does not
only here in the Text, Reprieve him from the sudden Execution of the Sentence
of a speedy Death, according to the Tenor of the Law made against Murder, but
bestowed also Long life upon him, which was a Mercy so great, as that it is
beyond conception and expression.

And that Cain lived long (as the premises speak) is an universal Tradition,
and the Sacred Scriptures (those infallible Oracles of Truth) assure us that he
lived to see his Childrens Children, it was a general opinion among the Jews
that Cain lived unto the Seventh Generation: to this purpose, they read the
words immediately before our Text.

Whosoever Slays Cain, Vengeance shall be taken on him Sevenfold etc.

The Hebrews read them thus,

Whosoever Slays Cain, at the Seventh Generation Vengeance shall take hold on
him.

And thus they make the words prophetical of Cain's living unto the Seventh
Generation, and of his being Killed in that Generation, and who ever should
then Kill him should be severely punished. The same Tradition makes Lamech to
be Author of Cain's Death. For whilst he was lying solitary in the Woods upon
the Ground, Lamech (an Hunter) mistaking him for a wild Beast Shot, and killed
him; for which Fact, Lamech's two Wives Adah and Zillah (v. 23. of this
Chapter) would no longer live with him, but endeavored a Divorcement from him,
he being a Murderer: Wherefore Lamech makes his just defense, and vindicates
himself, and takes off their Accusation of Wilful Murder, alleging that he
slew the Man Cain against his will, unawares; otherwise he had not done it; and
therefore, if God did permit Cain (a willful and malicious Murderer) to live
so long as to the Seventh Generation, he did not question, but God would suffer
Lamech (who had at the worst committed only Manslaughter unawares by mere
casualty) to live not only unto seven, but also unto Seven times seven
Generations, that is, unto a far greater number of years, then did Cain. St.
Chrysostom is of opinion that Lamech was a very good and just man, St.
Chrysostom. in Genesis 4. Hem. 10.
and that because, (...) etc. a good man is always the first accuser of
himself; For such an one was Lamech, who as soon as ever he had accidentally
Killed a man, does not conceal it (as did Cain) but ingenuously Confesses it,
and therefore if Cain sound mercy, much more Lamech.

But to conclude this particular, we will no longer traverse the above
mentioned Tradition, nor dispute its verity or falsity, only this we are
assured of, scil. That Cain lived long after the Commission of his detestable
Fact, and the Signature on his Forehead was a confirmation and sealing of the
lease of a Long Life to him, all which was an undeniable Argument of Gods
Goodness and Mercy toward him.

2. This Mark was a Token of great Mercy, in that God thereby did declare he
would not only give Cain a longer time to live in, but also a longer time to
repent in. For by thus delaying his Execution, God primarily aimed at Teshuvah
his sincere Repentance and conversion, expecting that now he should redeem
time, expiate and wash out (as much as in him lay) the stain of his
Blood-guiltiness in the Tears of Godly sorrow, of unfeigned Contrition and
hearty Repentance: It being an unexpressible Mercy to have a Moment of time to
repent in, and to sue for a pardon; but God be praised, this was Cain's good
hap; whereas many (like Zimri and Cozbi) are cut off by the Hand of Justice in
the very Instant, and Act, of sin.

Thus far we have heard how this Mark concerned Cain's own person.

It follows, that we enquire wherein it concerns us, and All men. The which it
does, In as much as it is a Mark of Caution and Warning unto all men, that they
do not presume to commit the same, or any other, sin; St. Chrysos. Hom. 19. in
Gen 3.
least God visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Third and Fourth Generation
of them that hate him, and that will not keep his Commandments. And although
Cain found Mercy, yet it is a great question whether any who shall dare
presumptuously to commit the like Transgression shall find the least Mercy, and
that because, posteriorum peccata semper sunt graviora, second sins are always
the worst, not only in their Nature, but also in their dreadful consequences
and effects.

2. This was a Mark of Instruction unto others, that they should not without
special Commission from God and lawful Authority Kill any Man, no though he,
were a Cain, a Murderer, and this is St. Chrysostomes note on the place,
(...), etc. Seeing all Vengeance belongs unto God and unto his Vicegerents, i.
e. the Higher Powers upon Earth, it is not lawful for any private Man what ever
to take upon him the Executing of the Law, nor to Kill any Man though never so
criminal without a particular Warrant from lawful Authority. ( Non licere
privato cuique vel paricidam occidere, etc.) It being Grot de jure belli and
pacis.
contrary to the very Law of Nature for one person-to Kill another though he be
never so Peccant: And although we read of private persons Killing of others, as
of Ehuds stabbing of Egglon, and of Phine as his running through Zimri and
Cozbi, yet they either had a special command from God, or were commissioned by
Lawful Authority, to do the same.

THE PARALLEL, OR K. Charles the I. HIS MARTYRDOM.
HAving done with the Text, and its Context: It is requisite, that we make
Application of the Premises, as far as they concern the Solemnity of the Day:

And to this purpose, we will briefly run The Parallel between them.

And consider, That, As, in the Context, We have an Holy and Innocent Abel; who
is, in Sacred Writ, styled, The Beloved, or Accepted of God, as also, (...),
the Just and Righteous Man, Heb. 11.4.

So, in the Day, we have a Pious and Religious CHARLES; the Etymology of whose
very Name, if taken from the Latin and Hebrew, speaks him to be Charus-El, one
Dear to, and Beloved of God: Or, if taken from the Greek, (...), one always
wishing his People joy and happiness: Or else, from (...), one that ever was
the Grace, and Glory of his People: And which is infinitely more, he was,
(...), The Anointed of God, and represented the Divine Majesty it self. And
further, that he was like Ahel also, (...), The Just and Righteous Man, is
evident in that, rather than he would be unjust and unfaithful to his Trust, he
chose to exchange a Corruptible Crown on Earth, for an Immarcessible One in
Glory, and rather than he would wound his own Conscience, or wittingly wrong
and injure his People by betraying their Rights and Privileges, he chose Death
before Life, and resolved to part with all the endearments of this Life, though
attended with never so great an affluence of Worldly Honor and Pleasure, then
to forfeit his Interest in Heaven.

And, as in the Context, Divine Providence declared, that Virtue and Goodness
being (Caelitus Natae) Heaven born, are no proper Inhabitants of this lower
sinful World; But, Astraea like, are Commissioned only for a while to View it,
and then to withdraw behind the Canopy; being the proper place of their
Residence was the glorious and highest Heavens. And therefore, God, in order to
the Exaltation of his Devout Servant Abel, unto his promised Mansion of ever
lasting kest, did permit wicked and envious Cain to give him an Exit hence, by
treacherously and forcibly dislodging his Immortal Soul out of its Terrestrial
and Fleshly Tabernacle.

So in the Day, The All-wise God, who superintends all Affairs and
Transactions, was pleased, as on this Day, to loosen the Reins of Government,
and to give Liberty unto Licentious Wicked Men, Sons of Belial, to vent their
Spleen and Malice, in Assassinating the Sacred Person of our Dread Sovereign
King CHARLES the 1. (who was too good to Associate any longer with sinful
Mortals) that so he might the sooner be Translated from these inferior Regions
of Sin and Misery, unto a perfect state of endless Bliss and Happiness.

In the Text, You have a Notorious and Aecursed Fratricide.

In the Day, A most Malicious and Pernicious Regicide.

In the Former, You have the true Cause of Abels Death and Murder, to wit, his
hearty Devotion, and sincere Piety toward God. 1 John c. 3. v. 12.

In this Latter, You have the Chief (if not the only) occasion of King CHARLES
his being so Barbarcusly and Cruelly Murdered, to be His Pious and Heroic
Resolution, to maintain the True Protestant Religion, in which he had been
Educated and brought up; which highly incensed the Papists: As also, his
unalterable Resolution, to preserve inviolably the wholesome Laws of the Realm;
together with the just Rights and Privileges of the Episcopal-Protestant
Church; which hugely enflamed the Dissenters, and made them miscall his firm
Perseverance in true Virtue and Honesty, a Stubborness of Will, and a
Pertinacious Obstinacy: This was the prime Cause, for which Jesuitical Papists,
and Deluded, Furious Dissenters, so unanimously Conspired the Ruin of that so
excellent a Prince.

And therefore, as Abel must die; because he would not (like Cain) dissemble
with, nor be false to his Maker, 1 John c. 3. v. 12.
as St. John informs us, in the forementioned Epistle.

So must King CHARLES die, not by the hand of Justice, but of Treachery, and
all Because, he would not be perjured in violating his Coronation Oath, nor
become Fedisragous and false to God and his Country.

And, as faithful Abel would not (to save his Life) swerve from the Rule of
Righteousness, nor from the Rubric of Gods Word and Command, nor would he
Innovate by offering up false Fire and Incense upon the Holy Altar, nor would
he present God with the Sacrifices of Fools; but gave him the best of his
Flock, and did Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and did maintain the
Orthodox Religion in its Power and Purity, and for so doing, both His Person
and Oblation found Acceptance with the Alenighty: Whereas on the other hand,
irreligious Cain valued not the Laws of his Maker, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastic, nor did he care to observe that Form and Mode of Divine Worship,
which God had prescribed. But played the abominable Hypocrite, putting the
Allmighty off with a little Lip-Service, and outward Formality; for which
Dissimulation His Person and Oblation was deservedly rejected by God. And Cain
being thus rejected, does immediately revenge himself upon his Innocent
Brother. For his Breast boiling with Choler and Anger, his Heart swelling with
Envy and Malice against Abel; he does without farther Deliberation, not only
Plot and Contrive, but also unhappily accomplish and effect the Murdering of
him.

As thus, Abel in the Context,

So King CHARLES in the Day, is most Inhumanely Destroyed and Murdered, for
his constant maintaining the True Reformed Religion, the established Episcopal
Government of the Church of England, the Righteous and Equitable Laws of the
Kingdom. So that, once again, with Tears and grief of Heart, let us say it,
Holy CHARLES was Murdered for his Piety and Faithfulness toward God; for his
Zeal toward the Protestant Church, in defending her Doctrine and Discipline,
her Rites and Government, in opposition unto all Jesuitical, Factious
Innovators; witness his Learned Dispute with that Incomparable Scholar, the Old
Earl of Worcester.

For, here we must premise, that if King CHARLES would have yielded unto the
unreasonable and unconscionable Demands of his Enemies both Papists and
Dissenters, who jointly desired an Abolition of the known and ratified Laws of
the Realm, as also, an utter Extirpation of the established Government of the
Church, and the Introduction of either the old Superstitious Mode of Rome, or
the new fangled Mode and Form of Geneva, in Divine Worship: If his Majesty
would have consented unto these their most unjust Demands, then indeed, he
might have lived longer, though not without a galled and wounded heart.

But, God be praised! such was the height of his Faith, such the undauntedness
of his courage, as that, this Blessed Prince chose rather to die Manfully, yea,
Gloriously, with a good Conscience, then to live Ignominiously and Shamefully,
with the stain and black spot of Guilt upon his Forehead

And, as, Righteousness and justice toward God and Man had been the drist and
design of all his Actions, so, eternal Glory and happiness for himself, was the
ultimate end of all his Dusires and enterprises. And therefore, as he had not
failed in the former, so, that he might not miss of the-latter, he does most
meekly and patiently submit to the cruel stroke of an unjust Death, and dies a
Martyr for the Reformed Protestant Religion, (...)
a Defender of the Protestant Faith, a patron of the Episcopal-Protestant
Church.

But to proceed in the Parallel;

As Abel was Murdered (according to Tradition) in his own Field, upon his own
Ground; and that, not clarcarly, or privately, in a Cellar, nor covertly in a
Bed: But, Audaciously in the open Field, in the full view of Heaven and Earth,
which cirenmstance extremely argued the Brazen-Fore-head, the Monstrous
Impudency of Cain the Murderer.

So, King CHARLES was persidiously Murdered and slain, not in a Foreign
Country, nor in another Man's Territories, but upon his own proper Ground; at
his very own Palace Gate. Nor was this done in a By-Corner of the Gate,
privately or obscurely, but in the sight of Thousands. For now, the
Conspirators were so hardened in wickedness, and were grown so bold and
confident, as that, they desired no cloak to cover their Villainy, and therefore
they, now scorning to assault His Royal Person, sneakingly, in an inner
Chamber, as Ehud did Fgglon, or in a Bed, as Hazael did Benhadad, do, with a
most prodigious Audacity, erect a Stage and Scaff^ld under the open Canopie of
the Heavens, on which they Act this Black and Horrid Tragedy, in the eye and
view of the whole World.

And, as in the Text, God set a Mark upon Cain, which Mark was a token of the
Divine Mercy and Justice, of the Divine Clemency and Indigation.

First, It was a Mark of Favor and Mercy, for thereby God did assure Cain, that
although his Capital and unpardonable Crime, deserved present Death, yet he
should not out of hand die, but have a Reprieve, and should live many, yea,
hundreds of years; and accordingly Cain did live a long tract of time and years
after this his horrid Fact and Murder, and did become in the World a very
Great and Potent Man, and made himself an absolute Prince and Monarch. And as
he was the first (we read of) who builded a City, so, he and his posterity were
the first that Lorded it, and Tyrannized in the World.

So, in the Day, God set a double Mark upon the Regicides, one of Favor and
Mercy, the other of Justice and Indignation. Of Faver, in that the hand of the
Divine Nemesis, did not presently and immediately seize upon them according to
their deserts, but benignly suffered them to live several years after the
perpetration of their Hellish and Treasonable Murder.

And which is very remarkable, Many of them became great and potent;
especially, as you all know, one among them Masantello like) exalted himself up
into the very Threne, and became an abiolute Monarch; making his own Will the
Law and Standard of his Actions.

And further, as in the Text, God to show his wonderful Mercy and Clemen^y, did
six a Mark upon Cain, which probably was (as you have heard) the Hebrew Letter,
(...), Tau, the first of Torah, the Law, and the first of Teshuvah, Repentance,
thereby mumating, that this Mark should be his Memento, timely and heartily to
Resent of his sin and Murder, by which he had wittingly transgressed, and
broke the indispensable Law of God.

So, in the Day, God out of tender Bowels of Compassion, suspended and deserred
the Execution of his Vengeance upon the fore mentioned Delinquents: Graciously
adds, unto their Days, many years; hoping, that, as Murdering Manasses and
David, so they, would at last, with a broken and bleeding heart, with a
mournful and penitent eye, reflect back upon their unheard of Wickedness, and
endeavor to wash away the stain and tincture of that their Crimson sin in the
Tears of godly sorrow, and of Evangelical Repentance.

Secondly, as in the Text, Cain's Mark was a Token of the Divine Justice and
Indignation; hinting to him, that although his Life for a while was reprieved
and spared, yet his sin and Murder was not pardoned: For at last, Vengeance
found him out, his sin and guilt at the long run, like a Blood-hound, as a Lion
skulking in the Highway seized upon him, for so the Word, (...), Genesis 4.7.
Signifies; at last the vindicative justice of God over-took him.

So, in the Day: Although the Divine Goodness gave the above mentioned
Malefactors a long space of time to live, and Repent, in, yet that Forbearance
and Indulgence did not declare them pardoned and absolved: For, at last, their
sin found them out, the impartial hand of justice laid hold upon them, and
brought them all to condign punishment. For, the Court of Judicatory, after a
fair and legal Trial, gave the Sentence of Death upon them.

And as Cain, so, many of them, had a Reprieve after Sentence: For, such was
the unparalleled Clemency of our present Liege Lord and Sovereign CHARLES the
second, as that several of the Regicides had the Execution of their fatal
Sentence suspended, and some of them are alive unto this very Day:

But to conclude.

As Cain's Mark spoke two things unto the Spectators and standers by, to wit,

First, That they and all persons which saw Cain, should mourn and pray for
him, should bewail that his so great and so lamentable a Fall.

Secondly, that his miscarriage should caution them and all men from ever
committing presumptuously the same, or any other, Sin:

So, in the Day, two Duties are plainly hinted to us.

First, That we all hang (...) harps and Musical Instruments upon the Willowes,
and lay our hands upon our Mouths, and our Mouths in the dust, Lament and
Mourn for the detestable wickedness and Murder of the Day. And pray Almighty
God, of his infinite Mercy, to forget and forgive the same: For otherwise, if
we, ( though possibly not born in 48, yet if we) should fail in this Duty, we
shall contract to our selves the Guilt of the Day, and shall make our selves
Accessory to the Murder thereof: For, by the Law of God and Man, that Man is
deemed an Accessory, who knows of a Murder, and does not confess and discover
it: Here is plainly a Murder committed, yea, the most malicious and most
Barbarous one that ever was (except that of Christ's.) And it is as plain and
true, that we all know of it, But, if we in our hearts perfidiously conceal
This Murder, and will not upon our bended Knees confess, and seriously bewail
it, before God, we then make our selves coplotters and partakers of the Guilt
of this days sin: Wherefore, be we all entreated (of what persuasion so ever we
be in other Matters) herein to Unite, and with one Heart, with one Mouth, to
lament the Wicked and Antichristian Fact of the Day, and say, Psalm. 51.14.
Deliver us from Blood-Guiltiness, O God, thou God of our Salvation, and our
Tongues shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness.

Secondly, from hence (aliena pericula cautos) be we cautioned not to Split
upon the same Rock, nor to run into the like, nor into any other kind of
Disloyalty whatsoever, least the same stroke of Vengeance reach us, as did
Those of the Day. For Rebellion, if not timely and humbly confessed, if not
heartily and sincerely repented of, never went unpunished: And although some
Delinquents have ended their days in peace upon Earth, yet Guilt has pursued
them beyond the Grave, even into the confines of another World, and there is
great Reason for it, because, as, God sev^^ely punishes all Rebellion committed
immediately and directly against himself, So, unless he will derogate from his
own Glory and Prerogative, he must also severely punish all Disloyalty and
Rebellion against his proper Vice gerent the King. And the Reason of the
Assertion is this, scil. Because, who ever presumptuously disobeys the King and
the Higher Powers lawfully set over him, in truth and reality, Disobeys God
himself: For God is struck at through the Loins and Sides of his
Representative by the Hand and Sword of Rebellion: And this is no other
Doctrine than what St. Paul taught the Church of Rome to Practice, Romans 13.1.
Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers, for v. 3. Whosoever resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and the Apostle enforces the Duty
with a cogent Argument taken, ab incommede, from the evil and direful
consequence that will certainly ensue upon Presumptive Disobedience to, and
audacious Resisting of, the Higher Powers, to wit, no less then utter
Damnation; for They that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. v. 2.
etc.

Q. If it be asked, how far, and in what things we are to Obey our King and
Prince?

Ans. In all things, that are either, in themselves Lawful; or, in themselves
indifferent before Commanded.

We believe none but Enthusiasts, and Anti-Monarchical, or Fifth-Monarch-Men,
will deny their Obedience as to things in themselves Lawful: The only
difficulty is, as to things indifferent before Commanded. For some will plead,
they have a Christian Liberty to Obey, or not to Obey, as their own Reason, and
private Judgment shall direct in things indifferent.

As to this Objection, we freely grant the Assertion, to wit, that we have a
Christian Liberty in things indifferent before Commanded, to do or not to do,
pro re nata, as prudence shall direct.

But the Case is altered in our present Dispute; For, nothing is any longer
indifferent to be done, or not to be done, when once Lawfully Commanded.

If you demand the Reason, for which a thing indifferent before Commanded,
ceases any longer to be so, after Commanded by Lawful Authority, it is this;
because otherwise, the Regal Power and Prerogative would be Nullified, and
instead of it, an Unbounded and Antichristian Libertisme would be introduced
destructive of, and pernicious to all Christian Government and Magistracy:
which evil to prevent, God has given the King and Supreme Magistrate an
absolute Power to make Laws, and to impose by Law upon his Subjects not only
things in themselves Lawful, But also things indifferent, as in His Royal
Wisdom he shall think most Conducing to the Glory of God, to the Honor and
Preservation of His own Person, and to the Safety and Welfare of the Church and
State; Both which are (under God) immediately Committed to His (are and
Protection. For otherwise, if every private Man had a Power and Liberty in
things indifferent, to Obey or not to Obey, when lawfully Commanded; then (as
was said before) the Kings Prerogative in matters Civil and Ecclesiastic,
would be invaded, and the King would cease any longer to be, the Defender of
the Faith: He would be only King in Complement, in Name and Title; but the
Quarrelling and Disputing Subject, will be King, in Truth and Reality.

And in our apprehension, nothing can be more Diametrically opposite to Kingly
Government, and to true Christianity, then this Disloyal Principle and Practice
of disobeying the King in things indifferent, when once lawfully Commanded.

We are sure, Christ did not Clip the Wings of Regal Power, but strictly
Commanded his Disciples, Apostles, and all Men, to give unto God the things
which were Gods, and to Caesar the things which were Caesar's; and to show Honor
to whom Honor is due; R^. 13 7.1 Pet. 2.13.17.
Obedience to whom Obedience is due: And St. Paul and St. Peter do require our
Obedience, in all things Lawful and Expedient, unto Kings, and unto all, that
are put in Authority over us, and that, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience
sake.

Q. And if you further Query, what you ought to do in case the Higher Powers
should Command your Obedience, in things absolntely unlawful?

Ans. In this Case, although you must not Actively do what is Commanded; but
you must Obey God, rather than Man, as did the Apostles. Act. 4.19. Still, for
all this, although you may not Actively Obey your Prince, by doing what is
Commanded: Yet, you must not rebel, nor take up Arms against your Prince; but,
in this Case, you must obey Passively, by patiently and peaceably submitting to
what Punishment soever the Supreme Magistrate shall think fit to inflict upon
you: Yea, though it be Death it self: For by so doing, (and by so doing only)
you will suffer, as a good Christian, as a Martyr for the Truth, as a Loyal and
Obedient Subject to you Prince: And, if in any case, a Frail Creature can, you
in this case, will, deserve and merit, a Crown of Glory.

But, in all other Cases, when either a thing lawful in it self, or, a thing
indifferent in it self is Commanded, then, if you Obey Passively, and not
Actively, you render your self Rebellious to your Prince: And, if your Passive
Obedience should be unto Death, then you become a Self-Murderer, in that, you
wilfully threw away your Life, (which you ought to have preserved) by dying,
for Obeying your King only Passively, when in Conscience you ought to have
Obeyed him Actively.

But, although we take this Freedom to argue with you, yet we hope better
things of you, and are persuaded, that as we have diligently Preached Loyalty;
so, you will, as Conscienciously practice it: And will in your Hearts, in your
Words, and in all your Actions, public and private, express your Fear of God,
and your Honor of the King.

God Save the KING.
AMEN.

