THE State of the CASE, Briefly but Impartially given betwixt the PEOPLE called
QUAKERS, IN Pensilvania, etc. in America, who remain in UNITY; And George
Keith, With some few Seduced by him into a Separation from them. As also a Just
Vindication of my Self from the Reproaches and Abuses of those Backsliders.

By SAMVEL JENNINGS.

Prove. 18-17. He that is first in his own Cause seems Just, but his Neighbor
comes and searches him.

Exodus 23.-1. Thou shall not raise a false report, etc.

Psalm. 120.3, 4. What shall be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto
thee, thou false Tongue? Sharp Arrows of the Mighty, with Coals of Juniper.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street, and at the Crooked-Billet in
Hollywell-Lane near Shoreditch. 1694.

The PREFACE.
Reader,
WEre it not for the sake of others, I should rather have chosen silence (than
thus to have appeared) and have made my Innocence my Sanctuary, from the
Tempests I have met withal, from the Raging Waves of my Implacable Enemies;
but lest my silence should pass for an Implicit Acknowledgment of the Guilt of
their Black Charge, and thereby any should stumble, or be offerded, I have
undertaken to wipe off, and throw back the Dirt they have cast at me, and to
give a Brief Narration of the True state of Things, as they arose, and were
carried on betwixt my Principal Adversary G. K. and those of his Party, and
Friends that have remained, and are still in Unity in America, that have
testified against G. K. etc. for the Breach they have made, and Scandals they
have raised and spread through diverse Nations. This is that which comes near
them, and sticks close to them, and of which they so often Complain, viz. The
Judgment of the Twenty Eight Ministering Friends given forth against G. K. and
his Adherents, of which Number my Lot fell to be one, which I am well assured
is the great reason why all this Smoke and Dust is raised against me; well, but
the Testimony is gone forth, and cannot be helped, so that in policy there
seems to be no other ^ray to weaken it, and keep up their own Reputation, but
by a Monstrous Charge upon the Subscri^ers of it, which G. K. let us us know he
is able to de, Plea of the Innocent, p. 24. where be says, It were an easy
matter to give such a Character of every one of them that have signed that
Paper of False Judgment, as may render them unqualified Men to give Judgment in
such a Weighty Case, etc. But though G. K. has given me such a Character now,
it is not long since I was his Dear Samuel, and he told me, He did not know that
he differed with me in an Hands breadth, and that he had sought my Friendship
more than any Man's in America; which I reminding him of, after he had vilely
abused me, he told me in the hearing of many, It was not for any Love he had to
me, but he knew me to be a Stiff Man, and was not willing to Engage me against
him. Here the Plot's discovered at once, he Flatters to gain me to h^ Party,
and that failing, as I said before, there was no other way left but to make me
Black enough consulting the Old Proverb, Throw Dirt enough and some will stick:
This is the Temper of th^^ Man, which I am persuaded will be more sensib^^
understood in a little time. I had one reason m^^ to confirm me, and may
demonstrate to others the it is matter of Malice, and not Conscience, the has
occasioned G. K. etc. thus intolerably to appear against me, for had it been
Conscience, an for clearing Truth from the Scandals they bespe^ me to have
brought upon it, how could they bear ^^ so long, and let the Truth suffer? For
the Time they assign wherein several things they would suggest me to have done,
were some Seven, some T^^^ and some a Dozen Year ago, in all which time (...)
never heard so much as a whisper or mutter (...) the things they charge me
with, G. K. Reason and Causes of the Separation, page 18. Charges Arthur Cook
with Breach of Gospel Order for concealing things so long, and then bringing
them forth against him, so that Argumentum ad Hominem, being a Phrase of his
own, I may justly here return upon him: As to the great noise they make of
Persecution, I doubt not but the Reader will find by what follows it is a Sham
and Abuse put upon the World; for how can any thing deserve to be called a
Suffering or Persecution that is so much desired and sought for? And I am
persuaded that G. K.'s. etc. greatest Suffering from the Government was, that
they could not provoke them to do more against them, that so they might have
made more noise in the World; but I would advise them to a better Behavior for
the future, believing that no other Government would have been guilty of such
Impunity, as to suffer Crimes so gross and enormous to pass with so slight a
Correction.

I shall give my Reader one Instance by which he may judge of the hard usage
that John M'comb and William Bradford met with during their Confinement, which
they represent as very Close and Cruel (though, says the Libeller, p. 11. of
that Book of the Trial, etc.) to give every one their due, while the Jailer was
so king as to let him, viz. J. M. go home an Hour or two sometimes in an
Evening after it was dark, etc. This Deceit is too great to pass unreproved,
had he or his Companions only the favor of a few Hours liberty in an Evening
after it was dark. I have heard John White say, and believe it to be true, that
he offered them upon their first coming in, if they would promise to come to
him upon notice given them, they might go about their Business till then, which
they would not accept at that time, (no doubt for this reason, that they might
have it to say that they were in Prison) but soon after their Stomachs fell,
and they accepted his offer, and I believe were never by him restrained more,
and to my certain Knowledge they had their Liberty most of the time they
bespeak themselves to be under such hard usage; but to make their Sufferings
look great, and put a Cheat upon the World, they having some Paper to sign,
which they designed should be public, had a mind to sign and date it from the
Prison, but were put to this hardship, the Sheriff not being at Home could not
get into Prison, but there being an Entry, common as well to the next
Neighbor, there they signed and dated their Paper, as themselves affirmed when
taxed by the Sheriff with that deceitful Act. This may give a little relish of
the Nature of their Sufferings, but I am afraid that those that can thus Sport
and play the Wanton with what they call Persecution, would not prove very
steady if really under it.

Thus Reader, thou may observe by this, and what follows, how officiously
Industrious these Adversaries have been to defame and bespatter not only
Persons but Societies, and what mean Artifices they have used to do it; but as
I am persuaded their Attempts will prove unsuccessful to their end with the
Judicious and Upright, so it will be torment enough to them to find themselves
disappointed therein, my end has been to inform the Ignorant, and rectify the
Judgment of the Abused, and shall leave the suecess to the Righteous Judge of
all.

Samuel Jennings.

THE State of the Case, etc.
THAT there has been a Breach made, by some called Quakers in Pensilvania,
etc. in America, is too well known, to the Grief of the Sincere, and Rejoicing
of the Adversaries of Truth of all sorts, whom the publishing thereof seems
designed to Gratify. But what the Matter of the Difference was, or the Manner
of its carrying on, is yet unknown to many, and therefore are incapable to make
a true Judgment thereof. For hitherto there has been little published
concerning it, but from G. K. and his Party: And if any through Inadvertency
have so far Transgressed the Rule of Justice, as to have drawn a Judgment from
that, I shall leave them to the Correction of their own Folly.

First then, as to the Matter, the Pretenses are diverse on G. K. etc. part: As,
that he, etc. discovered diverse Errors amongst us, and such, as wore too gross
to be Tolerated, and that even among the Preachers, who notwithstanding were
great Pretenders to Truth, and to the Immediate Teachings and Leadings of the
Spirit of Truth; yet very Ignorant and Unsound in some of the Chief Fundamental
Principles of the Christian Faith and Doctrine.

Now, to pass by his slight of the Spirit's Teaching, and his Reflection on the
Pretenses of some Preachers to it, I must take leave to tell him, that this
Charge lies couched in bare Generals, (a Way common to all Sophisters and false
Accusers) as he says, Plea, etc. p. 8. But may it not seem strange, that he,
tha^ had then been amongst us Twenty Eight Years; yea, most of that time a
Preacher (...) among us, and Vindicator of us, as himself says (and seems not
a little to value himself upon it) should not discover this till the But this
he uses to cover by saying, His Dissatisfaction was only with some Bastard
Quaker in America; but he was in Dear Unity with (...) faithful Friends in
England, and elsewhere, (...) the World over. How Real he was in this (...)
Deportment since his Arrival here, has not little discovered; and Time that
tr^^ Things and Persons, (yea I believe, a ve^^ little Time) will do it more
fully.

But to come to Particulars, he assigne^ this as the first Cause of the
Separation betw^^ them and us, that at a Monthly Meeting held Philadelphia the
29th. of the 11th. Month (...) Tho. Fitzwater having in the Face of the
Mer^^ing, Accused G. K. for denying the sufficie^^^ of the Light, and promising
to bring his Evidences the next Monthly Meeting; or then (...) he would
acknowledge he had done am^^ ( Reasons, etc. p. 8.) It seems, by what follows,
at the time appointed he did bring for Evidence to the Truth of his Charge W.
Meaning, and W. Stockdell, whose Evidence might thave past for a greater
Matter; and the Objections against it seem very weak. For,

First, It Is said, he was prejudiced, who says it? G. K. etc. against whom his
Evidence was. This is an easy way, but common with him to evade a Charge. But
secondly, He says, Diverse were present at the place and time, where and when he
alleged, he heard G. K. deny the sufficiency of the Light, etc. That cleared
him, that they heard him both then, and at all occasions, that he delivered his
Mind on that Subject, always bear his Testimony to the sufficiency of the Light
to Salvation. Now, how far all this will go to his clearing, is to be
considered, his Evidence undertaking a difficulty, viz. to prove such a
Negative, for how could they say they heard him at all times when he delivered
his Mind on that Subject? were they always with him?

But however it prevailed not so far with the Meeting, as to give forth a
Judgment against T. F. at that time; but we are told, The Meeting Adjourned to
the School-house on the Morrow. And after it was purged of some, that were not
in the Profession of Truth; the Friends of the Meeting (as he calls them) did
give an Vnanimcw Judgment concerning T. F. Some then (it seems) there were,
that were not in the Profession of Truth: (a thing not usual in solemn Monthly
Meetings) and what most of them had more than a Prefession that gave the
Judgmen, is fit to be considered; being most of them such, as afterward went
into the Separation with G. K. Upon the whole this is the substance; Though the
Monthly Meeting orderly established, saw no Cause to give Judgment against T. F.
yet this Adjourned Meeting, without any Hesitation, could do it Unanimously.
And at a Morthly Meeting afterward, when this thing came further to be
Examined, T. F. did prove his Charge against G. K. by Four Credible Witnessen
viz. Thomas Pritchard, William Harwood, William Southbee, and Benjamin
Chambers. So that I think, all reasonable People will accord in this, that
there was no cause to Condemn him.

But see the mischievous use he makes of this, and his strained Consequences
from it, Th^^ that Party (as he calls them) that clearel T. F. told, that the
Light is sufficient without any thing else, excluding the Man Christ Jesus. Now
this is a manifest Injury done to the Meeting, who never told nor thought so:
Nor was it the thing in Question, whether the Light were sufficient without
something else; but whether G. K. had said so, or not, which was proved be had;
as I have showed before. And how Consistent. G. K. is with himself to say, as
he does, (p. 8. Reason, etc.) That he was cleared from the Charge of it by
diverse Witnesses, who heard him both then, and at sll occasions, that he
delivered his mind on that Subject, always bear his Testimony to the
sufficiency of the Light to Salvation; and yet to affirm, It is not sufficient
without something else: And in his voluntary Declarution in the Yearly Meeting
to say, I ^now no man upon the Face of the Earth, that ^rofesses a Belief of
the sufficiency of the Light with^^ to Salvation, more than I profess or hold;
and ^ave always professed, since I came among Friends, ^iz. That the Light
within being God the Word, and the Spirit in every man, is sufficient to reveal
in every man all that is needful to his Eternal Sal^ation. Now, if this be his
sincere Profession without Reserve or Disguise) why then does ^e blame others
for Professing the same thing? ^n which if there be any Error, he has told
^s, He knows no man upon the Face of the Earth, ^at believes and professes it
more than himself: ^ere he seems to acknowledge the sufficiency ^f the Light,
as much as those he quarrels ^ith. But he endeavors to suggest, and ^ould
sednce the unwary into a Belief, that ^y our Acknowledgment thereof we deny and
exclude the Man Christ Jesus, and all the Bene^^s and Blessings that accrue to
Mankind by him. (...) this be a Necessary Consequence, it will fall as ^ell on
him. But as I do not believe, he ^er intended so (though I do not find in ei^er
of the places before-cited by rue, he ^ards at all against it) so if he could
have ^ercised the same Charity toward his Abused ^ethren in America, he mihgt
have spared ^s Charge in that matter against them; having been so often and
solemnly told by us, That we did believe all, that is Recorded in Sacred Writ
concerning our Blessed Savior: And not only believe it Historically; but also
that we through a living Faith in him, who is the Author of all true Faith, are
reconciled to God through him, who is the only way to the Father: And that we
do expect and believe, that as we are preferved in the Path of Righteousness,
we shall also, through the Grace and Bounty of God have a part in that
purchased Inheritance which our Blessed Lord Jesus has purchased for his with
his precious Blood. This and much more to the same Effect has bee^ often told
him; and its well, if he have no^ sinned against Knowledge in this Matter.

But to strengthen his Charge against us he says ( Reason, etc. p. 9) That W.
(...) A^tient Preacher (meaning William Stockdel did at the same Monthly
Meeting ( viz. t^^ 29th. of the 11th. Month) at Philadelphia (...) new his
former Accusation against him, cha^^ing him openly in the Face of the Meeting
That he Preached Two Christ's, because he Prea^^ed Faith in Christ within, --
and in Christ w^^ out us, etc. I confess, though I was not (...) that Meeting,
I have great reason to believe, that W. Stockdell did not so affirm them
because I observe in the Judgment afterward given forth against him by Friends;
they s^^ That W. S. denied the words so spoken: But the proceeded against him
upon the Evidence (...) Two Persons, that he said, so, viz. W. B. and J. M.
Now, had it been spoken in the Face of the Meeting, the Meeting must have heard
it, and would not have needed the Evidences of the Two Persons aforesaid; but
might have proceeded (and I believe, would) to have given Judgment against him
on their own Knowledge. But if ever W. did say, That he apprehended, he
preached Two Christ's; I cannot easily believe, that he assigned that as the
Ground of it, because he preached Faith in Christ within, and without, as G. K.
labors to insinuate: which I have heard him often solemnly to deny. But this I
have heard him to confess, That his speaking so much, and so frequently of
Christ without, and Christ within, might give ground to some to suspect, he
preached Two Christ's, and that the preaching of a Christ without, and a Christ
within, was to preach Two Christ's. However the Two Witnesses say it, and the
Meeting accordingly gives Judgment against it: And though the Credibility or
Incredibility of the Witnesses goes a great way with the Judicous, to satisfy
them of the Truth of their Evidence, or the contrary; yet Judgment commonly
goes according to Evidence. Whence it is, that sometimes the Innocent are
injured, yet the Judges clear of it. Now, as to these Two Witnesses, they were
much at the Devotion of G. K. and his creatures; to use as he pleased; one of
them being W. B. the Printer, whose Baseness and Treachery to his Benefactors
in Pensylvania, who at no inconsiderable Cost encouraged (...) Press there; and
how much it was after war^^ used to Abuse them, is too well known tob^^
covered. The other, viz. Joh. M' Comb, (...) Countreyman of G. K's, though
under Obligations strong enough to W. S. to have bound any Man of Common
Civility to him for his Kindness to, and Care of him in the Tim when he wanted
i^; yet he must be the Inst^ment of this mischief and strife by a sly, unmanly,
ungrateful way in a Visit to W. S. (...) pump him by Questions concerning G. K.
An he being more free, than discreet in his Coverse with him, away he goes to
G. K. (t^ way of a Common Talebearer) and aggnvates, what he had (in a sort)
extorted from W. S. which so incensed G. K. that he quick comes with these his
Two Witnesses, and liberally bestwos his Anathema Maranatha upon W. S. without
more ado; telling him, (...) was an Ignorant Heathen, not worthy of any pl^^ in
the Assembly of Friends: Though I har^^ heard by diverse, that knew his coming
for^ (which was early) and his Labor and Service in and for the Truth, and his
Success there in for the gathering many to it, that there he was no whit behind
(to say no more) the Person that so Treated him. Thus began the Difference
betwixt these Two Persons, and thus was it heightened: And although Friend did
never justify the words, which the T^^ Witnesses affirmed were spoken by W. S.
yet because Judgment against W. was not giver in his way and Time (although his
own Turbulency was the great Obstruction) he therefore sticks not to
Unchristian many, whom he sometime owned for his Brethren, charging them with
denying the Lord that bought them; affirming, that they owned no other Christ
but the Light within, excluding the Man Christ Jesus from having any share in
the Work of our Salvation. And this, he would have the World believe, is the
Ground of the Difference betwixt him and us; and all our opposition to him, and
Testimonies against him is, because God has raised him up Zealously to Witness
to those great Truths, and fundamental Doctrines of Christianity denied by
some, rejected by others, and meanly esteemed by too many.

I Consess the pretense is plausible, and had it as much of Truth, as it has
of Falsehood in it, he were to be commended and encouraged. But what manner of
Person must he be, if he ^ath falsely Accused the Innocent? Which, (...) affirm
on the behalf of my self, and believe for all that are in Communion, with, and
generally owned by the People called Quakers) he ^ath done, and that knowingly
too, concerning very many, that he has heard often Declare their Faith in the
aforesaid particulars, and what else is necessary to be believed and owned by
true Christians; all which he is as much obliged to believe, as any body else
is (...) believe him in the like kind.

And it is but a poor Shift for him to say (as he has sometimes done, when in
America we endeavored his satisfaction, and to remove his Jealousies
concerning us in matters of Faith) I will not believe you; you walk in the
Clouds, and have mental Reservations: and no^ withstanding your scriptural
Confession, you ha^ a Sense contrary to Scripture: At this Rat^^ who can be
secure in their Religious Reputation?

But I know the way he uses to take to Condemn by wholesale. There are, (says
he amongst you some, that I have detected of Err^^ which you by Cloaking and
Covering have m^^ your selves equally guilty with. If this be true I say so
too: But I challenge him to nam^ the Person amongst us, that any orderly
Complaint has been made against, and the matte proved, that has been Cloaked,
yea, the has not been testified against, if they refuse to Clear Truth in any
thing, whereby a Scandal through their Means was brought upon (...) either by
Principle or Practice. And at the last Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia a Minute
w^ made, That great Care should be taken, that (...) any amongst us had given
any Just Cause (...) Offense, they should be orderly dealt withal, the Truth
might be Cleared, and the offense remove So that I think, all his Pretenses of
Friend Cloaking, etc. in America, are taken awya, and will be no more a Cloak
for him, to Cove his false Accusations against them.

But because I find him so bitterly to Envy against a Person, whom I am well
assured he Abuses and Misrepresents, I shall do him that Justice to speak my
Knowledge of him in a matter wherein he (G. K.) does highly and frequently
Charge him ( Plea, etc. p. 5.) Many are Witnesses (says he) how at the
School-house-Meeting, as well as at these other Meetings aforesaid, Tho. Lloyd
Argued that Faith in Christ without us, as he died for our Sins, etc. and rose
again, was not necessary to our Salvation. I Confess, I was not at that
School-house-Meeting; but since he refers to other Meetings before, wherein he
suggests him to have Argued in like manner, I do remember, that at other times,
and once especially, I was present at a Discourse relating to that matter; but
the Question was not, Whether Faith in Christ without us, as he died for our
Sins, and Rose again, was not necessary to Our Salvation? But, Whether that
Faith were Indispensibly necessary to all Mankind, and that none could be ^aved
without it, though they had not the Means, Opportunity or Capacity to know or
receive it? Which will Include a great Part of Mankind, is namely all those,
that have not the Use of ^he Holy Scriptures, nor the Advantage of ^earing it
Preached to them; which will Affect many great Nations, as also all Infants,
Deaf and Dumb Persons, etc. But G. K. ha^ing affirmed before, That this Faith
is indipensibly necessary to all, occasioned the Discourse, and carries with it
a very harsh and uncharitable Judgment upon all that part of Mankind before
mentioned: Which I know not what can palliate, but the strange Notion of the
Revolution of Humane Souls. Which makes it more than Probable, that they shall
have Opportunity, one time or other, before the End of the World of Hearing
this Faith and Doctrine Preached, and may receive it; though now they die
without it. But this Point must be tenderly touched now, because few are ripe
for it: Yet how far he has Countenanced it, is known to many.

Further, he then said to Tho. Lloyd, That if he were not of the same Faith, he
could not o^^ him as his Christian Brother, but yet he might be a Devout
Heathen. Now see the Fallacy of this he would suggest, that T. Ll. made the
Faith of Christ Crucified a very Indifferently thing Indefinitely; when as
then, and many other times, I have heard him Affirm; That he di^ believe it to
be Our Duty, who had the Advantag of having the holy Scriptures, and hearing
t^^ Faeith Preached, to receive and believe it. I sha^ say no more on this
matter, believing that none that know T. Ll. can Impartially Judge him Guilty
of any thing so Antichristian.

I have thus far, according as I premised given an Account of the Matter of the
Difference in America, as is pretended on his part; and I hope, I have also
shown how little Real Ground there was for it: But my Reader must not Expect,
that I should follow him in all his vain and frivolous Charges, for that were
to swell a Volume, far beyond my Intention or Time. It remains now, that I give
an Account, what was then the Real Cause of this Unhappy Breach and Difference?
Which I will endeavor to do Heartily, Cautiously and Truly.

The General Cause I take to be an Unbounded Ambition in G. K. which had blown
him up into such Towering Thoughts of himself, as made him a very uneasy
Member of any Society, either Civil, or Religious; of which he has given too
pregnant Proofs, as I shall show hereafter.

He first began and sought a Qnarrel with the New-England-men, making it his
practice in many places, where he came, to Challenge Disputes with the
Professors and Priests; which ^ow little it redunded to Truth's Advantage, ^ am
a Witness, being then in N. England with him. And truly, the Spirit and Temper,
^n which he managed it (being with great deat and Rage) was a certain
Indication to me, that he designed Victory and Vain Glory rather ^^an
Edification. In which I was the more ^^nfirmed by his Common Insults, where he
^^ought he had any Advantage: For its a Maxim with me, "That who ever the Lord
(...) emploies in any Service of his, he furnishes (...) and abilitates with
his own Spirit in the Dis^^ charge thereof. And how Contrary that is (...) a
Spirit of Wrath and Bitterness, I leave to ^^ determined by such, as know the
Fruits of ^ach. And this single Observation has been enough to many, (and one
would think, might be to all, were they but Indifferent) to satisfy them of
the Nature of G. K's Work, even the Spirit, in which its Acted. Does he exceed
others in his Love and Zeal for God? how comes he then, to have so little of
the Love of God shed abroad in his heart? which teaches to Love Enemies, but he
has not spared vilely to Abuse his Friends: Is he under more than a Common
Constraint to preach and Exalt the sufferings and Death, etc. of our blessed
Savior? how comes he then to have so little of his Suffering Spirit and Image
upon him? And will he say, he loves God, while he hates his Brother? Let him
remember the Character due to such an one.

But I Confess, I have made a little Digression, by Expressing my own
sentiments; bu^ shall now Return again to matter of Fact G. K. not having
sufficiently vented himself by the Controversy he had with the New-Englanders,
he turns the point of his Weapon upon those he then owned and called his Friend
And begins first about Church Discipline; conplaining, That there was too great
a Laxn^^ therein: For the Amendment of which b^ presents a Paper to the Meeting
of Ministering Friends in order to have it published, and put ^^ to practice.
But there being many things i^ it, which seemed very uncouth and strange ^^
Friends, it was Referred to the further Consideration of the Ministering Friends
at the Yearly Meeting: and they not being satisfie^ therewith, proposed to send
it to the Yearly Meeting at London, to have their sense upon it. Which he
Refused, saying; He would rather let it drop. But it not being complied with,
as he Expected, we found him very Uneasy; and it was observed from that time
forward, he was more Captious; and made it his Business to pick up what he
could, to Reproach Friends withal. And having let in much Displeasure and
Contempt, he often expressed it publicly, as well as privately, Impeaching their
Testimony and way of Preaching. Which grieved many to find him so Regardless of
the honor of Truth, as to utter things of that Nature in public Auditories,
so large and mixed, as ours were. This, together with his own, Tedious, Dry, and
Insipid Discourses in our Meeting, did much lessen him in the Esteem of some,
that before had given Evidence enough of more than Common Respect to him. Yet
still things were quietly carried on Friends part to him, till at last he
charges a Meeting of Ministering Friends with being come together to Cloak
Heresies and Deceit; and that there were more Damnable Heresies and Doctrines
of Devils among the Quakers than among any Profession of the Protestants: This
was taken from his own Mouth at that Meeting, and a Minute made of it; and was
then read to him, and not denied by him: Though since he endeavors to Evade
it. This Charge was too Notorious and gross to pass by without Notice: but
because I find an Account given from our Meeting of Ministering Friends held at
Burlington the 20th. of the 4th. Month 1692. and another held at Philadelphis
the 24th. of the 4th. Month 1693. to the 2d. days Morning-Meeting in London, of
the manner of their Procedure with him, etc. I have thought fit to Insert that
here, being done with that Clearness and Truth, and being the Act of such a
Meeting, as cannot in Charity be suspected to be Partial or unjust therein.

The Present Case truly Stated, in reference to the Testimony given forth
against George Keith, by the Public Friends, the 20th of the 4th. Month. 1692.
OUR Late Friend George Keith having before and at the Meeting of the
Ministering Friends, held at Burlington in the last first Month, there openly in
a wrathful and bitter Spirit reviled and abused the said Meeting, by saying,
That they were met together to Cloak Heresy and Deceit; and that there were
more damnable Heresies and Doctrine of Devils amongst the Quakers than among
any Profession of Protestants. And though these Unbrother-like and Unchristian
Expressions were uttered by him in their hearing, that they needed no further
Evidence or proof of the same, and thereupon might have proceeded to have
disowned him then as a Ministering Brother, he continuing his Accusation with as
much vehmency as Rage; yet notwithstanding, the said Meeting having regard to
him, knowing the brittleness of his Disposition, omitted any further Notice
than an Entry of his reproachful Speeches, giving him to understand that we
expected he should condemn the same, and accordingly appointed two of his
Brethren and Members of the same Meeting to admonish him, and lay before him
his rude Deportment, and his unsavory Words, and to return his Answer to the
next meeting of that kind, which followed in course three Monchs after at
Philadelphia: The said appointed Friends (viz.) Samuel Jennings and Griffith
Owen, accordingly visited him the said George Keith, and reminded him of the
abuses given by him to the Meeting, and repeated his Words unto him; upon which
he justified the same, and speaking the said words over he declared the same
again, viz. That they were met together to Cloak Heresies and Deceit, and that
there were more damnable Heresies and Doctrines of Devils amongst them than
amongst any profession of Protestants, and that he trampled their Judgments
under his feet as Dirt; and with other vile Expressions he treated the two
Friends.

All which being reported to the said Meeting ensuing, and he declining his
usual appearance (tho at home) and having made an open breach by setting up
Separate Meetings in Philadelphia; and having Printed out of the Unity of
Friends the Cause and Reasons of his Separation, wherein he had injuriously
misrepresented the Meetings, and Calumnicated several Persons with whom he had
not dealt in the least in any Church Way: And this he did nine or zen Weeks
before this 4th. Month Meeting; however Friends being come together, and
considering his violent Temper, and the mischievous Schism and Rent that he had
made, and how he was like to Introduce further Exercises to Friends in these
Parts, they were generally inclined to wave any further procedure against him
at that time, and to adjourn their Meeting for a Forthnight longer, and in the
mean time appointed some-Friends to visit him, and to admonish him a second
time of his Evil Speeches, and to lay before him the evil of the Separation
established by him to the great blemish of Truth: Which was done by our said
Friends the same Evening, and Notice given to him of the time to which the
Meeting was Adjourned: but he giving no satisfaction, but persisting in his
railings, and vindicating the Separation, regarded not the time, and the
Friends meeting together; and weighing his further Answers, and observing his
fierce and frequent Endeavors to disquiet and divide many of the Neighboring
Meetings; did in a Christian care and duty Consider of a Testimony to go forth
against him herein; but delayed to give any out till two days after: being
informed he then was likely to be at home. And the public Friends coming then
together, they sent two of their Members, to wit, William Biles and Walter
Fawcet, to enquire at his house of his return, but he being absent they gave
forth the Testimony with this Caution, That it should not be published till
George Keith had an Opportunity of hearing it read unto him, and to such others
as he approved of; And that after the reading of it to him, a Copy thereof
should be prepared for him with what Expedition might be: All which was offered
unto him, which he refused till the Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, which fell
out four or five days after, and there by his Consent it was read unto him, and
a Copy given the day following. The intent of the Friends in delaying the
publication of it, until he had Opportunity of hearing it read privately, was,
that the spreading thereof might be prevented in Case he should then Condemn
the said Speeches and decline the Separate Meeting; whereof timely Notice was
sent to him: but he upon the reading of the Testimony in the Meeting, instead
of Expressing the least trouble or relenting for the same, did within a few
days after out of the method and way of Friends, put forth Clandestinely in
print a furious Condemnation against the Friends concerned against him, which
he styled by the Title of a Plea: Wherein he had like a most disingenious
Adversary, upon groundless reports, labored to reproach several of them, and
dispersed the same toward London, and other parts, some Weeks e're the Persons
against whom they were Printed had a sight of the same. And yet George Keith,
would possess his hearers and others by his Pamphlets, that he had no Gospel
Order from the Meeting, when the whole procedure is according to the order of
Truth established among Friends: And he himself cannot but be Conscious to
himself herein, that neither Gospel nor Order regulates him in Conference with
us, nor in his giving forth his Papers against us.

Signed on the behalf and by Order of our Meeting of Ministering Friends, held
in Burlington, the 6th of the 7th Month. 1692. Sam. Jennings.

POSTSCRIPT.
AND After George Keith and his Adherents, by his said Plea appealed to God the
righteous Judge of all Men, and next to all faithful Friends and Brethren here
in America, and in Old England, Scotland, and Ireland, or elsewhere, to Judge
between them and us: Yet in a short time afterward they got another Paper
Printed, which they styled An Appeal from the 28 Judges, to the Spirit of True
Judgment in all faithful Friends called Quakers, that meet at this Yearly
Meeting at Burlington the 7th Month, 1692. But instead of giving us any
friendly Notice of this Appeal, they spread and set the same upon Posts about
this Town of Philadelphia and else where, Nine days at least before the said
Yearly Meeting. And when the Meeting time came G. K. and his Company met apart
in the Courthouse, from whence he sent to Friends a Paper in the nature of a
Challenge, requiring a hearing of his said last mentioned Appeal, which
Challenge was Introduced by one of his followers, who climbing up in our
Meeting house Window (tho the door was open) stood in the said Window with his
Hat on, and read part of it while our ancient Friend Tho, Jauney was at Prayer.
And the public Friends from the Mornings Meeting had sent to G. K. by Word and
Writing; That in Case he had any thing to propose to that Yearly Meeting,
either as a Friend or Opposer, he should have a suitable hearing, and Answer,
provided he would stay till the day appointed for business, which was the last
day of the Meeting (Friends not being willing to invert the good Orde^ of
Truth, in Employing those days for business which were Established for
Worship.^ Nevertheless G. K. slighting Friends Proposals, calling them
Evasions, and Jesuitical Tricks, did give public Notice for the People to meet
him at our Meeting House after Meeting was over the next day, being the third
day of the Week; At which time they accordingly met, whereupon some Friends
were sent by the Ministering Friends to acquaint G. K. and the People then met
with him, how that Friends were ready and willing to give him the Opportunity
of a hearing next day following, which was the day appointed for business,
according to Friends former proposals in that behalf: But instead of admitting
those so sent to deliver their Message, he and diverse of his Followers cried
out against them, saying, They had nothing to do there, refusing to hear them;
and insinuating to the Auditory, that the said Friends came to disturb their
Meeting; and so they immediately withdrew to the Courthouse: And there the
said G. K. and the rest concerned in the said Appeal having set up those (who
made little or no Profession of Truth, for their Judges) whom they called
Impartial Men by reason of their not signing theretofore either with or against
the said Appealors, (though joined with them in Worship at their said separate
Meeting) and so drew up a sort of Judgment against Friends, and signed it that
very Night, which is also put in Print, as from their Yearly Meeting signed by
Robert Turner, Griffith Jones, and others: And though the same was completed
according to the Mind and Direction of our Opposer G. K. yet it was so far from
allaying his rage and violence against Friends, that he still persisted in his
abusive Carriage, calling Friends in our Religious Meetings, Hypocrites,
Snakes, Vipers, Blood-thirsty Hounds, Impudent Rascals, and such like, bidding
them cut him in Collops, fry him, and eat him; and saying, His Back bad long
itched to be whipped. And at the same Juncture he said, That he was like our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, comparing himself to a Dove, a Lamb, while he thus
appeared in a great Transport o^ Heat and Passion.

It would be tedious to trace him in one half o^ his Raileries, invective
Preachings, and loathsome Printings against us, since this disorderly Yearly
Meeting of his, and Separation from us; his Auditony being generally made up,
as to the bulk thereof, out of the disaffected, the Apostates, and the more
Profane of all Persuasions among us, whom he gratified with telling them of a
Preaching Quaker in Mary land, who got another Man's Wife with Child, which
they (meaning Friends) could not discern by the Light within; and with another
being carried drunk out of a Taphouse, with such unseemly passages for a Man of
his Rank and Pretenses: And though we published not a Line in Print to detect him
justly of his notorious Falsehoods against us, (hoping the have somewhat thereby
kept this unhappy difference from being made more public by us, as much as in
us lay, and as long a^ we could) yet this uneasy and farious Man, upon our
Return (as usually) to one Meeting on the First Days, during the severity of
the Winter, at our Meeting House on the Front of Delaware: He sets on afresh,
not only to disquiet Friends here, but very rudely and openly opposed our
public and serviceable. Travailing Friend, Tho. Everndon, and Richard Hoskins,
who bearing their Testimonies in the dread of the Lord, and in Humility of
Spirit among us, he called out upon them several times, Hypocrites, Hypocrites;
and the former of them (though two days before he said he had good Unity with
him) he called him then before many Hundreds, The greatest Hypocrite that ever
stood upon two Legs. And while for some Weeks we Assembled together, in some of
the last Meetings George Keith left Friends Gallery, and betook himself to the
Stairs near one of the Doors on the opposite side; and being soon weary of that
Seat, as appearing there too much like what he was, viz. a Common Opposer, his
Followers on a sudden set up on a Seventh Day a new Gallery for him over
against the Public Friends; which two of the Trustees hearing of, went that
Evening in a peaceable manner, calling to them Robert Turner, who was a Trustee
also, to remove the same, being set up there as a Seat of Contention, and
without the least Consent of the Meeting: And upon their going in, Robert
Turner, with more heat than true Zeal, and, as he said afterward, with a
dissatisfaction to Galleries, striking only a transient stroke at the new one,
he fell severely upon Friends Gallery, and with a suitable Assistance, cut and
tore down in an impetuous manner the Stairs, Seat, Floor, Posts, and Rails
thereof, levelling it with the Floor, G. K. being present, langht, and expressed
his fatisfaction therewith; but he losing ground by his extreme Passion, and
ill Conduct in those Contests, after one Meeting more he and Followers leave
Friends Meeting again, and retired to their separate Meeting place; where, as
we are credibly informed, a great part of their Meeting-time (...) spent by him
in his Personal Vindication, and in rendering Friends here as odious and
contemptible as the Malice and Lies of the wo^^ of our Adversaries would have
us to be But his Race being even run with us, and his further Excursions being
almost stopped, and not so much Credit being given to his repeated Accusations,
and his great Attempts of la^^ to the further exposing and dividing Friend
here, proving very unsuccessful to his Expect^tion, as by the Account of the
Late Conserence imposed by him upon us in a large promiscuous Auditory on the
Seventh Instan^ may further appear; and withal the seve^^ Established Meetings
in these three, and Neighboring Provinces having disowned him, he (...) now
hurrying all on a start for Old England being very Jealous some of those whom
he (...) bitterly Opposes should hasten there before him, though none of us are
so much upon th^^ Spur, as being satisfied that wheresoever (...) goes, or
wheresoever his Books reach among Faithful Friends, that he will be discovered
to be a degenerated Man from the Spirit and Charity of a sincere Christian. We
wish th^^ the Lord may be propitious to him in h^^ Voyage, and give him a sight
of his great Apostasy, and let him understand that notwithstanding the vain
pretense of his Errand, he is persecuting the true Christ of God in his
Followers, he seems so Zealously to profess. The Lord God of Mercy forgive him
all his severe Treatment of us, and his hard Speeches against us, granting him
Repentance unto Life, if it be his Gracious Will. This is the desire of his
Abused Friends.

Signed on the behalf, and by Order of the Meeting of Ministering Friends,
Philadelphia the 24th. of the 4th. Month, 1693 Sam. Jennings.

NOW by the foregoing Account of the Meeting of Ministering Friends held in
Burlington the 6th. of the 7th. Month 1692. it largely appears how Friends
dealt and bore with G. K. before any public Testimony was given forth against
him: Which said Account was Read in the Yearly Meeting at London, for this
present Year 1694. which might reasonably have been expected, would have stopped
G. K. from persisting in that often repeated Falsehood, Th^^ he was Condemned by
the Twenty Eight Ministering Friends in Philadelphia without all Conviction
(...) Trial: But because I met with it again in (...) late Book of his,
called, The Causless Ground (...) Surmises, etc. (p. 6.) I cannot but ma^^ some
Remarks upon it.

The said Judgment he so much complains (...) (and is so heavy upon him, though
he some times seems to slight it) does chiefly consist (...) Three Heads,
judging, 1. His Separati^^ 2. Late Printing: And, 3. Reviling L^^ guage: Which
Things were all too obvious (...) be denied. For his Sepaeration and Printing
those were exposed to the view of the Worl^ And for his Reviling Largu^ge, you
hear wh^^ was spoken in the open Meeting, viz. The they were met together to
cloak Heresy and De^ ceit; and that there were more Damnable H^^ sies and
Doctrines of Devils amongst the Quaker than amongst any Profession of
Protestants. (...) that these things considered, they might ha^ given Judgment
against him then; but th^^ forbore it, and appointed two Friends from the said
Meeting to visit him, and lay his Evil before him: And, if he would not be
reclaimed, to let him know, that the said Meeting did expect Satis faction from
him; and desired him to be present at the next Meeting of that kind, or send
his Answer. What Answer he gave to the two Friends, I refer to the aforesaid
Account: However to the Meeting he came not. They Adjourn for a Fortnight,
Visit him afresh by two other Friends, appointed by the said Meeting; who also
give him notice of the Time, to which the Meeting was Adjourned: which he
regarded so little, as to take occasion to be out of Twon at the Time; which
showed he continued his Slight to the said Meeting, who before had said, He
trampled their Judgment a^ Dirt under his Feet.

Now Judge, Reader, what cause this Man had to complain; and what confidence or
conscience he must have to proclaim to the World again and again, That he was
Condemned without all Conviction or Trial? The Meeting did all that was proper
for them to do; sought him, and acquainted him from time to time, what they
expected from him, or what he might expect from them. He had liberty, if he
pleased, to have made any Defense; but how unreasonable is it for him,
Contemptuously to absent himself from those Meetings at such times, and so put
it out of the power of the Meeting to speak with him; and then Complain, He was
not heard or tried, before Condemned. And if he by Trial aludes to Trials, by
course of Law he may find it very Practicable, to give Judgment by Default
against Persons refusing or neglecting to be present. But if to give Judgment
in the absence of a Person be so Criminal, how will he excuse his own Party,
who at the School-house-meeting gave Judgment against W. Stockdell in his
absence (he refusing, as they say, to come to the Meeting) Reason etc. p. 9.
but more inexcusable if the act of That they falsely call the Yearly Meeting, at
Burlington on that account.

As to the matter of the Separation, which he vainly endeavors to throw off
himself, upon Friends in America, I shall not meddle with it; the Yearly
Meeting at London having determined it, and it being so clearly demonstrated by
another hand, ( viz. T. E.) to lie at the door of G. K. etc. And though he
assigns diverse things as Reasons and Causes of it, more particularly his
Offense against T. F. and W. S. and Friends for not dealing with them according
to his mind; yet whoever shall weigh diverse Expressions that he occasionally
dropped to diverse Persons, will find that he was much alienated in his mind to
Friends, and had so little a share in that blessed Love and Life of Jesus, by
which Friends are made and kept one, that he rather waited for, and sought
occasions against us, than to heal or restore where any slipped. He told John
Wilsford, before the Separation a considerable time, That Friends were not the
People; but that there must come another People: And he told Caleb Pusie, and
others, That there were not Six Friends in America, nor in England, No, nor in
the whole World, that Preached Christ aright. He told another, That he had that
to Preach, that was never yet Preached by any Quaker; That he had much less now
against Water Baptism than formerly And that he saw now, that Hicks and Fald^
had more reason to write as they did, concerning the Quakers, than he then
thought they had: And that, if he should appear in Opposition to Friends, he
could do more hurt, than all that yet had appeared against them. All these
things will be proved against Him, if he deny them; and much more of a like
Tendency, Which shows how little his heart was with us, whilst he
Hypocritically seemed to be one of us. And its plain from hence, he had
entertained Thoughts (if not fully designed) to break off from us, and do what
mischief he could against us; which I think none can question, that reads his
malicious Pamphlets against us, Printed since he made that Breach in America,
or that has observed his Carriage here, since his Arrival.

I am now come to my last Part, viz. A just Vindication of my self from the
Reproaches and Abuses cast upon me by Geo. Keith, etc. in which if I have been
too dilatory, is has been because I preferred the Reputation and Peace of the
Church of Christ above my own: for which I shall make no other Apology, than in
the Apostle's Words, Forgive me that wrong. For upon our Arrival here (though
G. K. in the very first Meeting he came to, gave Evidence enough of his Spirit
and Temper) yet I found a desire and Travel in Friends, if possible, to reclaim
and restore him: In which, if it could have been, I should have had my share of
satisfaction with others: Which, rather than I would do any thing to obstruct,
by kindling fresh Coals, I chose rather to suffer in silence. But since he has
now left so little room to hope for his Repentance and Return having dealt so
treacherously with the Yearly Meeting by appearing in Print, as he ha^^ done,
against them, instead of submitting (...) their Advice and Judgment. And
expecti^^ my Time not to be long in this Nation, I se^ no reason longer to
forbear the doing th^^ Common Right due to my self. How much (...) have been
Calumniated by Tongue and Pr^^ by Geo. Keith and his Party, is known to many in
this and other Nations: But how the^ shrunk from the Charge, when called upon
i^ the last Yearly Meeting in London, to make (...) good, is also very well
known; and none (...) them had Courage enough to own or stand by that
Malicious, Sca^dalous Libel, called, N^^ England Spirit of Persecution, etc.
only G. K. did say, That part that concerned his on^ Trial, was his: nor would
any of the^ acknowledge or declare, who was the Author, or Authors of the rest
of it (...) giving this for one Reason of their Concealment. That if the
Author, or Authors were known to me, I might take the Advantage of Law against
them. I Confess, this was a safe Consideration; but how Manly or Honest not to
say Christian, I leave to be judged by all. Will they, to Defame a Person, do
that which shall subject them to the Correction of the Law, yet do it
Clandestinely to avoid the Stroke of Justice, and plead Conscience and
Christian Constraint for it too? Surely, This is to set Christianity beneath
the Morality of Infidels, who many of them would loath and detest a thing so
Execrable and Vile. But though I cannot commend the Justice of these Persons,
yet I may their Policy; who knew (at least one of them) that I was provided of
Evidence upon the place, to detect their Falsehood, if they should insist upon
the Matters suggested in that Libel: and not only so, but that G. K. himself
knew, before it was Printed, that diverse Matters of Charge against me therein
were false; and so far, as he has had a hand either as the Author or Publisher
thereof, so far has he sinned against Knowledge, and ma^iciously and
premeditatedly abused me. If he will deny himself to be the Author, I shall
^eave that to be believed by as many as can: but who knows how much that Party
were influenced by him, may safely conclude they did nothing of that kind
without him. However, That he has Published and spread them False, as they
are, is certain, and and goes a great way to Entitle him to them. But waving
that at present, I shall take notice (...) such passages in their other
Pamphlets as concern me, so far as there is occasion for it but to regard every
silly Flirt thrown out against me, were to waste Time, and too much gratify my
Adversaries.

I find in his Book, called, Plea of the Inocent, etc. p. 9. to palliate the
Ill Language he had given to Friends: He complains of Partiality in others,
Condemning that in him, (...) which themselves are Guilty: Some of the (says
he) having not only called him Liar, be Apostate, and worse than Profane, as
particularly S. J. in the hearing of diverse Credible W^^nesses. That ever I
called him Liar, I deny not but that I know him to be guilty of it but I like
not the Expression. And as to be Apostasy, to that degree as to render h^
worse than Profane, is so evident, that to about to prove it, were a work of
super arrogation.

Plea, etc. p. 13. He accuses me of R^^ Popery, for requiring (as he says) an
Absolute Submission from him to the Judgment of the Meeting. By calling of this
Rank Popery, (...) shows the Rancour of his Spirit. He wi^^ then allow, that
a Conditional Submission in Matters of Diff^^ence is due to the Society (...)
Meeting we belong to; but what is that Condition in his Sense? I could never
find it another than this, If the Party or Parties concerned like the Judgment,
they will yield to it, but (...) otherwise. And this his Opinion he has
confirmed by Practice in his Spurning against the Judgment of the Yearly
Meeting in London 1694. But this is so Trifling and Endless, that if his method
of Gospel Order and Discipline (which he would fain have been Propagating in
America) be no better than this, he may spare his Pains in further pressing it
upon us.

Further he says, I declared openly in a Mens-Meeting: That to do God's
business, we needed God's Power and Wisdom; but to do our own business, as Men,
we needed it not: which he says himself, Geo. Hutcheson, Robert Turner, and
John Heart publicly testified against. How truly he has related my words, I
know not; but do remember I said something to that effect, and I wonder not at
their Disatisfaction, who are all since gone into the Separation. But ^e much
perverts my intention therein, and would suggest as though I thought, we had
Self-Sufficiency to do our own Business as Men. ^ know that all our Strength
and Abilities are from God; my intent was only to show that ^n Church Affairs,
even the outward part of them, are to be undertaken and managed in the Power
and Wisdom of the Word of Life: And if there be not a greater necessity to wait
or it at such times, and in such Services, than ^n our Common Affairs, I leave
to all to judge. And I think those that took Offense at this, were too easily
Offended.

But he says, I refused to submit not only to the Judgment of the Mens-Meeting
here at Philadelphia, in a small Worldly Matter betwixt Tho. Budd and me; but
refused to submit to the Judgment of a Meeting of the most Eminent Friends,
viz. G. F. G. W. and others, appointed at London, to hear the difference
betwixt Edw^ Byllynge, and him, etc.

Now as to the First, which he calls a small matter, it was a matter of trust
of 400 (...) Sterling, by us to be employed for the use the Children of Samuel
Burden, given to thee by William Gravet of Exon: Which, how were used in that
matter by Tho. Budd, I shall show more fully if he desires it. But my judgment
was and is, that it is improper for any Religious Society to interrupt or alter
the W^ of the Deceased; and so the said Meeting declared afterward. So that in
this there is nothing but Noise and Clamor. As to the other part of this
Charge, it is false in Fact, (...) say, I refused to submit, etc. For it is we
known, I did submit, so far as I had Power else how came a Judgment to be given
in the matter, against which he has never heard (...) open my Mouth: But he
has mis-stated it, (...) not mistaken it. For the Difference lay no^ betwixt
me and Edw. B. but betwixt E. ^ and the Province of West Jersey, whose Ag^^ I
then was in that Affair, and acted by Commission from them. And for him to say,
he does, The said Meeting judged me guilty betraying my trust to E. B. is
false; there is no such thing in their Judgment, which I have still by me. And
were it not, that I hate to Rake in the Tombs of the Dead, I should say more to
that matter, of which I find him so Ignorant, that his silence therein had
better recomended his Wisdom. But he adds: That I came away from England in
Disunity, with the most Faithful Friends in London on that very account. This I
have often met with from diverse Apostates, (for I bl^ss God, my Controversy is
still with them) and this Story was raised and spread by hi^ Countryman George
Hutchinson, and is still avouched by him; whose behavior in that Affair, and
Trust of the Countries he knows, I could have discovered, and offered to do;
but that the Meeting appointed for that end, desired to have all things of that
nature buried. But since he and others have thought fit to revive them, as an
Effect of their Spleen to me, I thought fit to say thus much in my Just
Vindication. And shall add this, that had G. H. been as true to his Trust, as
he should, he had met with as many Rubs as his Neighbors. But to say, That I
went-from England in Disunity with the most Faithful Friends, is a notorious
Falsehood and Slander, and as such, I reject it.

But he goes on and Flirts upon me, for my too severe Government in West
Jersey; of which, he says, The People were generally weary. This I know to be
false; and there is not a Syllable to prove it. But since it is a General
Charge, as also what follows, of my Proud and Lofty Carriages, I shall only
return it to him again, and account it (as he says,) the way of all Sophisters
and false Accusers: Plea etc. p. 8. I perceive he takes it mighty ill, to be
told by me, That though he deny our Judgment, yet we shall Judge him. it may
be, he might think himself too Great to come under any Censure, whatever his
miscarriages were; but I desire not to be of that Society, where any Member is
too Great to be dealt with according to their just Demerits.

But (says he) seeing they have given false Judgment against G. K. it is no
cause of offense for him to say, He trampled their Judgment as Dirt under his
Feet. But if he please to remember, those words were spoken before any Judgment
at all was given forth against him; so that he could not trample upon it, as
false, before he knew what it was. And now that he does know it, his Contempt
of it, and frequent calling of it False, will not make it so; but that it is
True, I am very much satisfied. First, from Friends in all places being so
Unanimous in it; and Next, from his and their Uneasiness under it.

But G. K. frequently endeavors to incense his Reader, That some did endeavor
to bear them down in Religious Matters, by their Power as Magistrates. This is
very false, and unfair. He offers to give an instance of it, (in Plea, etc. p.
16, and 17.) about the Reading the Judgment, given forth against him by the 28.
in the Monthly Meeting at Frankford, and he says; It may be noted, That, T.
Lloyd, S. Jennings, J. de la Vall and S. Richardson came to the said Meeting,
to Countenance the Reading of their Paper of false Judgment against G. K. and
his Friends, having put it into the hands of W. Prestone to read: Who offering
to read it, the far greater part of the Meeting forbad the reading of it;
declaring, that nothing ought to be read in their Meeting, without the general
consent of the Meeting But this unruly and disorderly Man did presume to read
the Paper against the mind of most of the Friends present, and T. K. S. J. S.
C. J. D. and Anthony Morris, were so far from giving any Check to this
disorderly Proceeding, and Imposition upon the true Liberty and Right of the
Meeting, that they encouraged it; and one of them, without the least occasion
given him, did threaten to bind an honest Friend to the Peace, S. Jennings
calling out for a Constable.

It Is true, that the persons before named were there, and were Magistrates; but
I know not of any, that concerned themselves about the Reading of the Paper,
except S. Richardson, who was a Member of that Meeting. And why they should be
said to Countenance the Reading of the Paper any more than G. K. and those with
him, may be said to be there to Discountenance it, I know not: For diverse of
them were no more Members of that Meeting than the other. But where is the
blame of putting the Paper into the hand of W. P.? He was the Clerk of the
Meeting. But to say, The far greatest part of the Meeting forbad the reading of
it, I cannot believe to be true, according to my Obervation. I know, that there
was a Party in the Meeting, which were against it, which Joseph Fisher did head
with more Rage, than true Zeal or Knowledge. This Party were Ripe for the
Separation, and quickly fell in wit it; and no wonder they were so Tender of
Judging it. But why was W. Preston so unruly and disorderly for reading the
Paper, when sent to him from a Meeting in Unity? And I must say, and I believe,
may easily be proved, the far greater part pressed and desired it. But methinks
G. K. should blush, to style any Man Unruly and Disorderly, though it were
true; since it is hard to find any thing of Mankind (especially pretending to
Learning, and a Civil Education) that in that respect can equ^ himself.

But she says, That one of them threatened (...) bind an honest Friend to the
Peace. I know not who it was that threatened that, nor to whom but such as know
G. K. and the Company that came with him, and others that follow his here, may
pretty well guess, what he might be for an Honest Friend. But that I did
inquire, If there were a Constable there? is true and I thought was very
needful to keep the Peace. And there being one there, I did Charge him, as was
my Duty to do that and no more: For they had raised such a Tumult and Disorder
in the Meeting, that the Woman of the House came to me under much Concern, and
told me, She feared there would be mischief. For though they did not Strike, yet
in their Rage there were some, that did violently eatch at the Paper to have
torn it away; who had so little of Religion in them, that we had no assurance,
but they could Fight as well as Snatch and Rail. This was the Meeting, where G.
K. himself called a Magistrate (viz. Direck op de Grave) Impudent Rascal:
(which afterward to justify, he was put to the trouble of using Goodman's
Dictionary.) I think this last passage shows, there was so much of Heat and
Disorder, as might need a Constable to suppress.

G. K. in one of his Books (which I have not by me) charges me, with openly
calling one of our Church Members, in a Monthly Meeting Nonsensicai Puppy. The
first Intimation I had of this was in Print, which somewhat surprised me
knowing my self to be Clear of it. But being said to be spoken in a
Monthly Meeting, I went to diverse of the Members of that Meeting, to inquire if
they heard any such thing, or could tell me who had raised it? All that spoke
with, said, They heard no such thing: Till at last it was said to be spoken by
one Tho. Tress, a sort of an odd singular Man, that sometimes Meets with
Friends, sometimes with the Separatists. However, he affirmed it to be true. I
endeavored to Convince him, that it must be (at best) a mistake, seeing there
were so many, some of which were much nearer to me than him, who affirmed, they
heard no such thing, nor did they believe any such thing: And I do solemnly
affirm, There was no such thing. And so shall leave the Probability of the
Truth of it to be judged by others.

But to Aggravate the Crime, it is said, to be spoken to a Churchmember too:
What I did say, was spoken to Griffith Jones, who I never heard, himself
affirmed any such thing of me; so in that respect was a better Churchmember
than he, that had falsely Accused me But what Griffith is for a Churchmember,
I suppose is well known here, as well as elsewhere.

In that Book under the Name of Roben Hanny, p. 13. I am charged with Attesting
to Name of God to a Lie; as G. K. proved to the Yearly Meeting, by a Paper
signed by Sam^^ Jennings his own hand. What I said in the Yearly Meeting was
true, viz. That G. K. did say, That there were more damnable Heresies and
Doctrines of Devils amongst the Quakers, that amongst any Profession of
Protestants: And think, I had Reason to know it, for I wrote it from his Mouth,
and read it to him, and he denied it not at that time. Besides, it is not I
only, but the Meeting of Ministering Friend in Pensilvania, etc. that says it,
for the Paper is from them. But his Cavil at the Paper is because it says (in
another part of it) That he repeating the said words over again, declared the
same thing, viz. That there were more damnable Heresies and Doctrines of Devils
amongst them, (instead of Quakers) than amongst any Profession of Protestants.
Who that them was, he had declared before, viz. the Quakers; and who did he
speak it to? Quakers: And is any thing more common, than to say to any Society,
such or such things are amongst them. But I shall not insist further on it,
believing, that no honest Friend believed, that I was Guilty of any such thing
(for if they had, no doubt I should have been Censored,) much less that it was
proved against me: And here, I think the Author of that Pamphlet has ventured
upon Two great Falsehoods, to prove me guilty of One, viz. First, That what I
said was a Lie: And Secondly, That it was proved so.

In that Book called the Causeless Ground of Surmise, etc. p. 12, and 13. G. K.
seems equally uneasy that the Yearly Meeting have censured me and Friends in
America no more, as that they have censured him and those in the Separation
with him so much. I shall here pass by his complaint of what he calls the false
Judgment of the 28, having spoken to it before; but I shall here take notice of
the Instance he gives of my great Pride. When some of their Friends (as he
says,) were Expostulating the case with me, I stretched out my hand, saying,
If I draw forth my hand, I will not pull it in again, until I have quelled you
all. Something to this effect I did say, though not in the same words, which I
acknowledge to be unadvisedly spoken, and I might have expressed my self in words
less subject to exception. But it ought always to be allowed, where any thing
Ambiguous is spoken, for the person to interpret his meaning, and I do solemnly
say, I never intended them in that Sense, as they are by him and his party
perversely construed, as in the Book of the Trial, etc. They say, this
presumptuous expression savoureth too much of Lucifers Pride, who said, I will
be like the most high, etc. I think none that know me, can suspect me to be
guilty of such Vanity and Impiety, but the Friend he speaks of, that
expostulated with me, were of his own party, particularly John Macon (of whom I
have spoken already,) and Ralph Ward, of whom there is no great reason to speak
much as a Friend, these two with overs others of the Rabble, followed the
Magistrates, as they were going from the Cou^ to Dinner, and they two
especially did ra^^ and shall intollerably at us, saying, Then thank d God we
could not take their Live away, but we coveted their Goods; to who^ I replied,
let us alone, you see that we an unwilling to take any great notice of you
abuses, and do the least we can do; but the following us in the Street, and
persisting i^ their raillery, occasioned me to say what I did the meaning of
which in a candid and true Sense, was no more then this, That if I on^ engage,
and make use of the power I have, is the station I stand, I will not desist,
'till have reduced you to a better behavior: And precarious is the Power and
Condition of that Magistrate that cannot do it.

I shall now take notice of the procedure of Law that has been against G. K.
and some of his Party, which they so loudly and falsely call Persecution. It Is
true, there is such a thing as Persecution, and I take it to be thus
distinguished from a just Prosecution. Persecution is a suffering inflicted
upon the sufferers, for the discharge of their duty to God. Prosecution is a
justice done on Transgressors of the Law, for their injuries done to Men, or
blasphemies to God. Now that these Men were Prosecuted by Law for their abuses
to the Government, and those that were concerned in the Administration of
Justice, and how much some of them courted it, and endeavored to provoke the
Magistrates to it, I shall show hereafter.

In the Infancy of the settlement of Pensilvania, the Legislators saw cause to
make provision by a Law, to secure the reputation of the Magistrates from the
contempt of others, foreseeing no doubt (and perhaps perceiving something of it
then) that People by reason of their equality in other things, might be under
greater temptations, to run into this evil there, than where the condition of
the Magistrates had raised them above, and set them at a greater distance from
the Common People. It was therefore enacted, That whosoever should speak
contemptuously, or slightingly of a Magistrate, should be punished by a Fine
according to the nature of the offense.

Now that these complainers of Persecution, had egregiously transgrest this
Law, and that they did endeavor to raise Sedition and subvert the Government,
and for that cause only, and not upon any Religious account they were
Prosecuted, this following Instrument will make appear, together with the
several Presentiments brought in against them by the Grand Jury.

At a Private Sessions held for the County of Philadelphia, the 25th. of the
6th. Month, 1692.
Before, Arthur Cook, Samuel Jennings, Sam. Richardson, Humphry Murry, Anthony
Morris, Robert Ewer,
Justices of the County.

WHEREAS the Government of this Province being by the Late King of England's
peculiar favor Vested, and sithence continued in Governor Penn, who thought
fit to make his, and our worthy friend Thomas Lloyd his Deputy Governor; by,
and under whom the Magistrates do act in the Government; and whereas it has
been proved before us, that George Keith being a Resident here, did comrary to
his duty publicly Revile the said Deputy Governor, By calling him an Impudent
Man, celling him, he was not fit to be a Governor, and that his name would
stink, with many other slighting and abusive Expressions, both to him and the
Magistrates; (and he that uses such Exorbitancy of Speech toward our said
Governor, may be supposed will easily dare to call the Members of Council and
Magistrates Impudent Rascals,) as he has lately called one in an open Assembly
that was Constituted by the Proprietary to be a Magistrate) and he also charge
the Magistrates, who are Ministers here with Engrossing the Magistratical Power
into their hands, that they might usurp Authority over him; saying also he
hoped in God, he should shortly see their Power taken from them, all which he
acted in an undecent manner.

And further, the said George Keith, with several of his Adherents, having some
few days since, with unusual Insolence, by a Printed Sheet, Called an Appeal,
etc. Tradueed and vilely misrepresented the Industry, (are, Readiness and
Vigilance, of some Magistrates and others here, in their late proceedings
against the Privateers, (viz.) Babitt and his Crew, in order to bring them to
Condign punishment, whereby to discourage such attempts for the future; and
have also thereby defamed, and arraigned the determinations of the Provincial
Judicature against Murderers; and not only so, but also by wrong Insinuations
have labored to possess the Readers of their Pamphlet, that it is Inconsistent
for those who are Ministers of the Gospel to act as Magistrates: Which if
granted, will render our said Proprietary incapable of the Powers given him, by
the said King's Letters, Patents, and so Prostitute the Validity of every act
of Government, more especially in the Executive part thereof, to the Courtesy
and Censure of all factious Spirits, and Malcontents under the same.

Now for as much as we, as well as others have born, and still do patiently
endure the said George Keith and his adherents in their many Personal
Reflections against us, and their gross Revilings of our Religious Society, yet
we cannot (without the Violation of our Trust to the King and Governor, as
also to the Inhabitants of this Government) pass by or Connive at such part of
the said Pamphlet and Speeches, that have a tendency to Sedition, and
Disturbance of the Peace, as also to the Subversion o^ the Present Government,
or to the ^^ spersing of the Magistrates thereof.

Therefore, For the undeceiving of a^ People, we have thought fit by the
Public Writing, not only to signi^ that our precedure against the Person now
in the Sheriffs Custody, as well as what we intend against others Concerted,
(in its proper place) Respects only that part of the said Printed Sheet which
appears to have the Tendency aforesaid and not any part relating to difference
in Religion, but also these are to Caution such who are well affected to the
Security, Peace, and Legal Administration of Justice in this place, that they
give no Countenance to any Reviler and Contemners of Authority, Magistrates, or
Magistracy, as also to warn all other Persons, that they forbear the further
publishing and spreading of the said Pamphlets, as they will answer to the
contrary at their Peril.

Given under our Hands and Seal of the County, the Day, Year, and place
aforesaid.

Philadelphia, the Fifth of the Eighth Month, 1692.
WE of the Grand Jury, for the Body of this County, do present Peter Boss, for
that he has accused S. J. being a Magisterial Officer, with being an unjust
Judge and of his being Drunk, and of laying wager with John Slocum, and for
many other Scandalous, Reproachful, and Malicious Expressions, to the defaming
of him, and tending to the disturbance of the Peace, contrary to the Law in
that Cause made and provided.

We of the Grand Jury, do present Georg Keith and Thomas Budd, as Authors of a
Book Entitled, The Plea of the Innocent. Where in page the 13th. about the
latter end of the same, they the said G. K. and T. B. desamingly accuse Samuel
Jennings, he being a Judge and Magistrate of this Province, of being too High
and Imperious in Worldly Courts, calling him, an Ignorant, Presumptuous and
Insolent Man, greatly Exposing his Reputation, of an ill president, and
contrary to the Law in that Case made and provided.

The presentment of William Bradford, I take as they give it in the Trial, the
substance of which as they say, was, That they, viz. The Grand Jury present the
9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th, Articles of the Paper called An Appeal, etc. As
being of a tendency to weaken the hands of the Magistrates, and we present
William Bradford for Printing of the said Seditious Paper, etc.

I shall not Comment on the Sessions Paper; nor Presentiments, they speak plain
enough for themselves, and do sufficiently demonstrate, that the persons
exclaming so much of Persecution, were but under a just Prosecution of Law, for
their contempt and abuses of the Magistrates and Government, etc. But G. K.
etc. have a new devise to get off of that, after they have traduced and exposed
them at their pleasure, to tell them if charged with it, that they speak not
then to them, nor of them as Magistrates. How then do they speak to them? Why
to some as Ministers, and to others by profession Quakers, and do declare they
do it conscientiously too, Causeless grounds, etc. p. 12, and 13. But how can
any believe that this is done conscientiously, or with an intent, or desire to
reclaim the persons so exposed by them (supposing they were guilty) but rather
to recriminate such as have been engaged in a testimony against them. Have they
no better way to discharge their Consciences to such as they suppose to have
erred, than to publish their defects (if they were so) to the World, before
ever they have spoken to the parties th^^ abused by them? What Conscience is in
this I shall leave to any but a seared Conscience to determine. But G. K. had
like to have spoiled all, by an implicit acknowledgment, that some words
spoken or written by him; and T. B. by way of charge against me, did respect my
Magistiacy; See Causeless grounds, etc. p. 12th. Where repeating what they had
before charged me with, viz. That I was too high and imperious, both in Friends
Meetings, and Worldly Courts, and of being an Ignorant Presumptuous and
Insolent Man, which la^^ words, says he, did no ways respect his Magistracy.
Then I hope he will grant that some part of those words did, which is too plain
t^^ be denied, for they tax my carriage in Worldly Courts, in the exercise of
my Office as a Magistrate, and this is that for which G. K. and T. B. were
Presented and Prosecuted: which I think will take away all pretenses, that ^^
was on a Religious and Conscientious account and that instead of being
persecuted by the Government, they were the persecutors of the Government (if
there be such a thing as Tongue and Heart persecution) as G. K. falsely
insuates, he and his party were the object of Reasons and Causes, etc. p. 3.)
But how much he and his party were guilty of what they charged on others in
that respect, their own late Book will show in a great part, but such as were
Eye witnesses, and immediately concerned, did see and feel more; nor will G.
K's. Certificate from the Deputy Governor and Council of Philadelphia (which
he says clears him of all these charges, amply declaring his innocence and
peaceable behavior toward the Government, and them in Authority at that time)
do him much service, nor weigh much with thinking People. For who is it that
does not know the propensity that commonly appears (on any turn or change) in
those that succeed in place and power, to censure and expose such as were
before under the same charge and trust they are called to, especially where
there has been any emulation, or former grudgings on that account? But I shall
now touch upon some words and behavior of G. K's. after which I shall submit
it to the Judgment of the Impartial, how far that Certificate deserves to be
credited, or G. K. excused. I have been told by several Friends that were in a
Meeting in West-Jersey, where they heard G. K. say, That they should hear
before it was long, that he were either whipped or imprisoned; and rather than he
would appear a false Prophet, he did what he could to procure it; and hundreds
can witness, that he did in an open Meeting at Philadelphia, say to the Deputy
Governor Tho. Lloyd, Thou art a pitiful Governor, why do thou not send me
to Prison, or order me to be whipped, my back itcheth for a whiping, and has
long itched for it. And what language he gave to Tho. Lloyd, Telling him he was
an impudent Man, etc. And how he called a Magistrate Impudent Rascal, you have
an account before. Now what think thou Reader, Is this the Innocent person,
whose peaceable behavior toward the Government deserved to be so amply
declared and he cleared of all charges to the contrary, by a Certificate from a
Deputy Govern our and Council? Should I enumerate all his abuses to Government,
'twould be tedious but as all indifferent People must needs judge him much to
blame, from what is already said, so I think he is most of all to blame, after
all this, to justify such practices, abusively (...) proclaim to the World,
that he is persecute^ for Conscience sake; and when all is done What did he or
Tho. Budd suffer? Were they, or either of them Whiped or Imprisoned? No such
matter, they were only presented and had a trial at Court, were adjudged
Guilty, and had a Fine of Five Pound each set upon them, which was never
levied; for which if they had gratitude enough, they ought to acknowledge the
Clemency of the Government, and particularly such as might have exacted it. But
suppose they had been as hardly and rigorously dealt with, as they would have
the World to believe. What were all that to me, the abuse was not taken as done
to a singular or private Person, but to the Government, and accordingly they
were Presented by the Jury, and Impleaded by an Attorney, such as the Court was
pleased to allow: But they say I was upon the Bench when they were Fined, which
is also a mistake, for though I were there when the Judgment of Court was
delivered, yet I neither delivered it, nor was I concerned in agreeing what it
should be, but as is usual ^n such Cases; the Justices consult and agree that
in their Chamber, and order it to be delivered by the Clerk in Writing at the
close of the Court.

The next thing I take notice of is that of Peter Boss; who in that Book of the
Trial, etc. p. 10. is represented to be in Church Fellowship with me, at the
time when he wrote that Letter to me, showing his dislike of the judgment of
the Twenty Eight, and telling me (as he says) of some Scandals I lay under,
etc. I believe the occasion and reason of his sending that Paper to me at that
time is truly given, viz. That he was offended with the Judgment of the Twenty
Eight Friends, against G. K. etc. For this indeed I take to be the chief ground
of all their quarrel with me, but that he was in Church Fellowship with me, I
deny; for the judgment given forth against G. K. and his adherents included
him, who has given sufficient proof, how closely he adhered to him. By what
follows, therefore, no reason to expect from me any dealing with, in a Church
Method. But if he accounted himself a Church Member with me; Why did he not use
me as such, and admonish me privately, before he went about openly to defame
me? But to say that the Paper he sent to me was private is not true, for it
came unsealed to me, which shows it neither was private, nor intended to be so.
And how like a Christian admonition is it to me, let all judge, for he seems
not to address himself to me in it, which makes perfect Nonsense, and I have
been told by many, the matter contained in that Scurrilous Paper, was
frequently reported in any place, or company, by him before I received it, a
Copy of which here follows:

The Paper lately published at Philadelphia, by 28. against G. K. and those
joined with him, etc.
HAS and is like to occasion much Trouble and Difference among us, not only
because of the false things Compact in it, as is well known to many Witnesses,
and now to Impose it on all the Meetings, is plain downright Popery; and gives
just occasion to all, not only to judge it as it is for the Abuse, but also
inspect further into things and them; these Ministering Imposers upon other Men's
Consciences, like unto the Roman Clergy; and to show how ill the People do
resent these things, one who was not a Quaker, so soon as the Paper was made
public, says, What Devilish work is here like to be, a pack of Fools have
sent their Bull out? What a piece of work you will see in short time, and how
they will expose themselves, and force others to send it home in Print; (says he)
with worse words of some, unfit to mention here, etc. By exposing this your
Edict, you have made all People your Judges, into whose hands it shall come;
(the Papists themselves) for your Unrighteous Judgment, and drawing in those
with you that have subscribed to they know not what, who were not present at
either of the Meetings; so consequently did not hear the Words charged on G. K.
to be spoken by him, etc. but have taken all supon trust, and signed as a Man
that would be a false Witness to a Bill or Bond for Money, where none is due,
it is hoped that some will see their over-haste, and repent it, as well as
others have done. How can you expect this act of yours will be accounted
Righteous Judgment, to Condemn a Man for Words, and cover one another Deeds as
well as worse Words, in and among your selves; Has S. J. ever been dealt with
for his many Enormous, Palpable, Gross miscarriages chargeable upon him, his
Greatness and Pride, so Insolent and Lofty none dared to touch him, and for his
Abuses to a Poor Worm, who writ to him for Justice and Satisfaction, could have
no answer of the said Letter, and being discontented to hear him Preach to an
Auditory, knowing his Life to be unsavory, and an unjust Judge: I writ the
Second Letter to him of dislike to his Preaching, which after he had read,
flung it into the Fire; Why did he not answer it, and get satisfaction from the
Author? But that he knew himself Tardy; resolved to exercise Bonners's Cruelty,
on my poor Paper; and its matter of Sorrow, there is diverse among you know
enough of S. J. but you cover him and one another; and whom you please to abuse
down with him amain; Do you think People are Blind, and without Sense? Be it
known, they See, they Hear, etc.

1. Pray let it be queried into, whether it was not true that S. J. did wage
his Horse with John Slocum, to Ride a Race with their Horses; and whether J. S.
did not refuse to take the advantage of him because S. J. was Drunk, etc?

2. And pray let it be enquired into, whether S. J. at another time was not so
Drunk could scarce get over the Ship side of Joseph Bryar, when at Burlington?

3. And pray let it be enquired, whether the said S. J. did not wickedly i^
Surveying a Tract of Land, wh^^ John Antrum had actually began to do?

4. And pray let it be enquired into whether S. J. did not take away the Meadow
of Richard Matthews, who being in England took the advantage What the effect
will be time must manifest, how odious he will render other for S. J's. sake,
he being a pretty Eminent Man in London?

5. And pray let it be enquired into the Actions and Abuses of S. J. to John
Skeen Deceased, which should have been answered at Burlington Meeting?

6. And pray let it be enquired into, whether it were S. J. or J. Simcock, that
was by two persons carried to Bed Drunk?

7. And pray let it be further enquired into, whether it were the said S. J. or
J. Simcok, that was so Drunk lost a Coat that was borrowed of another Man, etc.
Seeing so many of you have Condemned G. K. for Words, let these Actions be also
Condemned, they being as great pretenders to be Ministers as him; and pray take
special care this be not burnt as the former, having a Copy of the same.

Peter Boss.

THE first thing I take notice of in the foregoing Paper, is the strange
confidence of the Man; in accusing me to be of a^ unsavory Life; which had it
been as true (as I bless God it is false) through the sufficiency of whose
Grace, I have been preserved from a Scandalous Life, since the time that I
received and owned the Truth; ye for his own sake, had he been Wife, he should
have forborne such an Expression, knowing that his own Conversation was so
notoriously unsavory and scandalous, as gave me occasion, long before any
thing of this Bread appeared, to rebuke, and reprove his forward and undecent
appearing in our Meettings of business in West Jersey; and though he did in
some part own and condemn the fact, with which he was charged, and should never
have been revived by me, had he kept as became him, under those Circumstances
But since he has so far forgotten himself, and would be thought so clean as to
be qualified to judge others; I shall remind him of that suitable Admonition
given by the best of Monitors to such an one, Matthew. 7. and 5. Thou Hypocrite
first cast out the beam of thine own eye, etc. His next complaint is, that
after I had read his Letter, which he calls his Second, I burnt it. In this he
is mistaken; for I burnt it before I read it, understanding from whom it came,
and knowing of no business he could have with me, but to Rail and Quarrel as he
did in his other, I thought therefore to discourage him, from persisting in
that course, and bid the Friend, at whose House I was, tell him if he enquired
for an answer, what use I made of it. But he goes on, saying, Why did I not
answer it, and get satisfaction from the Author, but that I knew my self Tardy,
etc? To which I Answer, I never knew what was in it, How then should I Answer
it? But his giving that as the Reason, because (says he) he knew himself Tardy,
put me upon a necessity of taking so much notice of his last Letter, as to get
satisfaction of him, according to his Desire and Challenge; for to do other
wise had been to submit to the guilt of his Charge; I therefore chose, since he
had so publicly reproached me, to make my Defense as publicly; which was done
in open Court, in Philadelphia, the 5th. of the 8th. Month, 1692. But the
Libeller would insinuate, p. 10. and p. 19. That Peter Boss and his Wife much
desired to come to Trial the First Court; and urged the injuries of the delay
thereof. This is such a piece of Fallacy, as may not pass without rebuke; for
they were offered a Trial the First Court, if they desired it, but withal were
told that the Court could not force it on them, so that it was left purely in
their own choice; and Peter Boss himself, together with his Took and Attorneys,
Tho. Harris, and Charl^ Pickering, did in open Court desire to have it deferred
to the next Court, which wagranted them, and the Juries dismissed, after which
the Justices being together in their Chambers, Peter Boss makes a demand of
Trial, when he knew the Juries were dismissed, so that this was a perfect design
the they might have an appearance of a conplaint. The Libeller would also
insinuate 17. and 19. as though Peter Boss could very hardly be permitted to
have his Letter a Papers read in Court, but however at ^^ through much
importunity, they admit some of the Papers to be read, which he^ follow. It Is
true that the Court did object against Paper Evidence; But why then ^^ they not
do me that Justice, to let the Wo^^ know, that I made it my request to ^^
Court, that they would suffer him to read that he had, and make the most of it;
^^ proof of any or all his Charge? Which w^^ accordingly done; but to say
through m^^ importunity, they admitted some of the Papers to be Read, which
here follow, T^^ is as Falacious as the sayings of the Oracles Delphos, did
they admit of but some of the to be Read; For what Reason, because the were not
all Offered to be Read, nor were (I believe) all there to be Read; but have
been picked up since that time, for I do affirm, he was not limited after my
request as aforesaid, and to remove the Courts Objections against it, I used
the Words of an old Maxim, That there can be no injury to a willing Man.

So he went on to prove the First Article of his Charge, viz. That I ran a Race
with John Slocum, was Drunk and lost the Wager, for proof of which, he produced
a Paper subscribed Mary Budd. This Paper says, That Mary Budd says, that Sarah
Buddle says, that William Biddle says, that John Scolum says etc. Was ever such
stuff produced in a Court for Evidence before, but to deceive the Reader they
would have it believed that they produced three other Evidences in Court
besides to this matter, as that of Bastill, Beck and Bainbridge, but nothing of
it appeared then, but if it had, What do they say? Why all upon report, and
that false too. But George Keith being in Court, and I having heard, that he
had made it his great care to enquire into this matter of John Slocum himself,
(for what end I leave) I did desire him that since I was openly Charged, that
he would do me that Justice as to declare Slocum's answer to him, which he
refusing, I told him, then I should do it as I heard it, which was as
follows, viz. That he told G. K. it was a bad Spirit in him, that went about
to pick up matter against his Neighbors: But G. K. pressing further to know if
the matter were true, told him, it was not true. Now G. K. knowing this, it had
been but bare Justice, not to ^^ generous, to have declared it. But for the
farther clearing of this point, here follow a Certificate, under the hand of a
Person that providence ordered to be now in England who was in my company all
that Journey, wh^^ this was said to be done, that does farther clear me of that
scandal, as also of another raised upon me since the Printing of the Malicious
Libel, of which I shall take note in its place.

WHEREAS it is Infinuated by 'Print and otherways, that Samuel Jennings did Run
a Horse Race with John Scolum, and was Drunk, and lost the Wager, at the time
when ^e West Jersey Commissioners met with them of the East Jersey; and also
^at he was Drunk at the same time, ^ the House of one Robert Cole at ^mboy; I
being in his company, and ^e employed in that Service, viz. For greeing the
Partition-line betwixt the ^o Provinces, do know the said Re^rts to be false.

^ess my Hand, this 29th. ^ the 3d. Month. 1694. Robert Dinsdale.

To the Second Article,
That I was Drunk on Board Joseph Bryar Ship, when at Burlington, that I could
scare get over the side; This is an absolute fall hood, which Peter Boss knew
to be so, the person whom he had reported to have said ^^ dersied it, before he
had thus accused me in that Paper. Judge then what manner ^^ usage I have had
from these my implacable Adversaries: But to clear the point further When this
slander was abroad in Print, Joseph Bryar meeting with it, without my knowledge
or desire, sent me a Certificate of my clearness in that matter; Which though I
cannot insert, not having it here, yet if any will ^^ ture farther to insist
upon it, I shall produce as also diverse testimonies from Friends another that
were with me at that time: For I know not that I was ever more then one on
Board the Ship of Joseph Bryar, seven Neighbors with their Wives being then
invited, and there.

To the Third Article.
Whether I did not wickedly, in Surveying a Tract of Land, which John Antrum
h^^ actually began to do? This is false, a^ nothing offered to prove it, which
I take to b^ because he knew it was so.

To the Fourth Article.
Whether I did not take away the Meadow of Rich. Matthews, etc? for which he
produced a long idle story from Daniel Leeds, who told me, he had Surveyed that
formerly to Rich. Matthews, if that be true, 'twill terminate the matter, for
it must resolve in this, ^ it were Surveyed to Rich. Matthews, it ^uld not be
legally Surveyed to me. If it ^ere not Surveyed to him, then it was common
Land, and might be Surveyed to me, or ^y body else. But I have heard by one
that ^as present when Rich. Matthews's Land was Surveyed; that this Meadow was
intended to ^ Surveyed to it, but was not then done, ^r do I hear of any
pretense to the doing of since. So that I am the more confirmed it ^s never
done by that lame Record of Daniel ^^ds's producing, that gives no account of
^urses, Distances, nor number of Acres of ^adow, which is such a return, as one
pre^^ding to art would blush at. But however ^e can be no wrong done by me to
Richard ^tthews; for either it was Surveyed to ^^, or it was not; if it were,
then he has it, ^t were not, What pretense has he to it ^e than I, who am a
Coordinate Proprietor ^h him?

The Fifth and last Article.
Relating to me, is only a suggestion in general terms of abuses done to John
Skeen Deceased, which if Peter Boss had nothing to say to make good his
Charges, I shall need to say as little in my defense.

As to the Sixth and Seventh Article.
Where he squibbingly queries, Whether it were S. J. or J. Simcock, that was
carried Drunk to Bed, betwixt to persons? And whether it were the said S. J. or
J. Simcod that was Drunk, lost a Coat that was borrowed of another Man? These
things I know nothing of, and believe that J. Simcock deserves not so base a
Reflection, being a M^^ fearing God, and of good Repute in the Country, but his
Crime is that he is one of the Twenty Eight, that flrst appeared in ^ testimony
against G. K. etc.

Thus Reader if thou art impartial, thou will see and grant, how little matter
is i^ this great and loud Charge, and nothing proved; so that all indifferent
People did nauseate, and abnor the baseness of the praction of this Man Peter
Boss, whom the Jury found only Guilty, as they say, of transgressing the 29th.
Chapter of the Laws of this Province, etc. For which he was Fined Six Pound.

The word only here, is given to put an ^mphasis upon the Verdict, which shows,
how ^ight a matter the Libeller esteems it, to slight and Condemn Magistracy
and Government, ^e necessity and dignity of which is not to ^e disputed in it
self, how mean soever the instruments of it be, since we have always awned it
to be an Ordinance of God. As ^o diverse other things suggested against me ^^
that malicious Libel, relating to the usage of my Servants, etc. representing
me either ruel or obscene: I deny any one thing as here suggested to be true;
and were it ^eedful, I could procure, as large a testimo^y of the good usage of
my Servants perhaps ^^ any Man in that Country, that has been laster of so
many, and that from the very ^ands of those that I am represented to abuse:
though I was never principled against giving ^e Correction to Servants; and in
that Coun^y where Servants are bound for time; it is ^ery well known, how
froward many have ^roved, with design if possible, to torment ^^d tire those
they have belonged to, to force ^em to give them their freedom.

I shall give but one Instance more, of the reasure I have had from these
People, I mean G. K. P. B. etc. and so come to a Conclusion, ^aving been much
larger then I intended, or ^^y circumstances for time would well allow, ^^ the
Book indeed deserved, being it is such ^^ none here, nor any where else can yet
be ^und by me to own. The matter is this, as near as I can relate it, not
having the Paper by me. Whilst Peter Boss was in the Pris^ at Philadelphia, he
says there came to visit hi^ one Robert Cole, who asked, What are you^ Prison
for. Saying S. I. was Drunk? I Will pro^ that, for he was Drunk at my House and
Spew^ in the Bed, and gave the Maid a piece of Eight to clean it. This Peter
Boss etc. spread To^ and Country, by small Manuscripts, thr^ into the hands of
such as never were of o^ Communion, for it came too late to be Priced with the
rest, or else no doubt we had ^^ it. When I heard it, I desired two Friend who
lived near Cole, to enquire if he had ^ reported; he told them if he had, he
did ^^ know it, for he confessed he was Drunk, wh^^ he was in Prison with Peter
Boss, and th^^^ knew no such thing by me, but said, on ^^ Morrow after he had
been with P. B. Geo^ Keith desired to speak with him, and wh^ together, G. K.
asked him, concerning wh^ he was said to have reported of me, he t^^ him, as he
says, that he knew no such thing ^ me, G. K. told him, an honest Man would ^ as
good as his word; and he having said ^ Why should he deny it? He said, he know
not that ever he said it, but did Confess, ^ was Drunk, and knew not what he
said: B^^ G. K. pressed it so far, till as Cole says, ^^ Wife desired him to
desist, saying, Husband the Man says he was Drunk, therefore let him alone. Yet
notwithstanding the report was spread by Paper, etc. to the utmost of their
power. I shall not need to aggravate this, by making any remarks upon it, being
so loathsome in it self, as cannot be related without great reluctance. How
like this was to Sufferers for Religion, and under the weight of a heavy
Persecution; I shall leave my Reader free to sudge, and pray God to forgive the
Iniquity of my Enemies, that have bitterly belcht out, and thrown forth whole
floods of reproach against me, which how ill soever it has been on their part,
I bless God, I have been carried through it and over it, and can hardly count
it ^ suffering, esteeming i^ as my Crown, to be reproached, by such as
Apostatize from the Truth, with which I have been acquainted long ^ough, to
make it familiar and easy to me. And it is my great satisfaction that the
unkindnesses I have met with in this Nation, at this or any other time, nath
^een mostly from those, ^at have been concerned in, or favorers of, ^he Old or
New Separation, which, rather than ^ would purchase their favor, at so dear a
^ate, as to spare them, much less to fall in with them, (till they repent) I
would rather choose, ^^ stand exposed to their ^tmost rage and fury. And though
I am not wholly unknown, nor a granger in this Nation, and have reason many
^ays to be endeared to it, and more, that the ^ay of God's Love reached me in
it, than that drew my first Breath in it. Yet having had my esidence for more
then 14 Years, in a remote and, it may with reason be supposed, that my
condition and Carriage may be better known there than here: For which Reason, I
have chosen to publish the Certificate, sent ^ me by Friends there, who remain
in Un^^ and have not been defiled with G. K.'s. S^^ paration, which I intend
for a Conclus^^^ of this Work.

To our Dear Friends and Faithful Brethren in England, and elsewhere, where
these may come; From our Quarterly Meeting in Philadelphia, in Pensilvania, the
4th. of the 10th. Month, 1693.
IN a tender sense of that Everlasting Love which God the Father through his
Dear Son Christ Jesus has Loved us, and United us together in the Unity of his
Spirit, and Bond of Peace, where there is no Rent, or Division, Hatred, or
Prejudice, do we sincerely salute you all; Earnestly desiring, that Grace,
Mercy and Peace, Love, Unity and Concord, be more and more multiplied amongst
you, and us, and all God's Heritage every where: And that it may please the
Lord to subdue, and cause that to wither and decay that would break our Unity,
trouble the Commonwealth of Israel; and lay Stumbling Blocks in their way.
Although it is a day of great Trial, Exercise and Affliction to the Seed of
Jacob in this part of the World, yet we have cause to say, it is a day of God's
Love, so that many were never nearer to the Lord, or enjoyed more of his
presence, which sweetens the waters of afflictions, and makes the passage
through the vale of tears and mourning easy unto us, the Lord having raised
our desires after, and given us a measure of the sense of the durable reward,
and Kingdom of Everlasting Joy, Rest and Peace.

Our dear and well esteemed Friend Same Jennings, having laid his intention
before the Meeting of going for England, to visit Frieds there; We thought fit,
and also our duty to certify unto you, that we have good Unity with him in the
Spirit and Life of Jesus whose Labor and Trayel in the Gospel ^^ Peace and
Salvation, the Lord has bee^ pleased to make successful, so that his Living
and Savoury Testimony, has a seal in ^^ Hearts of the true Israelites of God,
in th^^ American Parts; who has stood firm in the Building of the Lord, against
that Spirit i^ George Keith and his Adherents, that would Divide, Rent and
Scatter; and many have been the Malicious Arrows that have been Shot at him,
endeavoring with all the Art and Parts, that Spirit could prompt them to, to
Villfie, and Wickedly to Calumniate him both with Tongue and Press; therefore
the Love of God, and the regard we have to his Truth, constrains us to certify
unto you, that as far as we can understand, he is clear from the false
Aspersions and Defamations, that has been spread abroad in many Countries, by
the said G. K. and his Adherents, having been cleared in the face of the
Country of many of them, with shame to the false Accuser.

[ Note, The Friends saying, I have been cleared in the face of the Country,
with shame to the false Accuser, of many of the Aspersions and Defamations cast
upon me, respect all that was in P. B's. Letter to me, which was all that they
then suggested.]

We remain your Dearly Beloved Friends, and Exercised Brethren, George Walker,
Robert Ewer, John Goodson, George Gray, Evan Morris, James Fox, John Jennet,
William Southbe, Ralph Jackson, Richard Worell, Benj. Chambers, John Fletcher,
John Parsons, Alex. Beardsley, Thomas Bradford, Rich. Townsend, John Kinsy,
Sam. Richardson, William Gabitas, John Lynam, Tho. Fitzwater, Thomas Lloyd,
Arthur Cook, Griffith Owen, Joseph Paul, Evan Oliver, Derick op de Greet,
Reiner Tiesey, Pieter Soemaker, Caspar Hoodt, Giles Knight, Robert Burrow, John
Buzby, David Brentnall, Joshua Hastings, Abrah. Hardiman, Thomas Canby, John
Hastings, William Walker.


THE END.

