THE JESUITS Firing-PLOT Revived: Or, A Warning to Housekeepers.
Being the Full and true Relation how Elizabeth Owen, on the 8th of this
Instant November, set fire to the House of one Mr. Cooper, living in
Fleetstreet between S. Dunstans Church and Fetter-lane-end: she being a Servant
in the said House.

With an Account how she broke open and robbed several Trunks, into which she
put several lighted Candles, which fired both the Rafters and Floors of the
Garrets. With the Manner how it came to be discovered: and her Clothes found
ready bundled up among other things. As also her Examination, Confession and
Commitment to Newgate, in order to her Trial.

THough Rome has been so often baffled in her weak and shallow Contrivances,
yet her Agents think it not convenient to give over, although in every Design
and new Contrivance, their Malice and Folly is made to appear, to the
Abhorrence and Detestation of all sober and civil Persons; nor can they prevail
to Work upon any but Poor contemptible Proselites, whom they by the powerful
Charms of Gain, do bring into Snares: that so their work may be perfected,
though to their utter Ruin, as may be observed in the many Firing Plots the
cunning Jesuits have of late Contrived; in which for the most part they Employ
silly Servant-Maides, promising them after the pernicious Work is done, that
they shall receive much Wealth: which makes them go Boldy on to perpetrate the
horrid Deed: But then being taken by the Hand of Justice, they are left in
great Confusion and Amazement, not knowing where to find the Man that did
Enjoin them their destructive Task.

An Instance of which may be plainly seen, in a late unlucky Mischief which
happened to the House of Mr. Cooper, commonly known by the Name of the
Sussex-House, near to Fetter-Lane end, in Fleet Street: The m^nner of which was
as follows, About a Month since Mr. Coope^ having an occasion for a
Servant-Maid, by reason of the departure of his former, was by a Friend of his
Wished to one ^lisabe^h Owen who had of late dwelt in Grace Church Street and
upon his Friends Recommendation he accordingly Entertained her in his House, in
nature ^f his Servant; She behaving her self seemingly well, and never was
observed to have any one follow her, unless one young Man, whom she called
Cozen, pretending he was her Uncles Son: on Sunday last being the seventh of
this Instant November, her Mistress and she had a small falling-out, about the
Dressing of a Dinner, and some Words past, but in no likelihood of such force
as to prompt her on to such a desperate Revenge, the Feude being reasonably
pacified; She went about her Work as at other times she was wont to do,
continuing very Cheerful all Sunday after, and likewise Monday, which was the
Day, wherein she Acted the horrid Deed. About nine of the Clock in the Evening,
she was observed to go up Stairs, at which time, as She since did not greatly
deny, and by Circumstances does plainly Appear. She went into the Garret where
the Tapster of the House Lay, and with a Bunch of Keys that were afterward
found about her, opened several Trunks, in which were Clothes which she took
out and bundled up, putting several of her own amongst them: After that with
several Candles (the Tallow of which being found melted on the Floor) she set
the Trunks on Fire, placing them where she thought they soonest would take hold
of the Timber. This being done and she seeing them to begin to Blaize, went
down Stairs, and placed her self in the Bar, this being between Ten and Eleven
of the Clock: when immediately the Smoke came down Stairs, of which ever any
besides those of the House smelt it, She began to complain of, saying, That
there was an intolerable Smoke, which almost put her Eyes out. VVhereupon her
Mistress Answered, She saw no such mighty Smoke as she pretended: But if there
was any she believed, That it proceeded from the Burning of Faggots in the
Chamber over Head. There having been some Gentlemen of her Acquaintance lately
in the same. But the Wench persisted, That it could not come from thence, but
that the House she feared, was on Fire, or Words to that effect; the Smoke
still increasing more and more, They were induced to Believe there had some
mischief indeed happened, or that some Brand roaling out of the Chimney, might
have taken hold of the Hangings, so that running up Stairs, they went into the
Room where the Fire had been made, but found all things in good Order: When
looking farther they observed a Smoke to come down the other pair of Stairs,
that were yet higher: So that when they went up them, they found the Garrets
all on Fire, being fired in several places, and that in one place it had Burnt
quite through the Floor, into the Chamber underneath: Whereupon they
immediately called for help, which was not long ever they had sufficient from
their Neighbors; and through Providence in a short time Mastered that Raging
Element which then began to Blaze through the Roof of the House: And, Heaven
knows, had it not been so stayed, it being amongst Old Buildings, what harm it
might have done, or where have ended.

After the Fire was beaten down, and the hurry was over, they began to search
into the Cause of it, or how it should happen, which they long had not done,
before they found, as we have already mentioned, several parcels of Grease,
which come from the melted Candles, and that the Trunkes being first opened
were set on Fire, which being light and dry, had Fired the rest. Both the
Garrets being Fired in several places, the Trunks Burnt to Ashes, but the Ashes
of no Woollen Apparel found amongst the rest; Which made them Enquire what
might become of the VVoollen that was in them, and upon farther search found
that it was thrown out at the VVindow, into a little Paved Yard, and as it is
beforementioned many of Elisabeth Owen's own Clothes packt up amongst them,
which caused her Master and Mistress to suspect her as Guilty of Firing their
House: And thereupon by the Advice of several Neighbors, They Caused her to be
Apprehended, and for that Night secured, the next Morning She was carried
before the Right Worshipful Sir William Turner Alderman and Justice of the
Peace, for the City of London: Who Examined her strictly in all Points, but
could not get nothing out of her, She being of a sullen dogged Temper; only she
did Declare to some Persons of VVorth and Credit, that she did not design the
Fire should have began so soon, but that it should have been much longer ever it
had kindled, so that it might have Surprised her Master and Mistress, with all
the rest of the Family, her self only excepted, and have Burnt them in their
Beds, so horrid and desperate was her Hellish Design. After a long Examination
She was Committed to Newgate, where she now remains. Not long after She was
Committed, her pretended Cozen came to look for her; Who, perhaps had he been
taken and narrowly sifted, might have proved the Jesuit or the Jesuits Agent,
that Employed her to Act this desperate Exploit and horrid Villainy.

FINIS.
London, Printed for L. Curtiss. 1680.


