THE Jews Message TO Their Brethren in HOLLAND; AND A New Letter touching
their further Proceedings sent from the Kingdom of Scotland: With the arrive of
some of them near Aberdeen, in a small Ship, whose Sails were white branched
Satin, their Ropes and Tackling Silk of the same Color; and their Food on
Board only Rice and pure Honey.

Also, another Letter from Dr. Serarias, ^o Doctor Homes; The Rendevouzing of
Sixteen Hundred Thousand in the Turks Dominions; and Threescore Thousand come
into Europe; The Great Turks sad and fearful Dream; and strange Miracles
performed by the Captain General of the Wandering Israelites; A Description of
their Persons, Habits, and Weapons; the granting of Liberty of Conscience to
all excepting Infidels; A Prophecy touching the Downfall of Babylon in 66, and
the Year of Reformation for the Gospel to be preached throughout all NATIONS.

Printed for George Freem^n, Anno Dom. 1665.

A New Letter sent from Scotland, concerning the further Proceedings of the
JEWS.
SIR,
HAving received a more full account of the proceedings of the Jews, I shall
here present you with such Occurrences, in this juncture of time, wherein
scarce any thing else, is either talked of, or looked after, in comparison of
them. The whole World we see is out of order, nothing to be expected but
Intestine Broils, and whether the Lord will be pleased in the midst of these
Combustions to call in his Ancient People, and magnify his Name in them, He
only knows. On the 23 of October, by the foulness of the weather and
storms, put into Aberdeen a Ship, from whence she came, it is uncertain; but the
Professor of that City, of the Tongues and Languages, having Notice thereof,
went down unto them, and by their Discourse perceived they spoke broken Hebrew,
and bound for Amsterdam, as was intimated by a Letter in High Dutch, to have
Correspondence with their Brethren (the Jews) there: Which Letter further
relates, That there is Sixteen hundred thousand of them together in Arabia, and
that there came into Europe Sixty Thousand more; withal, that they have had
many Encounters with the Turks, defeating several Bodies, and killing many
Thousands, none being able to stand against them. They give Liberty of
Conscience to all, except the Turks, endeavoring the utter Ruin and
Extirpation of them. But for the ship, the Sails thereof are white branched
Satin, and all their Ropes are Silk of the same Color; and in the Sails was
this Inscription in fair Red Characters,

These are of the Ten Tribes of Israel. Which was to discover them to be Jews:
Their Food on board was only Rice and Honey: Their Habit [or Cloathing] Black
Black and Blew. It seems they have sent to most of the chief Cities in the
World to their Brethren, to give them Notice of their Proceedings, to the end
they may come and join with them. The Great Turk having had a Dream, that a Jew
had taken the Crown from his Head, resolved to put all to death within his
Dominions; but his Council dissuaded him from that Bloody Design. The Jewish
Host are sai^ to increase daily, and that many of them believe in the true
Messiah, and that it was the Savior of the World that was crucified at
Jerusalem.

This was sent in a Letter t^ Oxford, Dated from Scotland, November. 15. The
following Letters were s^nt from Dr. Ser^rias, to Dr. Homes, Mr. Bruce, and
others.
SIR,
SInce my last of the Proceedings of the Israelites, We have had Expresses not
only from Jerusalem, but Tunnis also; That this Year no Carrivan is to go to
Mecha, by reason the City is besieged by the Israelites, who appear in great
Numbers, and are said to be sent by the Ten Tribes to be the Forerunners:

From Jerusalem we have received very good News, and likewise many of our
Christian Merchants have received the like from Alexandria, The Particulars of
which is, that the Bashaw of Alexandria, with the King of Arabia, made use of a
Carravan, that is, an Army of Sixty Thousand Men, and marched toward Mecha, and
being within one days Journey of the City, sent out a Troop to take notice how
things were, which Troop having seen this People lying in Tents about the
City, and hearing that they professed themselves to be Israelites, reported this
to the Bashaw who for all that resolved to march on with his Forces and coming
within sight of the City, discovered an innumerable Multitude of People coming
out of their Tents. Whereupon the Turks advanced up against them, gave fire,
and discharged several Volleys of round shot; but after a little fighting a
pannick fear took them and terror seized on them, making them cry out Who is
able to fight with these People, seeing our Arrows and Shot return back upon
our selves. So the Turks leaving off fighting, ^eturned Home, and the
Israelites into their Tents without pursuing them. This Affront caused the
Bashaw and King of the Moors, thorow-out all Egypt and Arabia, to impose on the
Jews in all their Dominions a new Tax five times greater then it was before.
And the Bashaw, the better to inform himself what this People were sent ten
Jews to them who found them to be Israelites, and that they spoke Hebrew,
saying, they were sent before to remain at Meka till the rest of their Brethren
came, for that the time was now come, that they should return unto their own
Land of their Forefathers, which others had usurped and taken from them.
Another Letter says, that the Commander of Meka sent 4 Troops to oppose them,
but not one returned and that diverse Caravans and great Bodies have bin wholly
defeated by the said Israelites; and that twelve thousand Turks coming from a
City called Metai, near Meka were also routed, and eight thousand slain upon
the Place, their own Swords and Muskets turning against themselves. Of the ten
Jews that were sent, six remained with their Brethren, and but 4 returned to
the Turks. As for the great Prophet in North-Skilton, Doctor Collonest has bin
at his House in a Town called Long-Ditch, where he heard these things out of
his own Mouth. That in the Year 1661. he meditated on the Scriptures speaking
(...) ^^e La^ter Times; (...) of the great Multitude: yet withal heard of
other Jews that several of them spoke the Holy Tongue; and that whosoever goes
to contend with this People in Battle, are presently vanquished, and slein.

They have already possessed themselves of several Places and Cities, putting all
the Inhabitants to the Sword, the Jews only excepted. They are a People of a
middle stature, their Bodies comely, their Complexions fair: This Party saw no
Woman amongst them, nor any other Arms, besides those abovementioned; their
Horses are many, their Attire blew, and their Tents black. From the aforesaid
City of Sus, the whole Host of them might be plainly and distinctly viewed the
whole Week, and might see their Fires and Smoke ascending; but on the Sabbath,
neither of both could be discerned throughout the whole Camp, or Host.

Several of them being commanded up to a (...) (...) to (...) for a
Brass-Tamber, or Trumpet; and upon the finding it, three times to sound it, and
then all Nations to be gathered into one Universal Church: their Leader is of
an extraordinary discerning Spirit for no sooner does he see a Man, but he
knows his Mind, and the thoughts of his Heart, treating them with very much
humility and respect. And coming to a River not Foordable he consulted with his
Officers and unanimously resolved to implore the great ^od by Petition and
Prayer, to deliver them as he had ^^ne their Forefathers, and to show them
some Mira^^^ to evence them of the truth of the great Messiah born of a Virgin,
to be the Savior of the World: whereupon, so great and wonderful a Work was
wrought, that the great Waters immediately divided, as soon as they had ended
Prayers, and the whole Army in ^^^cked over even as it were upon dry Land.

FINIS.

