Arthur Jackson
portrait

ANNOTATIONS Upon The five Books, immediately following the Historical Part of
the OLD TESTAMENT, (Commonly called the five Doctrinall, or Poetical Books.)

To wit, The Book of Job, the Psalms, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song
of Solomon.

WHEREIN First, all such passages in the Text are explained, as were thought
likely to be questioned by any Reader of ordinary capacity: Secondly, in many
places the grounds of diverse Scripture-expressions are set forth, and other
things noted, needful to be known, that are not so easily at the first reading
observed: And thirdly, many places, that might at first seem to contradict one
another, are reconciled.

Intended chiefly For the Assistance and Information of those, that use
constantly every day to read some part of the Bible, and would gladly always
understand what they read, if they had some man to help them.

The third Part.

By ARTHUR JACKSON, Preacher of Gods Word at Faiths under Paul's.

Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding.
If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hid treasures;
Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.
Chrysostom. Homil. 13. in Genesin. Sicut aromata quanto magis digitis teruntur,
tanto majorem natura sua flagrantiam reddunt, ita and Scripturis usu venit, ut
quanto quis illis est familiarior, tanto magis videre possit latentem in illis
thesaurum, pluresque percipere infallibilium divitiarum fructus.

LONDON, Printed by ROGER DANIEL, for the Author, and are to be sold by
several Booksellers. MDCLVII.

To my loving and dearly Beloved neighbors and friends, the Inhabitants of the
Parish of Faiths under Paul's.
Dearly beloved in the Lord,
HAd there been nothing else to have put me upon this Dedication, but the great
respect which you showed to my Predecessor, Reverend Mr. Geree, that alone had
been abundantly enough to have commanded this Respect from me to you. The
contributing of 30l. per annum to his widow so long as she lived, and the
raising of a considerable portion of money for one of his children, after her
decease, that was left without any provision, was such a Testimony of the high
esteem you had of that your pious Pastor, as is not I think to be parallelled
by that which has been done by any other Congregation. And I have purposely
made this honorable mention of it, that when there is the like occasion, it
may be an example to many others.

But I have other inducements to move me to what I here now do. The greatest
part of this Work, such as it is, has gone through my hands, since I was
called by you to undertake the charge of your souls: and therefore, by reason
of the special Interest you now have in me, I know none that may challenge a
more special Interest in these my poor labors then you may do. The design
indeed of the Work looks farther then you, even to the common good of all, that
shall seek for some help herein for the understanding of this part of the Holy
Scripture. But yet because the support the Author has of late years received
from you has contributed so much to the carrying on of the Work, he cannot but
think it most equal, that it should tender its first service to you; and that
too the rather, because many of you, by reason of your calling, are like to be
very isntrumental in spreading it abroad into the hands of others. To you
therefore, my dear Brethren, together with as many affectionate desires of your
spiritual good as my poor heart can hold, do I here present this 3. part of my
Annotations; and do indeed own it as a special mercy of divine Providence to
me, considering how far my days were declined ere I was called to dispense the
word of Grace amongst you, that the third of my life should be drawn out so far
beyond mine own expectation, that I should now have the opportunity of leaving
behind me this pledge and memorial of my thankful acknowledgement of your
love and kind respects to me, (in the extent whereof amongst you I think I may
glory as much, as can well be expected in these broken times) as likewise of
the tender affection, which I bear to you all, and that continually I have you
in my heart (to use the Apostles expression Phil. 1.7.) that I may by all
possible means to the utmost of my power advance the spiritual and eternal
good of your souls.

Only now, I beseech you, let me close this tender of my service herein with
this Request, that you would not by looking on this Dedication, and minding the
Book no farther, make that a vain and empty complement, which I present unto
you with a real desire of advancing the stock of your saving knowledge in the
great things of Gods law, and which I hope through Gods Blessing may turn to
profit in this regard, if you will be pleased attentively to read over these
Notes together with these Scriptures, which their design is to unfold.

Oh, my Brethren, as you desire to growingrace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, be much in reading the Scriptures, the Oracles
of God. Hearing has the pre-eminence for awakening Conscience. But Reading (in
my poor judgment) carries with it some kind of peculiar advantage for the
edifying and establishing of the minds of Christians in point of solid
knowledge.

As for these particular Books, which are here explained, I think I may safely
say, without any blameworthy reflection upon the rest of the Scripture, that
they are the choicest pieces of the Old Testament. The Scripture is the
Paradise, the garden of God upon earth: and these Poetical Books are (as I may
say) as so many goodly knots in the midst of this garden; wherein the
discoveries that are made of divine truths are set forth with the intricacies
and elegancies of many florid figurative expressions, purposely to render them
the more delightful to us. Solomon himself says as much in express terms
concerning his Books, Eccles. 12.10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable
words; or, as it is in the Hebrew, words of delight. And this may well invite
you with strong affectionate desires to search into those treasures of wisdom,
which are therein so pleasingly conveyed to us.

And now, my dear Friends, I have nothing farther to add, but my prayers for
you, that you may be still united more and more in the way of truth, and in the
bond of Christian love and peace; and withal earnestly to beg your daily
prayers for me, that I may be still enabled through grace so to hold forth the
Word of life unto you, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that, even to
you-ward, I have not run in vain, neither labored in vain; which I hope you
will not fail to do for

April 21. 1658. Your servant in the work of the Lord, ARTHUR JACKSON.

A Preface or Advertisement To the READER.
REader, when I first undertook this Work of writing these Annotations upon the
Scripture, there was not, as I remember, any piece of this kind extant in
English, save only the Geneva marginall Notes. But since that time (blessed be
God, the father of lights) abundance of help has come flowing in by more able
Hands. Besides the two volumes of the Annotations of our English Divines, and
the Translation of the Dutch Notes, (more lately published) much has been done
in this very way, for the clearing of the difficulties in several Books of the
Scripture, by many particular men. Yea upon two of the Books, which here I have
undertaken to explain, so much has been done, I mean by Mr. Caryl in his
elaborate Comments upon Job (so far as he has gone) and by Dr. Reynolds in
that choice piece of his upon Ecclesiastes, which we have in the great English
Annotations, that they may well give abundant satisfaction to those that read
them.

But why then do I proceed in this Work? especially considering that Item given
by Solomon in one of these Books, that of making many Books there is no end,
and much reading is a weariness of the flesh? I answer truly and briefly;
first, that I have found so much sweet content and delight in this study, that
I can hardly persuade my self to give it over. Secondly, that the reiterated
persuasions of many of my Reverend Brethren that I would go on in this work
has been a very great encouragement therein to me; and thirdly, that I cannot
but hope that the plainness of the Expositions (if nothing else) will make
them accepted by many.

The greatest thing that has troubled me in this work was, that when I came to
commit it to the Press, I found it rise to so far greater a bulk then either
of my two former Volumes. But for this I desire the Reader would consider.
First, that the style and expressions of these Poetical Books are far more
dark and difficult, and fuller of many knotty intricacies, then those books
that were the subject of the former Volumes; and likewise that the clearing of
the scope and dependence of many passages herein is a work of much labor (as
will be most especially found in the books of Ecclesiastes and the Song of
Solomon) both which must needs make the Annotations the larger. Secondly, that
in this Volume I have undertaken to open, together with the Translation of the
Text which we have in our Bibles, the different Translations that are put in
the margin, (because I found many of them judged most agreeable to the
Original) which I seldom did in the other Volumes. And this also has much
lengthened the Notes* and thirdly, that to shorten the work, I have, as often
as I could, referred the Reader to the Exposition of the like passages and
expressions in other places; the frequency whereof therefore I hope will be no
occasion of dislike to any. Yea in some places I have been forced to leave the
Reader of himself to have recourse to former Expositions: for, as for Instance,
for the word Selah, and many other words frequently found in the Titles of the
Psalms, should I have inserted a several Reference, even these, with others of
the like nature, would very much have swelled the book.

In a word, though the work be larger then I intended, yet I hope it will be
the more profitable: I studied brevity, so far as it might not prejudice the
perspicuity of the Notes. The good Lord command a blessing upon it, where ever
it goes; and if thou, Reader, find it so with thee, I know I shall have thy
prayers, which I shall account a great return of Christian love to him, who is,

Thine in the Lord Jesus, ARTHUR JACKSON.

ERRATA.
Page 40. line 31. for overturns read indangers. p. 57. l. 6. for to overwhelm
r. so overwhelm. p. 69. l. 3. for whose troops r. whole troops. p. 70. l. 19.
for as is. r. as it is. p. 80. l. 43. for nor r. not. p. 88. l. ult. for
escretly r. secretly. p. 194. l. 10. r. or 3ly l. 13. r. or 4ly. p. 196. l. 7.
dele spoken p. 209. l. 2. for stone r. brass. p. 221. l, 23. dele more. p.
393. l. 9. for work r. word. p. 432. l. 15. for Chro. r. 1 Chro. p. 779. l. 1.
for effect r. affect. p. 844. l. 3. for see the Note. 2 Cor. 12.8, r. See 2
Cor. 8.12. p. 850. l. 39. for anger r. danger. p. 869. l. 36. for forget r.
forgo. p. 878. l. 13. for better r. bitter. p. 879. for 23. r. 29. p. 869. l.
36. for were their r. were not their. p. 919. l. 23. for worldly men r. worldly
wise men. Eccles. and Cant.

P. 35. l. 33. for ver. 15. r. ver, 5. p. 41. l. 30. they promote r. they may
promote. p. 103. l. 43. for retained r. returned. p. 130. l. 42. for into r, in
to. p. 149. l. 10. for but when, etc. r. and when by faith we do open to him,
yet because, etc. p, 168. l. 38, for people r. gospel. p. 188. l. 25. and
according dele and. p. 206. l. 9. for The last r. In the last. p. 218. l. 38.
for if the word comes r. if they come. p. 225. l. 12. for given the, r. given
from the.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Book of JOB.
CHAP. I.
THere was a man in the land of Vz, whose name was Job, etc. I That this book
was written by some of those holy men of God, that wrote by the inspiration of
the holy Ghost, cannot be doubted. For we see that this history is spoken of as
a part of the Oracles of God, committed to the Jews. Iam. 5.11. you have heard
of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; and by the Apostle
Paul a passage of it, to wit, that chap. 11.13. is cited in 1 Cor. 3.19. It is
written, he takes the wise in their own craftiness. Indeed who it was that
wrote this book is altogether uncertain: only we may say that they build upon
the fairest conjectures, that hold Moses was the writer of it, and that it was
the first scripture that was written. As for these first words, There was a man
in the land of Vz, etc. It is hard to say what the land of Uz was, where Job
dwelt, and of whom it was so called, whether of Uz, the son of Arum, the son of
Shem, Genesis 10.23. or of Huz, the son of Nahor, Abraham's brother. Genesis 22.25. or
of Uz the grandchild of Seir. Genesis 36.28. That it lay Eastward of Canaan, and
bordered upon the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans is evident in the story: and the most
probable opinion seems to be, that it was Uz in the land of Edom, or whereof
the land of Edom was a part. Lam. 4.21. Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of
Edom, that dwell in the land of Vz, and the rather because Teman also, the
country of Eliphaz, one of Jobs friends and neighbors. Chap. 2.11. either was
in Idumea, or bordered upon it. See Ier. 49.7. Amos 1.11, 12. Obad. 8.9. and
that the place of his dwelling is thus expressed, as a proof of his singular
piety, in that though he were not of the seed of Abraham, but lived amongst
those nations, that were much degenerated from the piety of the holy
Patriarchs, yet he was a man of eminent holiness and righteousness. For the
time when he lived, that likewise is uncertain; yet it is most likely that he
lived in the days of the Patriarks before Moses. 1. because in his time it
seems Religion was not wholly decayed amongst those Eastern nations, nor was
the true God only worshipped as yet amongst Abraham's posterity: 2. because he
lived after his afflictions were ended 140 years. Chap. 42.16. and by that
which is said of his first children, it is evident that they were house
keepers, and therefore that he was of good years before he was afflicted;
whereas after the age of the Patriarks men seldom lived so long. Psalm. 90.10.
3. Because after the giving of the law, it was not lawful to sacrifice, save
in the place which God had chosen, the tabernacle and temple: whereas we see
ver. 5. that Job sacrificed in the land of Uz. and 4* Because there is not the
least mention in this book of any thing concerning the commonwealth of Israel,
or of any of the glorious works that God wrought for them in Egypt, the
wilderness or the land of Canaan: which we can hardly say of any book of
Scripture besides, because they were written after Moses. However, that in
after times the story and name of Job was famous amongst the Jews, is evident.
Ezekiel, 14.14. Though these three men Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, they
should deliver but their own souls.

And that man was perfect and upright, etc.] to wit, therefore perfect, because
upright, or, he was a man of a sincere heart, and just conversation. His
eminent piety is here first related, because this is one of those things, which
chiefly in this history is recommended to our observation that being a man of
such rare piety, he notwithstanding underwent such heavy afflictions.

Verse. 3. His substance also was seven thousand sheep, etc.] The great wealth
of Job is thus particularly expressed, both because this added much to his
commendation, that he was not corrupted with his prosperity and wealth, as most
men are; and likewise because his patience was herein the more to be admired,
that being spoiled of so great riches he bore it as quietly, as if it had been
a matter of nothing which he had lost.

So that this man was the greatest of all the men in the East) that is, in
wealth, honor, credit and esteem; yet the comparison must be understood with
reference to others of the same quality and condition: for that he should be a
King (as some conceive) yea the greatest King in those parts of the world is
altogether improbable, and his own words of himself do plainly import the
contrary Chap. 29.25. I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a
King in the army, etc.

Verse. 4. And his sons went and feasted in their houses every one his day,
etc.] That is, his sons used ever and anon to feast one another, each one in
his day, though not for seven days together without intermission (for it is
said that each of them sent and invited their sisters to be with them). And
this is expressed. 1, Because it was the occasion of that miserable end that
befell his children. ver. 18, 19. when being met together in their eldest
brothers house according to their custom, the house fell upon them. 2. To show
how lovingly they agreed and lived together, this being doubtless a great
aggravation of his grief, when tidings were brought him of their sudden death.
3. To prove the singular piety of this man (so sorely afterward afflicted) by
this particular of his sollicitous care for his children, when they were
feasting together.

Verse. 5. And it was so when the days of their feasting were gone about, that
Job sent and sanctified them, etc.) That is, he sent and appointed them to
sanctify and prepare themselves for the sacrifices which the next morning he
meant to offer up to God in their behalf; and this they were to do partly by
such outward rites of purifying as were used in those times, partly by
spiritual means, as by holy meditations, prayer, mortification, repentance,
etc.

For Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned and cursed God in their
hearts.] That is, it being so usual with men in times of feasting to forget
themselves and many several ways to sin against God, thus it may well be it
has been with my children, perhaps by some more heinous sin they have provoked
God to anger against them and that out of some secret profaneness and contempt
of God in their hearts, which because it tends to the vilif^ing and
dishonouring of God is indeed no better then a cursing of God in their hearts.
This I conceive is the meaning of those words, as not judging it so probable,
either that Job made a doubt whether his sons had in the least degree swerved
from the rule of Gods law, or that he suspected in them the horrid sin of
direct blaspheming and cursing of God, no not in their hearts.

Thus did Job continually.] That is, so often as his sons did thus feast one
another, each in his course, which it seems they did frequently.

Verse. 6. Now there was a day when the sons of God, etc.] By the sons of God
here are meant the holy Angels, as again chap. 38.7. who are so called first,
because they do in a special manner bear in themselves the image of God, to
wit, in their singular wisdom and knowledge, their unspotted purity and
holiness, their admirable power and might and in the majesty and glory of
their spiritual essence. 2. Because all these excellencies wherewith they are
endued they have them from God, the fountain from whence they flow, in regard
whereof, when they stand before God they are as so many beams of his
inaccessible light. 3. Because they serve God as sons their father, with all
cheerfulness and willingness. and 4. Because as sons they are always in Gods
presence and see his face, and of these it is said that on a certain day they
came and presented themselves before the Lord, Satan being also amongst them,
etc. Which must not be literally understood, as if God had certain days
wherein he called together the Angels to attend him, (for the holy Angels are
continually in his presence, Mat, 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not one of
these little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always
behold the face of my Father.) Or, as if any such speeches passed betwixt God
and the Devil as here are recorded. It is only a figurative expression of this
truth, that both the good and evil spirits are always in his eye, and under
his command, and do nothing but what he will have them, and that it was
therefore of God that the Devil was suffered to tempt Job and try him as he
did; for because of our weakness the Lord does herein, as it were, stoop to
our capacity, and speaks of himself after the manner of earthly Princes, that
we might the better conceive him, in a manner of speech which we call a
Prosopopeia, not much unlike that in 2 Kings 22.19. I saw the Lord sitting on
his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on
his left, and the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and
fall at Ramoth-Gilead, etc.

Verse. 7. Then Satan answered the Lord and said, From going to and fro in the
earth, etc.] By this walking of Satan to and fro in the earth is only
figuratively employed, that those evil spirits are every where throughout the
whole world, seeking diligently to seduce men and to execute Gods vengeance on
them, and to do all the mischief they possibly can.

Verse. 8. Have thou considered my servant Job, etc.] By this the Lords boasting
of Jobs piety and righteousness is signified, that where the Lord by his
spirit inables his servants to frame their lives according to his will, God in
them is glorified, not without the confusion of Satan, who though he observes
with envy and vexation enough the uprightness of their ways, yet he is not
able to subdue and corrupt them, and so God in them does as it were triumph
over Satan, and they through Gods assistance are more then conquerours.

Verse. 9. Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, Does Job fear God for
naught?] By this answer of Satan is only employed, that he is the accuser of the
children of God, and is still ready to judge, that in prosperity we only serve
God for the good things he bestows upon us, and endeavors therefore by
troubles and afflictions to draw us off from the service of God.

Verse. 10. Have not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house?] that
is, his children and family: and hereby is employed that Satan is vexed, that
the Lord by his special protection does keep him off from doing that mischief
to the righteous that he desires to do.

Verse. 11. But put forth thine hand now and touch all that he has.] That is,
destroy or take from him, not some part of his estate only (for that may be
done and yet a sufficiency be left him) but all that he has, and then he will
discover himself otherwise then he has hitherto done. By touching is usually
meant in the Scriptures hurting, afflicting or destroying, as Ruth 2.9. Have I
not charged the young men, that they should not touch thee? Zach. 2.8. For he
that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And so it is taken here: and this word (
now) is added to imply that Satan desired to have it done presently; he was
eager to destroy him, and thought long to see Job in misery.

And he will curse thee to thy face.] That is, he will openly and impudently
blaspheme thy name; and hereby is meant not only express execrations cast upon
God, but also whatever may tend to the reproach of the Almighty, his goodness
and providence.

Verse. 12. And the Lord said unto Satan, behold, all that he has is in thy
power, only upon himself put not forth thine hand.] Hereby is employed. 1. That
Satan is continually desirous to afflict our bodies. 2. That the Devil cannot
stir an inch farther in afflicting us, then God gives him leave. 3. That the
Lord is careful that his servants should not be overpressed, and therefore
usually affords them some breathing time, as here, though he intended
afterward to give Satan power to afflict his body, yet a while he restrained
him from that.

So Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord.] The meaning of this is
only to imply, that the Devil is speedily ready to do all the mischief he can
to Gods people, if the Lord have once let loose his chain.

Verse. 13. And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating,
etc.] This time and this manner of destroying Jobs children is expressed, as
again afterward verse. 18. because this must needs much aggravate Jobs sorrow,
that they should be fetched in together by the providence of God, as it were
into a net, to the end they might all be destroyed together and not one of them
escape, as likewise that they should be thus suddenly in a fearful manner cut
off, which always has an impression of wrath upon it, when they were thus
lovingly rejoicing together: and that in their eldest brothers house, who
having the largest portion of estate was like to make the fullest and most
solemn feast. He always was afraid least they should sin in their feasting;
so that having their brains thus suddenly beaten out whilst they were eating
and drinking together, this might make him fear least they died with sin upon
them unrepented of.

Verse. 15. And the Sabeans fell upon them and took them away, etc.] The Sabeans
were a people (as most interpreters hold) inhabiting Arabia felix bordering
upon the land of Uz where Job dwelt, a people that lived by pillaging and
plundering their neighbors, and so easily won, by a suggestion of Satan's at
this time, to break out upon Jobs cattle and drive them away. And observable it
is, that though Satan could many ways have destroyed Jobs oxen and asses, and
the servants that were with them more immediately by himself, yet he chose
rather to make use of the Sabeans, as delighting not only in the misery of Job,
but also in the sin of these his wretched instruments.

And I only am escaped alone to tell thee.] The same is said by all the
several messengers that brought Job the sad tidings of the several calamities
that befell him, verse. 16, 17, 19. So that it was doubtless a piece of Satan's
policy that still one servant escaped to bring Job the relation of these
grievous losses; and two reasons may be given for it, to wit, 1. That the
relation of these afflictions might come suddenly to him; his servants escaping
out of such desperate dangers would be sure to fly home with all the speed they
were able; and 2. That he might not question the certainty of what was told
him. Had there been any color of doubting the truth of these relations, that
might have abated his sorrow for the present, and then recollecting his spirits
in the interim when he came to know the certainty of it, he might then have
been the better able to bear it; but having the report of these things from his
own servants, that were eye witnesses of what they spoke, he could have no
ground of questioning whether that they spoke were true or no, and so these
heavy tidings must needs presently fall upon him with their full weight.

Verse. 16. While he was yet speaking there came also another.] The immediate
report of these ill tidings one in the neck of another (which is here noted, as
also again verse. 17 and 18) was purposely no doubt effected by Satan, that he
might not have any breathing time, any leisure to call to mind any thought that
might support him, or allay any whit the bitterness of the former sorrow.

The fire of God is fallen from heaven, etc.] That is, a strange and
extraordinary lightening from heaven has consumed them; And remarkable is the
cunning of Satan, who destroyed not these, as he did the other, by making use
of wicked men, but by fire from heaven, that for his greater astonishment, Job
might the more assuredly believe, that not men only, but even God himself did
fight against him, and so might not fly to God for comfort, but rather in the
vexation of his spirit might blaspheme God.

Verse. 18. Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking, etc.] This
message was by the cunning of Satan reserved to the last place, because the
tidings of the loss of his goods would not have been so terrible, had he known
of his childrens death, to whom he hoped to have left them; and indeed when a
man lies under a great affliction, a less is not minded, and 2. Because when
he was already sorely distressed with the former sad tidings, he would be the
more unable to bear this doleful message, and the more likely to sink down
under it, and break forth into impatience and blasphemy against God.

Verse. 19. There came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four
corners of the house, etc.] Either this must be meant of a whirlwind, that did
together strike the four corners of the house, or else the wind from the
wilderness did with its violence shake the four corners of the house, so that
at length the house fell upon them.

Verse. 20. Then Job arose and rent his mantle, etc.] That is, having hitherto
sat still and heard these sad tidings, now he presently arose (as one that yet
sunk not under these afflictions) and rent his mantle and shaved his head, etc.
And this he did, partly that he might moderately bewail these afflictions and
specially the death of his children, and partly, thereby to testify his deep
humiliation under the hand of God, with repentance for all his sins; to which
some add also, that he did it out of detestation of those blasphemous
temptations which Satan at this time did suggest to him. As for these outward
rites of rending their garments and shaving their heads, which they used in
those times and countries: for the first see the note Genesis 37.29. and for the
second, the shaving of the head, that this also was used in times of great
affliction and sorrow of mind is evident in those places. Isa. 22.12. In that
day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to
baldness, and Ier. 7.29. Cut off thine hair O Jerusalem and cast it away, and
take up a lamentation. And then doubtless it was used to signify, that their
condition was such, that they had good cause to lay by all ornaments
whatsoever, hair being given for comeliness and ornament.

Verse. 21. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither:] Some expositours conceive that the word ( thither) in this clause is
not used in reference to his mothers womb, but in reference to the earth; and
that, because when he spoke these words, by way of adoration he cast or bowed
down his body to the earth, as it is in the former verse. Others conceive it is
the earth, which Job here calls his mothers womb, and that because the earth is
the common mother of us all, since out of it in Adam we were all taken. Genesis
2.19. But last of all, others, and with better reason, acknowledge, that Job
means indeed his mothers womb in the first clause, and then in the next clause
adds, that he shall naked return thither, only in reference to a returning to
an estate like that of his mothers womb, to wit, that as there he was shut up
naked in the streights and darkness of earth (so David calls his mothers womb.
Psalm. 139.15. I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts
of the earth.) waiting thence to be delivered in due time, so he should be
again shut up naked in the bowels of the earth, the grave, as seed sown in the
ground, waiting for a resurrection to a better life. However the drift of these
words was doubtless to show, that if God should strip him of all he enjoyed,
he should have no cause to complain, both because he brought not these things
into the world with him; God had given them and might, when he pleased, take
them away, and because they were given as temporal blessings, which he could
not hope always to enjoy, but must part with them at the time of his death.
For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing
out. 1 Timothy 6.7*

Verse. 21. Blessed be the name of the Lord.] So far was Satan disappointed of
his hopes, that in stead of cursing God, Job blessed him, both for suffering
him to enjoy his good blessings so long, and for his present afflictions,
wherein he knew the Lord might show his goodness and mercy to him, as well as
in his former bounty; and this doubtless did more deeply wound Satan, then all
Jobs afflictions had wounded him.

Verse. 22. In all this Job sinned not.] That is, in all this that Job spoke and
did, there was not any thing that was materially sinful. No man can do any one
act that is purely pure, free from the least stain or tincture of sin; Who can
bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean? chap. 14.4. But there is a
great deal of difference between a sinful action and sin in an action; Satan
had said that Job would curse God; but when it came to proof, there was no such
thing, he neither spoke nor did any thing that was materially evil.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. AGain there was a day, etc.] See chap. ^. verse. 6. How long it was
after those former losses, ere God gave Satan liberty to afflict him in his
body, we cannot say; only it is probable, that there was such a distance of
time between these two afflictions, as might serve for a full discovery of Jobs
Spirit under the first.

Verse. 2. From going to and fro in the earth.] See chap. 1. verse. 7-

Verse. 3. Have thou considered my servant Job?] See chap. 1. verse. 8.

And still he holds fast his integrity.] This is added to imply, that God is
in a special manner glorified and Satan confounded by the Saints perseverance
in piety in the time of affliction; for hence the Lord is here set forth, as it
were triumphing in this over Satan.

Although thou movedst me against him to destroy him without cause.] In this,
as formerly, God stooping to our capacity speaks of himself still after the
manner of men. He was not moved by any persuasions of Satan to afflict Job, nor
did it to gratify him; only because the Lord did it to manifest, that Job did
not serve God only for the blessings he bestowed upon him, as Satan judged,
therefore the Lord says here, that Satan moved him against him to destroy him,
and that, without cause, since the Devil could not effect what he aimed at, but
still Job continued the same he was before.

Verse. 4. And Satan answered the Lord and said, skin for skin, etc.] See chap.
1. verse 9. Some expound this proverbiall speech skin for skin, etc, thus, that
as willingly as men exchange one skin for another, they will part with all that
they have to save their life. And indeed the like manner of speech we may
observe in other Proverbs. Prove. 25. 3. The heaven for height, and the earth
for depth, and the heart of Kings is unsearchable. and verse. 25. As cold waters
to a thirsty soul: so is good news from a far country. But the most generally
received exposition is this, that as men would expose their hands to danger of
a blow that is coming, to save their heads, or any other place where the blow
might prove mortal, or suffer their cattle or other goods, yea their children
to perish, so themselves might sleep in a whole skin, so it was with Job, he
had hitherto forborne to curse God, not out of any true piety and sincerity of
heart, but only out of a base fear least he should be smitten in his own body,
as would soon be discovered, if his body were smitten too, and for the better
warranting of this exposition, it is said, that in those times, partly because
their substance consisted chiefly in cattle, and partly because their money was
made of skins, it was usual to express a man's whole estate by the word skin;
so that the meaning of this proverbiall speech skin for skin was usually this,
that there was no man but would give all his outward estate for the saving of
his skin upon his back, that is, for the saving of his life.

Verse. 5. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, etc.]
That is, afflict him in his body also, and that not lightly, but in some heavy
manner, that not his flesh only, but his very bones may be sensible thereof,
that the pain and distemper may pierce even to his very bones and marrow, that
so his whole body may be both pained and weakened, to the manifest endangering
of his life, and then he will curse thee to thy face. See chap. 1. verse. 11.

Verse. 6. Behold he is in thine hand, but save his life.] See chap. 1. verse. 12.

Verse. 7. So Satan went forth, etc.] See again chap. 1.12.

And smote Job with sore boiles, from the sole of his foot unto his crown.] And
thus, besides the inward tortures and sickness he endured, which consumed his
flesh and strength, and made him hopeless of his life. [chap. 17.1. My breath
is corrupt my days are extinct, the graves are ready for me.] He became in
outward appearance a fearful spectacle of Gods fiery indignation, insomuch
that his nearest friends loathed almost to behold him and were afraid to come
near him. chap. 19. verse. 13. He has put my brethren far from me, and mine
acquaintance are verily estranged from me. and again verse. 19. All my inward
friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned against me.

Verse. 8. And he took him a potsheard to scrape himself withal; etc.] It seems
that this scraping himself with a potsheard was whilst he sat amongst the ashes
or upon the dunghill, (as some translate it) and therefore are both these
clauses joined together. Though perhaps Satan deprived Job of much more of his
estate then is expressed, yet that he was brought to such extreme poverty, that
he had neither house to dwell in, nor a rag to wipe his sores with, and
therefore sat upon a dunghill and scraped himself with a potsheard, as some
conceive, I no where find, but rather find the contrary; for he had a bed to
lie on. chap. 7.4. When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise? and verse. 13,
14. When I say, My bed shall comfort me my couch shall ease my complaint: Then
thou scarest me with dreams and terrifiest me through visions; and a house
whether his friends resorted to him, even when his afflictions came to a
period, chap. 42.11. Then came there unto him at his brethren and all his
sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat
bread with him in his house. And though the Lord gave Satan liberty to deprive
him of all that he had, chap. 1.12. and it is not likely this enemy would show
him any favor, yet before he had taken all from him, seeing his wonderful
patience he might judge that he did it out of a slavish fear, least God should
strike him in his body too, and so, the Lord giving him liberty, might
presently bring these diseases upon him also. Rather therefore it may be
thought that voluntarily leaving his house and bed he went abroad (and thence
it is said verse. 12. that when his friends came to visit him they saw him a far
off) and sat down amongst the ashes, as men in their extreme sorrow and
humiliation used to do, Ion. 3.6. The King of Nineveh laid his robe from him
and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes, as a testimony of his earthly
condition and his baseness and unworthiness; and so being there having no
body else that would vouchsafe to dress him, he took up a potsheard to scrape
himself: either to allay the itching of his sores, or rather to take off the
matter and filth that issued from his ulcers, and that because his fingers were
so sore that he could not do it with them, and besides he perhaps loathed to
touch it, and as for his servants and friends they abhorred him so that they
would not come near him, Job 19.14, 17.

Verse. 9. Then said his wife unto him, etc.] Though Satan were not restrained
from wreaking his teen upon all that was Jobs, himself only excepted, chap.
1.12. yet he meddled not with his wife, either because she was a part of
himself, or rather because he intended to make use of her in tempting him to
impatience, as knowing well that men are most easily seduced by their wives,
that no injuries do sooner drive men to impatience, then those that are offered
them by such as are nearest to them, and that his friends and others were
likely to be encouraged to the like by her example.

Do thou still retain thine integrity? curse God and die.] I have met with
some expositours that understand this speech of Jobs wife to him thus. After
all these judgments which God has laid upon thee, do thou still maintain
thy self to be sincere and upright? Being brought so low, at the very point of
death will thou still deny thy hypocrisy? Take heed, by acknowledging thy
hypocrisy bless God, give glory to God, and so die, or, curse God and die,
that is, thou had as good discover by a desperate blasphemy at last what thou
have formerly been, that so dying it may be seen that God has dealt justly
with thee in all that he has laid upon thee. But because in the third verse
this phrase of retaining his integrity is used concerning Job in a way of
commendation, the more ordinary exposition of these words I take to be the
best, which is this, Do thou still retain thine integrity? That is, after all
these calamities and vain patience do thou yet retain thy integrity? alas
what does it profit you? to what end do you still hope in God, and pray to him
and bless him? He still as a persecuting enemy pours out his wrath more and
more upon you, rather therefore curse God and die, where by cursing God is
meant, as before, chap. 1.11. whatever might tend to Gods reproach, and this
his wife like an infernal fury advises him to, either as intimating that he
had as good die cursing of God as blessing him, since thereby he should at
least satisfy his grieved and afflicted spirit, or else as prescribing this as
a means to put an end to all his insufferable miseries, to wit, by provoking
God with his blasphemy to kill him outright.

Verse. 10. But he said unto her, Thou speak as one of the foolish women
speaks.] As if he should have said, Thou do not now, wife, speak like thy
self, this had not wont to be thy language, even those women that are most
silly and foolish, most profane and irreligious, most desperately violent in
their passions, could not speak more Atheistically and wickedly then thou have
now spoken, more indeed like those idolatrous women, that use to revile their
senseless Gods, then like a woman, who had been instructed in the knowledge of
the true ever living God, and one that had hitherto carried her self as one
that feared him

Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?]
These words imply many reasons why it is fit that men should patiently endure
those many afflictions, that sometimes fall upon them. 1. Because it is not fit
that wretched man should bind God to his will and prescribe him what he should
do, to wit, that he should still lade him with his blessings, and never
intermix any sorrows with them. 2. Because the many blessings which he has
bestowed upon us, far surpassing the evils he inflicts, may well bind us by way
of thankfulness to be content that he should exercise his dominion over us,
and afflict us when he sees cause without any murmuring against him. 3.
Because the good he does for us proves him a loving father, and therefore
should assure us, that even in the evil he inflicts, he seeks our advantage,
The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? says Christ. John
18.11. and so Heb. 12.9. We have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us
and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the
father of spirits and live?

In all this did not Job sin with his lips.] That is, not so much as with
speaking a hasty and impatient word; which was indeed a high degree of
patience, James 3.2. If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man,
and able also to bridle the whole body. See the note chap. 1.22.

Verse. 11. Now when Jobs three friends heard, etc.] That is, his three special
choice and most intimate friends, to wit, Eliphaz (who is called the Temanite,
either because he was of the stock of Teman, the son of Eliphaz the son of
Esau, Genesis 36.11. or else because he was of the land of Teman mentioned, Ier.
49.7.) and Bildad (who is called the Shuhite, perhaps because he was of the
stock of Shuah, the son of Abraham by Keturah, Genesis 25.2. perhaps of some
country or city so called) and Zophar the Naamathite (so called also for some
such like reason it may be from the city Naamah Josh. 15.41.) As for Elihu of
whom mention is made, chap. 32.2. he came not it seems with these his three
friends, but standing by, as perhaps many others did, and hearing their
conference he brake out also and spoke his mind. It is said by some that these
men were Kings; but no such thing do we find in the Scripture. Men they were
doubtless of eminent learning and piety (as by their discourse with Job does
every where appear) yea such to whom the Lord used to appear in dreams and
visions, Now a thing was secretly brought to me, (says Eliphaz chap. 4.12,
13.) and mine ear received a little thereof, in thoughts from the visions of
the night, as likewise men of great years and experience, whence is that of
Elihu concerning these men, chap. 32.6, 7. I am young and ye are very old, I
said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom, and Jobs
faithful friends; doubtless they were, and in their love to him came now to
visit him, and spoke all they said to him out of a sincere desire of his good,
though they erred foully in judging of his cause: All which made the harsh
censures which afterward they passed upon him, the more bitter and grievous to
be born.

For they had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him, and to
comfort him.] to wit, because it is a kind of ease to an afflicted man, to see
that others pity him and compassionate his case, neither can words of comfort
be acceptable unless they come from those of whom he is persuaded that they
have a fellow-feeling of his sorrows.

Verse. 12. And sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.] It seems there
were two several ways of sprinkling dust: sometimes they did barely sprinkle
it upon their heads (concerning which see the Notes, Josh. 7.6.) but sometimes
again they took the dust and threw it up into the air, so letting it fall back
upon their heads; for so we read also of the Jews that were enraged at Paul's
preaching, Acts 22.23. They cried out and casting off their cloths threw dust
into the air; and this circumstance of their throwing the dust toward heaven
might signify, either that it was a day of grievous darkness and affliction
that was come upon them, yea a day of dismal confusion wherein things were
turned upside down, and earth and air as it were mingled together, or else
that the spectacle they beheld was such* that they might well wish the heavens
were overclouded with darkness that they might not behold it.

Verse. 13. So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven
nights.] That is, say some Expositours, many days and many nights; for the
number seven is sometimes used indefinitely, as 1 Samuel 2.5. of which see the
Note there: or else the meaning may be that the greatest part of seven days
and seven nights they spent in a silent sitting by him, condoling his misery
and mourning with him. It cannot be thought that Job sat so long amongst the
ashes, without ever withdrawing himself upon any occasion; much less can this
be conceived of his friends; but as it is said of Anna that she continued daily
in the Temple, though it cannot be thought that she never went out of it, Luke
2.37. So it is here said of Jobs friends that they sat with him on the ground
seven days and seven nights, that is, the greatest part of that time, but yet
doubtless they took their time for necessary food and rest, etc

And none spoke a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great.]
To wit, both because they at first thought it not so seasonable to begin to
comfort him, before he had a little unladed his heart of sorrow, least by
speaking they should rather cause him to break forth into greater passion, then
any whit assuage his grief: and likewise because the longer they observed and
considered in what extremity Gods hand was upon him, the more they were even
overwhelmed with sorrow, and so not able to speak, and that doubtless
especially because though formerly they had always esteemed him a sincere
godly man, and therefore came with a full resolution to speak comfortably to
him, yet now the excessive misery they saw him in, made them begin to stagger
concerning this, and suspect that all he had formerly done was done in
hypocrisy, and therefore the Lord abhorred him and punished him thus severely,
and so herewith they were so astonished and perplexed, that they could not
speak nor knew what to say to him.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. AFter this opened Job his mouth.] That is, though for a while he sat
silent as being overwhelmed with grief and not able to speak, according to that
of David, Psalm. 77.4. I am so troubled that I cannot speak; yet getting at last
some power over himself he gave vent to his sorrows and cursed his day; or
thus, though hitherto Job had carried himself with admirable patience, yet
after this now at length he began to speak, and that freely and boldly (for
that is the meaning of this Hebrew phrase, Job opened his mouth) having sat
silent with his friends a long time before, he began now to complain of his
miseries, and gave therein too much liberty to himself, and was carried too
far beyond the bounds of patience by his passions, and therefore afterward
was sharply reproved by God out of the whirlewind. chap. 38.2. Who is this that
darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? and condemned by himself, chap.
40.4. Behold I am vile what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my
mouth, etc. And so again, chap. 42.3, 6. And doubtless the cause of this
sudden change was because God was now pleased to withdraw not only the light of
his countenance, to make his trial the more terrible, but also the strength of
grace whereby he had been hitherto enabled to endure with such patience what he
had suffered, and that to make it manifest, that all comfort and strength to
stand in trials comes from God, and what the holiest and best of Gods servants
would be, if they should be left unto themselves: yet it is not strange that
Jobs patience should be so highly extolled in the Scripture, if we consider, 1.
That his afflictions were not only exceeding great and very many but had also
continued a long time upon him ere he brake forth into this impatience; for at
the end of this dispute which he had with his friends, ere they left him, God
began to raise him up again, chap. 42.10. and yet then he had been many months,
(as some conceive many years) under these heavy pressures, we see what he
says, chap. 7.3. I am made to possess months of vanity. 2. That upon the
silence of his friends so many days together, the Devil might have occasion to
suggest that even they also (as his other friends had done before) deemed him a
wicked man upon whom God had begun to pour forth his wrath, and therefore had
not one word of comfort for him, which might much imbitter his soul. 3. That in
his greatest impatience he was not wholly overborn, his desire was still to
approve himself to God, only the flesh lusted against the spirit and prevailed
sometimes too far over him, and when he did forget himself, it was not so
much Job that did it, as sin that dwelt in him, Romans 7.17. he still strove
against it; and 4. That he did at length prevail over his corruptions, we see
what he says chap. 40.4, 5. Behold I am vile, I will lay my hand upon my
mouth, I will speak no more: and chap. 42. I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes. And herein especially is the patience of Job commended to us as
a pattern, because at the end he prevailed and got the day, Iam. 5.11. Behold,
we count them happy which endure: ye have heard of the patience of Job, and
have seen the end of the Lord.

And cursed his day.] That is, his birthday, as it is expressed verse. 3. Let
the day perish wherein I was born, not the very day whereon he was born, which
was long since past and gone, but his anniversary birthday, which was in its
time to return every year, as is evident verse. 4. Let that day be darkness,
let not God regard it, etc. And this he cursed, to wit, with those execrations
mentioned in the following verses, not as having a thought that those things
were like to befall his birthday upon his imprecations, or as deliberately and
seriously wishing it might so be, only transported with the heat of his
passions, he seeks thereby with all vehemence to express, how he abhorred his
life, what a dismal and unhappy thing it was to him that he was ever born, etc.

Verse. 3. Let the day perish wherein I was born and the night, etc.] That is,
whereas the tidings of a child born, especially of a man child, are usually
received with much joy, and their birth-daies afterward solemnized with a
great deal of mirth and jollity; I may rather wish that I had never been born,
or that the day of my birth and the night of my conception may perish, and not
have their course in the Calendar amongst the days and nights of the year, at
least that they may be no more solemnized but may be buried in eternal
oblivion (as it is more plainly expressed verse. 6. Let it not be joined to the
days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.) and that
because I was born to so much misery and sorrow. Some Expositours indeed will
have the night whereof Job here speaks to be not the night of his conception,
because it could not be then known that a man child was conceived, but the
night of his birth. But there is no necessity that we should thus understand
the words, for as Esa. 48.8. Thou wast called a transgressour from the womb, is
the same with Thou have been a transgressour from the womb. So here the night
wherein it was said, a man child is conceived, is to be understood in the same
sense as if he had said, the night wherein a man child was conceived; from this
verse to the beginning of the 42 chapter in the original the Penman of the
holy Ghost has expressed all that passed betwixt Job and his friends, etc. in
meeter.

Verse. 4. Let that day be darkness.] This may be understood figuratively, let
it be always a sad and sorrowful day; but I rather conceive that it was meant
properly, let it be always a pitchy dark day even as darkness it self. The
like may be said also concerning the last clause of this verse, neither let the
light shine upon it.

Let not God regard it from above, etc.] That is, let not the Lord afford that
day the light of the Sun from above, nor other the influences of the heavens;
that we enjoy a succession of light and darkness, fruitful times and seasons
it is from Gods care and providence over the world, and hence is that
expression which Moses uses concerning the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 11.12. The
eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year
even unto the end of the year: So that when Job wishes that the Lord would not
regard that day from above, it is all one as if he had wished that God would
not mind it nor yield it the least of those blessings which he affords to other
days.

Verse. 5. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, etc.] That is, a most
extreme darkness, to wit, first a darkness like death that may be the very
image and shadow of death, or 2. a darkness like that wherewith dead men are
overwhelmed that lie buried in their graves, or 3. a stifling killing
darkness, such as where damps and thick vapors that are in deep pits, that
strike men suddenly dead, or 4. a dismal horrible darkness, like enough to
kill men with the very terror of it, for hereto has that clause reference
also in the end of the verse, Let the blackness of the day terrify it, that
is, make it terrible to men. All this may be comprehended under this phrase of
the shadow of death, and when Job wished that such a darkness might stain the
day whereon he was born, the ground of the expression is this, that darkness
takes away the glory of a day, and hides the beauty of all things whatsoever.

Verse. 7. Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.]
That is, whereas the night is usually the time of feasting, dancing, and all
kind of jollity, as at marriages and all other times of festivity and rejoicing
whatsoever, let it not be so on that unhappy night wherein I was conceived, but
quite contrary let it be solitary, still, and silent, yea, let the darkness
thereof be so terrible, (all the stars in heaven withdrawing their light,) that
neither man nor beast may dare to stir or move either within doors or without.

Verse. 8. Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their
mourning.] That is, all that in the bitterness of their sorrows are wont to
curse the day, as being weary both of life and light, let them curse that night
wherein I was conceived and bo^n. Some expositours understand this of fishermen
and mariners, and that because they read the last clause of this verse,
according to the translation which is set in the margin of our Bibles ( who are
ready to raise up a Leviathan) Such men's mouths are usually full of most
fearful execrations and curses, and especially when they are employed in
taking whales, that huge fish which is called a Leviathan, chap. 41.1. And that
because the fishing for the whale is a business of great charge and greater
danger, so that when they have seized upon one and are ready to raise him up,
if by any mishap they loose him again, they are wont violently to break forth
into all kind of fearful imprecations against that unlucky and unfortunate
day, because great losses cause great passions, specially in such ungodly
wretches; and therefore, say they, Job here wishes that these men might curse
the night of his conception; and to this we may add too, that some refer
this to the cursing of those mariners, who as they sail along lighting at
unawares upon some place where they are ready to stir or raise up a whale, do
thereupon seeing themselves in such imminent danger, curse the day that they
entered upon that voyage, or that brought them within the reach of this
sea monster now ready to sink their vessel and drown them all. Again, others
by Leviathan understand the Devil, metaphorically so called, to whom many
authors in like manner apply that place, Esa. 27.1. In that day the Lord with
his sore, and great, and strong sword, shall punish Leviathan the piercing
serpent, even Leviathan that crooked serpent, and so conceive these words to be
meant of those furious men, that in their passions are wont to wish the Devil
might take either themselves, or others that are the occasion of their misery.
Let them curse it that in the extremity of their impatience, not only use to
curse the day, but also are ready ever and anon in their rage to raise up a
Leviathan, that is, to call upon the Devil to take them. But now if we read the
words according as our Translatours have rendered it, Let them curse it that
curse the day, who are ready to raise up their mourning, There is another
exposition may be given of these words, which seems far more apt and easy, to
wit, that whereas there were usually in those times certain persons, both men
and women, that were hired to howl and lament at funerals, or any other times
of great calamity and dismal sorrow, and that because they could do it
artificially, they were trained up to it, and had certain sad and doleful
ditties wherein they did in a solemn and passionate manner curse, sometimes the
day of those sad accidents, sometimes those that were the occasion of it, to
which custom many places of Scripture clearly have reference, as Amos 5.16.
They shall call the husbandman to the mourning, and such as are skillful of
lamentation to wailing. And so again Ier. 9.17. 2 Chronicles. 35.25. Mat. 9.23.
Ezekiel. 30.2. Joel 1.15. These now that were so ready and prepared at all times
to raise up a mourning, or to call their company together to mourn, these I say
Job desires might be employed to curse the night wherein he was conceived. And
happily some one ditty they might have fullest of bitter imprecations, that was
called a Leviathan.

Verse. 9. Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark, etc.] The stars are a
great ornament to the heaven, like so many spangles or Oes of gold set in the
Canopy of heaven, they are also a great delight and comfort in the night and of
special use for the direction of seamen and others. To express therefore
what cause he had to be troubled that ever he was conceived, Job here wishes
the night of his conception might not have a star shining in it, that it might
have no mixture of light^ no not in the twilight of the evening, nor in the
dawning of the morning (called here in the Hebrew the eyelids of the morning,
because the beams of the Sun the eye of the world, do then first discover
themselves) but desires that rather it might be a perpetual night, then that
any mixture of light by the approach of the morning should any whit abate the
terror of its darkness. Let it look for light but have none, which expression
is used as an aggravation of the nights darkness, that there should be a long
expectation of light, and then at last their expectation should be frustrate.

Verse. 10. Because it shut not up the doors of my mothers womb, nor hid sorrow
from mine eyes.] To wit, either that I might not have been conceived, or at
least that I had not been born, and so might never have seen those sorrows,
that now I have lived to see; for here Job begins to render the reason why he
had cursed both the day of his birth, and the night of his conception; and
therefore this may be referred to both.

Verse 12. Why did the knees prevent me? etc.] That is, why did the midwife so
carefully prevent my falling upon the earth, by receiving me so charily into
her lap, that I might be afterward washed, and swadled, and nursed up? why did
she not rather suffer me to fall from the womb to the earth, where I might have
lain and perished presently? and it may well be which some think, that in these
expressions Job alludes to that execrable custom used in those times by
unnatural parents, who were wont to cast out their children as soon as they
were born, and there to leave them upon the cold earth naked and helpless,
whereto the holy Ghost also seems to have respect in that remarkable place.
Ezekiel. 16, 3, 4, 5. Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite; and as
for thy nativity in the day thou wast born, thy navell was not cut, neither
wast thou washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all, nor
swadled at all; none eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have
compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the loathing
of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.

Verse. 13. For now should I have lain still and been quiet, etc.] It is evident
that Job speaks here only of the rest of the body in the grave, and the
freedom which death brings from all worldly troubles and sorrows whatsoever;
for he speaks of the rest which befalls all men after death, the bad as well as
the good, the wicked oppressors as well as the poor that are oppressed by
them, as is evident verse. 17. etc. There the wicked cease from troubling: and
there the weary be at rest. But since Job knew well enough (doubtless) and did
certainly believe, that when the bodies of men are laid in the grave, yet their
souls then pass to greater pains and miseries, unless they be of Gods elect,
to whom through Christ's merits, an entrance is given to heaven and everlasting
glory, why does Job here make no mention of this, but only speak of the rest of
men's carcases in the grave, as if he believed not the immortality of the soul,
nor put any difference betwixt the wicked and the righteous after death? surely
because 1. He had a kind of secret assurance concerning the bliss of his soul
after death, and so made no mention of that, and 2. Because through the
vehement perturbations of his mind at present, and the violence of his passions
by reason of the extremity of his sufferings, he only now minded as it were and
thought upon the happiness of those that were at quiet in their graves, and
the thought of a second life, and the resurrection of men's bodies to shame or
glory, they lie for the present as forgotten, buried under the rubbish of his
confused passions, as Moses when he saw the people of God like to be cut off,
by the revenging hand of Gods justice, did in a manner forget (what he knew
well enough) the immutability of Gods decree, and was only carried with the
vehemence of his affections to the people of God, and his earnest desire of
Gods glory, when he wished. Exodus, 32.32. that he would forgive the people their
sin, or else blot him out of the book of life.

Verse. 14. With Kings and counselors of the earth, which build desolate
places for themselves.] That is, had I died immediately either in the womb, or
so soon as ever I was born, besides that I should have escaped all the miseries
I have now suffered, in the grave I should have been not one jot in a worse
condition, then the greatest Kings and Nobles are when they come to die, for
all the great pomp and pleasure they have lived in before, and the great pomp
of their sepulchers when they are dead: for by Kings and counselors which
built desolate places for themselves are meant here the most glorious, the
mightiest Princes of the world, that by reason of their great power and riches
sought to perpetuate the memory of their name by building desolate places, that
is, either 1. by erecting huge and stately tombs and monuments, as memorialls
of their burial in those places, such as were the Egyptians Pyramids, etc.
which are called desolate places, not only because the dead bodies buried there
are left as it were forsaken of all friends in a desolate condition, but also
because such monuments were built usually not in towns and cities, but abroad
in the fields in solitary and unfrequented places* whence is that of the
prophet, Ezekiel. 26.20. where foreshewing the destruction of Tire, he speaks as
in the name of the Lord thus, When I shall bring thee down with them that
descend into the pit, with the people of old time, and shall set thee in the
low parts of the earth, in places desolate of old, etc. or 2. by rebuilding
what their ancestors durst not attempt, great houses or cities formerly
ruined, that had been a long time wast places, as the Prophet calls them, Isa.
58.12. whereof there had been nothing but the foundations left for many
generations; or rather, 3. by building in places formerly desolate, wherein
happily one would wonder how such buildings could be raised, either great cities
or stately houses for themselves to dwell in, and that of such a huge bigness
and vast compass, that a Princes family cannot fill them, but still they seem
in many places empty and desolate.

Verse. 15. Or with Princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver.]
That is, with the richest of Princes, who gathered in their life time the
greatest mass of treasure; yet some understand this, as spoken with reference
to a custom used in those times, of burying much treasure in the houses, that
is, the graves and tombs of their great Princes.

Verse. 16. Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been, etc.] That is, had I
not been born, but dyed in the womb, (which also Job had wished before verse.
10.) such as the condition of abortives is, that perish in the womb, to wit,
either those that by some mischance miscarry within a while after they are
conceived, (called here an hidden untimely birth, because they are presently
laid by or cast away as unpleasing spectacles, or not at all looked after; or
else because the form and lineaments of a child in such imperfect embryoes
cannot well be discerned,) or those that have their full and perfect shape, but
then die in the womb, and so being dead-born never see light; such (says Job)
had been then my condition, I had not been, that is, I had never been numbered
amongst the sons of Adam, but had been wholly buried in oblivion, and had
passed without name, as Solomon we see speaks of such an untimely birth.
Eccles. 6.4. He comes in and departs in darkness, and his name shall be
covered with darkness.

Verse. 17. There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at
rest.] By the weary here may be meant those that wicked oppressors have
wearied with continual troubles; and then the sum of the whole verse is
this, that in the grave the oppressors and the oppressed are both at rest
together. But the weary here intended may be also the wicked persecutours and
oppressors, that do weary and tire out themselves with vexing and troubling
others, till they come to be laid in the graves and then there they are at
rest, and this may seem the more probable exposition, because in the following
verse he speaks of those that suffer, and here therefore it is likely of those
only that make men suffer.

Verse. 18. There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
oppressor.] Because wicked oppressors use bitter words, and with their
terrible threatening, and their insulting and scoffing language are wont to
wound as deeply those that are under their power, as any other way: hence is
this expression, they hear not the voice of the oppressor.

Verse. 20. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the
bitter in soul?] These words are added, to imply how earnestly now he desired
death; They are indeed a kind of expostulation with God, for continuing life to
those that are in such misery, that they had rather die then live; but
doubtless, though the extremity of his miseries wrung these words from him,
yet he did not utter them with a purpose to contend with God, and to charge him
with dealing too hardly with those that are in misery. Indeed they are words of
lamentation rather then expostulation, wherefore is light given to him that is
in misery? that is, Alas, it were well for those that are in bitter calamities,
if they might die: they cannot but earnestly desire it, and it is a kind of
addition to their miseries, that they must live, though they would die. Revel.
9.6. And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall
desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

Verse. 23. Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God has
hedged in?] That is, to a man that cannot find out the meaning of Gods dealing
with him, or why it is that he is so sorely afflicted; or rather, to a man whom
God has so hedged and hemmed in with many and diverse calamities, and those so
desperate and inextricable, that (poor wretch) it is not possible he should
conceive which way to turn himself, or what course to take to find out any way
of escape, whereby he might wind himself out of these troubles, and therefore
must needs be in continual perplexity to think what will become of him, and
what the end will be of all these miseries that are fallen upon him. Much to
this purpose is that complaint of the Church, Lam. 3.9. He has enclosed my
ways with hewn stone: he has made my paths crooked.

Verse. 24. For my sighing comes before I eat.] This is added, to imply that he
was one of those, of whom he had spoken, to whom it was an addition of
miseries, that they must still live, though they can see no hope of
deliverance, and that because though he had always worked out his salvation
with fear and trembling (which is at least employed verse. 25, 26. The thing
which I greatly feared is come upon me,) yet his miseries were so grievous and
continual, without intermission, that he had not so much space of freedom, as
to eat his meat in quiet, nor could forbear his sighs and tears, when the
natural desire of food was most urgent upon him; which indeed is most like
that complaint of the Psalmist, Psalm. 102.9. I have eaten ashes like bread, and
mingled my drink with weeping. Some expositours understand this of his sighing
because of the pain it would be to him to eat, in regard of his ulcers,
wherewith he was every where filled, or because it grieved him to think that he
must by feeding uphold the life, which he would so gladly be rid of; but the
first exposition is far the most proper.

And my roarings are poured out like the waters.] That is, violently,
abundantly and without ceasing; for he compares his roaring to the pouring out
of waters. 1. Because when waters are poured forth, or break through the banks
that before held them in, they rush out in great abundance and with
unresistable violence. 2. Because the waters of rivers flow on continually
without ceasing, as being still supplied from their fountains and springs, and
3. Because the noise of his roarings, by reason of their violence, was much
like that of waters, where they break forth with such fury and carry all before
them that stands in their way. It must be a great affliction that can make a
man of spirit to mourn, and therefore much more that which makes him cry out
and roar; and therefore the extremity of a man's misery is usually set forth in
the Scripture by this that it makes him roar; as Psalm. 32.3. I roared for the
very disquietnesse of my soul; So that when Job complains not only that his
sorrows made him roar, but also that his roarings were poured forth like water,
this implies how exceeding grievous his miseries were.

Verse. 25. For the thing I greatly feared is come upon me, etc.] This is added
as an aggravation of his misery, (to show what just cause he had to be weary of
his life) to wit, that in the days of his prosperity he had not lived
carelessely and securely as wicked men use to do, that when things go well
with them confidently assure themselves that there shall never come a change,
and so walk on presumptuously in their own ways, without any fear either of
God or man; but that he had always considered before hand what might befall
him, and out of an awful apprehension of the great alterations, which God
could make in his condition even in an instant, he had always walked humbly
with God, and looked narrowly to his ways, that he might avoid his
indignation; and yet notwithstanding that which he feared was fallen upon him.
Had he in his prosperity glutted himself with pleasure and lived securely, it
had been another matter (for to such God has threatened destruction. 1 These.
5.3. When they shall say, peace and safety; then sudden destruction comes upon
them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape) But (says
Job) I was not in safety, I did not think my self safe, but as one that ever
feared what might come, I still watched over my ways, and yet these grievous
troubles are come upon me.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 2. IF we assay to commune with thee, will thou be grieved etc.?]
Hitherto Jobs friends had forborne speaking to him, partly because they were
afraid they should by speaking increase his grief, and partly because by the
extraordinary heaviness of Gods hand upon him they began to think, that
doubtless he had always been a secret hypocrite and therefore now at length
the vengeance of God was in this fearful manner fallen upon him; But when now
they had heard him in such an impatient manner curse the day of his birth and
wish for death, to put an end to all his miseries, but especially when they
heard him in his last words, as it were justifying himself, to wit, by
affirming that he had not by his security in the time of his prosperity
provoked God to deal thus with him, but rather had done what he could to
prevent it, this confirmed them in their opinion, that his heart was not right
with God. And therefore Eliphaz, as being happily the elder and the chief of
them, begins now with him, resolving to reprove him for his impatience, and to
prove to him that God uses not to plague any but wicked men, as he was now
plagued, and therefore it was fit that he should repent and turn to God, and
not justify himself. Now because he feared that this Job would hardly take in
good part, he begins with a profession that he was loath to grieve him, but that
he could not forbear; If we assay to commune with thee, will thou be grieved?
that is, I fear thou will, and it is that which has made us forbear so long;
but who can withhold himself from speaking? that is, hearing thee thus
dishonor God and justify thy self, as if all were well with thee, when Gods
fearful judgments upon thee do manifest the contrary, it is not possible we
should hold our peace; if we have any care of thy soul, or be tender of Gods
dishonor, it must need constrain us to speak.

Verse. 3. Behold thou have instructed many, etc.] This is the first argument
which Eliphaz uses, to condemn Jobs impatience, and to discover to him that he
had only hitherto carried himself hypocritically in the profession of religion,
to wit, that he had been a great Instructor and comforter of others, yea many
others, in time of their calamity, fear and sorrow, and yet now when it came to
be his portion to be in the like misery, no man could be more faint-hearted nor
more impatient and rebellious against God then he was. To strengthen the weak
hands and the feeble knees, and to uphold him that was falling, is to comfort
those that are ready to faint and sink in despair, because of any grievous
calamities that lie upon them, or are unavoidably, as they conceive, coming
toward them, as Esa. 35.3, 4. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the
feeble knees, say to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong, and so
likewise Heb. 12, 12. 2 Samuel 4, 1. Ier. 6, 24. 1 Samuel 23, 16. Now because Job
had done this to others, but minded not now to do himself what he had taught
others to do, this Eliphaz presses upon him, as an argument, that there was
never in him that truly religious heart, which he made show of to others.

Verse. 6. Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness
of thy ways?] That is, having made such a show in thy prosperity of fearing
God, of walking uprightly, of great hope and confidence which thou have in God,
whereas now when Gods hand is fallen upon thee, thou carriest thy self in a
quite contrary manner to what thou made a show of, and did advise others
to, does not this plainly discover, that all this was counterfeit in thee? and
that thou did but aim at thine own advantage in all that thou have done?
wherein when thou find that God would no longer satisfy thy aims, now thou
art ready to fly in Gods face and to spurn against him. This is the drift of
these words: And perhaps in the first place he speaks of his fear of God,
because Job had in a manner boasted of that in the two last verses of the
former chapter.

Verse. 7. Remember I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent? etc.] That
is, call to mind whether thou have ever seen, or read, or heard of any one of
Gods righteous servants, that have been destroyed by the avenging hand of God,
and so utterly cast off and forsaken by him? This is another argument whereby
Eliphaz seeeks to prove him not to have been so fearful to offend God, as he
pretended, to wit, because such plagues God used not to lay upon the righteous,
as were now poured upon him.

Verse. 8. Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, etc.] Wicked men are
said to plow iniquity and sow wickedness because 1. They plot before hand how
to accomplish their injurious purposes, as husbandmen by plowing the ground
make it ready for the seed. 2. They follow their plot with all possible pains
and diligence, moving every stone, turning up every clod, assaying by all means
they can think of, all kind of injustice, treachery and deceit, to effect what
they have contrived. 3. They act their wicked devices cunningly and
artificially, they are not bunglers in the ways of sinning, as some men are,
but manage their work with such curious cunning, that nothing can be done with
more exact skill for the accomplishment of their cursed devices, and 4. They do
all this in hope of some fruit and advantage that shall redound to them
thereby. And then again they are said to reap the same, because in time they
reap that which is the proper fruit of such ways, that is, the wrath of God,
as the just recompense of their evil courses. Prove. 22.8. He that sows
iniquity shall reap vanity, and Gal. 6.8. He that sows to his flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption: whence it is that the just reward and fruit of
wickedness is called wickedness (and therefore it is clear that they thus
reap the same) Ier. 4.18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things
unto thee; this is thy wickedness. Wicked men may not be punished for a time,
but at last they shall have a harvest answerable and proportionable to their
deeds. Hos. 10.13. Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ye have
eaten the fruit of lies; or because others at length deal with them just as
they dealt with others, and so God paies them in their own kind, and that
double many times. Revelat. 18.6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and
double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she has
filled, fill to her double: y^a sevenfold Psalm. 79.12. And tender unto our
neighbors sevenfold into their bosom; their reproach wherewith they have
reproached thee, O Lord. So also Luke 6.38. For of such unjust oppressors of
others, Eliphaz chiefly here speaks, as is evident by the following words verse.
10.1^.

Verse. 9. By the blast of God they perish, etc.] That is, the Lords anger
breaking forth against them, he does with ease on a sudden destroy them.
Because when men are filled with indignation their passion and wrath will
discover it self in the breathing and puffing of their nostrils, the Lords
anger is many times in the Scripture expressed by the breathing of his
nostrils, as Esa. 30.33. and because wicked men are oftentimes cut off in an
instant and with ease, the Lord only as it were blowing upon them, Hag. 1.9. Ye
looked for much, and lo it came to little: and when ye brought it home, I did
blow upon it; they are said to be destroyed with a blast, even as when corn
that comes up hopefully is on a sudden blasted (whereto we may the rather think
that Eliphaz alludes because of the foregoing metaphor of wicked men's sowing
wickedness and reaping the same) or as a house by a blast of wind is suddenly
blown down; and doubtless at that dismal death that befell Jobs children,
Eliphaz does in this expression especially aim.

Verse. 10. The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, etc.]
That is, the Lord usually abates the courage and power of the mightiest of the
wicked, even those that have made a prey of others, no body daring to resist
them; yea, he many times destroys them and brings them to perish with hunger,
both they and their whelps; That wicked powerful tyrannical oppressors* are
usually termed lions in the Scripture is manifest from many places; Ezekiel. 32.2.
Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh King of Egypt, and say unto him,
thou art like a young lion of the nations, and 38.13. Sheba and Dedan, and the
merchants of Tarshish, with all the young lions thereof thall say unto thee,
art thou come to take a spoil? and 2 Timothy 4.17. I was delivered out of the
mouth of the lion, that is, out of the mouth of Nero, and indeed oppressing
great ones do resemble lions in diverse respects: as 1. in their pride and
loftiness of spirit; for the lion is a proud and stately creature. 2. In
regard of their strength; for as the lion is the strongest amongst beasts, and
therefore there is no resisting or withstanding the lion: So great men that are
oppressors by reason of their power may do what they please, and there is no
contending with them. 3. In regard of the terriblenesse of the lions roaring,
and the sternesse of his countenance; the very threatenings and looks of
oppressing tyrants are dreadful to those that are subject to their power. 4.
In regard of their bloud-sucking cruelty; we see what the Prophet says of such
men, Mich. 3.2. They pluck their skins from off them, and their flesh from off
their bones, etc. and 5. In regard of their greediness after the prey. They
have set their eyes bowing down to the earth like as a lion that is greedy of
his prey, Psalm. 17.11, 12. So that because Job was a great man, a man in
authority, it may well be that Eliphaz intended in these words to give a hint
to Job that as he had dealt hardly and cruelly with others, so now the Lord had
accordingly dealt with him; and that last clause concerning the breaking of the
teeth of the lions whelps, or the young lions, may seem purposely added,
because of the destruction that fell upon Jobs children, when they were
feasting together.

Verse. 12. Now a thing was secretly brought to me.] That is, in a vision, and
that too in the secrecy and solitarin^sse of the night, and perhaps also in a
secret manner with a still and low small voice, not easily discernable; for
here Eliphaz begins to relate a vision he had formerly had, wherein amongst
other things this was revealed to him that it was a vain and audacious part for
men to contend with God when he corrects them, as if they were juster then God;
and that to prove, that by Gods dealing with Job it was evident enough that he
had given the Lord just cause to proceed with such severity against him, and
likewise to show what a foul sin it was in Job to murmr so against God as he
had done.

And mine ear received a little thereof.] Hereby is not so much meant that he
only heard some little part of that which was spoken to him, as that by his ear
he did receive into his mind, that is, understand and lay up in his heart,
somewhat of that which in his vision was imparted to him, acknowledging
modestly that he did not fully and perfectly either comprehend or retain what
God was pleased in this prophetical way to reveal unto him.

Verse. 13. In thoughts from the visions of the night, etc.] That Job might not
doubt but the vision he now speaks of was from God, and so the more regard what
was then revealed to him, Eliphaz here describes the manner of his vision, to
wit, that in the beginning of the night, when deep sleep falls on men, that
is, when men used to be most soundly a-sleep, in thoughts caused by a nightly
vision (but whether waking or sleeping it is not expressed) a spirit verse. 15.
passed before his face, that is, an angel appeared and came to him, he being at
the same time stricken with extreme terror and fear, fear came upon me, says
he, and trembling, etc. which last is the rather mentioned, because when God in
former times appeared to men in dreams and visions, he did always thus humble
and cast them down with fear, that by those impressions of terror, caused by
the apprehension of his Majesty and glory, they might be assuredly persuaded
that the vision was from God and so the more reverently receive and the more
carefully obey what he then gave them in charge, as the prophet Daniel
acknowledges of himself when he had seen a vision, Dan. 10.17. As for me
straight way there remained no strength in me, neither is there breath left in
me.

Verse. 16. It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof, etc.] That
is, the spirit, the angel before spoken of (having at his first appearance
approached toward him, or perhaps walked a turn or two in his sight) did at
length stand still before him (either that he might present himself the more
fully to his view, or as addressing himself to speak to him) and so he saw it,
though he could not fully and distinctly discern his shape.

There was silence, and I heard a voice.] This clause may be read, as it is in
the margin of our Bibles, I heard a still voice or a silent voice, that is, a
low whispering voice: for as we use to call an imperfect obscure light a dark
light, so a low soft voice we use to call a silent still voice; and the reasons
given by Expositours why the angel spoke with so low a voice are, 1. That
hereby might be employed that it was a secret which God would now whisper, as it
were, into his ear, and 2. That Eliphaz might thereby be stirred to receive
with reverence and attention what was spoken, and that because a man must needs
set himself with earnestness to hear that which is spoken in such a manner.
But according to that Translation that is in our Text it cannot be meant of the
silence of the voice, but of a silence, foregoing the voice, to wit, either the
silence of Eliphaz, that he spoke never a word, but waited to hear what would
be spoken, or else the silence generally that was in the place; whereas happily
at first the angel appeared with some noise, the more to increase his terror,
at length all things were hushed, and there was a still silence, and thereupon,
says Eliphaz, I began to recover my self out of my fear, and being attentive I
heard a low still voice speaking as follows.

Verse. 17. Shall mortal man be more just then God? etc.] That is, it is not
possible: and this Eliphaz alleges. 1, Because when men in their troubles do
expostulate with God, as if he had dealt too hardly with them, and especially
if they plead their own integrity and righteousness, as if thereby they had
deserved better at Gods hands, they do hereby make man to be more just then
God, and that because a just righteous man will not punish any one causelessely
or unjustly; yea they do hereby as it were profess themselves to be more just
and pure then God their creator, who has so causelessely punished them: and
2. Because he conceived that Job by expostulating so with God, and especially
by alleging chap. 3.23, 26. how humbly and warily he had walked and that
purposely to avoid Gods displeasure, the bitter effects whereof were yet
notwithstanding now fallen upon him, had in effect made himself more just then
God.

Verse. 18. Behold he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged
with folly:] These words, as it is most probable, are added by Eliphaz for the
better clearing of that before in the former verse, which was declared to him
in a vision by an angel; the servants of God here meant are the angels, as it
is expressed in the second clause (for that men, who are Gods faithful
servants, are not included, is clear by the opposition in the following verse,
How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, etc.) and that, as they
were all at first created in a holy and glorious estate and condition; and of
them it is here said, that God put no trust in them, that is, that they are not
firmly and unchangeably righteous in themselves, God could not trust nor rest
upon their righteousness, being mutable creatures subject to sin and to fall
from their estate, as some of them did, and the rest also might do, had not God
by Christ established them in this blessed and perfectly holy condition,
wherein they now serve God, Col. 1.19, 20. For it pleased the father, that in
him should all fullness dwell. And (having made peace through the blood of his
Cross) by him to reconcile all things to himself; by him, I say, whether they
be things in earth, or things in heaven, and 2. That he charged them with
folly, which may be meant not only of those Apostate angels, who abode not in
the truth, and so were cast to hell, but also of the holy angels, who though
they be not in the least degree tainted with sin, yet before God they are
chargeable with folly, not only comparatively in regard of his infinite wisdom
and purity, even as the moon and stars have no light, when the Sun appears, but
also in regard of their vanity and weakness, as they are mutable creatures,
because they are like enough in themselves to fall away, and to forsake their
own happiness, if God should not support them.

Verse. 19. How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay? etc.] From that
which is said in the former verse concerning the instability of the angels,
Eliphaz inferres how much less likely it is, that men should be found so
unblameably just, that nothing should be found in them reproovable and for
which God may justly punish them, who dwell in houses of clay, that is, in
earthly bodies whose foundation is in the dust and are crushed before the moth,
that is, are crushed and molder to nothing, if God lays his hand upon them,
more suddenly and easily, then a moth is crushed and rubbed to dust between a
man's fingers. And thus he makes the earthly and frail condition of man the
ground of this inference. 1. Because the angels, Gods choice servants, do
continually behold the face of God, Matthew. 18.10. attending always upon him,
as the Peers of heaven, in the glorious Palace of the heavenly Jerusalem, and
men that dwell here below and behold him only afar off, darkly and obscurely,
cannot be thought to be so righteous and holy as they are, 2. Because in regard
of their earthly condition they are so addicted to earthly things, that hereby
they are often ensnared in sin, and 3. Because by reason of their frailty, they
are subject to many miseries, and so in danger to be carried away with their
passions and to forget God.

Verse. 20. They are destroyed from morning to evening:] That is, they are gone
on a sudden, well in the morning and dead before night, Psalm. 90.5, 6. In the
morning they are like grass which grows up. In the morning it flourishes,
and grows up: in the evening it is cut down and withers; or, all the day
long they decay and wax old insensibly by degrees, and approach still nearer to
their end, and have every moment somewhat spent of their life: yea they are
subject to sudden destruction from morning to evening every moment, and hence
are those expressions, I die daily. 1 Cor. 15.31. in deaths often. 2 Cor.
11.23. we are killed all the day long. and Romans 8.36. they perish for ever
without any regarding it; that is, they are taken away never more to live in
this world; and yet scarce any amongst the living they leave behind them do
ever regard this or lay it to heart; This I conceive is the true meaning of the
place; for they are said to perish for ever that dye, only because they are
gone for ever, in regard of the comforts of this life, according to that chap.
14.14. If a man dye shall he live again? and that, Psalm. 103.16. As for man his
days are as grass; as the flower of the field so he flourishes; for the wind
passes over it and it is gone and the place thereof shall know it no more; and
it is doubtless the living that see this and make not good use of this
perishing condition of those that dye, concerning whom that clause of complant
is added without regarding it yet some I know understand this otherwise, to
wit, thus; whereas the consideration of this mortality of man might and should
(one would think) make men the more careful to walk righteously before God,
naturally it is otherwise, they never regard this, and so as others before
them, they die in their sins and perish for ever.

Verse. 21. Does not their excellency which is in them, go away? they die, even
without wisdom.] Some understand the first clause thus, that when men die,
their soul, which is the excellency and glory of man, goes away; but I rather
understand it thus, that even those men that have any excellencies above
others, whether natural or acquired, they perish and their excellencies with
them vanish and come to nothing, and then they die even without wisdom, that
is, either first they die like fools, men that had not the wisdom by the
mortality of men to consider beforehand of their end, but run on in their sins
and never provide for a better estate; or 2. They die, as if they had no
wisdom, they have no more privilege against the stroke of death, then fools
have, according to that, Eccles. 2.16. How dies the wise man? as the fool; or
3. They cannot carry their wisdom away with them, but that, as all other
their excellencies, vanishes away.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. CAll now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou turn?] Eliphaz having in the former chapter prooved that God
did never unjustly punish men, but for their wickedness, and therefore that it
was a most bold and presumptuous part in him to justify himself, and to
murmr against God, as he had done, in these words now he gives him to
understand, that if he should appeal, to any of the Saints and servants of God,
dead or living, he should not find one amongst them all, whose judgment were
like his, or that had raged against God, as he had done, by whose example he
might defend himself.

Verse. 2. For wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the silly one.]
That is, either these passions carry men headlong to such unadvised courses as
prove their death, or else 2. By murmuring and breaking out in wrath and
impatience against God, or by an envious grudging that God deals worse with
them then others, men provoke the Lord utterly to destroy them; a most
egregious piece of folly, which the Saints and servants of God have always
carefully avoided: or 3. By filling the soul with vexation and fretting grief,
they make a man's life a continual death, and do at last cause him to wast and
pine away and bring him to the grave; And in this Eliphaz strikes secretly at
the intemperate passion, which Job had discovered in his late expostulations
and complaints, which he conceived did spring from his rage against God for the
troubles he was in, and from a secret envy that others were in a better
condition then himself.

Verse. 3. I have seen the foolish taking root:] Eliphaz, having upbraided Job
for his wrath and impatience, returns here to his former argument of prooving,
that it is the wickedness of men, that brings Gods judgments upon them; for
yielding at first, that indeed he had seen foolish, that is, wicked men, in
such a flourishing estate for a while, that one would have thought there had
been no danger of a change, he adds, But suddenly I cursed his habitation,
which is meant, either that Eliphaz did immediately, even while they did thus
flourish, resolve with himself, and perhaps foretell, that doubtless Gods
curse would in the conclusion fall upon them, or else that suddenly their
estate was so changed, that he concluded it was the curse of God upon them.

Verse. 4. His children are far from safety, etc.] This is added to show, both
that wicked men's children are often involved in the same destruction with their
fathers, and likewise that though wicked men sometimes escape Gods judgments
in their own persons, yet at least then they fall upon their children and
posterity, they shall be oppressed in the gate, that is, before the seats of
justice, and no body shall stand in their defense.

Verse. 5. Whose harvest the hungry eats up, and takes it even out of the
thorns, etc.] That is, after all their labor in plowing, sowing, and keeping
their fields, when they are now in hope of reaping the fruit of their labor,
or have already reaped it, poor and needy robbers and men greedy of prey shall
violently seize upon their harvest (their hedge of thorns about their fields or
about their stack, Exodus 22.6. shall be no fence for it, nor whatever else they
can do to guard and preserve it) and shall carry it away, swallow it up, and
devour it. And under this one particular the same is employed concerning all the
goods and provisions, which wicked men gather up with a great deal of labor
and toil, namely, that they shall be spoiled of all by a company of poor greedy
wretches that will break through and have it, whatever it cost them.

Verse. 6. Although affliction comes not forth of the dust, etc.] Eliphaz still
proceeds to prove that Job was justly punished for his sins; and so withal
makes way to the following exhortation, covertly given him, verse. 8. of seeking
unto God, that for his sins had brought these miseries upon him. But because
this phrase of affliction coming forth out of the dust, and springing out of
the ground, may be understood probably four several ways, accordingly these
two verses may be expounded in a fourfold sense. 1. Thus, Though affliction
and trouble come not by chance and we know not how (as those things that of
their own accord grow out of the earth, without any seed sown) yet this we may
see, that men are born to trouble, and that several miseries befall them, even
as naturally as the sparks fly upward, and therefore doubtless some cause or
reason may be assigned for these things; and 2ly thus, Although affliction and
trouble springs not merely and only from the creature below, yet we see
plainly, that man is full of trouble; and therefore surely it comes from
heaven, from God, who disposes all things according to his own good pleasure,
and 3. Thus, although affliction springs not from the dust or any thing without
man, yet we see it is always man's portion, and therefore questionless it
springs from himself, even the sin that is within him; or 4. Thus, (which is
much to the same purpose with the former) Although the calamities and miseries
which men are subject to, spring not merely from the earthly condition of man's
body (for notwithstanding this, had man continued in his innocence he should
have been free from all miseries) yet man is born to trouble, to wit, because
he is born in sin, as naturally, as the sparks fly upward; it is as natural
for man to be in trouble and misery, as for the sparks to fly upward; yea it
is that which is derived to us by a lineall descent from our parents as our
inheritance or birthright, Man is born unto trouble; And thus the nature of man
is compared to coals, his sin and corruption to fire in the coals, and his
afflictions and troubles to the sparks that fly up from the fire, and Job is
taught to acknowledge, that he could not justly ascribe the calamities, that
were fallen upon him, to any thing else but his own wickedness, and to the
justice of God in punishing him for it.

Verse. 8. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause.] That
is, were I in your case Job I would not murmr and complain of Gods dealing
with me, as you do; but considering that it is the great God of heaven and
earth that I have to deal with, and that it is my sins that have brought these
miseries upon me, I would turn to him, acknowledge my sins, seek for mercy at
his hands, and in the mean season patiently bear what he was pleased to lay
upon me, and quietly commend both my self and my condition and cause wholly to
his disposing.

Verse. 9. Which does great things and unsearchable, mavelous things without
number.] This following enumeration of many several works of Gods Providence
is to prove the infinite power, wisdom, goodness and justice of God, and so
thence to imply, that it is not fit men should quarrel with him, the reason of
whose works they cannot search out, but rather seek to him for help, who is so
good and able at his pleasure to raise them up again from the greatest miseries.

Verse. 10. And sends waters upon the fields:] to wit, not rain only, but
springs also, brooks and rivers to water the several parts of the earth.

Verse. 11. To set up on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be
exalted to safety.] These words may be referred, either to the immediately
foregoing clause, verse. 10. who gives rain upon the earth, and sends waters
upon the fields, to wit, thereby to enrich those that were poor, by causing
their land to yield plentiful increase, and to save those that are ready to
perish for want, by sending fruitful times and seasons; or else rather, they
may be referred to those foregoing words, verse. 9. that God does great things
and unsearchable, mavelous things without number; and that hereby he does
many times set up on high those that be low, that those which mourn may be
exalted to safety: and thus Eliphaz gives Job a hint for his comfort and
encouragement, that if he would seek to God, as he had advised verse. 8. though
his estate was now very low, yet he might be set up again, and from that sad
condition wherein he lay, he might be exalted to joy and safety.

Verse. 13. He takes the wise in their own craftiness:] That is, he causes
the crafty plots of the subtle, wise men of the world, to become mischievous to
themselves, as it was in Achitophels and Hamans plots. And worthy it is of our
noting, that this speech of Eliphaz is cited by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.19. as a
divine Testimony.

And the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.] That is, when many
froward, that is, perverse and stubborn wicked men lay their heads together to
do any mischief to Gods servants, their counsels and resolutions shall be
overthrown and come to nothing, and that, either by the very rashness and
headiness, wherewith they shall be carried in their consultations, pitching
upon these resolutions for want of due deliberation, which had they been
prudently weighed, were never likely to prove successful, or by their
rashness and precipitancy in acting what they had well enough contrived.

Verse. 14. They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope at noon days,
as in the night.] That is, where things shall be clear and manifest, yet they
shall not see it, but shall be needlessely scrupulous, full of doubts and
fears, not knowing what to do, and like blind men more likely to mistake then
hit the right way. See Deuteronomy. 28.29. Thou shall grope at noon day, as the blind
gropeth in darkness, etc.

Verse. 15. He saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the
hand of the mighty.] That is, he saves them, not only from the open violence
of their enemies and strong oppressors, but also from their slanders,
reproaches and pernicious counsels, and whatever other ways there are,
wherewith wicked men are wont by their venomous tongues to do mischief to the
poor servants of God.

Verse. 16. So the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her mouth.] That is, by
the experience which men have of the Lords delivering the poor that are
oppressed, from the power of the oppressor, others that are in the same
condition are encouraged to put their hope in God; and so though they have
nothing else in the world left them to trust in (as these words import) yet
they have hope, as an anchor for their souls, sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.19.
and on the other side the wicked shall not have a word to say, they shall not
dare to slander the godly, they shall not dare to vaunt and brag of their proud
purposes, but shall become silent, as mute as fishes, as being filled with
shame and confusion, or silenced with admiration, finding how evidently the
Lord does aid those, that are of no might to help themselves against those that
wrong them.

Verse. 17. Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects, etc.] Eliphaz having
persuaded Job to seek to God and to commit his cause to him from verse. 18. here
he shows him that if he would do so, that which he now suffered would be
evidenced to be only the correction of a father, wherein he would be happy, and
should have no cause to complain of it.

Verse. 18. For he makes sore, and binds up: etc.] That is, he lays not
affliction upon men to hurt them, but wounds as a Surgeon, that launceth a
sore, to the end he may heal it, and when their afflictions have brought forth
the quiet fruit of righteousness, he binds them up again, that is, by binding
he heals them; for Physicians say, that the careful and skillful binding up of
a wound does much conduce to the cure of it, and hence binding in this sense is
so often mentioned in the Scriptures, The diseased have ye not strengthened,
neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which
was broken, Ezekiel. 34.4. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their
wounds, Psalm. 147.3.

Verse. 19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles: etc.] That is, though God
send never so many troubles, following successively one in the neck of another,
or compassing thee about at one and the same time, so that there seems to be no
way of escape, he will deliver thee from them, yea from all that can befall
thee, not only these afterward mentioned, but any other more grievous then
these; the Lord will not be weary of protecting thee from troubles or
delivering thee out of adversity, but again and again he will be thy refuge,
and give a comfortable issue out of them all, so that no evil shall touch thee;
and this last clause may be meant either of the evil of sin, to wit, that God
would preserve him from defiling himself with sin in his troubles; or of the
evil of punishment, to wit, that in his troubles all should be for his good,
there should be no wrath in his sufferings, which only makes troubles truly
evil.

Verse. 21. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue:] That is, from
reproaches, backbitings, slanders, false accusations and witnesses of
malicious wicked men: for as in a scourge there are many cords, so there are
many several ways wherewith wicked men's tongues do lash and wound Gods
righteous servants: and they are said to be hid from the scourge of the tongue,
whom the Lord either preserves from being slaundered or reviled, or else
defends against all such lies and calumnies, by causing their righteousness to
break forth, as the light and their just dealing as the noon day.

Verse. 23. For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field: etc.] That
is, they shall be so far from doing thee any hurt, and so ready rather to do
thee good, as if there were a mutual covenant of friendship made betwixt thee
and them. Now the stones of the field, may in this sense be said to be in
league with Gods people. 1. When they are not an occasion of the least hurt
unto them as they pass up and down from one place to another, not so much as of
dashing their foot against a stone, Psalm. 91.12. 2. When they no way hinder the
increase of their land, but rather are a help thereto, and when the most stony
and rocky places yield great store of fruit, according to that, Deuteronomy. 32.13. He
made him suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock, and that
of Job, chap. 29.6. The rock poured me out rivers of oil: 3. When the stony
walls raised about their fields are such a sure defense thereto, that they are
safely preserved from all dangers whatsoever, and 4. When neither stones nor
rocks of the field do harbor any poisonous serpents or ravenous beasts, that
do suddenly break out and hurt Gods people.

Verse. 24. And thou shall know, that thy tabernacle shall be in peace;] That
is, thou shall see thine house free from the invasion of any enemy and from
homebred dissension, yea that thy house and household affairs do all prosper,
and shall not fear but be fully persuaded of the continuance hereof in time to
come.

And thou shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin.] That is, thou shall
wisely and successefully order upon all occasions thy household affairs, the
more circumspectly watchful not to sin against God, because of the experience
thou shall have of Gods blessing thee in a right way.

Verse. 25. Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great, etc.] That is,
though now thou have lost thy children, yet God shall restore them again, and
they shall grow to an innumerable multitude.

Verse 26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, etc.] That is, though
there seems now no hope of thy recovery, yet recover thou shall, and shall die
old and full of days, and be buried with honor.

Verse. 27. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, etc.] That is, Though I
alone have spoken, yet this I presume is the judgment of us all; we have all
found this true by diligent enquiry, and clear experience; and therefore learn
it, believe it, and make a holy and good use of the knowledge of it.

CHAP. VI^
Verse. 2. OH that my grief were thoroughly weighed, etc.] Eliphaz sought to make
good that there was no true piety nor fear of God in Job, because his passions
in his afflictions were so violent, and his complaints so grievous and bitter
in the two foregoing chapters. Job now undertakes to show that his calamity,
grief and anguish of spirit were such and so intolerable, that they might well
drive him to those bitter complaints that he had uttered, though his heart were
all the while upright toward God. According therefore to this drift and aim
of Jobs words, they may be understood two several ways. 1. That if his grief,
that is, the bitterness and anguish of his spirit, and his lamentations and
complaints were laid in one scale, and his calamity and distress, both outward
and inward, were laid in the other, and so weighed together, his calamity would
far overweigh his grief and bitter complaints; his calamities being indeed
heavier, then all the sands of the sea, according to that which Job says also
in another place, chap. 23.2. My stroke is heavier then my groaning; or 2. That
if his grief and calamities were weighed against the sand of the sea, they
would be found heavier then that, as elsewhere the wrath of foolish wicked men
is therewith compared, Pro. 27.3. A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a
fools wrath is heavier then them both. However doubtless Jobs intention in
these words is to show, that such misery as he had undergone might well make
any man that was flesh and blood to complain, as bitterly as he had done, yea
though therein he should forget himself.

Verse. 3. Therefore my words are swallowed up.] That is, I want words to
express my grief and misery: when I would set forth what I suffer, extreme
anguish stops my mouth, and I am not able to utter what I would say.

Verse. 4. For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, etc.] That is, God has
not only wounded me, with diverse and many outward calamities, but besides also
he has wounded my spirit inwardly, by making impressions of his wrath upon my
conscience, persuading me that these things he has laid upon me in his
indignation and hot displeasure against me. All kind of plagues, especially
those that come suddenly and swiftly, are compared to arrows in the Scripture,
Psalm. 38.2. For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.
and again, Ezekiel. 5.16. But here they are principally the inward terrors
wherewith his soul and conscience were wounded, that are compared to arrows,
yea to poisoned arrows, (it being usual in those days to poison the heads of
their arrows in times of war) and that because the miseries he underwent,
however grievous in themselves, were far the more grievous, and did the more
torment him, because they were dipped, as it were, in the poison of Gods wrath
and displeasure, that is, he apprehended that God had in his wrath and hot
indignation laid these heavy punishments upon him, which made them so
insufferably painful, insomuch that they did with their burning drink up his
spirit, that is, his vital spirits and strength, or his blood (wherein lie the
vital spirits) according to that which the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 32.42. I will
make mine arrows drunk with blood, (and my sword shall devour flesh) and that
with the blood of the slain; etc.

Verse. 5. Does the wild ass bray when he has grass? or loweth the ox over
his fodder?] Two several ways these words are expounded by Interpreters: and
happily what both say Job did intend. 1. That it is no wonder though they that
lived in all plenty and peace, were so quiet and still, and spoke nothing that
might savor of impatience and discontent, were he in such an estate, he could
do so, even the bruit beasts both wild and tame, yea those that have the least
shadow of understanding in them, the ass and the ox, will be quiet when they
want nothing; and were they not therefore too uncharitable, they might well
think that he would not complain so bitterly, if he had not just cause: But
then 2. some again understand them, as spoken to show the reason, why the words
that Eliphaz had spoken to him did no whit appease his grief, to wit, because
he had said nothing that could yield true satisfaction to a troubled soul
(namely as he applied what he said, charging Job with hypocrisy, and that now
he quarrelled with God, being justly punished for his former wickedness) even
the bruitest beasts, says Job, are quiet when they have whereon to feed, and
worse were I therefore then a beast, if I should not be pacified, had there
been any thing in your words that might have eased or refreshed my mind.

Verse. 6. Can that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? etc.] These words,
as those before, may also be probably expounded two several ways; to wit, 1.
That it is not possible that any man should take pleasure in such bitter
afflictions, as God had mingled for him to drink, yea that he should not
abhor them, and complain of the bitterness of them, no more then it is
possible for a man not to distaste that which is unsavory and has no relish
in it; all afflictions are grievous, especially such as have no mixture of any
thing that is pleasing; and if the want of a little salt make men distaste
meat, needs must Job distaste such bitter sorrows as he had underwent, unless
he were senseless and stupid, or 2. That Eliphaz his speech to him had been so
harsh and bitter, that it was as possible for a man's palate to find relish in
the white of an egg or any other unsavory meat, as for him to receive any
comfort from such unsavory speeches, as he had uttered: and indeed though
Eliphaz spoke what was most true in it self, yet as he applied it, there was
not the least grain of pity or prudence in what he had said, and so was more
likely to imbitter his spirit more and more, then any whit to allay his grief
or temper his passions.

Verse. 7. The things that my soul refuses to touch, are as my sorrowful
meat.] Job here proceeds still on in the metaphor he had formerly used,
comparing the words of Eliphaz to bitter meat, now given him to feed upon to
his great sorrow, which heretofore he should have abhorred to touch; he was
forced now to swallow down that with grief, which in former times he could not
have endured. Others understand this more generally, of all the several
miseries, that Job underwent, which he was forced now to feed upon, though in
former times his stomach would have risen against them: yea some understand it
of the corruption running down from his soars upon his meat, by means whereof
that which formerly he should have loathed to touch, he was now forced to eat
together with his meat But the first exposition is the best.

Verse. 9. Even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose
his hand and cut me off.] That is, that God would be pleased presently to cut
me off and make an end of me, and not suffer me thus to languish away by
degrees; hitherto he has held back his hand, that though I were wounded, yet
his strokes might not be mortal, but by this means my misery is the greater,
and therefore my desire is (if he would be so pleased) that he would let loose
his hand and strike home, even that he would out of hand presently destroy me.

Verse. 10. Then should I yet have comfort, yea I would harden my self in
sorrow;] That is, If I were sure that God would out of hand make an end of me,
that would be some comfort to me, and though what I suffered were never so
bitter, yet would I harden my self to endure it.

For I have not concealed the words of the holy One.] This Job gives as a
reason, why he desired death, to wit, because he had always professed the
truth of God, and therefore knew well, that death could do him no hurt, but
only give him an entrance into a blessed and happy estate.

Verse. 11. What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end, that
I should prolong my life?] This is added as another reason, why he desired
death, and might justly do so, to wit, because his condition was such, that he
could not hope that his life could long continue; languish he might a while in
that grievous misery (and better it were for him to be cut off presently then
to do so) but to hope he should prolong his days it was altogether vain, and
that because he was not able to endure such grievous misery as he suffered, his
strength would not bear it: Eliphaz had told him that because of the great
things that God often does in the world, the poor has hope even in their
lowest condition, chap. 5.16. and again, verse. 24, 25. that if he would turn
unto the Lord, he should know that his tabernacle should be in peace, his seed
should be great, and his offspring as the grass of the earth, and that he
should come to his grave in a full age, etc. In answer therefore to all this,
Job now tells him that he was so worn out with the miseries he had undergone,
that he could not hope in regard of any strength in him, that his life should
be prolonged for the recovering of such a happy condition. This is the drift of
these words, what is my strength that I should hope? and so likewise do many
Expositours understand the next clause also, what is mine end that I should
prolong my life? for they conceive, that by his end here is meant the end of
his misery, that he could not see any likelihood that his miseries should come
to an end, and so should therefore desire still to live, or rather that it is
meant of the end of his life, that man's life being so fading and transitory,
and so soon at an end, there was no reason why he should hope long to prolong
his life, especially lying under the pressure of such insupportable miseries,
and therefore had just cause rather to desire that he might be presently cut
off. But there is another Exposition of the last clause which others, and that
upon good grounds do most approove, what is mine end, that I should prolong my
life? as if he had said, I know no such evil in coming to mine end, that I
should desire to prolong my life: the misery of dying cannot be so great, thar
I should desire to avoid that to spin out my life in that grievous misery I now
undergo, since after death I am sure to be in a blessed condition; let them
therefore that have no hope in their death, desire the prolonging of their
life; but as for me, being assured what mine end will be, I see not why I may
not well desire death rather then life.

Verse. 12. Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass?] To
wit, that I should hope to outwear these grievous miseries I lie under, or for
the present endure them without complaint, as if I had no sense nor feeling of
them: No; I am made of flesh and bones as well as others, and therefore must
needs feel what I endure, nor can long endure what I feel.

Verse. 13. Is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me?] Either
hereby is meant, that Job was not yet so void of wisdom and judgment, but
that he was able to discern between right and wrong, and so accordingly to
judge of their unjust dealing with him, to help himself and maintain his cause
against all their false accusations, or else rather that he had in him that
which would sustain and support him against all their harsh censures, to wit,
his innocence and the testimony of a good conscience, and that he did still
continue in the fear of God, which is the only true wisdom. And indeed this
exposition agrees well with that of the Apostle, Gal. 6.4. But let every man
prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not
in another.

Verse. 15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of
brooks they pass away: etc.] Job here compares his friends to winter brooks,
that are full of water in the winter, and are dried up in the summer; and the
reason why he so compares them, is more fully explained in the following
verses, to wit, that as those brooks when the traveller passes by them in the
winter time, having then no need of them, overflow their banks, and by reason
of rain and snow are full of water and blackish by reason of the ice, (which
may be meant of their being black by reason of the deepnesse of waters, or of
the color of ice) and so being frozen seem stable and like to continue, but
then in the warm summer they are suddenly dried up and gone; at first happily
there are several little drilling streams here and there passing through the
sands (which are therefore called, verse. 18. the paths of their way) but at
last even they also are dried up and vanish to nothing, and so when the troops
of Tema and companies of Sheba (that is, those that travel through the
countries of Tema and Sheba, of Arabia the desert, and happy, where they went
by troops, because of the danger of robbers) that had formerly taken notice of
those brooks in winter time, do afterward in summer time come thither to seek
for water to quench their thirst, whereof they are exceeding desirous in those
hot countries, they find none and so are ashamed and confounded, as men use to
be that have long hoped certainly for any thing, and then in time of need their
expectation fails them, so did his friends deceive him now; for in the time of
his prosperity, when he had no need of their comfort, they made a fair show of
great friendship, but now in his afflictions, when he had need of their
comfort, they failed him quite.

Verse. 19. The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.]
That is, the inhabitants of Arabia the desert, and Arabia the happy, traveling
either for merchandise or other occasions from those countries; for the
posterity of Tema the son of Ishmael, Genesis 25.15. did inhabit Arabia the
desert, and the posterity of Sheba, who was the grandchild of Abraham by
Keturah, Genesis 25.3. did inhabit the other Arabia.

Verse. 21. For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid.]
That is, ye yield me no comfort. Just such as those brooks before spoken of,
are in the summer to the thirsty travelers, such are you to me; for having
made great show of love in the time of my prosperity, when I had no need of
you, now in the day of my calamity, when I stand in need of your friendship, ye
are nothing, not one drop of comfort comes from you; my affliction you see, and
are afraid, that is, you stand astonished, not able to speak one word of
comfort, yea ye are ready to fly off from me, as being afraid to be infected by
me and are startled at me, as a fearful spectacle of Gods vengeance, one upon
whom the wrath of God is poured forth because of my sins.

Verse. 22. Did I say, bring unto me? or give a reward for me of your
substance?] The drift of Job in these words, might be either to clear himself
from that charge of being so impatient merely for the loss of his estate,
because his not seeking to them to have his losses repaired, did plainly
discover that it was not that which did so exceedingly pinch him, or else to
aggravate their uncharitableness: If he had desired of them a supply of his
wants or help in his troubles, it had been fit they should have done it; and
was it not hard then they should not afford him a mouth full of counsel or
comfort? or lastly, to show how causelessely they were so harsh to him; Did I
say, bring unto me? etc. That is, being deprived of my estate, I sent not to
you to relieve me, or to give me any thing to supply my wants, or to rescue
that which I had, out of the hands of those that spoiled me of my substance;
had I been thus or any other way burdensome or chargeable to you, it had been
the less strange that you should be thus bitter; for such I know is the common
guise of the world to insult over those that seek to them for succor, and to
use them as reproachfully as they please; but I neither have nor do yet desire
any such thing of you; All that I desire of you is, that you would comfort me
in my affliction, and it is very strange you cannot afford me that.

Verse. 24. Teach me and I will hold my tongue: etc.] That is, it is not enough
to pass harsh censures upon me, as that I have been an hypocrite, and that for
my wickedness all this is fallen upon me, convince me of this by evident
proofs, and I will yield presently, I will complain no more, I will reply no
more against you.

Verse. 25. But what does your arguing reproove?] That is, though right words
are powerful to convince men, yet this kind of arguing which you use has no
power of reproof in it; you have charged me with many things, but you have
convinced me of nothing.

Verse. 26. Do you imagine to reproove words, etc.] Two several ways this
expostulation of Jobs may be well understood, 1. As if he charged them with an
unjust slighting that which he had spoken, Do you imagine to reproove words?
etc. that is, do you think that all I have spoken is mere empty words, and that
there is no weight of reason in them? Do you conceit that you speak nothing but
clear reason, and I nothing but idle frothy discourse, the speeches of an idle
headed man who cares not what he says, or says he knows not what, yea the
speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind, that is, the speeches of
a mad man, who being in a condition that seems desperate and hopeless, is
therefore as a man distracted, and speaks he knows not what, words no more to
be regarded then a puff of wind? and indeed this last expression does in this
sense agree with other places, where vain regardlesse words are compared to
wind, as Ier. 5.13. The prophets shall become wind, and Job 15.3. Should a wise
man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the East wind? or 2. As if he
accused them of captiousnesse and seeking to contend with him without cause, Do
you imagine to reproove words? that is, Do ye continue to catch at my words, do
ye think it enough to take an advantage of some word or other that I have
spoken, not considering the truth of the cause, and the aim and intention of
him that speaks them, yea and those too the speeches of one that is in a
desperate condition as I now am, not considering that the words of men in such
a condition are usually as wind, that is, sudden, violent, and full of passion;
as if he should have said, in this ye deal not fairly with me.

Verse. 27. Yea ye overwhelm the fatherless, and you dig a pit for your
friend.] That is, this your insulting over me, and trampling upon me in my
miseries, when I am in such a poor condition, forsaken of all, not having one
left to plead for me, is all one as if you should overwhelm and oppress the
fatherless, that are left to the wide world, and have no body usually to stand
up in their defense; and whilst you thus seek, as you do, to entrap me in my
words, and to take advantage against any word that falls from me, this is no
other but to dig a pit for your friend. And indeed the captiousnesse of men in
cavilling at that which they hear spoken by others, and picking a quarrel
against them for it, is usually in the Scriptures compared to digging of pits,
and laying of snares treacherously to catch men in, as Esa. 29.21. where it is
said of wicked men, that they make a man an offender for a word, and lay a
snare for him that reprooveth in the gate.

Verse. 28. Now therefore be content, look upon me, etc.] Job having hitherto
chiefly complained of the uncharitableness of his friends in passing such
rigid censures upon him because of his complaints, he now again addresseth
himself to set forth the grievousnesse of his misery, and to that end does
first in these words desire his friends to attend to what he should farther
say, Now therefore be content, that is, be no longer carried away with passion,
but be willing and yield to hear that I shall say, and so to consider better of
my condition, look upon me, that is, slight me not, turn not away your eyes
from me in discontent, but view me well and observe well the condition wherein
I am, as I shall discover it to you (for this clause may be meant both of
beholding him with their bodily eyes, and of marking what he should say
concerning his condition) by that which I shall declare, yea by that which you
may see with your eyes, it is evident and clear, whether I have lied or do lie
unto you; yet some understand this somewhat otherwise, thus, look upon me, for
it is evident unto you if I lie, as if he had said, come let us quietly argue
out this business a little farther, I am not afraid to dispute it with you
face to face, and no doubt upon a more sober debate the truth will out, you
will soon discover in my words or in my countenance whether that which I have
spoken be true or false.

Verse. 29. Return I pray you, let it not be iniquity; etc.] Some understand
these words, Return I pray you, as spoken by Job to call back his friends that
were ready to go away in a pet or in a fume; But we need not, I conceive,
build upon such a supposition; the words are clear enough, if we understand
them to be a persuasion of his friends to consider again more equally of his
cause and condition. Return I pray you, as if he should have said, you have
hitherto cast me off as a reprobate, as a wicked wretch forsaken of God, why?
because you were carried away with passion, and did not seriously and exactly
weigh my condition; Return therefore from these unjust and passionate censures,
betake your selves to a more equal review of my estate, to consider of and
discuss these things more seriously then yet you have done, let it not be
iniquity, that is, consider well of what I suffer, and in your disputing and
reasoning with me, let right prevail, and deal not unjustly with me, or do not
charge me with iniquity till we have again weighed the matter, yea return
again, my righteousness is in it, that is, return again to a second
consideration or debate of my cause, the result will be that my righteousness
and innocence will appear in the business, or my righteousness depends upon
your examining of my cause yet more exactly.

Verse. 30. Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse
things?] That is, do I or have I spoken that which is unjust? am I not able to
judge what is true and what is false, what is just and what is unjust? or
observing what I shall farther now say, you shall find that I will not utter
any thing false or unjust, and that I am able to judge of things, and that I
have not spoken a miss in defending my innocence as you think I have done.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. IS there not an appointed time to man upon earth? etc.] Some read the
first clause of this verse, Is there not a warfare to man upon earth? and
accordingly conceive that man's life is by Job here compared to a warfare, both
because as soldiers are continually exposed to variety of dangers, and all
kind of hard labor and sorrows, hunger and thirst and heat and cold, and
watching and wearisome travels etc. So is man in this life subject to all kind
of miseries: and likewise as soldiers are hired but for a time, and then
receive their pay, and at length are discharged, so is it with men, there is a
time, to wit, the hour of death, when they are discharged from all the miseries
of this life. But the best translation I conceive is that in our Text, Is there
not an appointed time to man upon earth? for that best agrees with the second
clause, are not his days also like the days of an hireling? However the
meaning of the words is evident, for Job here returns (as he had desired his
friends they might do, verse. 29. of the former chapter) to a review of his
estate, and undertakes to make it manifest to them, that it was not such an
heinous offense as they would make it, that he had wished for death and desired
that God would cut him off, considering the grievous misery that he endured; to
which end in the first place he here wishes them to consider, that there is an
appointed time for man upon earth? and that his days also are like the days
of an hireling, that is, as the hired servant is hired but for a certain time,
and so though he endures much hard labor during the time of his service; yet
that time being run out, then there is an end and he takes his rest, so is it
with man, God has allotted him a set time for his days upon earth, which are
indeed few and full of labor and sorrow, like the days of an hireling; but
then death brings rest, so from thence afterward concluding that it was no
more strange that he should desire death, (especially if the unusual miseries
that he underwent were all weighed,) then that an hireling should desire an end
of his hard service etc.

Verse. 2. As a servant earnestly desires the shadow.] That is, the night; and
indeed as in all places the rest and cool of the night is most welcome to the
weary labourer, so especially in those hot countries where they must needs by
day be scorched with the scalding heat of the Sun.

Verse. 3. So am I made to possess months of vanity, etc.] That is, in such a
sad and wearisome condition, panting and longing after some ease and rest, do I
spend my days, only it is worse with me then it is with the servant and
hireling: for he when he has wrought all day, receives his wages at night, and
then can lie down quietly and take his rest; but I am in misery whole months
together, and when the night comes, that is as laborious and troublesome to me
as the day is, and that is all the wages and the reward I have for the misery I
undergo, and therefore well may I desire the shadow of death, as the laboring
servant does the shadow of the night, as knowing in this life rest I shall find
none. By months of vanity are meant months of restless misery, wherein he
enjoyed no comfort, nothing of the good and rest he expected but mere vanity
and vexation of spirit, and when he says he was made to possess these months
of vanity, his meaning is that these sad times and sore afflictions were
certainly and unavoidably imposed upon him, by the hand of God, and lay upon
him continually without intermission; in which regard he had cause enough to
desire he might die and be rid of these miseries.

Verse. 5. My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust, etc.] This he
mentioned to show the strangeness of his misery, and so why he thought the
time of his life so tedious and irksome, to wit, that his flesh was clothed,
that is, covered all over from head to foot as with a garment with worms and
clods of dust; where by worms are meant either lice or very worms which do
sometimes breed in the corruption that distills out of sores and ulcers, when
they are not constantly washed and kept clean, and by clods of dust are meant
either the very clods of dust which whilst he lay tumbling on the ground did
cleave to his ulcerous body, or rather the very dry scabs of his sores which
were like clods of dust, or the scurf wherewith, when he had clawed his scabs,
his flesh was overspread and that his skin was broken, to wit, chapped with
extreme dryness, or broken with ulcers, and so with the filth and corrupt
matter that issued thence very loathsome.

Verse. 6. My days are swifter then a weavers shuttle, and are spent without
hope.] That is, my life is suddenly spent in a manner, and gone without hope of
recovery. And this Job adds to prevent an objection, which his friends had
indeed harped upon, chap. 5.18, etc. to wit, that if he would repent and turn
to God as he ought to do, God would put an end to all his miseries, and
prolong his days; No says he, there is no hope of that, I may plainly see
that my end is at hand, and why should I then wish for any thing but the
hastening of my death, to put an end to my miseries.

Verse. 7. O remember that my life is wind:] Job having as he thought cleared it
sufficiently, that a man in misery might as well long for death and desire it,
as the hireling may desire the night for rest etc. especially being in such a
condition as he was, without hope of seeing any other end of his misery but
only death, he turns here his speech to God, and desires him to remember that
his life was but a blast of wind, that is, suddenly gone without hope of
recovery (as the Psalmist also expresses it, Psalm. 78.39. he remembered that
they were but flesh, a wind that passes away and comes not again.) intending
thereby, that his desire was, that since he was in such a hopeless condition,
the Lord would therefore not let his hand be so heavy upon him, but suddenly
cut him off, and so put a period to his sorrows.

Mine eye shall no more see good.] That is, I shall certainly die, nor shall
ever live to enjoy good day more in this world: for in the scripture phrase to
see good, is nothing else but to enjoy good; Ier. 17.6. He shall be like the
heath in the desert, (says the Lord of him that trusts in man) and shall not
see when good comes. And so also to see evil is to suffer evil, Psalm. 90.15.
Make us glad according to the days, wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil. and to see death is to die, Psalm. 89.48. What
man is he that lives and shall not see death?

Verse. 8. Thine eyes are upon me and I am not.] That is, I shall be cut off or
shall not be found amongst the living, as Rahell weeping for her children,
refused to be comforted for her children because they were not, Ier. 31.15. and
Genesis 42.13. The youngest is this day with our father, and one is not. As for
the first words of this clause concerning Gods eyes being upon him, there may
be several expositions given of them. 1. That they are spoken to set forth the
frailty of his life, that if God should but cast his eyes upon him to cut him
off, he should soon be destroyed, one glaunce of his eyes would do it. 2. That
they are spoken as a motive to persuade the Lord, to show him mercy speedily,
because else help would come too late; if God should relent, and turn his eyes
in mercy upon him, he should not be found amongst the living, to whom mercy
could be showed, and 3. That they are only spoken, as that which went before,
to set forth his hopeless condition, how certain it was that the misery he lay
in would at length, yea and that ere long too, make an end of him, and
therefore consequently that he had reason to desire that God would not prolong
his misery, but cut him off instantly, for having in the former words said that
the time was coming when those that saw him should see him no more, he adds,
thine eyes are upon me and I am not, that is, yea if thou seek for me
amongst the living thou shall not find me, Job herein speaking of God, as is
usual, after the manner of men. And this I conceive to be the best exposition,
because it agrees best with the drift of Jobs speech, and that which went
before.

Verse. 9. So he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more.] To wit, to
live in this world as formerly, as Job explains himself in the following verse,
He shall return no more to his house etc. Job therefore does not in these words
speak as one that knew not or believed not the resurrection of the dead at the
last day, but only showed the impossibility of man's returning after he is once
dead and laid in the grave, to live again in this world amongst his friends and
acquaintance as formerly.

Verse. 10. Neither shall his place know him any more.] That is, he shall no
more come to enjoy the place of office or dignity which formerly he enjoyed, or
he shall be no more known in the place of his habitation amongst his family and
friends as formerly; as it is said of the flourishing flower of the field,
Psalm. 103.16. The wind passes over it and it is gone, and the place thereof
shall know it no more, that is, it shall be no more seen in the place where it
grew.

Verse. 11. Therefore I will not refrain my mouth, etc.] That is, since my grief
and miseries are so intolerably great, and my condition in that regard
desperate without hope of recovery, I will never forbear to speak, or restrain
my self in speaking, but will rather pour out my complaints freely in
whatsoever my soul imbittered with grief shall suggest to me, and so hereby
will ease my mind overladen with anguish and sorrow whilst I may do it, there
being no hope of redress or ease any other way for me.

Verse. 12. Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou set a watch over me?] That is,
am I such a monster of men, that thou must deal with me, as with no other man?
am I so proud and rebellious against thee, or likely to break forth with such
fury and unresistable rage upon men to hurt them, as the sea does sometimes,
and even to swallow them up as the whale swallows up a multitude of smaller
fishes, and overturns ships and galleys when they come in his way, that
thereupon as thou have set bars and doors to shut up the swelling waves of
the sea, saying, hitherto shall thou come and no farther, and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed, and as thou do by thy providence watch in a special
manner over the whale the king over all the children of pride (as he is called,
chapter 41.34.) and have shut him up within the bounds of the great Ocean, that so
the lesser fish may the more safely live in other seas, so thou set a watch
over me, curbing and restraining me with these ulcers, and many other miseries
least otherwise I should break forth into rebellion against thee, or to the
destruction of those that live about me; or is there such an overbearing might
and strength in me, as in the sea or the whale, that nothing but the almighty
power of God can withstand or restrain me, that no less then these many
grievous and mighty afflictions can keep me within compass? as if he should
have said, surely it is not so; I have neither been so stubborn against God,
nor so harmefull to men that I should need to be so shackled, nor am I so
strong, but that a smaller matter, if there had been any such danger, might
have kept me in.

Verse. 13. My couch shall ease my complaint:] That is, my couch shall ease my
pain and sorrows, the cause of my complaint, by yielding me some little
refreshing rest and sleep, and so consequently shall allay the bitterness of
my complaints too.

Verse. 14. Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through
visions.] Dreams and visions may be meant both of one and the same thing; or
else we may thus distinguish them, that whilst he slept he was scared with
terrible and fearful dreams, and whilst he lay awake, with ghastly sights and
visions. It is indeed most probable that Satan did both ways seek to disturb
him, that so he might the better drive him to despair; and that this it is
which Job here complains of and bemoans; and yet because Satan can do nothing,
but as he receives a Commission from God, therefore Job speaks thus to God,
Thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions.

Verse. 15. So that my soul chooses strangling; and death rather then my life.]
That is, hereupon it is that I had rather die, if I might have my choice, yea
though it were by any kind of death, rather then to live in this miserable
condition, wherein I now live: for strangling he mentions in the first clause,
to signify that he would prefer any violent, bitter, shameful death before
life; and the second clause, death rather then my life; which is in the
original death rather then my bones, discovers the ground of his choice, to
wit, the miserable condition wherein he lived, being become a very Anatomy,
nothing but skin and bones, or having a body that was consumed and rotted even
to the very bones, which made him choose any death rather then such a life: and
indeed considering that Satan desired at first, that God would touch his flesh
and his bones, we need not doubt but he had gone, as deep as his Commission
would permit him.

Verse. 16. I would not live always:] To wit, in this world, and in this sad and
miserable condition, wherein I now live; my sorrows make me loath life, so that
if I might live always and never die, I should rather choose to die, then to
live under such a burden of affliction as now I endure.

Let me alone for my days are vanity.] That is, do not support and continue me
in this misery, but let me alone that I may die, for my days are no better
then vanity, and why should I desire to live in such a vain condition? or else
withdraw thine hand, and do not afflict me so grievously; for there will be no
need of it, my days are very vanity, so that a smaller thing then what I
suffer would soon make an end of me.

Verse. 17. What is man, that thou should magnify him? etc.] This is not
meant of the great blessings, which God has poured forth upon men, concerning
which the like expressions are used in other places, as Psalm. 8.45. etc. and
Psalm. 144.3. to wit, that such a base wretch as man is, was not worthy of so
much honor, as God had done him, and did him daily in making such precious
account of him, in causing all the creatures even the Angels themselves to be
serviceable to him, yea in keeping such a watchful eye of providence over him
to support and protect him and to supply him with all things requisite for him
day after day; But first it may be meant of the great honor and riches,
whereto God does many times advance men, and had advancad Job in particular;
reflecting upon his former greatness, (for he was the greatest man in the
East) and considering how extremely miserable he was now become, he breaks
forth into this expostulation, what is man that thou should magnify him?
etc. Why should the Lord do so much to magnify and set up a man, that may be
so suddenly cast down again? It is as if a man should lay out much to trim and
adorn a house that may be cast down with every puff of wind, or 2. Rather it
is meant of his afflictions and his continual overpressing evils, to wit, that
it was too great a magnifying of so base and despicable a worm as man is, that
the great God of heaven and earth should so sollicitously contend with him, as
a Prince should too much honor a poor servant, that should bend all his might
to contend with him, and to prevail over him, watching daily to take some
advantage against him, and making it his great study and business to crush and
ruin him. So that as David spoke to Saul, 1 Samuel 24.14. After whom is the King
of Israel come out? after whom do thou pursue? After a dead dog, after a
flea; so does Job here speak to God, What is man that thou should magnify
him? as if he should have said, it is strange to me, that thou should
vouchsafe so far to honor such a base vild wretch as man is, as to contend
with him, that thou should set thine heart upon him, that is, that thou
should mind or regard him, that thou should so sollicitously intend him,
either to crush him, as if there were any danger in him, or to humble him, and
to do him good by the evils thou layest upon him, that thou should visit
him every morning, and try him every moment, that is, that thou should so
continually day after day, yea every moment of the day, and so diligently (as
those that rise early in the morning to dispatch their business they desire
earnestly to be done) observe and mark his ways and follow him with thy
chastisements and trials. The whole drift of this speech is to show, that poor
base man was not worthy of so much honor, that the great God of heaven and
earth should so far buisy himself about such a wretch to contend with him,
and to show forth his power against him.

Verse. 19. How long will thou not depart from me? etc.] That is, how long will
it be ere thou will give over afflicting me, and let me be at ease, though it
be but for a moment, till I swallow down my spittle, that is, for a little
while, even but whilst I take my breath, which is the very expression Job uses
afterward, chap. 9.18. He will not suffer me to take my breath.

Verse. 20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?]
As if he had said, It is true indeed, that I have sinned, though I cannot yield
what my friends would charge upon me, that I have been secretly a wicked and
vild hypocrite, and so have drawn these extraordinary calamities upon my self;
yet that I have many ways sinned, and provoked thee by my sins to displeasure,
I freely acknowledge, there is no need that thou should hold me still upon
the wrack to draw this from me, I freely confess it, and what shall I do unto
thee, O thou preserver of men? that is, teach me, O Lord, what I shall do: or
rather, I know not what to do: I cannot make that undone which is done, I can
no way justify or excuse my sins before thee, who art the searcher of the
heart and reins, I can by no means make thee amends for that I have done, or
satisfy thy justice, all I can do is thus to confess and acknowledge my
fault, and seeing therefore thou art the gracious preserver of men, seeing thou
do of thy great goodness nourish, cherish, defend, and sustain men, and
take it as one of thy glorious titles that thou art the Savior and preserver
of men, why do thou destroy me whilst thou preservest others, and dealest not
with me according to thy wonted grace and goodness to other men?

Why have thou set me as a mark against thee? etc.] That is, seeing I confess
my sins, and humble my self before thee, why do thou still follow me with so
many miseries, and afflictions, as if thou had culled me out from others, as
a mark against whom thou did mean to empty thy quiver, and as it were to make
it thy sport to make me miserable, so that I am a burden to my self, that is, I
am not able to endure my self, my very life and being is a burden to me:
Parallel hereto is that complaint of the Church, Lam. 3.12. He has bent his
bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow, and that of Job elsewhere, chap.
16.12, 13. He has taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up
for his mark. His archers compass me round about, he cleaves my reins asunder.

Verse. 21. And why do thou not pardon my transgression? etc.] Why do thou
not, according to thy wonted grace to others, freely forgive all my sins and
transgressions, removing them all out of thy sight, that then accordingly also
thou may withdraw thine hand from correcting me?

For now shall I sleep in the dust etc.] That is, if thou do not send help
speedily, I shall quickly be laid in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the
morning and I shall not be, that is, and then if thou should make never so
much have to help me, it would be too late: for thou should not find me in
the land of the living, amongst those that are capable of thy goodness and
mercy.

CHAP. VIII^
Verse. 1. THen answered Bildad the Shuhite,] Bildad, having heard Job hitherto
defending himself, and disliking what he spoke in his defense, more then his
former complaints, undertook at length to second what Eliphaz had before
spoken, reprooving Job for charging God with injustice in his dealing with him,
and exhorting him to repent of his former wickedness, as the only sure means
to turn away the Lords displeasure; yea it seems by his first words in the
following verse, that whereas Job was proceeding on to have spoken farther,
Bildad did here interrupt him, as not able to endure him any longer, How long
will thou speak these things? etc.

Verse. 2. How long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?] That
is, violent, and bruitishly impetuous, not sparing any body, no not the Lord
himself when he comes in thy way; Because Jobs words in his answer to Eliphaz
had been indeed somewhat sharp and rough, and full of vehement expressions;
therefore Bildad compares them here to a strong wind; and because he had so
often reiterated his complaints of the grievous miseries he suffered, and his
protestations concerning his desire of death, etc. yea and that after Eliphaz
had sought to convince him of the evil hereof, not regarding any thing that he
had spoken, therefore he upbraids him with his persisting in this way, How long
will thou speak these things, and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like
a strong wind? But yet withal there is another thing, which Bildad might also
intend to imply in comparing Jobs words to a strong wind, to wit, that whilst
he went about to overthrow the justice of God, as if he had not deserved what
God had inflicted on him, his words though never so violent, would be but as a
puff of wind; Gods justice would stand firm and unmoved whatever he should say
to the contrary.

Verse. 3. Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice?] As
if he should have said, Every one by the light of nature knows that this is
altogether impossible; though God be almighty, and able to do to men whatever
he pleases, yet he is not wont to make use of his power to do any thing but
what is just, as great and mighty men many times do, and that because. 1. He
is essentially and so infinitely just, as well as almighty, 2. The judge of the
whole world, to whom men must fly for refuge and help, when they are unjustly
wronged and oppressed, and therefore he can no more deal unjustly with any man,
then he can cease to be God.

Verse. 4. If thy children have sinned against him, etc.] That is, though God
has utterly cut off and destroyed thy children, it was doubtless for their
sins, and what he has therefore done therein, he has done most justly, and
thy self he has not hitherto destroyed, but spared thee, that thou might
take warning by them; which if thou would do, and would betimes, that
is, speedily and with all possible care and diligence seek reconciliation with
God, and pray unto him for favor and mercy, in stead of pleading thine
innocence, quarrelling and contending with him as thou have hitherto done, and
withal abandon all thy former wicked ways, and that upon sincere ends, and so
become pure and upright in heart and life, (without which indeed no seeking to
God by prayer will do any good) then doubtless he would not fail to pardon
thy sins, withdraw the judgments that lie upon thee and do thee good; whereas
hitherto he has seemed to sleep, and not to regard thy miseries, he will
presently awake to thy help, and make the habitation of righteousness
prosperous, that is, prosper thee and thy family and all that belongs to thee,
so long as you all continue to live righteously and to do that which is just
in Gods sight.

Verse. 7. Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
increase.] Two several ways these words are understood by Expositours; first,
that though when God should begin to prosper him after his repentance, his
estate should be but little, (as some indeed think it was but little, and that
he began upon alms, as it were, when his kindred and acquaintance gave him
every man a piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of gold* chap. 4^.11.)
yet by degrees this little should increase so, that at last he should again
come to have a mighty estate: and 2. That the estate he had before this
tribulation befell him, how great soever it was, yet should be but little in
comparison of that he should have in the conclusion, if he would repent and
turn unto the Lord; as the moon, one of Gods two great lights, is but little in
comparison of the Sun, whereto may seem to agree that which is said of Job,
chap. 42.12. So the Lord blessed the later end of Job more then his beginning.
But yet the first exposition is clearly the most proper.

Verse. 8. For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, etc.] Bildad here
prooves what he had said by the experience of all former ages; to which he the
rather appeals, because there was probably then no written word: Enquire (says
he) I pray thee of the former age, etc. as if he should have said, search the
records of former times, make enquiry how it has been in the days of our
ancestors, and so likewise of their fathers for many generations, even from
the beginning of the world, you shall find that it has been always thus as I
have said, that God has prospered the righteous and punished the wicked, and
that when evil doers have repented, forsaken their evil ways and turned unto
the Lord, he has then withdrawn his hand from punishing them, and poured forth
his blessings plentifully upon them.

Verse. 9. For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because etc.] This is
added as a reason, why Bildad councelled Job to search into the records of
former times, and it is also two several ways expounded; for some, yea indeed
the most of Expositours, conceive that in these words Bildad compares the short
lives of those of this age with the long lives of the fathers in the first ages
of the world, we are but of yesterday, says he, and know nothing, that is,
whereas the fathers lived many years, by long experience their knowledge was
very great, we alas in these times live but a little while in the world, our
days passing away as a shadow, and so for want of experience know nothing
comparatively: But then again others conceive that Bildad here opposes the
short life of man to the experience of all former ages; and shows how much
better satisfaction we may receive by examining the testimony of all ages, from
the beginning of the world, then by resting merely upon our own observation,
who are but of yesterday, of no continuance to speak of, and so of little or no
experience and knowledge, because our days are few and as a shadow pass
suddenly away.

Verse. 10. Shall not they teach thee and tell thee, and utter words out of
their heart?] To utter words out of the heart is to speak truly what men think,
and what they have seriously and diligently considered of, and with judgment
and wisdom concluded; so that the meaning of these words is, that if Job
would enquire how it had been in former ages, those that lived in those times
would truly make known to him, what by due consideration and diligent
observation, they had found to be true, to wit, the same which he had said to
him, that they are the wicked only whom God destroys, and that the upright and
righteous shall certainly flourish.

Verse. 11. Can the rush grow up without mire, etc.] This which follows unto the
end of the 19. verse may be read as the answer, which Bildad pretends would be
given to Job by the ancients of former times, if he would enquire of them, as
he had advised him, but howsoever the drift of these words is to show that it
is noe more possible, in regard of the ordinary course of Gods providence and
government of the world, that wicked hollow-hearted hypocrites, who are not
rooted in grace, and in whom there is no true piety, should always flourish
and prosper, then that rushes and flags, which have no solidity in them, but
are of a spungy substance, should by the ordinary course of nature grow without
mire and without water. Can the rush grow without mire? etc. that is, as rushes
and flaggs do only thrive in miry and watery grounds, and therefore in times of
drowth when there is no water, even when they are in their perfect greenness,
though they be not cut down, they wither in an instant, so soon as ever they
begin to want moisture; so neither can any man flourish and prosper long, whom
God favors not, whether they be openly profane or such as only make a show of
religion, but in truth are hypocrites, So are the paths of all that forget God,
and the hypocrites hope shall perish, that is, such is the conclusion of the
ways and counsels of all that think not of God, that mind not the approving
of themselves to God, and the seeking of his favor, but only trust to
themselves, that slight and despise God; they may as such rushes and flaggs
flourish for a time, but at last they shall wither, and come to nothing; if
they be not cut down and destroyed by men, as many times they are by the just
judgment of God, yet a secret curse of God shall wast and consume them, and
all the hope of such dissembling hypocrites shall prove vain and quite deceive
them, so that at last they shall give over such vain hopes.

Verse. 14. Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spiders
webb,] That is, those things, wherein such men do place all their hope and
confidence, shall be utterly destroyed, and come suddenly to nothing, and so
their hope and confidence shall perish together with them; and indeed these
things are well compared to a spiders webb. 1. Because their wealth and
dignities, their projects and counsels, are raised and made up with much
labor and skill, by many curious and subtle contrivements, spunne as it were
out of their own bowels, and 2. Because when all is done there is no firmness
nor solidity in them, but they are easily on a sudden, as a spiders web,
brushed down and destroyed: all which doubtless Bildad intended, that Job
should apply to the sudden ruin of his own family and estate.

Verse. 15. He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand, etc.] That is,
as the spider rests securely upon his cobweb house, and does what he can to
fasten it surely, but all in vain; for on a sudden it is swept down and broken
to pieces, so the wicked man and the hypocrite shall rely upon his house and
great possessions, etc. and do what may be done to assure them to him and his,
yea he shall rest upon his spiritual gifts, his performance of holy duties and
his supposed graces, but to no purpose; for ere he is aware of it, all his
outward supports shall be ruined, and all the means he can possibly use shall
not avail to prevent their ruin, and those spiritual things whereon he rested
shall do him no good, but shall quite deceive him.

Verse. 16. He is green before the Sun, and his branch shoots forth in his
garden.] Many Expositours understand this and the following verses of the
righteous, that enjoy the love and favor of God, and so conceive, that it is
added as by way of opposition to that which was before spoken concerning the
hypocrite, to express which they are forced to insert these words, As for the
righteous, in the beginning of this verse, As for the righteous man, he is
green before the Sun, etc. But according to our translation, this also must
needs be a continuation of that, which was before said concerning the wicked,
whether openly profane or hypocrites, to wit, that though they flourish
exceedingly for a while, yet at last they shall be utterly destroyed: He is
green before the Sun, and his branch shoots forth in his garden, that is, as
a tree planted in a rich and fruitful garden is green and flourishes, rather
cherished by the quickening heat of the Sun, then any way impaired and parched
by the scorching beams thereof, and so daily spreads forth his boughs and his
branches; so is it usually a long time with wicked men, they flourish and
prosper every way, and their children are greatly increased, yea in the most
perilous and hard times when others wither, and flourish still and grow
greater and greater.

Verse. 17. His roots are wrapped about the heap and sees the place of stones.]
This is also spoken of that flourishing tree, to which the flourishing of the
wicked for a time is compared: but yet in what sense they are spoken, it is
hard to say. Some conceive that it is meant of the harmfulnesse of such a tree,
that the spreading roots thereof are at length wrapped about the foundation of
the owners house, to the evident weakening and endangering thereof, and so the
owner is thereupon forced to cut it down, and to grub it up by the very roots,
as it follows in the next verse, and that thereby is noted that the wicked
man, who is resembled to this tree, thrives and will thrive if by any means he
can, though he undermines and ruins another man's house to fasten and establish
himself. Others think, that the spreading of the roots of this tree amongst the
stones is only mentioned, as the occasion of its withering, to wit, that
however at first it flourished exceedingly, yet when at length the roots come
to be bound up and streightened in stony places then it withers and dies away,
and so is hewed down; so making this tree in this regard to resemble the estate
of hypocrites, who though they live in great prosperity a while, yet at last
they meet with something or other, that nips them as the root and marres all
their glory: But then 3. There are many that conceive, (and that I think upon
best grounds) that these words also, as those before, tend still to set forth
the flourishing of this tree, and the flourishing of the wicked principally
intended therein, to wit, either that as such a tree grows and flourishes, yea
even in places of greatest disadvantage, in stony places, though her roots be
wrapped about heaps of stones, yet that hinders not her growth and flourishing,
so is it with the wicked for a time they prosper, maugre all opposition,
nothing can hinder their pomp and glory, they thrive amongst stones: or else,
that as trees, whose roots are wrapped about stones, will stand firm in the
greatest storms, when those that grow in loose sandy earth or tougher clay are
easily thrown down with tempestuous winds, so the wicked stand firm and strong
for a time in their flourishing estate against all opposition.

Verse. 18. If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I
have not seen thee.] That is, if the Sun, of which he had spoken verse. 16.
parcheth and so kills this tree, or if the husbandman or owner of this tree,
shall once cut it up by the roots, how goodly a show soever it made before,
there shall not be the least memorial of it left, whereby it might be known,
that it did once grow in that place, and so shall it be with the wicked, that
flourish and prosper for a time, when the Lord begins once to hew him down, he
shall so utterly destroy him and his, that his very memory shall be quite
extinguished; for that is the meaning of the phrase here used, that his place
shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee, as is noted before, chap, 7.10.

Verse. 19. Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
others grow.] This is spoken Ironically; 1. With relation to the flourishing
tree of which he had spoken, thus, Behold, this is the joy of his way, etc.
that is, this is the conclusion of this tree, which seemed for a time to exalt
it self and rejoice in its flourishing condition, down at last it is cut and
grubbed up by the roots, and then out of the earth others grow up in the room
of it; and 2. With reference to the wicked man, whom he had compared to this
flourishing tree, Behold, this is the joy of his way, etc. that is, this is the
issue of that rich and prosperous estate and condition, wherein such wicked
wretches do for a time so exceedingly rejoice, that at last the Lord does
utterly destroy them, and then out of the earth shall others grow, that is,
others shall arise up in his room, not of his posterity, but rather mere
strangers to him, that shall enjoy his lands, riches and honors, according to
that which Job afterward acknowledges concerning such hypocrites, chap.
27.16, 17. Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the
clay, he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall
divide the silver.

Verse. 21. Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.]
In the foregoing verse Bildad began to lay down the conclusion of all that he
had formerly spoken, to wit, that God will not cast away a perfect man, neither
will he help the evil doers; which though it were delivered generally, yet
being spoken with an intention of applying it to Job particularly, he therefore
adds these words, till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with
rejoicing, as if he should have said, this thou shall find true in thine own
particular, if thou returnest to the Almighty and walk sincerely before him,
as becomes a perfect and upright man, God will not cast thee off, though he
have afflicted thee for a time, but will so abundantly bless thee, and
destroy those that wrong thee, that for exceeding joy of heart thou shall
continually break forth into laughter and rejoicing; for then is the mouth said
properly to be filled with laughter, when a man has more joy then his heart
can hold, when the joy of his heart causes much laughter, so much that he can
hardly speak for laughing.

Verse. 22. They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame.] That is, they
shall be overwhelmed and covered with shame on every side in the sight of all
men, to wit, when they shall see thee, over whom they have formerly insulted,
settled again in a more happy and prosperous estate then formerly.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 2. I Know it is so of a truth; but how should man be just with God?] Job
perceiving by Bildads speech, that he also, as Eliphaz had done before, did
quite misunderstand what he had spoken, charging him as if he had accused God
of dealing unjustly with him, he now yields to all which Bildad had said for
the justifying of God, and advances the justice of God farther, then either he
or Eliphaz had done, to wit, by affirming not only that God is just, in that he
does always bless the righteous and destroy the wicked, but also that he
cannot be charged with injustice even then when he afflicts the most righteous
and innocent. I know, says he, it is so of a truth, that is, I know that God
does not pervert judgment, nor does the Almighty pervert justice, (which is
that Bildad had objected, chap. 8.3.) I know it is most true, that he does
always prosper the pure and upright, and that the wicked shall certainly be
destroyed, though they may flourish for a time; but how should man be just with
God? that is, how shall any man living be found so just in Gods sight, that
when God corrects him he may justly complain, that he has wrong done him? No
alas; those that are best, whatever they may be in their own eyes or in the
judgment of others, if they come to be tried before God, will be found to have
deserved far heavier punishments, then he has laid upon them.

Verse. 3. If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.]
That is, if any man whatsoever should undertake to expostulate with God
concerning his sufferings, as thinking to justify himself, and to clear
himself from having deserved what God has laid upon him, he shall never be
able to answer one of a thousand of those things, which God may object against
him, and charge him with, as the just cause of those his sufferings; which
agrees with that where Job speaks particularly of himself in the 14 verse. of
this chapter, How much less shall I answer him, and choose out words to reason
with him?

Verse. 4. He is wise in heart and mighty in strength, etc.] This which Job here
adds concerning the infinite wisdom and power of God is, 1. To prove that
God is exactly just, because being wise in heart, that is, knowing all things,
and how to govern them, it cannot be thought that he knows not how to do
right, and being mighty in strength, he needs not pervert justice for fear of
men; and then 2. To discover how vain and perilous a thing it is for the most
righteous men that live to murmr against God, to quarrel and contend with
him when he corrects them, as if they would justify themselves; and that
because being of such infinite wisdom he can charge them with much evil,
which they discern not in themselves, neither can they by any excuses or
pretenses hide their guilt from his all-seeing eye, and being of such infinite
power, there is no possibility that they should prosper, that do harden
themselves to contend with him.

Verse. 5. Which removes the mountains and they know not,] That is, God can if
he please remove the greatest hills and mountains from one place to another,
and overturn them in his anger, and that suddenly even in an instant, before
they can apprehend what is done to them; for though this clause, and they know
not, may be meant of those that dwell in these mountains, to wit, that such
mountains are in such an instant carried out of their places, that the
inhabitants have no warning to discern the danger, that they might shift for
themselves; yet it may as well be understood often he mountains themselves, the
Scripture usually speaking of things without life, as if they had both life and
reason and understanding too, as Psalm. 58.9. Before your pots can feel the
thorns, he shall take them away.

Verse. 6. Which shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble.] That is, he can, if he pleases, shake the earth from the top to the
bottom, and make the very foundations thereof to tremble; The earth is here
compared to a great building, supported with pillars; and because the earth
has no other foundations, but its own center, to which the earth on every side
presses by reason of its natural heaviness, therefore this or the lower
parts of the earth may be supposed to be that, which is here called the pillars
of the earth: Now though it be generally held by the learned, that in the
greatest earthquakes the whole body of the earth is never shaken, but only some
parts of it, whence they say it is that David says, Psalm. 104.5. that God laid
the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever, yet Job
says here, that he shakes the earth out of her place, because God can thus if
he sees cause even overturn the course of nature, and because indeed in great
and terrible earthquakes, it seems to men that the whole body of the earth does
quake and tremble.

Verse. 7. Which commands the Sun and it rises not, and seals up the
stars.] This which Job here says, that God commands the Sun and it rises
not, may be meant of the ordinary providence of God in disposing the
night-season, by keeping the Sun for a time in another hemisphere, as likewise
of his hiding the Sun from shining upon us in the Eclypses it frequently
suffers, or in the darkness of mighty tempests, when by the extraordinary
blackness of the clouds, the day is, as it were, turned into night: and so
again, that which follows, that God seals up the stars, may be
understood, either of Gods hiding the stars from us by the ordinary
intercourse of the day, or of his covering them from our sight by thick and
pitchy clouds, as in that terrible tempest, Act. 27.20. when neither Sun nor
stars for many days appeared. And thus indeed many Expositours do explain
this place. But I rather conceive that it is meant, as the former verses also
are, of Gods supreme overruling power, not of that which God does ordinarily,
but of that which he can do, to wit, that if he pleases he can command the
Sun that it shall shine no more upon us, and lock up the stars from us, as
long as he lists, and so deprive us both of their light and influences: of
which unlimited power the Lord gave a notable proof, when he commanded the Sun
to stand still upon Ioshuah's prayer, and to go backward in the days of
Hezekiah.

Verse. 8. Which alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of
the sea.] That is, who as he did at first in the creation of the world, so he
still does by his continual providence, stretch forth the heavens, as a
glorious Canopy over our heads, and rules the raging billows of the sea at his
pleasure; for that is meant by his treading upon the waves of the Sea, that
they are subject to his dominion and power, so that he does in them what seems
good unto him.

Verse. 9. Which makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades, and the chambers of the
South.] That is, who makes all the several stars and constellations in the
heaven, from the Northern to the Southern pole, to arise in their several
seasons from the beginning to the end of the year; for though some few only are
here mentioned, yet under these all the rest are comprehended, and these
amongst the rest are particularly expressed, both because they are amongst many
others most remarkable, and because also by them the several seasons of the
year are distinguished: for Arcturus is a Constellation of stars near the
North Pole, behind the tail of Vrsa major, or the greater Bear* (a
Constellation so called because it has the form of a Bear) and is thence
termed Arcturus, (...), that is, the tail of the Bear, and it rises in our
Horizon about the beginning of September, some few days before the Autumn
Aequinoctiall, which was amongst those ancient Eastern Nations counted the
beginning of the year: Orion also is a Constellation of stars that rises in
our Hemisphere in December, when we account winter begins; the Pleiades is a
Constellation usually called the seven stars, about the tail or back of the
sign Taurus, and it rises in our Hemisphere about the beginning of the Spring,
and therefore also called Vergiliae; and by the chambers of the South are
meant, either those Southern stars, which because they are near the Southern
Pole, and so we that dwell in the Northern Hemisphere cannot see them, are
therefore called the Chambers of the South, as being stars, that are hid and
withdrawn from our sight: or the dog star and others that rise in the summer.

Verse. 11. Lo, he goes by me and I see him not, etc.] Having said in the
foregoing verse, that God does great things and unsearchable, mavelous things
without number (which is fully what Eliphaz had said before, chap. 5.9. of
which see the Note there) here now Job prooves this, that Gods works are thus
innumerable and unsearchable. Lo, he goes by me and I see him not, etc. That
is, the Lord does continually, not only in his works of creation, but also in
the daily works of his Providence, manifest himself to us, his wisdom,
justice, mercy, power, even as one that should walk up and down before us, and
so presents himself near at hand to be seen by us; but alas, it fares with me,
says Job, in this, as it does with others, he goes by me and I see him not;
poor wretches, we many times take no notice of him in his works, and when we do
discern any thing of God by that which he does, it is nothing comparatively in
regard of that which is taught us thereby, neither are we any more able to
comprehend by our reason and understanding the depth of his ways and
counsels, with the exact reason of them* though they be all most exactly just
and reasonable, then we are to behold him with our bodily eyes, who is
invisible; so unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out,
as the Apostle says, Romans 11.33. And this Job adds as another reason to
prove what he had said before, verse. 3, 4. to wit, that it was vain for the
justest man living to contend with God, because when he does afflict us, we are
not always able to reach the reason of his so proceeding with us, nor are we
any ways able to guard our selves when he strikes; he may come upon us on
every side, and take all advantages to destroy us, and we not discerning him
cannot possibly help our selves.

Verse. 12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him,
what do thou?] That is, if God is pleased at any time to take away from men,
as he has from me, their estates, or their children, yea if he should be
pleased to take away their lives, no man living can withstand him, nor so much
as call him into question, to render a reason, why he does it, his own will and
pleasure being reason sufficient: so that as before he pleaded man's inability
to discern the ways of God, so here also he pleads the weakness and inability
of man to withstand God in any of his ways, or so much as to question what he
does, and that because of the unresistable power and unquestionable justice of
God, which whilst he did so freely acknowledge, it was not likely that he would
quarrel and contend with God, as his friends did unjustly charge him.

Verse. 13. If God will not withdraw his anger the proud helpers do stoop under
him.] That is, when God is angry if he do not of his own free grace, and upon
the repentance and prayers of those he is offended with withdraw his anger, if
he do not receive them again into favor, but resolves to proceed in his
displeasure against them, alas it is in vain for the strongest, the wisest, the
justest of men to go about to withstand him; let those against whom he is
angry, or any that shall seek to help them, oppose themselves against his
proceedings, either by pleading for them and defending their innocence, or by
seeking to resist and keep off the strokes of his displeasure, the Lord will
soon crush both the one and the other, when in their greatest pride they exalt
themselves against him, not ceasing till he has convinced them of their folly
and forced them to stoop to him, or at least crushed them by his power.

Verse. 14. How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason
with him?] These words may have reference to those in the foregoing verse, that
if the proud helpers do stoop under him, that is, if the Lord does so easily
quash the stoutest, that in the proud conceit of their own strength or
righteousness shall contend with him, and all that shall rise up to help them
herein, how much less should be a poor weak and despised wretch be able to
answer him, or with a studied speech in a rhetorical manner reason with him,
hoping to convince him, that he has dealt hardly and unjustly with him; or
else they may be referred to all that he had before spoken, to wit, that if
neither the mountains, the sea, the heavens, nor any other the strongest of the
creatures, were able to stand before his almighty power, nor to endure the fury
of his indignation, much less should such a poor worm as he be able to rise up
against him, yea even so far as to plead his cause with him, to choose out words
to reason with him. Indeed he says afterward, chap. 13.3. that he desired to
reason with God* but that is meant only of a reasoning by way of declaring his
case and condition before God, this of a reasoning by way of contestation, or
quarrelling about the works of Gods Providence; and therefore whilst he desired
that, he might well disclaim this.

Verse. 16. If I had called and ^e had answered me, etc.] The chief difficulty
of this passage lies in this word called* some understand it of his challenging
or calling God to an account, to make good what he had done, or of calling God
to let him plead his righteousness before him, wherein if God had answered
him, condescending to give him an account of his ways, or yielding to hear
what he could say, yet he would not believe that he had hearkened to his voice,
that is, either he could not believe, that the great God of heaven and earth
should vouchsafe to hear the defense of such a poor worm as he was, or else
rather he would not believe that he had so far hearkened to his voice, as to
accept of his defense, and to determine on his side, and so to acknowledge he
had done him wrong; as if Job had said, so far am I from undertaking to
justify my self, that if I had required liberty of God to prove mine
innocence, and God had given way to me herein, yet would I not believe, that
God had thereupon hearkened to my voice and acknowledged mine innocence; and
that because the contrary is evident, in that his hand is still so heavy upon
me. But then others again understand this word ( called) of prayer, and so they
conceive the sense of the words to be this, that if he had called, that is, if
he had prayed and made supplication to his judge for mercy, (as he had said
before in the foregoing verse,) and God had answered him, that is, had
consented to grant him his desire, yet he would not believe, that he had
hearkened to his voice, that is, that he had done it in respect to him or his
prayer, for any worth in him, or in any service that he could perform: and that
because his hand was now so heavy upon him. And indeed either of these
expositions do well agree with the scope of Jobs answer to Bildad.

Verse. 17. For he breaks me with a tempest, and multiplyeth my wounds without
cause.] As if he should have said, they are not ordinary calamities that God
has laid upon me; No, he has broken me in pieces, as with a thunderbolt from
heaven, and multiplyeth my wounds still more and more, and that without cause,
that is, without any cause manifested, or without any cause that I can
discover; not being conscious to my self of any so great wickedness I have
committed that should provoke him to lay so heavy a punishment upon me.

Verse. 19. If I speak of strength, lo he is strong, etc.] That is, how should
I hope to contend with God? either it must be by strength, that I must defend
my self against him, or by pleading my cause in a way of justice and judgment;
Now alas if I speak of strength, if I hope that way to contend with him,
behold, he is strong, that is, absolutely, infinitely strong, so that there is
none that can possibly stand before him, and if I speak of judgment, hoping by
a way of legal proceedings to clear mine innocence, who shall set me a time to
plead, that is, where should I find a judge, that having power over us both,
should appoint me a day, wherein I should plead my cause, and answer what the
Lord could object against me.

Verse. 20. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me, etc.] That
is, though I should be admitted to plead my cause against the Lord, yet should
I undertake to justify my self, mine own mouth would condemn me, to wit,
either because the Lord by many several particulars he might examine me upon,
and charge me with, would easily so far convince me, that I should be forced
with mine own mouth to condemn my self, or else because not having any
sufficient plea for the defense of my self, mine own lips would discover the
weakness of my cause, I should be entangled in mine own words, and even those
things which I should speak for my self would be retorted upon me to prove me
perverse, or else lastly because this very affirming of my self to be
righteous, would be abundantly enough to condem me, since first it is sinful
for man to boast of his own righteousness; and secondly, thereby I should lie
against the truth, and should discover most desperate boldness in contending
against God, yea I should charge God with falsehood, and injustice, who has
concluded all under sin, and does daily correct the most righteous for their
transgressions; all which agrees fully with that of St John. 1. John 1.10. If
we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

Verse. 21. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul, I would despise
my life.] That is, though I did verily persuade my self, that I were perfectly
righteous, yet would I not believe mine own heart herein, nor regard mine own
soul in this, to stand upon mine innocence, as knowing that there might be much
amiss in me, which I discerned not in my self, but even for fear of trial
before the great God I should despise my life, that is, be glad I were dead;
yea in point of justification I would utterly disclaim and despise the
righteousness of my life and conversation, and would acknowledge my self an
unprofitable servant. Or else the meaning of these words may be given thus:
though upon pleading my cause, God should find me and acknowledge me perfect,
yet I could take no joy in this, nor durst exalt my self, but should despise
this righteousness of mine own life.

Verse. 22. This is one thing, therefore I said it; he destroys the perfect
and the wicked,] That is, this one thing is sure and certain, or this is the
only one thing wherein we differ, and whereto all that I have spoken tends,
(for as for those many other things you have delivered concerning God, therein
we jointly agree) which being clear and evident, therefore I said it, I could
not forbear plainly to aver it, and do and shall still maintain it, namely,
that God destroys the perfect, no less then the wicked. Hitherto Job has
made good that he made no more question of the justice of Gods proceedings,
then his friends did; but now he shows wherein the difference lay betwixt them,
to wit, that whereas they maintained, that it should always be well with the
righteous and ill with the wicked here in this world, and that therefore,
either the righteous should ever live in prosperity, or if the Lord did correct
them for a while, when they had gone astray, yet upon their repentance he would
soon show mercy, and not suffer them to end their days in such miseries; and
on the other side, either he would suddenly destroy the wicked, or if he
suffered them to flourish for a time, he would afterward pour out his
vengeance the more heavily upon them, he for his part was far otherwise
persuaded, namely that for these outward things, Gods dealing was many times in
every regard the same, both toward the righteous and toward the wicked, and
that therefore there was no just cause at all, why his friends should condemn
him for an hypocrite and a wicked man, because of the afflictions that God had
laid upon him: and thus he answers what Bildad had said, chap. 8.20. Behold,
God will not cast away the perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers.

Verse. 23. If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the
innocent.] As if he should have said, when the Lord sends any sudden calamity,
that sweeps away both the wicked and the righteous, the wicked by way of just
vengeance, the righteous to prove and try them, there can be nothing said
against the Lords proceeding herein, he will laugh at the trial of the
innocent, he will and may justly scorn the plea of any man's innocence, though
the uprightest man breathing, and that because the most righteous have by their
sins deserved worse then he lays upon them, nor can allege any just cause,
why they should be exempted from such calamities.

Verse. 24. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covers etc.]
This text of Scripture is very difficult, and accordingly it is diversely
expounded: some conceive that by the wicked here is meant the Devil, and so
conceive the meaning of the place to be this, that God has delivered the earth
to the power and sway of the Devil, permitting him to rule and have dominion
amongst the children of men (as indeed he is called, in regard of his power
over wicked men, the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4, and the ruler of the
darkness of this world. Ephesians. 6.12.) and that accordingly he covers the faces
of the judges thereof, that is, he makes them that sit in the seat of justice
to be as blind men, neither regarding right nor wrong, neither justifying the
righteous nor punishing the wicked, that oppress the righteous, but suffering
them without control to run on in their violent courses, as if they saw no
evil in them; And this they conceive is alleged by Job as one reason, why the
righteous suffer so much misery here in this world. But then others by the
wicked understand wicked men, into whose hands the earth is said to be given,
because they are advanced and become Lords in the world, and have the chief
sway and command in every place, and that thus, as Job had before confuted what
Bildad had said concerning the Lords constant blessing the righteous, so here
he refutes what Bildad had also said chap. 8.13. concerning the curse that
falls on the wicked, to wit, by showing that instead of being accursed of God,
they flourish and are exalted above others, and so rule and domineer in the
world at their pleasure; and then for the next clause, he covers the faces of
the judges thereof, that also accordingly they understand of the wicked man,
thus advanced in the world, but in two several senses, to wit, that these
wicked men do, either by bribery, or by their overbearing power, cover the
faces of the judges, corrupting and blinding them, and making them do
whatsoever they will have them without any respect to justice or equity; or
else, that they despise and disgrace, yea condemn and deliver over to death the
judges thereof, that is, men that are deservedly honored for their wisdom
and integrity: and to justify this last exposition, they show 1. That by
covering the face in the Scripture is sometimes meant the delivering up of men
to death; for so it is said of Haman, when the King was offended with him,
Esth. 7.8. they covered Hamans face, and 2. That by judges in the Scripture is
sometimes also meant, not only those that sit in seats of judgment to punish
malefactors, and to give sentence in matters of controversy, but also
whosoever they are, that are honored for their eminent wisdom and integrity,
and are any way a stay or defense to the commonwealth where they live, and so
this word seems to be used again, chap. 12.17. He leads counselors away
spoiled and makes the judges fools. But then again there is a third way of
expounding these words, and that seems to me above the rest the most probable,
to wit, that both these clauses must be understood of God, that the earth is by
him given into the hand of the wicked, that through his providence the wicked,
irreligious and ungodly sort of men are the great men of the earth, and rule
and domineer in the world at their pleasure; and whereas the only remedy for
this should be in those that sit in the seat of justice, he covers the faces
of the judges thereof, whereby is meant, either that by withdrawing his grace,
leaving them to themselves, yea delivering them up to a reprobate mind, he
covers their faces, so that they sit in judgment like so many blind men, yea
like so many idols, and as not discerning between right and wrong, when it is
most palpable, they regard not the violent courses of these wicked wretches,
but let them alone to do what they please; or else that he is able to cover
the faces of the most righteous judges with shame, when they think they have
judged most uprightly, by discovering to them their failings and punishing them
for it. And indeed hereto best agrees that last clause, If not, where and who
is he? For though some understand this as a challenge, if this that I have said
be not so, who and where is the man, that will disproove what I have spoken? Or
thus, if it be not the wicked man, that does this which I have spoken, to wit,
that covers the faces of the judges, then who is it that does it? who but a
wicked man would do it? yet I conceive the meaning of these words runs more
clearly thus, If not, where and who is he? That is, if it be not God that does
these things, where is he or who is he that does them? as if he should have
said, it is not possible that this should be done without the knowledge and
will of God: for if we say, that it is of the Devil or wicked men, yet we
cannot but know that God is the supreme Ruler and governor of the whole world
and all things that are therein, and that they could do nothing therefore
without liberty from him. And thus does Job conclude, that it is God that does
both advance the wicked and afflict the righteous.

Verse. 25. Now my days are swifter then a Post, they flee away, they see no
good, etc.] That is, the days of my prosperity. Here Job returns to his
complaints, alleging himself as an instance of Gods severity in afflicting
those, who have endeavored to walk uprightly with God; As he has dealt with
others in this kind, so he has dealt with me, says Job, the days of my
prosperity are gone on a sudden, in a moment I am deprived of all that I
enjoyed, mine honor is laid in the dust, and my life in a manner is brought
unto the grave. As for that clause, that his days did see no good, the meaning
is, that he in his days had seen no good; and either it must be understood of
that time only, wherein this sudden change had befallen him, that therein his
prosperity was gone on a sudden without the mixing of one good hour, or if it
be extended to his whole life, it must be taken, as spoken by way of amplifying
the sudden vanishing of his prosperous condition, that the good he had enjoyed
was nothing to speak of, as indeed in pressing miseries men are wont to forget
many times all the good which God has done for them, and are only taken up
with their present sufferings. See also the Note upon chap. 7.7.

Verse. 27. If I say, I will forget my complaint, etc.] That is, if I determine
to put the evils I have suffered, and do still suffer out of my mind, and so to
give over complaining, if I resolve not to give way to my passions and grief as
I have done, but to cheer up and comfort my self, it is all in vain, I am
afraid of all my sorrows, that is, the sense and weight of my sorrows do to
overwhelm me with terrors and fears of Gods wrath and displeasure against me,
that I am not able to quiet my mind and comfort my self; or thus, when I think
of chearing my self, my sorrows present themselves a-fresh before me, and even
scare me with their terrors: I know that thou, Lord, wilt not hold me
innocent, that is, I see plainly that thou will still pursue me with all rigor
for the evil thou see in me: however upright I may seem in mine own eyes, or
in the sight of others, thou will easily find matter enough of condemnation in
me, and then thou will not acquit me, thou will not declare me to be innocent,
and so convince these men that unjustly censure me, to wit, by easing me of
these miseries; so that even by thy present proceedings with me, I plainly
perceive that thou will still follow me with these evils, and that it will
never be better with me. And thus Job, being overborne with the terrors of his
present sufferings, does in the impatience of his spirit cast away all hope as
it were of deliverance for the time to come. I know there are some learned
Expositours that understand this as spoken to Bildad, I know that thou, Bildad,
wilt not hold me innocent, meaning that as long as his troubles continued, he
would still condemn him for an hypocrite. But the general current of
Expositours runs the other way.

Verse. 29. If I be wicked, why then labor I in vain?] These words are
expounded by Interpreters diverse ways; some conceive it to be spoken as in
answer to that counsel which Bildad had given him in the former chapter, verse.
5. To seek unto God, and to make his supplication unto the Almighty, as
affirming that this would be labor in vain, if he were such a wicked
hypocrite, as they his friends had affirmed him to be; others conceive it to be
spoken by way of discontent, to wit, that if he were condemned by his friends
as a wicked wretch, notwithstanding all his care and strict endeavor to walk
uprightly with God, it was then labor in vain to walk so exactly; and he had
even as good do, as others did. But the best exposition I conceive is, that
these words are spoken with reference to those in the foregoing verse, to wit,
that if he were wicked, as his friends thought his affliction did import, and
as indeed he must needs be found to be, if God should proceed to judge him,
according to the rigor of his justice, it would be then in vain to seek to
suppress his sorrow, and to comfort himself with hope of better days for the
time to come; and that because he could not be so righteous, but that God would
find matter enough of condemnation in him, as it follows in the next verses.

Verse 30. If I wash my self with snow water, etc.] It is probable that Job here
alludes to the ceremonial washings, that were used both amongst the Jews and
Gentiles, as a sign of purification. A man as exactly pure and righteous, as
man can be, is here compared to one that is washed with snow water, not because
snow water does cleanse and wash things better then other water, (though
perhaps it was so in those countries where they had no good washing water, and
so some conceive that Job alludes to that) but either because the best washing
water, the clearest fountain water may be figuratively termed snow water, for
its purity and orient clearness; or else because those things that are washed
most exactly do in whiteness resemble the snow, it being usual in the
Scripture to express the whiteness of any thing by saying it is washed in
that, the pure whiteness whereof it does represent, as Cant. 5.12. the holy
Ghost speaks of doves washed with milk, meaning only thereby doves or pigeons
as white as milk; If I wash myself with snow water, says Job, and make my
hands never so clean, yet shall thou verse. 31. plunge me in the ditch, that is,
were I as pure and clean from sin, not only in the opinion of others, and in
mine own judgment, but in deed and in truth, as sinful man in this world can
possibly be, were I as pure spiritually, as he is bodily, that is washed and
scoured till he appears at last as white as snow, and were the works of my
hands, my life and conversation, never so spotless and unblameable in the eyes
of men, yet should thou, O Lord, come to examine and judge me, thou might
easily discover me to be most abominably unclean, if thou should judge me
according to the severity of thy justice, (yea the rather because I went about
to justify my self, and was so clean in mine own eyes) even as unclean as a
man that has been plunged over head and ears in a ditch that is full of dirt
and mire, and mine own clothes shall abhor me, says Job, that is, (say some
Expositours) thou would cast me down in dishonor, and so the clothes I
formerly wore in my prosperity, as being not seemly for so base a wretch, would
abhor me; or thou would slay me, and then my garments, as not becoming, as
abhorring a dead carcass, must be stripped off from me; or else rather I shall
be found so monstrously filthy, that mine own clothes, if they had sense, would
abhor to touch me; indeed this last clause some read thus, And mine own
clothes shall make me to be abhorred, and so conceive the meaning thereof to
be, either that those things wherewith they should endeavor to hide his
filthiness would make him the more abominable, or that the very righteousness
wherewith he was clothed would be found as filthy rags and therefore justly
make him to be abhorred. But the first Translation is most generally approoved.

Verse. 32. for he is not a man as I am, that I should answer him etc.] This is
added as a reason of that he had said in the foregoing verses, to wit, that
though he were never so innocent, yet God would discover him to be exceeding
guilty. The reason is, because there was no hope to deal with the Almighty God,
as he might deal with men for the clearing of himself in a way of justice; He
is not a man as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together in
judgment, as if he should have said, if I had to deal with you or with any
other man as my self, with whom I might enter into judgment upon equal terms,
I would not doubt to clear my self, and to answer what might be objected
against me; But alas God is not as man in this regard, with whom I have to do,
he can easily discern that evil in me, which man could never see, yea which I
should never discern in my self; even those things which are in high esteem
with men are an abomination with God; And besides his majesty and glory would
soon confound such a worm as I am, if I should undertake to answer what he
would object against me.

Verse. 33. Neither is there any daies-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand
upon us both.] As if he should have said, as I dare not contend with God in
judgment, so neither is there any to whom I can refer the cause for
arbitration; if I were so foolish as to desire to plead my cause with God in
that way, alas where should we find any daies-man, or umpire that should
undertake to judge and decide the cause betwixt us both, and so should
consequently have power over both to prescribe bounds and orders to us in our
arguing together, to restrain either party as occasion was offered, and to
pass a final sentence in our differences, whereto both of us should be forced
to stand? for doubtless this phrase of a daies-man that might lay his hand
upon us both, is either used with respect to the usual custom of Umpires, who
being chosen to hear and end some difference between parties at variance, do
sometimes lay their hand upon the one and sometimes upon the other, when they
undertake to show them, wherein they are or have been to blame, or when they
would restrain them from being too violent, or order either party what they
should do, and do at last cause them to shake hands and be friends; or else is
used only to signify the power which the umpire must needs have over both
sides, to dispose of them in the controversies committed to his arbitrament as
he sees cause; for the laying of the hand upon any thing signifies the power
which we have over it, and hence is that expression, Psalm. 89, 25. I will set
his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.

Verse. 34. Let him take his rod away from me, etc.] We cannot conceive that
Jobs meaning in these words was, that if God would withdraw his scourge, which
lay now so heavy upon him, and not overawe him with the terror of his
majesty, he would then freely and without any fear of God undertake to plead
his cause with God, and to show that he did causelessely lay those evils upon
him; for this were expressly contrary to that he had said before, verse. 2, 3.
that no man living can be just with God, nor able to answer him one of a
thousand, if he will contend with him, yea to that he had said immediately
before, verse. 30, 31. that though he were never so pure and innocent, God could
easily discover him to be as spiritually filthy, as he must needs be outwardly,
that has been plunged over head and ears in a ditch full of mire; and
therefore the meaning of these words is rather this, that if God would not
proceed in such extremity with him as now he did, nor would terrify him with
the fear of the rigor of his justice and judgment, before which he knew well
he was not able to stand, then he should not stick boldly and freely to plead
his cause in regard of his accusers, and to prove his integrity, that he was
not a wicked hypocrite as his friends affirmed him to be, and therefore had
such grievous punishments poured forth upon him.

Verse. 35. But it is not so with me.] That is, I am not in such a condition,
that I should speak so freely; his rod lies so heavy upon me, and I see that he
does so discover his indignation against me, and his resolution to deal with me
in the uttermost severity of his justice, that I am even overwhelmed with
terrors, and having to deal with God, dare not say what otherwise I could say
for my self, if I had only to deal with men.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. MY soul is weary of my life, etc.] Job having said in the latter end
of the foregoing chapter, that God was of such terrible majesty and might, that
he durst not plead his cause with him, as he would do with a man as himself;
here now as it were correcting or recalling what he had said, he professes
that yet his miseries were so great and insufferable, that he could not forbear
breaking forth into complaints and expostulations, My soul is weary of my life,
I will leave my complaint upon my self, etc. Some read the first clause thus,
as we see in the margin, My soul is cut off while I live, as if he had said,
though as yet I live, yet I am in a manner no better then a dead man, and that
either because he was in such a sad condition, that he was more like a dead
stinking carcass then a living man, the life that he lived was not worthy the
name of life, or because he was irrecoverably gone, as we use to say, ready
immediately to tumble into the grave, there was but a step betwixt him and
death; or else thus, my soul is in a manner cut off in the midst of my days, I
was likely enough to have lived many a fair day, but on a sudden my life is cut
off and my days are shortened. But reading this clause as it is in our Bibles,
My soul is weary of my life, either it is an Hebraisme wherein the soul is put
for the whole man, my soul is weary, that is, I am weary of my life, and it may
be meant generally that he was weary of living, or that he was weary of that
miserable life he lived; or else it is expressed thus by way of emphasis, My
very soul, that is the cause I live, is weary of my life, I do even from my
soul loath and abhor life, and would be glad I were dead. And this he lays
down as the ground of his following complaints, to wit, because in such
bitterness of sorrows he was not able to forbear, and withal happily to
intimate his hope, that God would the rather bear with him, because by so great
miseries he was as it were constrained to say what he said; or else to imply
that hereby he was encouraged to give way to his passion, because if he should
loose his life for speaking, he should but loose that he was weary of: and
thereupon he adds, I will leave my complaint upon my self, I will speak in the
bitterness of my soul; where by leaving his complaint upon himself, is meant
either that he would leave complaining of himself, since he saw that by
accusing and condemning himself, he got no ease at all, and would now plead his
cause with God; or else that though he suffered his soul to break forth into
complaints, yet his complaints should not rest upon God but upon himself, he
would only declare the misery, of his condition without uttering a word that
should tend to the reproach of God, that had laid these sore calamities upon
him; or else rather that he would abundantly pour out his complaints concerning
his sad and doleful condition whatever came of it, I will leave my complaint
upon my self, etc. as if he should have said, I will give way to my complaints
to break forth, they strive for a vent, and I will no longer restrain them; if
any evil comes of it, at my peril be it, I must undergo it though I have been
hitherto afraid to speak, yet now I am resolved to give the reins to my
imbittered spirit, I will make a full complaint of my sufferings, and there at
all adventures will leave it upon my self, that God may consider of it; and let
him do with me as shall seem good unto him. And so these words are indeed to
the same purpose with what he had said before, chap. 7.11. I will not refrain
my mouth, I will speak in the anguish of my spirit, etc. of which see the Note
there.

Verse. 2. I will say unto God, do not condemn me, etc.] Many Expositours
conceive, that before Job comes to plead with God, and to pour out his
complaints before him, as he had resolved he would do, he does here deprecate
the indignation of the Lord therein, Do not condemn me, that is, though I take
a little freedom to plead my cause before thee, do not blame me, be not
offended with me for it, yea though any thing should slip from me rashly or
inconsiderately, charge it not upon me; which is much as Abraham spoke when he
pleaded with God, Genesis 18.30. Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak.
But the most of Expositours do I conceive better understand this to be the
effect of these words, to wit, that either God would withdraw his hand from
punishing him so severely as he had done, or else that he would show him, why
it was that he contended with him. Do not condemn me, that is, deal not with
me thus as a wicked wretch, whom thou have condemned to be cast off and
destroyed; By the judgments thou have laid upon me, thou do in a manner
proclaim me to be such a one, and so all men are ready to judge, and therefore
either acquit me from this censure by withdrawing the stroke of thine hand, or
else show me wherefore thou contendest with me. Questionless Job was not
ignorant, that by sin he had deserved to be condemned and severely punished,
but he argues with God here as in relation to the Covenant of grace, which God
had made with our first parents after the fall, wherein God was pleased to
promise pardon of sins, and all other blessings to those that by faith
embracing the promised seed should thereupon fear him, and endeavor to walk
holily and righteously before him all their days; Now because Job was not
conscious to himself, but that he had thus as one in Covenant with God,
sincerely given himself to serve and fear him, therefore he desires that he
would not condemn him and cast him off, but that he would show him what it was
he aimed at in afflicting him so, or what it was in him wherewith he had been
provoked to deal so severely with him, that so he might amend what was amiss,
and not provoke him any longer.

Verse. 3. Is it good unto thee, that thou should oppress? etc.] As if he
should have said, that is far from thee, thou art not wont to do so: and
there are three particulars which he mentions, that he would imply are not with
any reason to be conceived of God. 1. That he should oppress him. 2. That he
should despise the work of his own hands, and 3. That he should shine upon the
counsel of the wicked. By oppressing him is meant a causeless laying so many
judgments upon him, both in his estate, children and person; by despising the
work of his own hands is meant the destroying of his creature as a worthless
despicable thing, without so much as vouchsafing first to try, convince and
condemn him; and by shining upon the counsel of the ungodly is meant favoring
and prospering their counsels and endeavors; Now none of these, Job would
have us know, can be charged upon God: for this phrase, Is it good unto thee
that thou should oppress? that thou should despise the work of thine
hands? etc. does imply either that it cannot be just and right in the eyes of
God, who is infinitely just and good, and hates all oppression in others, to
deal thus with his poor creature; or else that it could be neither pleasure,
nor profit, nor honor to the Almighty to deal so with man, and that therefore
however sinful men sitting in seats of justice, may out of by-respects to some
advantage that is like to redound to themselves, or merely to please
themselves, oppress the innocent and favor the wicked, yet no such advantages
can move God unjustly to oppress or destroy his creature. Besides because he
is the work of his own hands, he cannot make so little account of him, as to
destroy him without cause. Every workman loves the work which himself has
made; a potter when he has made a vessel of clay, will not without any cause
take it and dash it against a wall; and much less then can we think that God,
whose tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. will causelessely
destroy his own creature, whatever he may do by his sovereign power: As for
that last clause, or that thou should shine upon the counsel of the wicked,
though diverse Expositours understand it to be spoken as in relation to Jobs
friends, namely that God by laying such heavy judgments upon Job, might seem
to favor and make good their judging him to be an hypocrite, yet in regard I
can hardly think that because these his friends did rashly and unjustly censure
him to be a wicked hypocrite, therefore he would run into the same sin of
judging them to be wicked men, I should rather conceive that Job spoke this
generally, of Gods favoring wicked men without respect to any particulars, or
that he might have respect, if to any, to those Sabeans and Chaldeans, who had
unjustly surprised his estate, and went away tryumphing in their good success;
though God may prosper wicked men, yet he never favors them or their wicked
designs.

Verse. 4. Have thou eyes of flesh? or see thou as man sees?] As if he had
said, thou see into the secrets of men's hearts, and do not behold only that
which appears outwardly as man does, yea thou know all things perfectly. And
this Job adds either to show, that therefore God could not deal with him as he
did, out of ignorance; though his friends not knowing his heart, condemned him
for an hypocrite, yet God the searcher of all hearts could not be so deceived:
or else to intimate that God therefore needed not by laying such sore
afflictions upon him, to endeavor to make a discovery of what he was or what
he had done, as earthly judges are sometimes forced by tortures to search into
the secret offenses of those that are to be tried before them. I know that some
Expositours do give other interpretations of these words; as that God is not
wont for ever to look with a fierce and revengefull eye upon those that have
sinned against him, as men use to do, as it is said of Saul, 1 Samuel 18.9. Saul
eyed David from that day and forward, or, that God looks not upon men with
partial eyes when he judges them, as men do that are blinded with gifts, and
corrupt affections, whether anger or love, and taken with the outward splendor
of men, and so despise the poor and favor only the great and mighty, which
agrees with that expression the prophet uses concerning Christ, Esa. 11.3. He
shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, etc. or, that God judges not men
by their actions only, which is the only way of man's judging, but by that which
he sees in the men; he judges them by that which they always are, and not by
that which they sometimes act. But the first exposition is far most agreeable
to the drift of Jobs speech.

Verse. 5. Are thy days as the days of man? etc.] That is, they are not as the
days of man; and this may be understood generally, to wit, that God is not
subject to any such infirmities as man is. But because of those following
words, Are thy years as man's days, that thou inquirest after mine iniquity,
and searchest after my sin? it may more particularly be meant either 1. Of the
immutability of God, that he is not as man changeable and inconstant, to day a
friend, to morrow an enemy; and therefore it could not but seem strange to him,
that after so many clear manifestations of his love to him, all should be now
turned into such extremity of indignation against him; or 2. Of the eternity of
God, that he is not short-lived as mortal man is, that hereupon he should deal
with him in so great severity, heaping upon him such a multitude of miseries,
least he should not have time to search out his sins, or to punish him for them
when he had found them out; in reference whereto some observe, that only days
are here ascribed to frail man, but years to the immortal ever-living God; or
3. Of the omniscience of God, and that in relation also to his eternity, namely
that whereas man gains knowledge by degrees in continuance of time, God is
eternal, his life consists not in a succession of days and years, and so he
knows all things past, present and to come in the indivisible moment of his
eternity, and therefore there was no need that by long continuing tortures and
enquiries he should thus labor to search out his iniquity and sin.

Verse. 7. Thou know that I am not wicked, etc.] Having in the foregoing
verses reckoned up many particulars which could not be conceived of God; as
that he should oppress or despise the work of his own hands, etc. here now Job
applies these things to himself, and shows how strange Gods dealing with him
was in these regards, thereby also to imply his desire that God would remove
these sore calamities from him, and not deal otherwise with him, then he dealt
with any of his servants besides. Accordingly therefore for the words of this
verse, Thou know that I am not wicked, and there is none that can deliver
out of thine hand, Some conceive they are added in reference to the words in
the two foregoing verses, and that to prove that God needed not to go on in
such a way of searching out his sins, as men are wont to do, to wit, by long
continuing tortures, and that 1. Because he knew his heart, and therefore could
not be ignorant of his integrity, Thou know that I am not wicked, that is,
of thy self without any search or enquiry thou know that my heart is
upright, and that I am not a wicked man; and 2. Because there was no
possibility that he should escape out of his hand; None can deliver out of
thine hand, as if he should have said, malefactors are wont to be shut up fast
in prison, to be shackled and bound in fetters and chains, lest they should
escape the judgment that is to be executed upon them; yea and sometimes judges
proceed with the greater rigor to bring those they have in their hands to
confess the evil they suspect they have done, as fearing lest they should by
some higher power be fetched out of their hands, before they have gotten that
out of them which they desire to know; But now, Lord, there is no cause why
thou should thus shackle and coop up me, as thou seem to do, to be sure
to make me forthcoming, since there is no possibility that any man should
escape out of thy hand, either by flight or rescue. But now again others do,
and I think better, refer these words to that which Job had said before,
verse. 3. Is it good unto thee that thou should oppress? and accordingly
conceive that they are added to show, that since it was no way likely that God
would causelessely oppress a poor wretch that was not able to withstand him,
how strange therefore it must needs seem to him, that God should so crush him
as he had done, both because he durst say that God knew that he was not wicked,
though he could not justify himself as free from sin, as himself had formerly
confessed, chap. 9.20. yet he durst say that God knew that his heart was
upright, Thou know that I am not wicked (and it was indeed a very notable
evidence of a clear conscience, that the hand of God being so heavy upon him,
and his friends charging him so expressly with hypocrisy, he should
notwithstanding thus courageously appeal to Gods knowledge of him that he was
not wicked) and also because he was by no means able to save himself from Gods
unresistable power, none can deliver out of thine hand; when humane powers
oppress, there is one above them that can deliver the oppressed, as Solomon
says, Eccles. 5.8. He that is higher then the highest regards, and there be
higher then they; But now none can deliver out of Gods hand, and therefore the
innocent and righteous would be in an ill condition, if he should oppress
them. And this is the argument whereby Job does here covertly plead with God to
remove his hand from him.

Verse. 8. Thine hands have made me and fashioned me round about, etc.] That is,
in every part all my body over; yea every member of my body and every faculty
of my soul; the meaning is, that he was wholly the work of Gods own hands, that
there was not the least piece of him from head to foot, within or without, not
so much as the nails upon his fingers and toes, which the Lord had not wrought
and fashioned with all possible diligence, care, and skill; and in the words
there may seem to be an allusion to a careful and cunning workman, that uses
when he has made any choice piece, to turn it this way and that, and to look
round about to see if there be any thing that is defective, or that may be made
more curious and exact then as yet it is. Now for the connection of these words
with that which went before; Some conceive, that Job here prooves what he had
said in the foregoing verse, to wit, that God knew that he was not wicked, and
that none could deliver out of his hands, namely, because God made him, and he
must needs know man that made man, neither was it possible that the work should
deliver it self out of the hand of him that formed it; and indeed that God must
needs know man perfectly is prooved by the same argument, Psalm. 94.9.
Understand ye brutish. -- He that planted the ear shall not he hear? he that
formed the eye, shall he not see? But I rather conceive that Job adds this also
in reference to what he had said before, Is it good unto thee that thou
should despise the work of thine hands? intimating how strange it seemed to
him that God should despise his own workmanship, especially a piece of such
excellency as man was; and that yet he could not judge otherwise but that thus
it was with him: for God had made him, and yet, says he, thou do destroy
me, as if thou made no reckoning of me: oh how wonderful are thy judgments,
and thy ways past finding out! Indeed because there is no wonder at all in it,
that God should destroy wicked men, though they were the work of his hands
(concerning the old world the Lord said, I will destroy man, whom I have
created, Genesis 6.7. and concerning the rebellious Jews by the prophet, Esa.
27.11. He that made them will have no mercy on them, and he that formed them
will show them no favor) therefore some Expositours conceive, that those words
Thine hands have made me and fashioned me are meant, not only of Gods first
forming him in his conception, but also of the work of Regeneration, when the
Lord by the spirit of Grace, did renew his image in him, and made him a new
creature, this being that which seemed so strange to Job, that being such a
one, yet God should destroy him. But methinks it is evident, that the words do
intend only the fashioning and framing of Job in his first conception; yet
indeed that which Job mentions as the matter of his wonder, is not so much that
he should destroy the work of his own hands, as that he should do it
causelessely (for so Job conceived it was with him) as if he minded not his own
handiwork, as is noted before, verse. 3. And besides this complaint may imply a
deprecation, Thou seem resolved to destroy me, but do not, consider that I
am the work of thine own hands, as it follows in the next verse. Remember I
beseech thee that thou have made me, etc.

Verse. 9. Thou have made me as the clay, and will thou bring me into dust
again?] Here Job proceeds to desire God to be favorable to him from the
foregoing consideration, that he was the work of his own hands, which he
farther enlarges in the following verses. In the first words, Thou have made
me as the clay, some hold that he has respect to the creation of our first
father Adam, in whom we were all made of earth, of the dust of the ground, Genesis
2.7. or else to his conception in the womb of his mother, where the first
materials whereof he was made were such, that it might well be said, that he
was at the first no better then clay; But if he had had respect to either of
these, he would not have said that he was made as the clay but of clay. Rather
therefore the meaning is only this, that as a potter does form and fashion the
clay which he makes into a vessel, so God had wonderfully shaped and fashioned
him in the womb of his mother; and however some also conceive, that the drift
of this is to desire the Lord to deal more gently with him, as considering of
what brittle principles he was made, Thou have made me as the clay, and will thou bring me into dust again? that is, thou have made me as brittle as a
vessel of clay, so that thou need not lay thine hand so heavy upon me, to
bring me back into dust again; yea since I am sure ere long to molder into dust
again, let that suffice, and do not make me live that short time I have to
live, in such extreme torment and misery as now I do; yet I should rather
judge that the chief thing he still pleads is, that since God had so
wonderfully made him, he would not now causelessely destroy the work of his own
hands: for though he had many times in a passion wished himself dead, yet it is
no wonder at all, that when he comes to plead with God, he should desire him to
spare his life, at least that he would not with such fury and indignation grind
and beat him to dust, as by his present proceedings with him, he seemed
resolved to do.

Verse. 10. Have thou not poured me out as milk, and crudled me as cheese?] Thus
he modestly expresses how wonderfully he was by the mighty power of God
conceived in the womb of the seed of his parents, which being first poured
forth as milk, (whereto in color it is not unlike) afterward was congealed
and crudled together like cheese, and so became an imperfect embryo. And hereby
Job seeks to set forth what a rare and choice piece man is, especially
considering of what vild and sordid principles he is made. We wonder not much
to see a cheese made of crudled milk; but that a living man bearing the image
of God, and so artificially and curiously framed and joined together in every
part, should be made of such base materials, this is exceeding wonderful; and
the more it heightened the worth of Gods workmanship in the forming of man, the
stranger it seemed to Job, that God should despise such a precious piece of his
own handywork.

Verse. 11. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh; etc.] He terms his skin
and flesh a clothing, either in reference to his soul, which is the chief of
man, and to which the body is as it were a garment, which it wears during its
abode here in this world, and then at the hour of death puts it off, and lays
it by for a time, whence is that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.4. where those that
die are said to be unclothed; or else rather in reference to the inward, and
more noble and tender vital parts, the heart, liver, brains, and bowels,
which are clothed and covered with flesh and skin, especially the vital parts;
which are therefore also said to be fenced with bones and sinews, as alluding
to the fence of the ribs, and the orderly juncture of other bones and sinews,
whereby the inward, especially the vital parts, are kept safe and preserved.
However Job still proceeds to show how wonderfully he was formed in his mothers
womb, when the same liquid substance, which a while was but as crudled milk,
became severally in some part skin and flesh, and elsewhere bones and sinews;
all which tends still to set forth how strange it was to him, that God should
causelessely destroy what he had made with so many miracles of wisdom and
skill.

Verse. 12. Thou have granted me life and favor, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, of thy free grace and favor thou have granted me life. But rather
by life and favor two distinct mercies are meant, to wit, that God did not
only add a living soul to the body, which was so wonderfully and curiously
fashioned and made, but also many other mercies and comforts to make life sweet
and pleasant to him, as especially reason and understanding, wherein man
excells all other living creatures, together with those excellent gifts of wit,
judgment, memory, ability to speak and discourse, and the like; and then also
beauty, which is most properly called favor, health, and strength, and
liberty, good education and instruction in all kind of knowledge, both humane
and divine; yea under this word favor may be comprehended all other requisite
accomodations for his life and well being, as food and raiment, etc. And then
to this he adds too Gods careful preserving of him, and thy visitation has
preserved my spirit,, that is, thy providence has continually watched over me,
and secured my life in many dangers; and indeed considering how strange it is,
that the child should live in the streights of the mothers womb, and what
dangers it passes through, both in the birth and afterward, well might Job
admire the sollicitous and constant providence of God, in sustaining and
preserving him alive after he had made him.

Verse. 13. And these things have thou hid in thine heart; I know that this is
with thee.] Some Expositours refer those words ( these things) to the
calamities which he now suffered; as if Job had said in a kind of passion and
discontent, I know that all the time thou shewedst thy self thus favorable to
me, thou had a resolution to bring all these miseries upon me; even as a man
that intends to be revenged on one that has wronged him, does yet cunningly
conceal what he intends till he can get a fit opportunity to do it: so thou
did not discover till now what evil thou intendedst against me, but even then
I know it was hidden in thine heart: But this is somewhat too harsh to be
conceived of Job, and therefore others refer them (and I think upon better
ground) to those gracious dispensations of Gods providence toward him, whereof
he had immediately before spoken, to wit, his wonderful conception and
preservation, and many other favors that God had afforded him; and yet they
differ in their judgment concerning the meaning of the words; for some think
that Job therein speaks of man's inability fully to comprehend those secrets of
Gods providence, whereof he had spoken, And these things have thou hid in thine
heart, that is, how thou have done these things no man exactly knows, that is a
secret which lies hid in thine own heart; but that these things were as I have
said, so much I understand, and I know this is with thee. And then others
conceive the meaning to be this, And these things have thou hid in thine heart;
I know that this is with thee, that is, I know thou do remember that I am the
work of thine hands, and therefore am persuaded that thou will not causelessely
destroy me, though indeed for the present thy dealing is such with me, that
thou do not discover any such thing; thou know better then I how
wonderfully thou have made me, and how tenderly thou have preserved me, though
now thou hidest thy self, as if thou did not regard the work of thine own
hands: neither indeed can I comprehend how it should come to pass, that having
formerly shown me such favor, thou should now afflict me so sorely. And
this as it is the most ordinary, so I conceive it is the best exposition of the
words: they contain an assertion of Jobs assurance that God loved him, even
whilst he laid such sore afflictions upon him, and withal it may be alleged,
as an argument to move God not to destroy him, since hereby he should loose all
he had formerly done for him.

Verse. 14. If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from
mine iniquity.] Some refer this to the last words of the foregoing verse; I
know, says Job there, that this is with thee, and here he expresses what was
with him, If I sin, then thou markest me, etc. Others refer it to the 12
verse, there he had said, Thou ^ast granted me life and favor, etc. But now
here he adds, that though God had been so many ways favorable to him, yet God
would not bear with him, if he did not walk uprightly, If I sin, then thou
markest me, etc. But more generally it is thought, that Job here enlarges
himself as in relation to the last branch of his former expostulation, verse. 3.
Is it good unto thee, that thou should shine upon the counsel of the
wicked? for because by laying such sore calamities upon him, he seemed to
favor those that condemned him for an hypocrite, or at least not to be such an
enemy to profane wretches as he was to him, or rather because Gods severity in
punishing every sin of his (though he were not wicked) was a clear proof, that
God was far enough from shining upon the counsel of the wicked, therefore he
alleges here how severely God dealt with him, If I sin, then thou markest me,
etc. where by ( marking him) is meant either Gods keeping a watch over him to
make sure he might not escape punishment, or else rather Gods observing every
sin he committed, If I sin, then thou markest me, etc. that is, thou take
notice (which is very hard) of every fault I commit, and keep a strict
account of it, resolved to let no slip of mine pass unpunished.

Verse. 15. If I be wicked, woe unto me, etc.] As if he should have said,
whether I be wicked, or righteous, it is all one, I can however hope for no
release of my misery; which agrees with that chap. 9.22, where he says that
God destroys the perfect and the wicked: for if I be wicked, woe unto me,
that is, then I were in a woeful condition indeed, I have then deserved the woe
and misery that is upon me, and it is just that I should suffer what I do
suffer, yea worse and worse I might well expect even unto eternity; and if I be
righteous, one that sincerely fears God, and desires to obey his commands, yet
will I not hold up my head, I dare not for that stand to justify my self, or I
cannot for that cheer my self with any hope or comfort; and the reason why he
said thus, might be, either because he knew that however righteous he was, yet
many things he had done amiss, for which God might severely and yet justly
contend with him; or else because the sorrows he endured were so extreme, that
he could not any way comfort himself; and thereupon he turns himself at last to
God, desiring him to take pity of him, I am full of confusion, that is, the
more I think of my estate, the farther and farther am I still plunged in
confusion, being overwhelmed with distracted thoughts, not knowing what to
think of my condition, nor wherewith to cheer up my spirit, therefore see thou
mine affliction, that is, consider in what a sad and miserable condition I am,
and have compassion on me.

Verse. 16. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion, etc.] Some Expositours conceive
that it is himself that Job compares to a lion, and so understand the words
thus, that as men hunt a fierce lion that has ranged up and down and done much
mischief, following him with all violence till they have at last taken him and
slain him, so the Lord dealt with him: as if he had been some fierce proud
wretch, that had been mischievous to the place where he had lived, God had
hunted him wirh variety of plagues that he might destroy him; much according to
that which Job had formerly said, chap. 7.12. Am I a sea or a whale that thou
set a watch over me? But others do better hold that it is the Lord whom Job
compares to a lion, thou huntest me as a fierce lion, that is, thou as a fierce
lion (before whom no beast can stand) do with all violence pursue me with thy
judgments, and by thy unresistable strength do rend and tear me in pieces*
which indeed agrees with those expressions we find elsewhere concerning God,
Hos. 5.14. I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house
of Judah: I even I will tear and go away, etc. and that of Hezekiah, Esa.
38.13. as a lion so will he break all my bones.

And again thou show thy self mavelous upon me.] This may be understood
thus, that as formerly God had marvellously blessed Job, insomuch that he was
the greatest of all the men of the East, chap. 1.3. and for piety and grace
there was none like him in the earth, verse. 8. so now again God did as
marvellously punish him. But the most ordinary exposition I conceive is the
best, to wit, that as his sufferings were very great and bitter, so they were
successively renewed again and again upon him: and this phrase thou show thy
self mavelous upon me is used to imply, either that the plagues were
wonderful that God had laid upon him, insomuch that he was become a strange
spectacle of misery to all that looked upon him, and men therefore stood amazed
to behold his condition, and Gods dealing with him was, as if God intended him
for a president, upon whom he would show what he could do, and how many new
strange ways God had to torture him; or else that it was strange and
mavelous, that God who was so abundant in mercy and compassion should deal
with him, a man that feared God, as if it were some profane wretch that he had
in hand. However in those last words, ( upon me) there seems to be some
emphasis, and again thou show thy self mavelous upon me, that is, upon me
that am in a manner half dead already.

Verse. 17. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, etc.] That is, thou do
continually come upon me with new plagues, which are witnesses of thy
displeasure, and by mine uncomfortable friends are taken as evidences, whereby
thou bear witness for them against me, that thou do esteem me no better
then an hypocrite.

Changes and war are against me.] That is, changes of war: the meaning is
that many and diverse miseries and sorrows did continually assail him; as in the
war several troops and companies of soldiers do successively one after
another renew and maintain the fight, so it was with him, whose troops of
diverse calamities did successively afflict him, so that he was continually
assaulted, and had scarce any breathing time to rest himself.

Verse. 18. O that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!] Either he
wishes that he had died in the womb, that so wasting there away he had never
been born, and then no eye had seen him, which agrees with the foregoing words,
wherefore then have thou brought me forth out of my mothers womb? or else that
he had died in the womb or so soon as he was born, and so no eye had seen him
alive, or he should have been carried presently to his grave before there had
scarce any notice been taken of him. And indeed it may well be, as some
expositours conceive, that in that clause, that no eye had seen me, he had
respect to that great esteem amongst men, which he had formerly enjoyed, and so
his meaning might be to imply, that however in his former prosperity the eyes
of men had been much upon him, and he had been much observed, and respected of
all that knew him, yet considering the grievous miseries he had since suffered,
it had been happy for him if no eye had ever seen him.

Verse. 22. A land of darkness* without any order, and where the light is as
darkness.] A description this is of the grave or the region of death: and it
is said to be without order, because there are there no vicissitudes or
distinctions of times, persons, etc things disposed in order, which is indeed
the beauty of the land of the living: no vicissitudes of day and night, winter
and summer, joy and sorrow; no distinction of ages or degrees, the oldest do
not go thither first, and then the young, the rich first and after them the
poor; and when they are there, the bones and dust of Princes and beggars lie
confusedly tumbled together without any difference. As for the last clause
where the light is as darkness, the meaning is only this, that when the Sun
shines brightest elsewhere, there is nothing but pitchy darkness there: or
that there is nothing there but darkness; if we can imagine any thing to have
a show of light in the grave, that very light is as darkness.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. THen answered Zophar, etc.] The friends of Job, as became grave men,
took then turns in order, and so spoke to him one after another. Zophar
therefore having heard the several answers which Job had returned to Eliphaz
and Bildad, undertakes here in the third place to reproove and admonish him, as
the other two had done before him; only indeed the heat of contention in these
disputes, as is usually increasing by degrees, Zophar is somewhat more sharp
and bitter then the other two had been, insomuch that he forbears not
reproachful and reviling language, upbraiding him as a babbler, a liar, a
mocker, etc. so highly he was offended with Job, even to passion, to see that
after he had been twice reprooved, he should again break forth into the same
impatient complaints that he had used at the first, as we see he did in the
latter end of the foregoing chapter, wherefore then have thou brought me forth
out of the womb? etc.

Verse. 2. Should not the multitude of words be answered? etc.] We may observe
that Job had been hitherto much larger in his replies upon Eliphaz and Bildad,
then they had been in their speeches to him; and indeed considering how full
his heart was of sorrow, both by reason of the many miseries he suffered, and
especially their unjust censuring of him hereupon as an hypocrite, no wonder it
is, though he were abundant in pouring forth his complaints, and labored by
all the arguments he could to clear himself from their accusations. But Zophar
receiving no satisfaction from that which he had spoken, and therefore fretting
to hear him heap up so many words, as he conceived, to no purpose, (the rather
perhaps because he longed to vent what he had conceived in his mind to reply
upon him) he upbraids him with his multitude of words; and it is very probable
(as is noted before concerning Bildad, chap. 8.^.) that he interrupted Job, and
would not let him go on as he meant to have done, Should not, says he, the
multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of talk be justified?
wherein he would imply either 1. That it was not fit that he should run on as
he had done, and that no body should be suffered to speak but himself, and that
when men are thus talkative, not willing to hear any body crowd in a word with
them, they should be reprooved for it, and not be bolsterd up in their vain
babbling by the silence of those that stand by, but should be made to know that
in the multitude of words there wants not sin. Prove. 10.19. or 2. That it was
not fit that he should carry the cause away only with his pouring forth such a
multitude of words. Usually indeed men are unwilling to answer those that are
all tongue and talk, as knowing that it is to no purpose, it is not possible to
stop such men's mouths, they will have the last word; but yet because when
standers by are silent in this kind, they seem to give a tacit consent to the
truth of that which such bablers say, and so to justify that they have spoken,
therefore it is not fit such men should be unanswered; and as for Job he should
know, that let him talk never so long and with never so much eloquence set a
fair color upon an ill cause, that should not serve his turn, because they
were resolved to answer him, and to discover the weakness of all that he had
spoken.

Verse. 3. Should thy lies make men hold their peace?] Job had formerly appealed
to them, that he did not lie in that which he spoke, chap. 6.28; nor was there
indeed any great likelihood that he should lie, especially at this time when
the hand of God was so heavy upon him, and he looked for death as it were every
moment. But so confident Zophar was, as his other two friends before him had
been, that God would never have laid such sore and grievous judgments upon
him, had he not been an hypocrite, that thereupon he persuaded himself, that
what he had affirmed concerning his own integrity was utterly false, and that
he spoke not sincerely in all that he had spoken concerning the justice of God;
and so he upbraids Job with lying, and protests against a silent swallowing
down those untruths he had uttered; Should thy lies make men hold their peace?
we may read it also, Should thy devices make men hold their peace? But both
readings are much to the same effect, lies being nothing else but devised
untruths, according to that answer which Nehemiah returned to the false
accusations of Sanballat and his companions, Neh. 6.8. There are no such things
done as thou say, but thou feignest (or devisest) them out of thine own
heart. However the drift of Zophar in these words is evident, namely, that he
judged it an unreasonable thing to hold his peace, when he heard him utter such
gross falsehoods; and that though some men may have their mouths stopped with
a fair flourishing tale or plea, though there be never a word of truth in it,
and some may judge it in vain to argue with one that cares not what untruth he
utters; yet he thought it unfit to let him so carry it, but was resolved to
disproove those devises and falsehoods, wherewith he had sought to justify
himself.

And when thou mockest shall no man make thee ashamed?] As if he should have
said, it is impossible that a man that fears God should hear thee speak in such
a scornful flouting manner, as thou have done both of God and of the reproofs
and admonitions of thy friends, and not seek to discover thy folly and
wickedness herein to thy shame. Some conceive that Zophar speaks this in
reference to that which Job had said, chap. 10, 3, (as thinking he had spoken
that in a mocking manner) Is it good unto thee that thou should oppress?
that thou thouldest despise the work of thine hands, etc. and others refer it
to other passages. But I rather think that he speaks it more generally, as
apprehending that in many passages he had only made a mock of that which his
friends had spoken to him.

Verse. 4. For thou have said, My doctrine is pure and I am clean in thine
eyes.] His meaning is, that he had maintained that to be true which he had
spoken concerning God and his providence, the afflictions of the righteous and
the prosperity of the wicked, etc. and that he was innocent and upright before
God: and it may well be that Zophar spoke this in reference to that which Job
had said chap. 6, 10. I have not concealed the words of the Holy one. and again
verse. 30. Is there iniquity in my tongue? and so likewise, chap. 10.7. Thou
know that I am not wicked. But yet because Job had so clearly again and
again expressed himself, that he durst not justify himself before God, as
chap. 9.20. If I justify my self (says he) mine own mouth shall condemn me;
If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse, it is most probable,
that Zophar in these words intended not to charge him any farther then thus, to
wit, for saying that he by any secret wickedness or hypocrisy had not
provoked God to punish him so severely; for this Zophar judged a lie, and a
reproach of God, as holding that God would never have made him such a pattern
of misery, had he not been an hypocrite.

Verse. 5. But, O that God would speak and open his lips against thee.] Because
Job had wished that he might plead with God concerning his condition, chap.
9.34, 35. Let him take his rod away from me and let not his fear terrify me,
then would I speak and not fear him, and because he had for the most part in
the foregoing chapter directed his speech to God, verse. 2. I will say unto God,
do not condemn me; show me wherefore thou contendest with me, and because
withal Zophar apprehended, that he minded not what his friends said to him,
nothing that they spoke did the least good upon him, so that though it were his
turn now to speak, it would be to no purpose, therefore he wishes here that
God would by himself answer him, O that God would speak and open his lips
against thee, (which must needs be meant either of Gods convincing him by the
inward voice of his own spirit, or else rather of Gods speaking to him in a
vision, or by an audible voice from heaven, as afterward indeed he did, chap.
38.1.) hereby implying that if God should plead with him, or but open his lips
to speak a word to him (which yet after all his importunate desires he might
see God had refused to do) he would then see his folly, and would find that
God had in no degree dealt so severely with him.

Verse. 6. And that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are
double to that which is, etc.] A very difficult passage this is, so that there
are very few Expositours that agree in one judgment concerning the meaning of
it. By the secrets of wisdom may be meant, either the secrets of divine
instruction which men do not nor cannot sufficiently comprehend, or the
secrets of Gods purposes and counsels in the manifold dispensations of his
providence; and so accordingly by Gods showing Job that these secrets of
wisdom are double to that which is may be meant, either that the conformity
which God requires of man to his will, is double to that which is, that is,
far more then that which man apprehends, or which is found in the best; or
that the secret contrivements of God in the works of his providence are double
to that which is, that is, far more then what outwardly appears, or man can
comprehend: And indeed both these might be well intended by Zophar, his drift
being to imply to Job that God in his wisdom knew infinitely more that was
sinful and vild in him then he knew by himself, and that therefore that which
God in his wisdom knew might justly be laid upon him, was double to that
which he did undergo; for this agrees fully with that following clause, know
therefore that God exacteth of thee less then thine iniquity deserves.

Verse. 7. Can thou by searching find out God? etc.] That is, thou can not
by all thy possible endeavors search and find out God, to wit, to know him or
his ways and counsels perfectly; we may know him in part, much we may
understand concerning God by observing the footsteps of his power, wisdom,
and goodness in the creatures, but to know him exactly and unto perfection is
absolutely impossible; to express which that second clause is added* can
thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?

Verse. 8. It is as high as heaven, what can thou do? etc.] That is, if by
all we can do, we cannot exactly find out and know the height of the heaven,
or the depth of hell, or the length and breadth of the earth and Sea, how much
less shall we be able to comprehend him, or the wisdom of his providence,
who is infinite and therefore incomprehensible: and in all this Zophars aim
still is to show Job how foolish a thing it was to quarrel with God, because he
could not see the reason why he proceeded so severely with him.

Verse. 10. If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder
him?] The first word (which is in our translation If he cut off) may be
renderd, If he make a change. But however that be translated it is not easy to
say what is meant by that or the following words of shutting up and gathering
together. Some conceive that all these words do but express one and the same
thing, to wit, the Lords overturning the whole frame and course of nature, If
he cut off (or make a change) and shut up, or gather together, that is, if he
turn and change, destroy and subvert the whole frame and course of nature, and
so mingling things together should reduce all into a confused chaos again, then
who can hinder him? that is, no body can control him, or allege any just
reason why he should not do best in so doing; and hereby (they say) Zophar
gave Job to understand, that if God might thus change and break in pieces the
whole frame of nature, and be unquestionably wise in so doing, it were strange
that now he should be called in question for the subverting of his family
alone. Again others understand the words of two contrary dispensations of
providence, thus, that if God will deal well with some and ill with others, if
some he will destroy or shut up in prison, and others he will gather together
into towns, cities or provinces, or if he will at one time destroy or shut up,
and another time gather together and save the very same persons, all this he
may do in great wisdom. Again others by cutting off (or making a change)
understand the subverting and ruining people, families or persons, and by
shutting up the bringing of men into great streights and difficulties; but then
by gathering together they understand the gathering together his witnesses or
his armies for the condemning of those whom he intends to judge, or for the
cutting off those whom he has condemned; so that, I say, Expositours differ
much in their judgment concerning the meaning of these words. But yet however
the drift of the words seems to be clear, to wit, from the unsearchablenesse of
Gods wisdom to conclude, that whatsoever strange things God should do, yea
though he should overturn all things and mingle heaven and earth together, yet
it were not fit that men should question his proceedings therein. Indeed Job
himself had said as much before in effect, chap. 9, 12. Behold, he takes away,
who can hinder him? But it seems Zophar conceived that this could not agree
with other things that he had spoken, and therefore he presses him here with
this which himself had acknowledged.

Verse. 11. For he knows vain men, etc.] It is also very questionable how this
depends upon that which went before. 1. It may be added to show why God in
great wisdom does so diversely deal with the same men, sometimes blessing
them, and at other times again sorely afflicting them, to wit, because he
knows vain men, that is, he knows the vanity and inconstancy of men; such
is the fickleness of the best, that they are ever and anon ready to start
aside from the ways of righteousness, and therefore he cannot proceed with
them in one continued way and course of gentleness and favor. 2. It may be
added to show why it is not possible that any man should except against the
wisdom of any of Gods proceedings, to wit, because poor simple vain man is
altogether unable to comprehend the wisdom of God in the several
dispensations of his providence. But 3. It may be to show that when God is
pleased to make any alterations in the world, there is no hindering of him in
what he is resolved to do, for he knows vain men, that is, he knows that
poor frail man cannot in the least withstand his will, he may do what he will
with him; and 4. It may imply the reason why there is no excepting against the
wisdom of Gods proceedings, even when he does cut off and destroy, namely
because he knows vain men, that is, he knows exactly all that is amiss in
man; though poor simple man cannot comprehend the ways and wisdom of God,
yet God knows the vanity of man, the pronenesse of his nature to sin, and even
when there is nothing to be discerned that is not right in the outward
conversation, yet he knows the vanity that is in their hearts; so that men
may wonder at the afflictions of those that yet are most justly afflicted,
because they know not that evil in them which God knows by them. And this I the
rather think is principally intended, because hereto agree the following words,
he sees wickedness also, will he not then consider it? as if he should have
said, since God sees all the evil that is done by the children of men shall we
or can we think that God will pass it by as if it were nothing, and not lay it
to heart, to punish men for it? Noe surely.

Verse. 12. For vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild asses
colt.] Some conceive that man is here said to be born like a wild asses colt,
because indeed when they first come into the world there seems to be no more
knowledge and understanding in an infant newly born then in a wild asses colt
newly foaled; But I rather think that this phrase relates to that bruitishnesse
which is in all men naturally as they are born into the world since the fall of
our first parents, to wit, that they are no more able to comprehend the things
and ways of God, then a wild asses colt is able to comprehend matters of
reason. So that these words are I conceive added as in a way of derision, vain
man would be wise, etc. that is, foolish man has a high opinion of his own
wisdom, and will many times pretend to so much wisdom and understanding, as
to be able to judge of Gods ways, and to expostulate with God concerning his
works, whereas naturally, poor wretch, man is as brutish as unteachable, and
untractable for the understanding of the things of God, as a wild asses colt
is. This is I take it the clear meaning of the words; yet some would have the
meaning to be this, that vain man would be wise, that is, he would be made
wise, to wit, by Gods chastisements, though naturally he be as brutish, as
unteachable, and untractable in regard of such knowledge as the most stupid and
untamed creature that is.

Verse. 13. If thou prepare thine heart and stretch out thine hands toward
him.] That is, if thou will with all sincerity of heart pray to the Lord for
pardon and grace; for the stretching forth of the hands to heaven is the
gesture of those that pray, as we see in Solomon 1 Kings 8.22. whereby is
signified 1. The lifting up of the heart to God. 2. Their earnest desire and
assured hope of receiving from God what they beg of him. 3. A holy striving
with God, or an earnest intention of spirit as it were to take hold of God, and
4. Their yielding up themselves to God, as ready to do whatever he will have
them.

Verse. 14. If iniquity be in thine hand, etc.] That is, if there be any sinful
practice thou have been inured to; or if there be any thing unjustly gotten in
thy possession; put it far away, that is, abandon it utterly; And let not
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle, that is, neither walk thy self in any way
of wickedness, nor suffer those of thy family to do that which is evil in
Gods sight: though wickedness may get into thy house, yet when thou know
it, let it not stay there.

Verse. 15. For then shall thou lift up thy face without spot.] Job had said
chap. 10.15. If I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head, in reference to
this Zophar tells him here, that if he would with a prepared heart repent and
turn to the Lord, he might then lift up his head, Then shall thou lift up thy
face without spot, that is, then may thou walk cheerfully and comfortably,
and hold up thy face before God or man as any occasion is offered without fear
and without shame, Because when men have their faces spotted with dirt, they
are ashamed to show their faces, whereas if those spots be washed away then
they go abroad again without blushing or fear, therefore when a man can appear
before God, or man with a countenance not cast down, either through the guilt
of any foul spot of sin that lies upon him, or the shame of any reproach or
dishonor that lies upon him, or of any punishment wherewith God has testified
against him, he may be then said to lift up his face without spot.

Yea thou shall be steadfast and shall not fear.] The first clause, thou shall
be steadfast may be meant, 1. Of the steadfastness of his outward condition, to
wit, that being upon his true repentance received into Gods favor he should be
established in a sure and steadfast prosperous condition; whereas when
hypocrites are in a prosperous estate, there is no certainty of their continuance
therein, they stand in a slippery place, being ever in danger of a dismal
change and fall, his prosperity should be steadfast and permanent; free from all
danger of the return of any such calamities as now he had suffered, and 2. Of
the steadfastness of his mind, to wit, that he should have a settled and
composed mind through the assurance of Gods favor, and so free from all
distraction of fear; and then thou shall be steadfast is explained by the
following words and shall not fear. Because men in fear are always full of
many roving distracted thoughts, sometimes suggesting this or that evil which
they fear will come upon them, and sometimes contriving diversely what course
they should take to help themselves, hence. they say is this expression, thou
shall be steadfast and shall not fear. I know there are some that include in
this promise likewise that spiritual steadfastness whereby he should be
preserved from relapsing into sin; But I cannot see that this is so clear in
the words.

Verse. 16. Because thou shall forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that
pass away.] That is, thou shall quite forget all thy former misery, or at
least thou shall scarcely or very little remember it: for three things the
expression here used may imply; 1. That he should so long be freed from those
calamities that had afflicted him, that he should in a manner forget that ever
he had been so afflicted. 2. That he should be so perfectly delivered from
those manifold miseries and calamities that he now lay under, that there should
not be the least memorial left of them, to put him in mind of what he had
suffered, thou shall remember it as waters that pass away, that is, as a
land-floud though it overflow all for a time, yet passes away and is gone on a
sudden, and then there is no sign of it left, to make one think there had ever
been such mighty streams of water there, so should he be freed from those
floods of affliction that had broken in upon him, insomuch that there should be
no memorial of them left, but they should quite be forgotten. 3. That God
should so abundantly bless him with all blessings inward and outward, that his
present prosperity should quite put out of his mind all his former misery; even
as the waters that run by in a river are no sooner out of sight then out of
mind, by reason of a new supply of water that comes still in the room of that
which passes away. And indeed usually in the Scripture an eminency of
prosperity is expressed in these terms, that it should be such as should make
them forget their former sorrows, as Genesis 41.51. where Joseph being highly
advanced in Egypt called his firstborn son Manasseh, and gave this reason for
it, For God, said he, has made me forget all my toil, and Esa. 54.4. Thou
shall forget the shame of thy youth, and shall not remember the reproach of thy
widow-hood any mo^e, and John 16.21. A woman when she is in travail has
sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon as she is delivered of the child,
she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.
and 4. That at least he should remember his former miseries without the least
distress, or anxiety of mind for fear they should return again upon him; for
this is to remember his misery, as waters that pass away, which being once
gone can never possibly turn back again.

Verse. 17. And thine age shall be clearer then the noon day; thou shall shine
forth, thou shall be as the morning. That is, thine adversity shall be suddenly
changed into exceeding great prosperity; and so the remainder of thy time or
life, even thine old age, which thou give for lost, of which thou make no
reckoning, and which thou expectest will yield thee nothing but weakness and
sorrow, shall be the prime part of thy days for joy and glory. To signify
that his joy and glory should be exceeding great, it is said that his age
should be clearer then the noon day: and to signify it should come suddenly
after a sad night of affliction and should then continually increase more and
more, it is said that he should shine forth and be as the morning.

Verse. 18. And thou shall be secure because there is hope, etc.] That is, being
in this prosperous condition, thou shall be fearlesse of any such sad changes
as have now befallen thee, and that because thou shall then upon thy repentance
have assured hope and confidence in Gods love and favor; to which purpose also
is that which follows, yea thou shall dig about thee, and thou shall take thy
rest in safety, for thereby is meant, either that he should follow his
husbandry, digging and ploughing his ground without any fear of an enemy, or
digging for water for his flocks and herds without any to withstand him, yea
figuratively it may be meant of the labors of any calling, as Luke 16.3. or 2.
That he should sleep as securely, as those do that have dug some deep
trench about them, to secure them from the breaking in of an enemy upon them,
or 3. That if he did but build an house (for digging may be put for the digging
of the foundation of a house) or dig a place to pitch his tent in, and withal
some little trench about it (as the Arabians in those times used to do, to
which Zophar seems here to allude) he should enjoy himself safelier herein then
otherwise he would do in a walled city.

Verse. 19. Many shall make suit unto thee.] That is, being so greatly enriched
and highly exalted, many both great and small, yea even those that now insult
over thee, shall crouch and bow before thee, and sue to thee for favor. Little
did Zophar indeed think that this which he now promised Job should be
accomplished in him, and his two companions Eliphaz and Bildad, that did now so
harshly censure him. But yet so we see it was when the Lord sent them to Job
humbly to desire him that he would pray for them, chap. 42.8, 9.

Verse. 20. But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, etc.] Because the fixing of
the eye long upon one place to look for any thing does much weaken the sight,
especially when also men weep much, by reason that they so earnestly desire and
look for comes not (for nothing marres the eyes more then weeping, Lam. 2.11.
Mine eyes do fail with tears) therefore when men in misery do earnestly wait
for deliverance or comfort and all in vain, it is usually expressed in the
Scripture by this phrase of the failing of the eyes, as Psalm. 69.3. Mine eyes
fail while I wait for my God: and so here to express that wicked men shall in
vain expect any help from God in their distress, he says the eyes of the
wicked shall fail, and then adds, they shall not escape, and their hope shall
be as the giving up of the ghost, the meaning whereof is either 1. That after
all their expectation the end of their hope shall be a miserable death, or that
they shall die in their misery, either by making themselves away in despair, or
by some other way of Gods just vengeance upon them, or 2. That in the
conclusion they should come to be in as hopeless and desperate a condition, as
is a man when he is giving up the ghost, or 3. That their hope should come to
nothing, even as the breath of a man vanishes to nothing when he gives up the
ghost, and therefore indeed some translate this clause thus, their hope shall
be as a puff of breath. Now the main drift of this was to give Job a hint,
that if he continued in his wickedness and did not repent, this at last would
be his portion.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 2. NO doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you.]
Because Zophar had interrupted Job when he was speaking, charging him with
babbling forth a multitude of words to no purpose, yea with uttering many lies
and falsehoods, chap. 11.2, 3. and had in effect, though covertly verse. 12.
compared Job to a wild asses colt, Job therefore undertaking here to reply upon
him upbraids Zophar, and together with him his other two friends also, who had
all run on in the same strain, with the high conceit which they had of
themselves, and their contempt of others; and this he does not out of hatred or
envy, not as scorning or disdaining his friends, but merely to reproove them
for their vainglorious exalting of themselves and despising of him: No doubt
but ye are the people, etc. It is ironically spoken; and that which he upbraids
them with is, either that they carried themselves, as if they thought that what
they said was in effect as much, as if all the people in the world, or the
whole people where they lived had said it, and that because they were the great
Oracles for wisdom, to whose sayings all the people would be ready to
subscribe; or else rather that they thought themselves the men, that is, the
only wise men in the world, that no body knew any thing but they, all were
fools yea bruit beasts in comparison of them; insomuch that if they died, all
wisdom must needs die with them, there would be nothing but darkness where
their Sun shined not; and thus it is much to the same purpose, as is that
ironicall expression of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.10. We are fools for Christ's
sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak but ye are strong, etc.

Verse. 3. But I have understanding as well as you, I am not inferior to you,
etc.] As if he had said, I see not but that through the grace of God, I am able
to understand and judge of things as well as you, nor am, at least in this
cause that I have pleaded against you, one whit inferior to you. Now this he
adds also, not in a way of bragging and boasting, as vainglorious men are wont
to do, but only to plead so far for himself, that his friends might not
slight what he said out of an overweening conceit of their own surpassing
wisdom. And indeed the following clause shows that it was not from any high
conceit of himself that he had spoken this; for therein he makes so little of
that which they had spoken, that it could not seem pride in him to equal
himself with them, yea, says he, who knows not such things as these? that
is, such things as these that you have uttered, and which you magnify as such
high points of wisdom, namely that God is infinitely wise and just, and is
wont to do good to the godly and to punish the wicked; every one, man or
woman, that is but of ordinary understanding is able to say as much as this;
and therefore there is no reason why you should so exceedingly exalt your
selves for the profound wisdom of that which you have spoken.

Verse. 4. I am as one mocked of his neighbor, who calls upon God and he
answers him, etc.] The greatest difficulty in these words is, whereto that
clause must be referred, who calls upon God and he answers him: Some
refer it to the man that is mocked of his neighbor, and accordingly they
conceive that those words who calls upon God and he answers him are added,
1. To imply that he means a holy righteous man that is mocked of his neighbor,
one who though he be scorned and despised by those amongst whom he lives, yet
God makes precious account of him, and is always ready to hear and answer him
when he calls upon him; and hence those words are added in the following
clause, the just upright man is laughed to scorn. 2. To imply the danger of
those that do mock such a man, and that because if the good man that is thus
despised of his neighbor do call upon God and make his complaint to him, God
will answer his prayers and take his part against his neighbor that mocketh
him. But then again others refer those words to the mocking neighbor, I am
as one mocked of his neighbor, who, that is, which mocking neighbor, calls
upon God and he answers him; and accordingly also they conceive that these
words are added to imply the prosperity of such a mocker, as if it had been
said, I am as one mocked of his neighbor who lives in plenty and prosperity,
God affording him whatever his own heart can desire: let him but ask or wish
for any thing God answers him and grants him his desire, yea and many times
more then he desires, and so being in a prosperous condition himself he can
mock and despise him that is in misery. And indeed though wicked men do never
truly pray and call upon God, nor does God ever regard such prayers as they
make, yet even of such it may be said, that they call upon God and he answers
them, because the light of nature teaches them to wish as it were, and in some
kind to seek the good they desire of God, and commonly it is said of such
prosperous men, that they are heavens favorites, and that God does for them
whatever they will. But however, the drift of Job in these words is manifest,
to wit, covertly to blame them, for despising him as they had done. He had told
them that he had understanding as well as they; but, says he, it fares with me
as with many other good men that being in affliction are despised even of their
nearest neighbors and friends, that live in a high and prosperous condition.

Verse. 5. He that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in the
thought of him that is at ease.] The drift of these words is the same with
those in the foregoing verse. By a man ready to slip with his feet is meant one
that is ready to sink under heavy calamities that lie upon him, one that is
like to be utterly ruined and undone, in such desperate danger that there seems
to be but a step betwixt him and death, he is every moment ready to fall under
the heavy hand of God that is upon him; this is evident by many other places,
as Deuteronomy. 32.35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense, their foot shall
slide in due time. Psalm. 38.16, 17. When my foot slippeth they magnify
themselves against me, for I am ready to halt and my sorrow is continually
before me* and Psalm. 94.18. when I said, My foot slippeth; thy mercy, O Lord,
held me up. Again on the other side that man is said to be at ease that lives
in prosperity, and is not disquieted with the least affliction and sorrow, as
we see Psalm. 123.4. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those
that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud, and thereto agrees that
of the rich man, Luke 12.19. I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods
laid up for many years, take thine ease, etc. And lastly therefore whereas it
is said here that he that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp despised
in the thought of him that is at ease, the meaning of this expression is, that
men brought low by affliction are slighted and despised by those that are
inprosperity, as poor, base, and worthless things. When a link or torch is
burnt so far away that we can hold it no longer, when a candle is spent to
the very snuff, though before they did us very good service, yet then they are
of no farther use, but are like to be noisome, and therefore we cast them away
and tread them under foot, and so when men formerly of great esteem come to
sink in affliction, those that are themselves in prosperity mind them no more
then the snuff of a candle. And thus Job shows the reason why his friends did
so despise him and regard his words so little; it was because he was brought so
low, and they were at ease and felt not the least of that which he suffered.
But yet withal too there is in these words a transition to that which next
follows, to wit, the disprooving of that which his friends had jointly
affirmed, concerning the certain prosperity of the righteous, and the misery of
the wicked: Zophar had told Job that if he would repent and turn unto God, his
age should be clearer then the Sun at noonday, chap. 11.17. but Job here tells
him, that so far are the righteous from being always in such a glorious
condition, that they are many times as a despised lamp, etc.

Verse. 6. The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are
secure, etc.] Having reprooved Zophar and the rest of his friends for scorning
him as they had done, and despising what he had spoken, here he undertakes to
disproove that which they had all so stiffly maintained, to wit, that the
righteous do always prosper for outward things, and that the wicked are ever
outwardly punished, and particularly that wherewith Zophar had concluded his
speech, chap. 11.20. The eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not
escape, etc. alleging that none have usually such abundance of all outward
things as the worst of men that carry themselves most insolently both toward
God and man; and it is like that he instanceth the rather in the tabernacles of
robbers as in relation to the Sabeans and Chaldeans that had robbed him of his
cattle.

Verse. 7. But ask now the beasts and they shall teach thee etc.] That which is
most questionable in these words and that which follows in the two next verses
is, how they have dependence upon that which went before. Some conceive that
herein also Job still proceeds to prove that God does nor always either
bless the righteous with outward blessings, or else cut off and destroy the
wiched; and two ways there are which Job might intend, whereby this might be
learnt, even from the unreasonable and senseless creatures: for 1. This may be
clearly gathered from hence, that even amongst beasts, and foul, and fishes,
none fare better then those that are most fierce and ravenous, and live
altogether by rapine and devouring those that are not so strong as themselves,
and on the other side none fare worse then those that are best and gentlest,
and least harmfull to others, those that live upon prey will be fat and in good
liking, when others it may be are ready to famish for want of food, and we see
in daily experience that the pheasant and partridge the fowler looks after,
when the kite and vulture are never minded; and thus it is too with beasts and
fishes, there are multitudes more killed daily of those that are gentle and
harmless, then of those that are most mischievous and feed altogether upon the
blood of others, yea and amongst the plants of the earth, we use to observe
that ill weeds grow apace, and poisonous plants do often flourish and spread
faster then those that are most useful and most acceptable amongst men. Now
since we may conclude with Job that none can be ignorant, but that these things
are done thus by the special Providence of God, verse. 9. who knows not in
all these that the hand of the Lord has wrought this? we may gather from
thence, that if God by his providence, does for the glory of his own Name order
it thus amongst the other creatures, why may he not also order it so amongst
men, they being also the work of his own hand, and made for his glory as well
as the rest. And again 2. It may be gathered from hence, that none have such
plenty of the creatures, beasts, foul or fish, none have so great a portion of
the earth as the wicked usually have; so that all the creatures do proclaim the
certainty of this truth. But then others again conceive, that because Zophar
had such high thoughts of that which he had spoken concerning the
incomprehensible wisdom and power of God, therefore Job shows him, that every
ordinary man might learn as much as that concerning God, though he had no other
instructers then the dumb unreasonable and senseless creatures; Zophar had
said, to set forth the transcendent wisdom of God, that it was as high as
heaven, and deeper then hell, etc. chap. 11.8. Job here answers him that there
was no need to climb up into heaven, or to descend down into hell to find out
this, since we may learn it from every creature that we behold with our eyes;
by every beast, bird, fish or plant we may easily learn this, that the God that
made them must needs be a God of infinite and incomprehensible both wisdom
and might.

Verse. 11. Does not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat?] As if he
should have said, and so likewise does the mind of man discern these spiritual
truths concerning God, which are taught by the Creatures; that which the dumb
creatures proclaim concerning the wisdom, power, and providence of God, the
reasonable soul of man may as plainly and easily discern, as the ear discerns
words, or the mouth tastes meats; These are not such hidden mysteries as you
would pretend, they may be easily discovered even by the outward senses. Thus
very many Expositours understand this clause, and so take it as added by way of
amplifying what is said in the foregoing verses, concerning the clear discovery
that is made of Gods incomprehensible wisdom and power in every one of the
creatures. But yet there is another exposition that is given of these words,
which is judged by many better then the former. Does not the ear try words? and
the mouth taste his meat? that is, as the mouth does discern the taste of meats,
what is sweet and what is sour, what has a pleasant, what an unpleasant
relish, so is the ear to judge of words we hear spoken, to wit, whether they be
true or false, what is wisely and what is foolishly spoken. And if we thus
understand the words, then the drift of Job therein must be, either to show the
reason why he did not immediately embrace all for truth which they had spoken
(which it seems they expected he should have done, and therefore were offended
that he did oppose them) it was because his ears were given him to hear what
was spoken, that then he might judge of it, even as his mouth was to judge of
the taste of his meat: or else to answer that which Bildad had said, chap. 8.8,
9. Enquire I pray thee of the former age, and prepare thy self to the search of
their fathers; for we are but of yesterday and know nothing, etc. showing that
we are not to be carried away merely with the learning or age of the speaker,
but by the ear must judge of what is spoken, even as by the mouth we judge of
the taste of meats that are set before us; or else rather by way of reprooving
his friends, because they slighted and disregarded his words, yea because they
misconstrued what he had spoken, and that for want of due pondering and
considering his words, Does not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his
meat? as if he had said, ought you not to let your ears do their office, which
is to attend to that which I speak, and not thus to slight what I say, and so
for want of well weighing my words to misunderstand and pervert what I have
spoken? And indeed because Elihu uses the same expression, thereby to persuade
Job and his friends well to mind what he would say, chap. 34.2, 3. Hear my
words, O ye wise men, and give ear unto me ye that have knowledge; for the ear
tries words, as the mouth tastes meat, this is that I conceive which Job also
chiefly intended in these words.

Verse. 12. With the ancient is wisdom and in length of days understanding.]
Either this is added, as a farther illustration of that which he had said
concerning the knowledge of God which may be learnt from the creatures, namely
that hence it comes to pass that ancient men, that have many years observed
what God has discovered in the works of creation, are therefore better able to
judge of these things then young men are; and some are of opinion, that Job
might herein covertly strike at some of his friends that were younger then he,
and yet insulted over him, as if he were not worthy to speak to them. But yet
because elsewhere it seems evident that these friends of Job were very aged
men, chap. 15.10. With us are both the gray headed and very aged men, much
elder then thy father, says Eliphaz; and Elihu speaking to these friends of
Job, chap. 32.6, 7. I am, says he, young and ye are very old; wherefore I was
afraid, and durst not show mine opinion, I said, Days should speak and
multitude of years should teach wisdom, I should rather think that this is
added, either in answer to that which Bildad had said, chap. 8.8, 9. concerning
enquiring of the aged (of which mention is made above in the foregoing Note) or
at least in answer to the high opinion, which his friends might have of their
great wisdom because of their years, wherein he first yields, that it is true
indeed that with the ancient is wisdom, that is, they have had a fair
advantage for the gaining of wisdom; but then adds in the following verse
what does plainly imply, that yet all the wisdom in man, however it is to be
esteemed in it self, is no better then vanity if it come to be compared with
the wisdom of God; and that therefore we ought not so to prize the judgment
of men of great years, as therefore to reject any truth which God has taught
us.

Verse. 13. With him is wisdom and strength, he has counsel and
understanding.] Some indeed conceive that Job here expresses what it is that
men learn concerning God from the creatures; to wit, that with him, (that is,
with God) is wisdom and strength, etc. But rather, as is noted on the former
verse, this is added as by way of correcting or opposing what was said there
concerning the wisdom of the aged; Nay, says he, with him, that is, with
God, is both wisdom and power too, and that in such a transcendent manner,
that the wisdom that is in the wisest of men is not worthy the name of
wisdom in comparison of that which is in God; he is essentially, infinitely,
incomprehensibly wise and mighty; and this unsearchable wisdom he daily
exercises in disposing all things that are done in the world.

Verse. 14. He shuts up a man and there can be no opening.] That is, if he
undertake to shut up a man for ever, either in prison or in any streights of
distress, or under the power of any sickness or calamity whatever, there is
no possibility ever to find out any way to set such a man free.

Verse. 15. Behold, he withholdeth the waters and they dry up, etc.] That is, he
withholdeth the waters from above, the rain, and then the waters beneath in
ponds, lakes, brooks and rivers do soon dry up: or it may be understood without
any such distinction of the waters above and the waters beneath, to wit, that
if God commands that there shall be a drought and forbears to give a supply of
water either by rain from above, or springs and fountains beneath, there will
soon be no water left, which agrees fully with that of the prophet Nahum,
chap. 1.4. He rebukes the sea and makes it dry, and dries up all the rivers;
yea and then all things growing in such places are dried and parched up too;
also he sends them out and they overturn the earth, that is, the fruits and
inhabitants of the earth where these floods of water come.

Verse. 16. With him is strength and wisdom, etc.] This is the very same that
Job had said before verse. 13. (for though in the original there be not the
same words here and there, yet they are to the same purpose and meaning, and
therefore are rendered by our Translatours with the same words) and two
probable reasons may be given, why here he should so immediately repeat the
same thing again; as 1. Because that verse. 13. might be only intended to show
what God is in himself, to wit, that he is a God of infinite wisdom and
might; and then this here he might add, either to show that this wisdom and
might of God is every moment discovered in his wise and wonderful ordering of
all things that are, and that are done in the world, or else that all the
strength and wisdom that is in the creature comes from him and is at his
disposing, so that he gives and takes it away as seems good in his own eyes,
and 2. Because being now to instance in works of providence, that are far
more above the reach of man's reason, then any thing he had yet spoken of, he
repeats again here that which he said before concerning the wonderful power
and wisdom of God, thereby as it were, to curb men from quarrelling and
contending with God about such things, which is most clear in the first
particular he alleges in the words that immediately follow, The deceived and
the deceiver are his, that is, they are both alike under Gods all-ordering
power and command, who is the Sovereign Lord of the whole world, and are herein
guided by his providence, and made to serve his counsels and glory; when one
man seduceth another into any error, or any other way gulls and deceives him,
there is a hand of God herein, it is by the decree, and appointment, and
providence of God, that the one attempts to deceive and that the other is
deceived by him. At this and such like truths naturally men are ready to
startle, questioning how it can stand with the justice and holiness of God,
that he should have any hand in the ordering of such things as this, (and yet
we see the Scripture does often expressly affirm it, as Ezekiel. 14.9. If the
prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that
prophet, and 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. God shall send them strong delusion that they
should believe a lie) To prevent therefore men's cavilling at such truths as
this, this clause is here prefixed again, with him is strength and wisdom,
intimating that even these things could not be done without the concurrence of
Gods almighty and all-ruling power, and that all that he does he does with
great wisdom, though we cannot comprehend how it should be.

Verse. 17. He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the judges fools,.]
The meaning of these words is plainly this, that God many times makes fools of
the wisest of men, such as are counselors and judges, who are usually esteemed
the great Oracles of wisdom in the several places and times wherein they
live, according to that prayer of David, when he heard that Ahithophel that
great Politician sided with his son Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.31. O Lord, I pray thee,
turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness, to wit, either by a real
depriving them of their wisdom and understanding (and in that sense some
Expositours conceive that they are here said to be spoiled, that is, stripped
of those abilities of mind, which formerly they had) or else by infatuating
them so that they speak and do those things, which one would think none but
fools or mad men should speak or do, or else by crossing them so in all their
subtle plots and devices, that all their wisdom prooves no better then
folly; and indeed thus some understand the word ( spoiled) in the first clause,
namely that he causes counselors notwithstanding their great wisdom to be
carried into captivity, spoiled and stripped of all their riches and dignity
and power, whence it is that the vanquishing and captivity of Egypt is
expressed thus, Esa. 19.11, 13. Surely the Princes of Zoan are fools, the
counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish. However because
God is manifested by his vanquishing and ruining the great Politicians of the
world, especially when they proudly opposed him and his kingdom, it may well
be said that he leads them away spoiled, as Princes are wont to do those they
have vanquished in a way of triumph.

Verse. 18. He loses the bond of kings and girdeth their loins with a girdle.]
Three several ways this may be understood, to wit, 1. That when kings are in
bonds, the Lord many times freeth them from their captivity and bondage (as he
did Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.13.) and restores them to the Regal dignity again;
for the girdle about the loins is sometimes mentioned in the Scripture as an
ornament of princes, and therefore in allusion thereto it is said of Christ,
Isa. 11.5. Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness
the girdle of his reins. See Ier. 13.1, etc. or 2. That he many times degradeth
kings and deposes them from the Regal state (for by the bond of kings may be
meant the Regal or military Belt wherewith they are girded, and so the loosing
thereof may well signify their being deprived of their Sovereignty) and that
they are brought to the mean condition of other ordinary men, he girdeth their
loins with a girdle; or 3. (which I like the best) that he often sets subjects
free from the bondage of kings (for by the bond of kings may be meant that
authority and power, whereby the people are held as bondslaves in subjection
to them) and then brings those kings to be themselves in a very low and mean,
yea a servile and captivated condition; for because in the Eastern countries,
where they wore long garments, in all preparations for travel or labor they
used to gird themselves; therefore girding with a girdle is often mentioned in
the Scripture as the posture and habit of servants, according to that of the
Lord to his servant, Luke. 17.8. Make ready wherewith I may sup and gird thy
self and serve me, and so also Luke 12.37.

Verse. 20. He remooveth away the speech of the trusty.] By the trusty
understand men of sure credit, men of such sufficiency and faithfulness for
instruction or advice, that princes and others may safely rest and rely upon
them, men actually trusted or worthy to be trusted with public affairs; and it
is said that God remooveth away the speech of such trusty men, either when he
takes away such men, and perhaps sends in their room either flatterers or
fools, according to that, Isa. 3.1, 2, 3. For behold, the Lord, the Lord of
hosts does take away from Jerusalem and from Judah -- The judge, and the
prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, etc. or else when such as were
trusty before become weak or faithless, and so are unable to instruct or
advise, or else teach falsehoods or give ill counsel; or when he causes men
not to give any credit to their advice, which he often does in a way of
punishment for the sins of a people.

Verse. 21. He pours contempt upon Princes, and weakneth the strength of the
mighty.] To wit, either by depriving them of their strength, or by crossing
them so in all their enterprises that they are as men that have no power to
effect any thing they go about. This last clause is in the Original and
loses the girdle of the strong; for because girding causes strength, and men
are the more steady and nimble when their armor or garments are girt close
about them, especially in those countries where they wore long garments, hence
this phrase of loosening the girdle of the strong is used for making the strong
weak, or opposing them so that they are not able to do what they endeavor,
but are as men that are clogged and hampered with their long loose garments.

Verse. 22. He discovers deep things out of darkness and brings out to
light the shadow of death] Some refer this to Gods revealing to his prophets
the interpretation of dreams and visions, and discovering things that should
long after come to pass; others to his bringing to light the most hidden
things, which seemed to be buried in perpetual darkness, such as are the
secret plots and conspiracies of enemies, (which may also be called the shadow
of death, because the dangers thereof are terrible and horrible as death;) yea
some refer it to Gods rending asunder the earth with earthquakes, whereby
those inward depths of the earth are discovered, which otherwise would never
have been seen. But doubtless the meaning of the words is general, to wit,
that there is nothing so secret but God does many times bring it to light; and
it may well be too which some conceive, that this particular is added the
rather to intimate that by such discovering of the hellish secrets of many men,
he makes it evident that he does not execute the judgments before mentioned
merely to exercise a tyrannical power over his creatures, but that he has
just cause to do as he does, though we know it not.

Verse. 23. He increases the nations and destroys them; he enlarges the
nations and streighteneth them again.] That is, he mightily increases the
number of a people and then destroys them, and brings them to a handful
again; and so likewise he many times enlarges their territories, dominion,
power and wealth, and then brings them again into as great streights and as
low a condition as ever before.

Verse. 24. He takes away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth,
etc.] By the chief of the people of the earth may be meant either the Princes
and Rulers of each nation, or those that are the chief and choicest amongst a
people for wisdom and courage, etc. and it is said that God takes away the
heart of these men, and causes them to wander in a wilderness, etc. because
he many times deprives them of their wisdom and understanding, and brings
them into unavoidable streights, into a desperate lost condition, so that they
are as men in a wood or wilderness not knowing which way to turn themselves,
yea as blind and drunken men that grope at noonday as if it were night, and
thereupon enter upon ways which no wise man ever trod, and take up resolutions
and counsels that are most pernicious to themselves and others. This I
conceive is the true meaning of the words, yet some understand it literally
that God takes away all heart and courage from them, and so causes them to go
into desolate wildernesses to hide themselves.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. Lo, mine eye has seen all this, etc.] The drift of Job in these two
verses is the same, as in that he had said before chap. 12.2, 3. (concerning
which therefore see the Notes there) to upbraid his friends for despising him
out of a high conceit which they had of themselves, by willing them to observe
from what he had now spoken, that he understood as much concerning the justice,
the wisdom, the power and providence of God as they did.

Verse. 3. Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with
God.] Zophar had said chap. 11.5. O that God would speak* and open his lips
against thee, and that as deriding Jobs former confidence in wishing he might
plead his cause with God; in reference hereto therefore Job here professes
that he was still of the same mind, Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I
desire to reason with God, as if he had said, I could say much more to you, but
however confident you are, that it would go ill with me if God should grant me
my wish herein, I still desire rather that I might plead my cause with the
Almighty; not as with an adversary but as before my judge; not to accuse him
for any thing he has done to me, (which never came into my thoughts) but to
justify my self against your false accusations, and modestly to desire to be
informed by him why his hand is so heavy upon me, which as yet I profess I
understand not: You judging of me by what I suffer, and misconstruing all that
I speak, do most unjustly condemn me for an hypocrite; but now God is
omniscient, and knows the integrity of my heart, and besides he is true and
just and will therefore certainly bear witness to the truth, and justify his
servant whom you condemn; so that though I know God in his majesty must needs
be terrible to his enemies, yet trusting in mine integrity I should desire to
plead my cause before him.

Verse. 4. But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.] 1.
Because they had affirmed that God never laid such sore afflictions upon any
righteous man, as he had done upon him, and thence concluded that he was a
wicked hypocrite, but yet withal had very cunningly and artificially composed
their speeches with many fair flourishes and plausible pretenses, that they
spoke what they spoke merely out of zeal for Gods glory, to defend his
unquestionable justice and holiness, and out of a desire to win Job to repent
of his wickedness, and so to seek reconciliation with God, thence is that
expression, But ye are forgers of lies, much like that Psalm. 50.19. Thou give
thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit; and so also he retorts upon
them that sin of lying, wherewith they had unjustly before charged him, chap.
11.3. and 2. Because misjudging of him, and so not rightly applying the truth
they had delivered, under a pretense of comforting him, they had added to his
afflictions and done what in them lay to drive him to despair, and all their
exhortations that he should repent, etc. were to no purpose, therefore he
terms them physicians of no value, as being herein like to unskilful
physicians, who not considering or not understanding the disease of their
patients, give them good medicines, but altogether improper for such a disease,
and so do them more hurt then good. The expression is to the same sense with
that where he calls them miserable comforters, chap. 16.2.

Verse. 5. O that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your
wisdom.] Zophar had protested that he could not hold his peace, and suffer
Job to run on as he had done, chap. 11.3. Should thy lies make men hold their
peace? etc. and it seems in relation hereto Job now tells him, that considering
how false and to no purpose that was that he had spoken, as was employed in the
foregoing verse, it would be a part of greater wisdom if both he and the rest
of his friends would hold their peace, and so hearken to what he should say to
them, and that had they continued silent as they were at first, when for seven
days together they sat by him and spoke not one word to him, chap. 2.13. they
had never discovered so much folly as now they had done; which agrees fully
with that of Solomon, Prove. 17, 28, Even a fool when he holds his peace is
counted wise, and he that shuts his lips is esteemed a man of understanding.

Verse. 7. Will you speak wickedly for God and talk deceitfully for him?] They
speak wickedly for God that under a pretense of pleading for God, do speak any
thing that is evil or wicked, or which if it be well examined does indeed tend
to the great dishonor of God; and so also they talk deceitfully for him that
maintain that which in their own consciences they know is not true, and yet
they cunningly set a fair gloss upon it and carry the matter with a great show
of zeal for God, and for the defense of his justice: Now this Job charge upon
his friends, because under a pretense of pleading for God they accused Job to
be a wicked man, though they had long experience of him and knew to the
contrary. and because they affirmed that God were not just if he should so
severely punish a righteous man, which was indeed dishonorable to God, as if
God might not justly correct the most innocent man, or do with his own
creatures what seemed good in his own eyes? Will you speak wickedly for God?
etc. as if he should have said, can you judge it right to patronise Gods cause
with lies? Has he need of any such defense? or do you think he will like it
that you should plead his cause in such a manner?

Verse. 8. Will ye accept his person, etc.] That is, will you as by way of
gratifying God speak that for him, which you in your own consciences know is
not right and true? as those do that accept the persons of great men, and so
not regarding the cause but the person, will speak any thing in favor of them,
though they know it to be never so false; And to the same sense we must
understand the next clause, will ye contend for God? that is, will you thus
contend and wrangle for God against that which you know to be just and right?
To contend for the glory of God in a right manner is exceeding commendable; but
that which Job upbraids his friends with in these words is, that they should
think, as it were, to do God a pleasure by speaking that which was false in
his defense.

Verse. 9. Is it good that he should search you out? etc.] As if he had said,
you cancannot be ignorant that God knows all that is in your hearts more
exactly, then men can know any thing which with greatest diligence they search
into; so that how zealous soever you seem for God, and how cunningly soever you
frame your accusations against me, if that you have spoken have proceeded more
from corrupt passion then true zeal, more from a desire to conquer, then to
comfort me; if you deal not heartily and sincerely with me, if you charge me
with that which in your consciences you know is not true, and that as it were
to collogue and curry favor with him, or if you do indeed think in your hearts
that God is unjust if he punishes the righteous, God will find this out, and
can you think that this will be any advantage to you? Take heed, you cannot
mock and deceive God, as one man mocketh and deceives another.

Verse. 10. He will surely reproove you, if ye do escretly accept persons.] If
you unjustly accuse me, that thereby you may seem to gratify God, though you
do this never so secretly and cunningly under a pretense of maintaining his
justice, he he will reproove you and punish you for it; though from men this
may be concealed, God will discover it and make you smart for it.

Verse. 11. Shall not his excellency make you afraid? etc.] That is, shall not
the majesty of God scare you from thinking to deal with God, as you would deal
with a man as your selves?

Verse, 12. Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of
clay.] By their remembrances may be meant, either particularly their fame and
memorial after their death, or else more generally whatever was excellent and
worthy to be remembered concerning them, as their great honor, power, wealth,
their high esteem, and the memorable acts they had done whilst they lived. So
that this is doubtless added as a reason of that he had said in the foregoing
words, that the majesty of God might well scare them from thinking to deal with
God, as they had done, to wit, because of their base and despicable condition
in regard of that transcendent excellency that was in God: Your remembrances
are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of clay, As if he should have said,
how dare such vile and contemptible creatures as you are, in whom all that is
most memorable shall come to nothing, as ashes that are scattered with a puff
of wind and are seen no more, even your very bodies no better then earthen pots
or heaps of clay, how dare you speak of God as you have done? Consider your
condition what you are in comparison of God, and you will see your folly in
thinking to come in with your lies to help him, as it were at a dead lift. The
expression is much like that chap. 4.19. concerning which see the Note there.
Some indeed understand this to have been spoken as by way of threatening, to
wit, that because they had spoken so rashly and reproachfully of God, both
themselves and their memorial should utterly perish and come to nothing, even
as when ashes, the only memorial of wood burnt, are blown away, and so are as
if they had never been; nor could there an apter punishment be threatened to
proud men that are so ambitious to have their names had in remembrance when
they are gone. But the first exposition agrees best with that which went
before and that which follows after.

Verse. 13. Let me alone that I may speak, and let come on me what will.] Some
think that Job only intended hereby, that he was resolved to speak however his
friends took it or what censure soever they should pass upon him. But it may
better be referred to the determination of God. Jobs friends had advised him to
forbear those speeches he had used, as out of compassion to him, least he
should provoke God to lay his hand yet more heavily upon him; He desires
therefore here that not taking thought in this kind for him, they would give
him free liberty to plead his cause with God, and then let God do to him what
he pleased. Yet this he speaks not in a desperate manner, as not caring what
became of him, but as out of assurance of Gods fatherly love, as is evident in
that which follows verse. 15.

Verse. 14. Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth and put my life in mine
hand?] Because when a man is sollicitous to keep a thing safe, he will carry it
in his hand, and will scarce let it go out of his hand upon any occasion,
therefore putting the life in the hand is interpreted by some for a sollicitous
care of life; As if he had said, wherefore do I keep my life so close, as if I
were loath to part with it? what need I take so much care for my life? since if
I loose my life I know it shall be well with me: If God slay me, I will trust
in him. But rather on the contrary putting the life into the hand may note a
man's readiness to die; And so here Job might say that he put his life in his
hand, either because he was in a manner a dying man, ready every moment as I
may say to lay down his life, or else because he was so willing and desirous to
die, and to give up his life. It is a phrase frequent in the Scripture,
concerning which see the Note. Judge. 12.3. But now the first clause, wherefore
do I take my flesh in my teeth? is far more obscure; but the most probable
expositions that I meet with are these. 1. Some conceive that it was an
ordinary proverbiall speech in those times to say of those that were desirous
to die, that they took their flesh in their teeth, meaning that they were so
weary of their lives, that they could find in their hearts to tear themselves
in pieces, thereby as it were to open a passage to let forth their souls: and
that therefore, as in relation to the frequent professions he had made how
earnestly desirous he was to die, he asks his friends here, wherefore do I
take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in my hand? that is, wherefore am I
so eagerly desirous to die? think you that I speak it as out of despair? No
such matter, No, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, as he adds in the
next words. 2. Some hold that because men that are inwardly enraged and
tormented in their minds are wont to tear their own flesh with their teeth, or
at least to pine and consume away, and so in that sense may be said to eat
their own flesh, as it is said of the slothful fool that starveth himself with
mere idleness, Eccles. 4.5. He foldeth his hands together, and eats his own
flesh, therefore Job uses these expressions as by way of checking himself for
being so immoderately disquieted in his mind for any thing, which either his
friends said or he suffered: wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth? and. as
if he had said, why should I thus pine my self with grief, and eat up mine own
flesh with sorrow, or why do I thus vex and fret and torment my self, as one
that in the indignation and anguish of his soul is ready to tear his own flesh,
and to give up the ghost? there is no cause at all why I should do thus,
though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and 3. Again some think that the
ground of these expressions was, either because his flesh was so chapt and
broken in several places that he might bite out pieces with his teeth, or
because he was so wasted, that all his flesh would scarce make one mouthfull,
or else rather because his pain and misery was many times so extreme and
insupportable, that ever and anon it made him ready to tear his flesh with his
teeth, and so the meaning of these words, wherefore do I take my flesh in my
teeth? etc, must be that he desired to know of his friends either why such
grievous intolerable punishments should be laid upon him, if as they said God
did only punish wicked men, since he was not conscious to himself of any such
horrible wickedness that he had committed, or why he might not desire to plead
his cause with God, since it was evident he did not complain without great
cause.

Verse. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: etc.] That is, though I
were at the point of death yet would I trust in him for help; yea though I were
sure that God would slay me, yet would I rely upon his mercy, in full
expectation that thereby I should only be brought to a better life. Now this he
adds, either by way of checking himself for his former impatience, and
resolving from henceforth what he would do; or else to imply how strange it
was, that notwithstanding this his trust and confidence in God he should be so
severely dealt with; or to show that though his miseries made him complain
sometimes very bitterly, yet he did not despair of Gods love to him; or else to
prove that he was not a wicked wretch as they pretended he was. And therefore
is that too which he next adds, but I will maintain mine own ways before him,
that is, though I will rely upon his mercy whatever he does to me, yet I will
plead my cause and maintain mine innocence before him, and that in the
integrity and sincerity of mine heart, as knowing that he searches the heart
and the reins.

Verse. 16. He also shall be my salvation, etc.] That is, I know he will
preserve me in these miseries, and in his good time deliver me from them, or at
least that he will save me eternally hereafter. As for the following clause,
for an hypocrite shall not come before him, that is added to show a reason why
he would maintain his ways before God, as he had said in the foregoing verse,
namely, because he knew well that if he were an hypocrite God would not endure
him; and this his friends had charged him with chap. 8.13.

Verse. 18. Behold now, I have ordered my cause, I know that I shall be
justified.] That is, now I have examined mine own conscience, and have weighed
and digested what I shall say in mine own defense, whereas you condemn me for a
wicked hypocrite, I know that herein God will justify me: and so indeed it
prooved at last when God passed that sentence against his friends, chap. 42.7.
ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.

Verse. 19. Who is he that will plead with me? etc.] That is, trusting therefore
in the unquestionable justice of my cause, let who will undertake to plead with
me, I am here ready to defend my self against them: But however plead I must my
cause with God; for now if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost, that
is, being provoked and vexed, as I have been with the opprobrious speeches you
have used against me, if I should not ease the grief of my heart by speaking,
it would burst within me and so kill me.

Verse. 20. Only do not two things unto me; then will I not hide my self from
thee.] That is, then shall I have no cause to hide my self from thee, then
shall I not shrink from appearing before thee, but shall boldly come into thy
presence to plead my cause. Now the two things he desires of God are those
expressed in the following verse to wit, the one that God would free him from
the present miseries that lay upon him, wherewith being oppressed, distracted
and disturbed it was not possible he should, with that freedom of mind as was
fitting, intend what he should say and order his speech aright before God; and
the other that God would secure him from the terrors of his majesty and power
for the future, which alone was enough to overwhelm a man with fear, and to
make the most eloquent man as one that is dumb and not able to speak a word. I
know that some learned Expositours do otherwise understand this place, namely,
that the two things, which Job here desired that God would not do to him, were
either 1. That he would not smite and dispute with him together; or 2. That he
would not punish before he made known the cause why he did it, and that when
the cause was made known he might have free liberty to answer for himself
before he proceeded any farther against him; and accordingly the last words
they understand thus, then will I not hide my self from thee, that is, then
shall I willingly undergo whatever thou shall be pleased to lay upon me. But
doubtless the first exposition is far the best: that which he desires here
is the very same he desired before chap. 9.34. concerning which see the Note
there.

Verse. 22. Then call thou and I will answer, or let me speak and answer thou
me.] That is, do thou call me to an account and object against me, and I will
answer for my self, or else let me object and do thou answer; and thus he
speaks as one willing to give his adversary all the advantage he can desire: A
speech that has so much boldness in it, that though no doubt it proceeded
from a holy courage and confidence of his own integrity, yet withal methinks
it argued that his passions were stirred, and had transported him beyond the
bounds of that modesty, which should have been in him that pleaded with the
great Creator of heaven and earth.

Verse. 23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? etc.] Zophar had said, that
if God would yield to speak to Job, he could soon make him see that he had
exacted less of him then his iniquity had deserved, chap. 11.5, 6. and verse.
14. If iniquity, says he, be in thine hand put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles. Job therefore beginning here his plea
with God, desires in the first place to know what those manifold and grievous
sins were, which his friends seemed to charge him with, for which such sore and
grievous punishments were laid upon him; implying that though his friends were
still unsatisfied after all his protestations of his innocence, yet he was not
conscious to himself of any such thing: and that if it were otherwise he
desired it might be discovered fully to Gods glory and his shame, that he might
repent, etc. See the Notes chap. 10. verse. 2, and 7. where there are
expressions much to the same purpose with this.

Verse. 25. Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou pursue the
dry stubble?] That is, can thou think it will be any glory for thee to
contend with such a poor weak wretch as I am, no more able to stand before
thine indignation, then a leaf can stand before the wind or dry stubble before
the fire? And thus too by the mention of his exceeding frailty and weakness he
covertly seeks to move God to deal more gently with him.

Verse. 26. For thou writest bitter things against me, etc.] To show that
notwithstanding he was but as a leaf or dry stubble before God, yet God did set
himself to break and destroy him, he sets forth here with what violence and
severity he proceeded against him; Thou writest bitter things against me, that
is, thou have adjudged me to most grievous punishments, and such as seem to be
the effects of a mind exceedingly imbittered against me; for in this expression
of writing bitter things against him, he seems to allude to the custom of
Judges in those times, who used to write down the judgment they passed against
offenders, aggravating therein the offenses for which they were so allotted to
be punished, and then read it in public when they came to pronounce sentence
against them; which may seem the more probable if we compare this with other
places, as that Ier. 22.30. Thus says the Lord, write this man childlesse,
etc. and that Psalm. 149.8, 9. To bind their kings with chains and their nobles
with fetters of iron; To execute upon them the judgment written; As for the
following clause and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth, that is
also added to set forth the severity of Gods proceeding against him; and the
meaning is, either that Gods dealing with him was as if he meant to make him
bear now at once the punishment of all the sins that ever he had committed,
even the iniquities of his youth, which he had long ago repented of, and which
by reason of the ignorance and imprudencie of that age are usually accounted
most pardonable; or else rather that by the strange and grievous punishments he
had laid upon him he made all his sins even those of his youth, which he had in
a manner forgotten, to come fresh to his remembrance, and there to lie
continually grating upon his conscience, which did with great terror ever and
anon suggest, that surely God had not pardoned those sins but did now call him
to an account for them.

Verse. 27. Thou put my feet also in the stocks, and look narrowly to all
my paths.] Still Job goes on to show that God proceeded with much severity
against him as against some notable malefactor; for by putting his feet in the
stocks, and looking narrowly to all his paths is meant, that God had brought
him into such streights of afflictions, and had so hemmed him in with diverse
calamities, as if either he were afraid he should escape out of his hands, and
so meant to make sure of him in that regard, or that he meant to look narrowly
to him, to see that he should no way get any liberty or ease.

Thou set a print upon the heels of my feet.] Either this is added as in
relation to the foregoing clause concerning the putting of his feet in the
stocks, namely that hereby there was a print made in his feet, the stocks
eating into his flesh; and the meaning then is only this, that he bore in his
flesh the impressions of Gods wrath, the marks of those pinching streights
whereinto God had cast him, which it is like he meant of the sores and ulcers
wherewith his body was overspread from head to foot; or else the drift of these
words is to imply, that God did hunt him as it were, and follow him so close
that he did in a manner tread upon his heels, even as prisoners have their
keepers still close at their heels that they may not escape.

Verse. 28. And he as a rotten thing consumes, etc.] That is, Job; (for he
speaks here of himself in the third person) as if he should have said, And thus
poor Job soon consumes away, as a rotten thing or as a moth-eaten garment; the
drift whereof is covertly to imply, that there was no need that God should
proceed with such violence against him, since an easier stroke would quickly
make an end of him, and so withal to entreat God to take pity of him.

Verse. 1. MAn that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble.] He
says not Man is of few days, but, Man that is born of a woman, which words
are added. 1. To note that this is the condition of all mankind, every mothers
child, none excepted, according to that Matthew. 11.11. Among them that are born
of women there has not risen a greater then John the Baptist, and 2. To note
what the cause is why man is of such a fading, weak, and miserable condition,
to wit, because he has his original, from such a poor, weak, frail creature
as woman is. Though man was weakened by sin as well as woman, yet because a
greater degree of weakness was inflicted upon woman as a punishment of sin,
(in regard whereof the Apostle Peter calls the woman the weaker vessel, 1 Pet.
3.7.) therefore man's being born of a woman is made the chief ground of man's
frailty; having his descent from one, who being defiled with sin lies under
the curse of bearing so many weaknesses and sorrows, no marvel though he be
born a poor, weak, helpless creature, few of days and full of trouble. Now
this which Job here says of the frailty and misery of man, he speaks it as in
reference to himself, thereby still to imply that he was fitter to be an object
of pity and compassion, then of such fury and indignation as God had shown
against him.

Verse. 3. And do thou open thine eyes upon such an one? etc.] Though these
words may be taken in a general sense, to wit, that it was much that God
should vouchsafe to look toward such a poor, base wretch as man is, either by
way of favor to watch over him for his preservation, and to provide for him,
or in any other respect (and therefore some understand it thus, that he
acknowledged it a singular favor, that so miserable a wretch as he was should
be admitted to stand and plead his cause before him, to which also they apply
the following clause, and bring me into judgment with thee?) yet
considering both what went before and what follows after, it is more likely
that Job speaks here of Gods opening his eyes upon him to search into his sins,
and to see how he might punish him for his transgressions; for as men are said
to wink at a man when they will not take notice of what he has done amiss
that they might punish him for it, so they may be said to open their eyes upon
a man, when they set themselves strictly to enquire into their offenses and to
bring them into judgment; and accordingly the meaning of these words seems to
be this, that it was strange that God should think such a poor despicable
creature as man is worthy his anger; or that he should so far mind him as to
take vengeance on him for his sins.

Verse. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.] That is,
there is not one born of sinful parents after the manner of men, but he must
needs be sinful as they are; or not one who can any way procure, that he that
is born of parents polluted with original sin should not himself be polluted
and unclean: yea and it may refer to men's actions too, that a man unclean by
nature cannot bring forth any clean thing, that is, any clean action; what
sinful man does must needs be sinful. Now this Job adds. 1. To abase himself,
and to make his heart stoop under the severity of Gods proceedings with him,
since being so unclean it was no wonder though the most holy God should lay his
hand so heavy upon him: and 2. To intimate that though God might most justly
condemn such a filthy wretch as he was, if he should examine him according to
the rigor of his righteous judgment (and by this employed confession of his
spiritual uncleanness he did covertly condemn his friends, who charged him
with saying that he was perfectly righteous and pure from sin) yet considering
this was the inevitable condition of all men, who must needs be sinful because
they came out of the loins of sinful parents, therefore he hoped and desired,
that God would take compassion of him and not deal in such extremity with him.

Verse. 5. Seeing his days are determined, etc.] This plea of Jobs is much like
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 89.46, 47. Shall thy wrath burn like fire? Remember
how short my time is, etc. to wit, that since God had appointed that man should
die, as the just reward of his sins, and had determined the set time of his
death, which could not be far off, he would therefore let that suffice, and
not make that little time he had to live so extremely irksome with
insupportable miseries; which is that he desires in the following verse.

Verse. 6. Turn from him that he may rest, etc.] An expression much like that,
chap. 7.19. How long will thou not depart from him? as if he had said, Mark not
so strictly what he is, or what he has done, meddle not with him but let him
be quiet, take off thine heavy hand and let him spend his days peaceably
without molestation, till he shall accomplish as an hireling his days, that
is, till he has finished the time appointed him for his living here to serve
thee in his generation, which being as the days of an hireling, full of hard
travel and sorrow, his coming to the period thereof must needs be welcome and
acceptable to him. See the Note chap. 7.2.

Verse. 7. For there is hope of a tree if it be cut down, etc.] The plea he
uses here is this, If it were possible for a man after death to live again
here in this world, as a tree cut down will sprout up again, the hope that his
life then might be more comfortable would enable him the more patiently to bear
his present sufferings. But alas there is no hope of this. A tree indeed though
it be felled down to the ground, yet may sprout out with fresh tender branches
again.

Verse. 8. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof
die in the ground.] That is, though the root through age be in a manner
withered and shrunk, and no sign of life appear in the stock.

Verse. 9. Yet through the sent of water it will bud and spring forth boughs
like a plant.] That is, like a young tree newly planted. As for that
expression, through the sent of water it will bud, either thereby he intended
to show by what means the roots of such a tree may be as it were revived again,
to wit, that if it be watered it will bud forth a-fresh, or else it is used to
show how little a thing will cause it to sprout out again, to wit, that if any
moisture comes but near it, if it do as it were but smell the waters, it will
suck in moisture and sap, and grow up with new tender branches.

Verse. 10. But man dies and wastes away; yea man gives up the ghost, and
where is he?] As if he should have said, there is no hope of his living again
here in this world: concerning which see the Note, chap. 7.9. Indeed in the
several terms that are here used to express man's dying and the order of
them, there is some difficulty. Some conceive that in the first words, But man
dies and wastes away, by man's dying is meant the same that is afterward
termed giving up the ghost, and then by wasting away is meant either his
wasting away by sickness, (and if so then there is an hysteron proteron in the
words, as if he had said, Man dies being wasted away with sickness,) or else
rather his wasting away by death, as if he had said, man dies, and then
consumes and rots away. But others take dying and wasting away in the first
clause to be but preparatories and antecedents to man's giving up the ghost,
which the particle yea seems to confirm, man dies and wastes away, that is,
man decays and wastes away by degrees, death creeping upon him daily by
little and little, yea, at last man gives up the ghost and then, where is he?

Verse. 11. As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decays and dries
up.] By the sea here may be meant any great confluence of waters; for such are
usually in the Scriptures called seas, as for instance that which is called the
lake of Genesareth Luke 5.1. is also called the sea of Tiberias, Ioh. 21.1. But
however the greatest difficulty here is what is meant by the waters failing
from the sea and the floods decaying and drying up; and to what purpose it is
here alleged: Some understand it thus, that as when the waters fail from the
sea, that is, when the sea fails to send forth waters through the pores of the
earth unto the rivers, then the rivers and floods decay and dry up; so the
natural and radical moisture being spent in a man, he dies, as it is
expressed in the following verse, and so is laid in the bed of his grave. Again
others give this to be the meaning of it, that as when the waters fail or pass
away from the sea or rivers, to wit, either by evaporation, or by running over
the banks into the land, or by gliding away in their several channels, or by
soaking into the earth and so drying up in times of great heat and drouth,
these very waters thus failing or passing away do never return to their places
again; so it is with man when he dies, he is taken away, and there is no
possibility of his returning to his place again; for so it follows in the next
verse.

Verse. 12. So man lies down and rises not, till the heavens be no more, etc.]
This phrase till the heavens be no more may be taken two several ways, to
wit, either that man being once laid in the grave shall never rise again,
namely to live again here in this world, and that because the heavens shall for
ever continue, whence is that expression Psalm. 89.29. His seed also will I make
to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven, and verse. 36, 37.
His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me, etc. or
else that he shall not rise again till the general Resurrection, when it may
be said, that the heavens shall be no more, because if they shall not be wholly
dissolved, yet at least they shall be so far changed, that they shall be no
more the same heavens that they were before, according to that Psalm. 102.26.
all of them shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them,
and they shall be changed, and that of the Apostle. 2 Pet. 3.12, 13. The
heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat; nevertheless we according to his promise look for new heavens,
etc.

Verse. 13. O that thou would hide me in the grave, that thou would keep
me secret until thy wrath be past, etc.] 1. Many Expositours understand this
of Jobs desiring to die, that he might be freed from those heavy effects of
Gods wrath that now he endured, and be laid in the grave, (where he should be
sure to be shelterd from all storms) till the indignation of God against him
were over; and that the following words that thou would appoint me a set
time and remember me, are either a farther enlarging of this his request,
namely that God would appoint him a set time when he would lodge him in that
longed-for bed of his grave, and that at that set appointed time he would not
fail to remember to hide him there; (and if so we understand these words, it
was unadvised passion and not grace that was breathed forth in this desire) or
else are added to imply his expectation of being raised up again at the last
day; and so the meaning of the words they take to be this, that in regard of
the grievous calamities that he now suffered, he was most desirous to die, only
then withal he desired, that God would not cast him off in the grave, but set
him a time wherein he would remember him in mercy, and raise him up again, to
wit, at the day of the general Resurrection. 2. Others do otherwise understand
these words, to wit, that Job having before said, that when man dies he is
irrecoverably cut off from living any more in this world, he professes here
that were it not for that he should be glad with all his heart that he might
die, and be laid up in the grave, because there he should be hidden as it were
from the wrath of God that now he endured, O that thou would hide me in the
grave; that thou would keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou
would appoint me a set time, and remember me; as if he should have said, so
that I might be laid in the grave only for a time, and that God would appoint
me a set time, wherein he would not fail to remember me in mercy and to raise
me up again to live here in a more comfortable condition, even as the stocks of
trees that are cut down, that seem in the winter to lie dead in the ground, and
yet in the Spring do sprout out afresh, then it would be a pleasure to me to
die, and to be laid up in the grave. And indeed this I conceive is more
probable, then some judge it to be. 1. Because he speaks of Gods appointing him
a set time, which seems to intend a prefixed time for his rising again in
particular, namely to live here in this world, and cannot well be understood of
that day which God has appointed for the general Resurrection of all mankind.
2. Because he speaks of it, as of a most unlikely and improbable thing, which
he could rather wish then believe, O that thou would hide me in the grave,
etc. and 3. Because this well agrees with the general scope of Jobs speech in
this place. 3. Some take it thus, that he desires that God would at a set time
appointed lay him up in his grave, in the chambers of death; only he would not
that God should then quite cast him off, but desires that God should even there
remember him. And whereas according to this exposition he should desire death,
without any expression of his desire to be raised up again from the grave; to
this it is answered, that he speaks as a man distracted so with sorrows, that
he asks of God he well knows not what; eased he would be of his trouble, and
out of his desire of that, he wishes what came next to mind or lay uppermost
in his thoughts; let God hide him in the grave, or do what he would with him
to free him from his sad estate, so he did not utterly forget him. And lastly
by the grave may be meant any place under ground, where he might be hidden
a-live; such as were those caves and dens in the earth where the Saints in
times of persecution were wont to hide themselves, and so were for the time as
men buried a-live. Heb. 11.36; and so then his desire is only, that he might be
hidden somewhere under ground, where he might be in safe custody out of the
reach of those troubles that now annoyed him, till the indignation of God were
over, and that then at a time prefixed God would remember him and fetch him
forth again. But which way soever we take these words, most probable it is that
he uses this phrase of being hid in the grave, in allusion to the custom of
those Eastern countries, where they used in those times to have great caves or
vaults for their sepulchers or burying places, whereinto in times of danger
they were wont to run and hide themselves.

Verse. 14. If a man die, shall he live again? All the days of my appointed
time will I wait till my change come.] As the former words so these also are
diverse ways expounded by Interpreters. Some say that the change here meant is
that which Job had wished or desired in the foregoing verse, to wit, his being
raised out of the grave after he had been hidden there for a time, to live
again here in this world; and accordingly they conceive that the first words
were spoken by way of admiration, If a man die, shall he live again? Is that
possible? and then that the next words were added as the Resolution of Job upon
this supposition, as if he should have said, Could this be, or let this be
granted, and then surely all the days of my appointed time will I wait till my
change come, that is, I will willingly wait all the set time allotted for my
abode in the grave, until the change shall come of my being raised up again
from thence; and thus they say he spoke in reference to his foregoing words, O
that thou would appoint me a set time and remember me. Again others conceive
that he speaks here of his change at the general Resurrection of the dead; and
so they take the first words to be spoken, either of man's living again in this
world, and the interrogation to be a vehement negation, If a man die, shall he
live again? No, I know he shall not; it is altogether impossible; and that
thereupon he adds, All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my
change come; as if he had said, I am not therefore afraid to die, there being
no fear of returning hither again after death, again to endure the miseries of
this present world, but will gladly wait all my appointed time till my change
at the Resurrection of the dead shall come: or else of man's living again at the
day of judgment; and of those that understand it thus, some hold that the
interrogation does here intend an affirmation of that concerning which the
question is propounded, If a man die, shall he live again* as if he had said, I
know he shall, there will a day come when God will raise him up and restore him
to life again; whereupon he inferres that he would wait in expectation of this
blessed change, All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change
come: and others conceive that it is spoken by way of doubting, and accordingly
they make this to be the drift of the words, to wit, that the first words
contain the temptation wherewith Job was tempted, namely that he questioned
whether man being dead could ever rise again, If a man die, shall he live
again? Is this possible? and then that the next clause contains the Resolution
of his faith overcoming that temptation, All the days of my appointed time
will I wait till my change come, as if he had said, yes I know there shall a
change come after death, when they that are dead shall rise and live again, and
so corruption shall put on incorruption, and therefore all my appointed time I
will wait till that change shall come. But last of all there is another
exposition, which to me seems best, as best agreeing with other foregoing
passages, namely that by his appointed time here is meant the time allotted him
of God for his living here in this world, according to that he had said before
verse. 5. His days are determined, the number of his months are with thee,
etc. and so the sense of the words is this, that since being dead there was no
hope of living again here in this world, there was nothing for him to do but
all his appointed time to wait upon God till his change come, that is, till God
should be pleased to deliver him from this sad condition wherein he now lived,
and put him into a more prosperous estate, or rather till the time of his
departure out of this world was come, when he doubted not but God would receive
him to his mercy.

Verse. 15. Thou shall call and I will answer thee, thou will have a desire to
the work of thine hands.] That is, out of the love thou bear me as thy
creature, and much more as one in whom thou have renewed thine own image, thou will not cast me off for ever, but wilt receive me again unto thy self; which
is spoken in reference to the former clause, Thou shall call and I will answer
thee, of which also there are several expositions given by Interpreters,
answerable to those they give of the foregoing verses; for 1. Some take it to
be spoken as in reference to that which they conceive he intended verse. 13.
where he speaks of his being hid for a time in the grave, namely that if that
might be so, if God would hide him for a time till his indignation were over,
and then would remember him in mercy again, then when God should call him
forth, he would readily come forth unto him, hoping to live here in his favor
again. 2. Some understand this also of the Resurrection, Thou shall call, that
is, thou shall command me to arise from the dead, and I will answer thee, that
is, I shall as in obedience to thy command readily arise and present my self
before thee, not needing then to fear thy face as hypocrites will; and indeed
though this phrase of Gods calling him, may be used in reference to the manner
of Gods raising men from the dead, concerning which the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall
rise first, etc. yet by the call of God may be meant simply the will and
command of God, as where it is said that God called for a famine upon the land,
Psalm. 105.16. that is, he commanded a famine to be in the land; and so our
Savior speaks of the Resurrection, Ioh. 5.28. The hour is coming in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, etc. and 3. Some understand it
of Gods calling him out of this world by death, and so conceive that Job here
professes his readiness to yield to Gods call herein, and that because he
knew God would one day remember him in mercy and not utterly cast^off the work
of his own hands.

Verse. 16. For now thou numbrest my steps, etc:] This is added as a reason why
he so earnestly desired to die, or to be hid in the grave, as he had said verse.
13. till Gods wrath and indignation was over; or why he had besought God that
he would withdraw his hand and let him finish his days in peace, verse. 6.
namely because God did now at present proceed with such severity against him,
as one that took strict notice of all his ways, that not one sin of his might
escape unpunished. See chap. 10.14. To which purpose also is that which follows
in the next verse, of Gods sealing up his transgressions in a bag, that is, his
laying them up in store, as evidences and indictments against him; of which see
the Note, Deuter. 32.34.

Verse. 18. And surely the mountain falling comes to naught; and the rock is
removed out of his place, etc.] The drift of these words is either 1. To imply
that God proceeded with as much fury and violence against him, as when he
overturns mountains and removes rocks out of their places, etc. or 2. To
intimate that if the strongest creatures, and those that seem most steadfastly
settled in their places, cannot stand before the indignation of the Lord, much
less could poor, weak man stand before it, and that therefore God needed not
proceed with such over-bearing violence against him as he now did; or 3. To
bewail his continuing so long in so great miseries, that when the strongest
creatures were not able to stand before Gods power when he meant to bring them
to naught, and so the hope of man was destroyed by his hand, as is expressed in
the last clause of the 19 verse, that is, all things wherein vain men hope, or
all the vain things wherein men are wont to hope, yet he a poor, weak creature
should hold out against so many and great afflictions, and live in the midst of
so many deaths, or 4. To renew his old request that he might die, that since
all things, even those that were the most like to continue, were often removed
and wasted out of their place, so he desired it might also be with him; or 5.
To intimate his fear least his patience should fail, and thereupon to desire
that God would in pity release him, surely the mountain falling comes to
naught, etc. as if he had said, mountains and rocks will fail, and how much
sooner may my patience fail? My strength is not the strength of stones, as he
had said before, chap. 6.12. and therefore either remove my afflictions or
remove me out of this world; or 6. To show that God proceeding so severely
against him, and not suffering any sin of his to pass unpunished (as he had
said in the foregoing verses) as other creatures, that seem more surely settled
then man is, do utterly perish by the mighty power of God, so it must needs be
with man, he also must needs be cut off irrecoverably, The mountain (says Job)
falling comes to naught, and the rock is removed out of his place, to wit,
sometimes by extraordinary earthquakes, sometimes by the violence of great
floods and inundations of waters, the waters wear the stones, by continual
beating and dropping upon them, thou washest away the things that grow out of
the dust, namely when rivers or seas overflowing or breaking through the banks,
do with a mighty torrent sweep away all before them, and thou destroyest the
hope of man, that is, and thus after the same manner is man cut off and
destroyed by death, and that as concerning any hope of living again here in
this world irrecoverably; and this I conceive most probable to have been the
drift of Job in these words, being the same in effect with that which he had
said before verse. 11, 12.

Verse. 20. Thou prevailest for ever against him and he passes; thou changest
his countenance and sendest him away.] That is, it is always thus, be a man
never so strong, die he must; if thou contendest with him, he must needs sink
under thine hand and that irrecoverably, it being altogether impossible that he
should resist the stroke of thine hand; his comeliness and beauty thou soon
turnest into a ghastly ashy palenesse, and so sendest him packing out of this
world.

Verse. 21. His sons come to honor and he knows it not, etc.] This may be
meant either of man after death, as in reference to what he had said
immediately before concerning man's passing away out of this world, to wit, that
after that he never knows more what is done here in this world; whether his
children live in prosperity or misery, it is all one to him, for he knows not
how it fares with them: and then it is added to show how absolutely men are by
death cut off from all possible communion with those that remain behind them:
Or else it may be meant of man when he is dying, to wit, either that through
the anguish and extremity of pain and misery which he endures, he regards no
earthly thing how nearly soever it concerns him; be his children in a
prosperous or in a mean condition, he minds it not, it works in him neither joy
nor sorrow, or else that this is one part of his misery, that dying he knows
not what shall become of his children.

Verse. 22. But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him
shall mourn.] Those Expositours that understand the foregoing words of man
after death, must needs find it too difficult to give a reason how after that
this should come in, But his flesh upon him shall have pain, etc. Yet two
several ways they allege how this may be inferred upon that which went
before, though so understood, for 1. Some take the words to be a figurative and
poetical expression of the sad condition of a man cut off by death, his flesh
upon him shall have pain, (alluding to the worms gnawing the flesh of his body)
and his soul within him shall mourn, that is, it shall be disquieted and
grieved, because it is parted from the body; it is, say they, such a poetical
expression, as that afterward chap. 21.33. where it is said of man in the
grave, the clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him: and 2. Some make the
connection thus, that having said in the former verse, that man after death
knows nothing what is done in the world, this that follows is added in this
sense, But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall
mourn, as if he should have said, But yet whilst he lives he shall have pain
and sorrow; and therefore any man may judge whether it were not better for me
to die then to live. But now understand the foregoing words of man dying, and
then the dependence of this upon that is easy and clear; There he had said
that man dying minds not how it is, or knows not how it shall be with his
children; whereto he adds now, But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his
soul within him shall mourn, that is, he shall be wholly taken up with the
thoughts and sense of his own misery, the pain and sorrow that lies upon him.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. THen answered Eliphaz, etc.] The three friends of Job having all
objected what they could against Job successively one after another, and Job
having severally answered them all, it came now to Eliphaz turn, who began
first to speak, again to reply upon what Job had answered.

Verse. 2. Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the
East wind?] That is, is it seemly for a man that pretends to such wisdom and
knowledge as you do, to talk so idly and foolishly, so furiously, and
presumptuously, and mischievously as you have done? for he alludes to those
words of Job wherein he seemed to condemn them of folly, at least to maintain
that his knowledge was every way as much as theirs, chap. 13.2. What ye know,
the same do I know also, I am not inferior unto you, and again verse. 5. Oh
that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your wisdom. He
compares Jobs words to the wind, to imply 1. That they had been vain and
unprofitable, and nothing to the purpose, there was no substance and solidity
in them, but they were merely a blast of words, which soon vanished and came to
nothing, and 2. That they had been turbulent, violent, and furious, and uttered
with a great deal of heat and choler; and he mentions the East wind
particularly rather then any other, because that wind used to be in those
countries most raging and tempestuous, and withal because it was usually very
hurtful to their corn, and fruit, and other things, as we use also to say,
that the wind in the East is neither good for man nor beast, and so thereby
Eliphaz might intend to imply also, that his words had been mischievous and
hurtful both to others and to himself, pernicious to others by way of ill
example, and hurtful to himself, in that they must needs blast all the hopes
he might otherwise have had of Gods delivering him out of his miseries. In Jobs
first answer to Eliphaz he had taken exceptions against him for slighting what
he had spoken, as if there had been no weight of reason in any thing he had
said, and that in these terms, chap. 6.26. Do ye imagine to reproove words,
and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind? (concerning which
see the Note there) Now as Bildad did immediately twit him with this, retorting
upon him that very expression, chap. 8.2. How long shall the words of thy mouth
be like a strong wind? (where also see the Note) so likewise Eliphaz here
remembering it seems those words of Job, when he came now to speak again
upbraids him with the same words, Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and
fill his belly with the East wind? as if he had said, you were not pleased that
I esteemed your words no better then wind; but I pray what have your words ever
since been better then so? A wise man one would think should never utter such
vain and unprofitable things as you have spoken; and it is like he meant this
of those passages in Jobs speech, where he had complained of Gods dealing so
hardly with him, and where he had wished that God would hide him for a time in
the grave, chap. 14.14. and others of the like nature. As for that expression
of filling his belly with the East wind, the meaning is, either that he did
feed and please himself with such windy frothy discourse, or rather that he did
first conceive such things in his mind, and then afterward uttered them.

Verse. 4. Yea thou castest off fear and restrainest prayer before God.] Some
Expositours understand this thus, that by many things that he had spoken he had
in a manner laid a foundation of Atheism, that men should neither fear God nor
call upon his name; for if that were true which he had said, chap. 9.22. that
God destroys the perfect as well as the wicked, and so chap. 12.6. that the
tabernacles of robbers prosper and they that provoke God are secure, etc. who
then would fear God or pray unto him? yea and some add, that by his speaking
so irreverently to God he had hereby given evil example unto others, after the
same manner to cast off the fear of God, and in stead of praying to God to
contend with him. But I conceive the meaning to be plainly this, that he
charge Job with casting off fear and restraining prayer before God, because
he had spoken to God in such a bold and presumptuous manner, as if he had been
speaking to one of his fellows, and in stead or humbling himself before God,
and craving mercy and pardon, he had stood upon terms of justifying himself,
and had as it were challenged God, that he might argue with him and plead his
cause before him.

Verse. 5. For thy mouth utters thine iniquity, etc.] That is, thy mouth
discovers and blazons abroad that base wickedness and iniquity that is in
thine heart, according to that of our Savior, Matthew. 12.34, Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And this is added as a proof of what
he had said in the foregoing verse, to wit, that Job had cast off the fear of
God; as is likewise that which follows and thou choosest the tongue of the
crafty, that is, thou do wittingly talk in a crafty manner; and the craft
Eliphaz intends is, either that he did in an hypocritical manner cunningly
cover over the iniquity of his heart, to wit, by speaking at some times very
modestly and humbly, though at other times he was ready as it were to fly in
Gods face, as in those passages chap. 6.24. Teach me and I will hold my tongue;
and cause me to understand wherein I have erred, and chap. 7.20. I have sinned;
what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? and chap. 9.2. How should
man be just with God? or else rather that in a mere cavilling way he had
hitherto sought to make good an evil cause.

Verse. 7. Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before the
hills?] In these words Eliphaz seems to have respect to that which Job had said
chap. 12.2, 3. No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you,
but I have understanding as well as you, I am not inferior to you; yea who
knows not such things as these? and to that verse. 12. of the same chapter,
with the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days understanding: for
apprehending that Job had spoken those words, in a way of exalting himself in
regard of his knowledge, and in regard of his age above them, and as thinking
scorn that they should therefore compare themselves with him, and that thence
it was also that he had sent them to learn knowledge of the bruit beasts, chap.
12.7. Ask now the beasts and they shall teach thee, etc. hereupon he now
replies to this in a way of scoffing, Art thou the first man that was born? or
wast thou made before the hills? as if he should have said, what do you make of
your self that you take so much upon you in regard of your knowledge, and in
regard of your years? Sure you were the first man that ever was born in the
world, yea perhaps you were before the creation, and so are older then the
hills, and having therefore lived in all the ages of the world, it is no wonder
though you have gotten so much knowledge, that we are counted no better then
fools in comparison of you. Thus I say almost all Expositours understand these
words; only indeed some conceive that Jobs friends were older then he, which
they ground upon that which follows verse. 10. and that therefore Eliphaz could
not suspect that Job despised them because of his great age, but that rather he
twits him on the contrary, because being younger then they, yet he vaunted
himself in his great knowledge, as if he had been the first man that ever was
upon the earth, and had been ever since treasuring up knowledge, and so must
needs understand more then ever man did.

Verse. 8. Have thou heard the secret of God? etc.] As if he should have said,
has God made you of his privy counsel, and so thereby admitted you to the
knowledge of those secrets, which no man knows besides your self? whereupon he
adds also, and do thou restrain wisdom to thy self? that is, have you think
you all the wisdom? and are all fools besides your self? and in the following
verse, what know thou which we know not? etc. in all which Eliphaz does
plainly retort upon Job what he had before said to them, chap. 12.2, 3. No
doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you; but I have
understanding as well as you, etc. and chap. 13.2. what ye know, the same do I
know also, etc.

Verse. 10. With us are both the gray headed, and very aged men, much elder then
thy father.] Still he seems to aim at that which Job had said, chap. 12.12.
With the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days understanding; but the
meaning may be, either that some of these his friends were much elder then his
father was, or then his father would have been, had he been still living (and
it may be Eliphaz intended himself, who we may well think was the eldest of the
three, because he spoke first) or else that though they themselves were younger
then Job, yet he had no cause to despise them as he had done, since they had in
their several habitations many on their side, of their party and opinion, yea
many masters and teachers, from whom they had received those truths which they
had maintained, that were so very aged, that his father was younger then some
of them.

Verse. 11. Are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret
thing with thee?] That is, say some Expositours, do thou esteem the
consolations of God such mean and contemptible things, that we should propound
them to wicked men, such as thou art, or that thou should think they belong
to thee? No, surely; such holy things are not to be given to dogs; only perhaps
you know something which others know not, or have some secret righteousness,
which questionless none can discern in you but your self, and hence it is that
you will not be beaten off from applying the comforts of God unto your self.
But doubtless the true meaning of these words is, that Eliphaz here upbraids
Job for slighting the consolations of God, to wit, those which himself, and his
other two friends had as from God propounded to him; that if he would repent of
his wickedness, and humbling himself under Gods hand would forsake his evil
ways, and beg mercy of him, God would then pardon his sins, remove the
judgments that now lay upon him, and abundantly bless him again. Job had told
them in express terms, chap. 13.4. that they were forgers of lies and
Physicians of no value: and happily in relation to that Eliphaz here upbraids
him for despising those divine consolations wherewith they had sought to do
him good; Are, says he, the consolations of God small with thee? as if he
should have said, we have propounded the only way of comfort for one in your
condition that God has prescribed, and do you make so little account of the
consolations of God? and thereupon he adds too, Is there any secret thing with
thee? that is, do thou know any better way of comfort, (which perhaps
neither we, nor our fathers, nor any man else ever knew or heard of,) whereupon
thou despisest that to which we have advised thee? Or, have thou any secret
Privilege or unknown worth in thee and so thou have no need of these
consolations? Or, is there any secret sin or guilt in thee, which makes thee
unfit to receive the comforts that have been tendered thee? Or, do thou know
any thing unknown to others, by warrant whereof thou think, notwithstanding
all that we have said to thee, that God may justly be blamed for dealing too
hardly and severely with thee?

Verse. 12. Why does thine heart carry thee away? etc.] That is, why does the
pride of thy heart, or the passions of thy heart transport thee so far as a
man besides himself, even beyond the bounds both of reason and of that modesty
and reverence, wherewith it becomes men to carry themselves when they speak to
the Lord their Creator? As for the following clause, and what do thine eyes
wink at? it is very hard to say what is meant thereby; and therefore every
Expositour almost gives a several exposition of it. Some by his winking with
his eyes understand his frowning, and looking with an angry, and fierce furious
eye; others an hypocritical looking demurely in a way of seeming holiness, as
if he were silently praying to God, or had his thoughts taken up with some
serious, high, and heavenly meditations, when indeed there was no such thing;
others his closing of his eyes against the truth of those things which they had
delivered; others of his fleering and looking with a flouting and and scornful
eye, as David also describes the scornful behavior of his enemies, Psalm.
35.19. Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me; neither
let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause: and last of all others
understand it thus, and what do thine eyes wink at? that is, what do thou
look at? or what do thou aim at (alluding to those that shooting at a mark
are wont to wink with their eyes) that thou art thus overborn by thy passions,
and carried out of the way? which exposition of all the rest I like the best,
because of the following words that have dependence upon these.

Verse. 13. That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and let such words go
out of thy mouth?] That is, that when God afflicts thee, thou should thus
with an imbittered spirit turn again upon him and contend with him, and so
should suffer such proud, desperate speeches to proceed out of thy mouth,
justifying thy self, and blaming God for laying his hand so heavily upon thee.

Verse. 14. What is man that he should be clean, etc.] As if he had said, It
cannot be that poor wretched man coming out of the loins of sinful parents
can be righteous, and pure, and clean from sin. See the Note chap. 14.4.

Verse. 15. He puts no trust in his saints; yea the heavens are not clean in
his sight.] That is, the Angels, the holy inhabitants of heaven; for
Expositours do generally understand both branches of this verse of the Angels,
and so make this place fully parallel with that chap. 4.18. (concerning which
see the Notes) and say that Eliphaz presses this argument again upon Job, as
being confident that hitherto in all that he had spoken he had given no
satisfactory answer thereto. And indeed that by the Saints of God in the first
clause the holy Angels are meant is the more evident, because they are
elsewhere called Gods Saints, Deuteronomy. 32.2. The Lord came from Sinai -- and he
came with ten thousands of Saints (of which see the Note there) and because the
Saints here spoken of are opposed to man born of a woman in the foregoing
verse, and therefore cannot be meant of holy men. But for the second clause,
yea the heavens are not clean in his sight, it is more questionable whether
that may not be meant, both of the Angels inhabiting the heavens, and of the
heavens themselves, in that though the heavens be of a bright, and clear, and
pure substance, free from that earthliness and dregs that is in all sublunary
bodies, yet they are unclean and impure in comparison of that perfect purity
that is in God; and indeed it seems the more probable that it is so, because
the like expression Bildad uses afterward concerning the stars, chap. 25.5.
yea the stars, says he, are not pure in his sight.

Verse. 16. How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity
like water?] This expression which Eliphaz here uses implies several
particulars concerning man's natural inclination to sin, as 1. That men are
prone to sin as naturally, familiarly, and readily as they are to eat when they
are hungry, or to drink when they are thirsty. 2. That they are as greedy to
sin, as a thirsty man is to pour down water, yea to exceed therein, and 3. That
it is as pleasing and delightful to men to sin, as it is to a thirsty man to
drink a draught of water; to which purpose the like expressions are used in
other places, as chap. 34.7. What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning
like water? and Prove. 4.17. they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the
wine of violence.

Verse. 17. Hear me, and that which I have seen I will declare, etc.] That is,
that which I have found true by experience; to which he adds in the next verse,
that as he had observed this himself, so he had heard it also from many wise
men, that had likewise received it by tradition from their fathers; that which
I have seen I will declare; which (says he verse. 18.) wise men have told from
their fathers and have not hid it.

Verse. 19. Unto whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among
them.] To make it evident that those wise men, or their fathers mentioned in
the foregoing verse, from whom by tradition they had received that truth which
Eliphaz was now to deliver, were witnesses worthy of all credit and esteem,
they are said here to have been such unto whom alone the earth was given, and
no stranger passed among them; whereby may be meant, either that they were the
first heads of the world, to wit, in the days immediately after Noah,
concerning whom it might well be said, that the earth was given unto them
alone, and that no stranger passed among them, because they had indeed the
whole earth divided amongst themselves alone, and so there was no stranger
amongst them, that is, none but such as were well known one to another (the
people of the world being then but very few, so that there was no need why they
should invade or molest one another) or no stranger of a different religion, by
whom they might be corrupted with errors; Or else the meaning may be, that
they were men so famous and highly esteemed both of God and man for their
wisdom, justice, courage, and all other heroical virtues, that unto them
alone the earth was given, that is, the dominion of the several lands where
they lived was by the voluntary consent of the people, and the all-ruling
providence of God given unto them, and no stranger passed amongst them, that
is, they so ordered themselves in their government, and God was pleased also so
to bless their discreet, just, and holy endeavors, that no foreign enemy did
break in upon them, or molest and trouble them, but the people lived under
their government in peace and safety. Both these expositions are very agreeable
to the drift of Eliphaz in this place; but if we understand them according to
the last exposition, besides their principal drift which is to show how
unquestionable the Testimony of those men was, whom he had mentioned in the
former verse, as assertours of the truth he was now to deliver; they do also
covertly imply the falsehood of that which Job had maintained, to wit, in that
he affirms them to have been wise men and good governors unto whom alone the
earth was given, which is in direct terms contrary to what Job had said, chap.
9.24. the earth is given into the hand of the wicked.

Verse. 20. The wicked man travelleth with pain all his days, etc.] That is, he
is continually in distress and sorrow, sometimes because of the calamities
that God brings upon him, but always by terrors of conscience, and
distracting fears: for here Eliphaz undertakes again to make good what he had
before said, chap. 5.3. to wit, that the Lord does always pour forth his wrath
upon wicked men here in this world according to their demerits, as in direct
opposition to that which Job had said, chap. 12.6. The tabernacles of robbers
prosper, and they that provoke God are secure; and to that end he alleges
here the continual distress and anguish of spirit, wherein they live even in
their greatest prosperity: to which he adds, and the number of years is hidden
to the oppressor. Now though there be several interpretations given of these
words; Some taking them thus, that God has in his secret counsel appointed to
the oppressor how long he shall live, and when he will cut him off; and others
thus, That God will cut short the years of the oppressor, he little knows how
suddenly: yet even this also is alleged I conceive to the same end, and the
number of years is hidden to the oppressor, that is, he is always in fear not
knowing how long he shall enjoy his prosperous estate, or how soon he shall be
cut off; for though good men know not how long they have to live no more then
wicked men, yet this is peculiar to wicked men, that they are in continual
perplexity of spirit concerning their end; and this is that which Eliphaz
intends in these words. But however observable it is, that in setting forth the
misery of wicked men herein, Eliphaz does particularly insist on the fears of
the oppressor; for herein he does doubtless covertly strike at that
particular sin whereof he thought Job was guilty, as having been a great man
and a man of authority in the place where he lived, as we see he afterward
tells him in express terms, chap. 22.6. Thou have taken a pledge from thy
brother for naught, and stripped the naked of their clothing.

Verse. 21. A dreadful sound is in his ears, etc.] That is, He is troubled with
the sad reports of near-approaching evils; or he is ever and anon affrighted,
as if he heard some sound or noise of danger: wherein it is very likely that he
aimed at that which Job had bewailed in himself, to wit, that God scared him
with dreams, and terrified him with visions, chap. 7.14. As for the following
clause, in prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him, that I conceive is
added to show that there is reason enough why he should be afraid when he seems
to be in the safest condition, namely, because even when he is in his greatest
prosperity, he shall suddenly be destroyed.

Verse. 22. He believes not that he shall return out of darkness, etc.] That
is, as in prosperity he fears a day of darkness and distress that is coming
upon him, so when that day is come, there is no persuading him that he shall
ever any more see better day, he utterly despairs that ever he shall be
delivered from that misery and distress, those troubles and fears that are
come upon him; and to show also that his fears herein are not groundless, he
adds, and he is waited for of the sword, that is, in stead of being delivered
from his present misery, there is indeed a sword waits for him to cut him off.

Verse. 23. He wandreth abroad for bread, saying, where is it? etc.] Though the
meaning of this may be, that being brought to extreme poverty he wanders about
to beg his bread, or seeks by any sinister means to supply his want, being
anxious and full of care where to get bread to put into his mouth; yet the most
and best Expositours understand it more generally, to wit, that the wicked man
in his greatest prosperity, even through the terrors of his conscience,
apprehending that an evil day is coming, does hunt about to store up for
himself with as much impatience and greediness, as if he were in danger to
perish for hunger, and yet all the while his own heart tells him that all his
endeavors will be in vain, misery and destruction will at length come upon
him, which is that Eliphaz intends in the following words, he knows that the
day of darkness is ready at his hand, that is, he is confident that it is nigh
at hand, and that it will not be long ere he shall be cut off.

Verse. 24. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid, etc.] That is, both
outward troubles and inward terrors of conscience shall affright him; they
shall prevail against him, as a king ready to the battle, that is, with an
unresistable power; for kings when they go forth themselves in person to war,
are wont to go out with mighty armies, and in the battle have usually the
flower and strength of the army with them, and so ordinarily they are a great
terror when they come, and bear down all before them with a mighty violence.

Verse. 25. For he stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens
himself against the Almighty.] Here Eliphaz gives the reason why God does so
severely punish the wicked man, as is expressed in the foregoing verses,
namely, because by his opposing the people of God, by his bold blaspheming of
God, by his scornful vilifying his threatenings and judgments, and his
desperate opposing the will of God in all things whatsoever, he does in a
manner set himself to fight against God. Now in expressing this in the second
clause, he mentions God by this attribute the Almighty, and strengeheneth
himself against the Almighty, purposely to imply the folly of such daring
boldness in those presumptuous wretches that are not afraid to lift up their
hand against him who is an almighty God, and able therefore to do with them
whatever he pleases.

Verse. 26. He runs upon him even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers.] Many of our best Expositours understand this of God; for, say they,
Eliphaz having in the former verse set forth the impudence of the wicked man in
fighting against God, he adds here that thereupon He, that is, the Almighty
God, runs upon him, that is, upon the wicked man, even on his neck, upon the
thick bosses of his bucklers (for the bucklers which they used in war had
always thick bosses in the midst, out of which came a sharp piece of iron or
steel like the head of a spear, by reason whereof an enemy could not run in
upon a man armed with one of these bucklers without manifest peril to himself,
and thence is this expression of running in upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers) as if he should have said, even as when a mighty man is provoked by
the insolency of one that is no body in his hands, he runs upon him for all
his bucklers and other weapons wherewith he is armed, and taking him by the
neck throws him down and disarmes him, so does the Lord usually deal with those
insolent wretches, that dare thus exalt themselves against him; for all their
great wealth, authority* and power, wherewith they think themselves safely
shielded as with armor or proof, God runs in upon them, takes them by the neck
or throat, and crushing them down to the ground, strips them of all those
things whereon they rested with so much confidence: and indeed the like
expression Job uses in the following chapter, verse. 12. speaking of Gods
severe dealing with him, He has, says he, broken me asunder, he has also
taken me by my neck and shaken me to pieces. But now others again understand
this of the wicked man (and indeed considering the whole context as it is in
our Translation I cannot see how it can be understood otherwise) having said in
the former verse, that he stretches out his hand against God, etc. in these
words yet farther to set forth his incredible arrogance and insufferable
impudence Eliphaz adds that he runs upon him, that is, upon God, even on his
neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers, meaning that notwithstanding the
almighty power wherewith God is armed to destroy all those that rise up against
him, yet such is the desperate daring boldness of these wicked wretches, that
they make no more of rushing upon the pikes of his displeasure, then if they
had to deal with some weak man, whom they could easily vanquish and subdue.

Verse. 27. Because he covers his face with his fatness, and makes collops
of fat on his flanks.] This is the reason that is given why the wicked man
dares carty himself so proudly against God, to wit, because he is grown rich
and great, and lives in much prosperity, pampering himself with pleasure, and
so thereupon is puffed up with pride, and obdurate against all fear, even to
the exalting of himself against God his Creator; for thus the spirit of God
does frequently in the Scripture express the prosperity and pride of wicked
men, as we may see, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Jesus waxed fat and kicked, etc. Psalm. 7.10.
They are enclosed in their own fat, with their mouth they speak proudly, and so
in many other places* and that say some Expositours, because the fat in man
has no feeling and the fatter men are the less subject they are to fear.

Verse. 28. And he dwells in desolate cities, and in houses which no man
inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.] Many good Expositours understand
this of the misery, which God at last brings upon those men, that do so proudly
set themselves in defiance against God, as is expressed in the foregoing
verses; and by their dwelling in desolate cities, and in houses which no man
inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps, they conceive is meant, either
that through extreme poverty having neither house nor home, they are glad to
get into any old ruinate houses there to lie and shelter themselves, or that
through very terrors of conscience they get into such desolate and
unfrequented places merely to avoid the society of men, or else that by the
people that rise up against them, not able any longer to endure their
oppression and tyranny, they are driven from the places where they have
formerly lived, and so forced to hide their heads in such desolate and solitary
places, as it was with Nebuchadnezzar, who was driven from men, and had his
dwelling with the beasts of the field. But I say as the Context runs in our
Translation it is methinks evident, that this is also added farther to set
forth that great prosperity of the wicked man, which is the cause of his
exalting himself against God; for having said that he covers his face with
his fatness, etc. he adds here, And he dwells in desolate cities, and in
houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps, wherein may be
employed both their exceeding wealth and greatness, in that they were able to
rebuild desolate cities, and ruinated great houses and castles, either merely
to get them a name or for the safety of their persons, as tyrants are wont to
do, according to the former expression, chap. 3.14. With kings and counselors
of the earth, which built desolate places for themselves, of which see the Note
there; and likewise their mighty oppression and tyranny, in that they dwelt in
cities which they had made desolate and poor by their impoverishing the
inhabitants, and in houses from which they had driven the inhabitants by their
cruel dealing with them, and then seized upon them for their own use.

Verse. 29. He shall not be rich, etc.] Considering that Eliphaz speaks still of
that wicked man, that exalts himself against God, because of his fat and great
estate, as is expressed in the former verses, the meaning of these words He
shall not be rich must needs be, either that he shall not attain that height of
riches which he propounds to himself, or that he shall not continue rich;
though he be rich for the present, yet he shall at last come to poverty, as is
explained in the following clause, neither shall his substance continue; and
therefore also is that clause added, neither shall he prolong the perfection
thereof upon the earth whereby either the same thing is expressed again in
other words, to wit, that he shall not long continue in such a glorious
condition, or else the meaning must be that he shall not continue his name upon
earth by leaving his great estate and honor to his children and his childrens
children, which is the perfection of a worldlings greatness and glory.

Verse. 30. He shall not depart out of darkness.] That is, he shall never get
free from those miseries and sorrows which God shall bring upon him. I know
indeed there are some Expositours understand this of the wicked man's not daring
to go forth from those secret hiding places, whereto he has retired himself,
and that because through the inward terrors of his conscience, he is afraid as
Cain was least every man should kill him. But the first exposition to me seems
far more easy and clear.

The flame shall dry up his branches, etc.] By the wicked man's branches many
Expositours understand particularly his posterity; and so conceive that Eliphaz
herein aims at Jobs loss in that particular: but others do I conceive better
understand this clause more generally, to wit, that the wicked man being here
compared to a flourishing tree, by this that the flame shall dry up his
branches is meant, that by the fire of tribulation or by the fire of Gods
wrath, all his riches, and honor, and children, and whatever else it is that
makes his estate so flourishing and glorious, shall be withered and dried up,
yea that all his hopes, and designs, and endeavors shall be brought to
nothing. As for the following clause, and by the breath of his mouth shall he
go away, though the meaning thereof may be, as some take it, that together with
the breath of his mouth he shall perish, or rather that he shall die or be cut
off by the breath of his own mouth, that is, by the desperate and blasphemous
speeches, which in his wrath and pride he shall utter and belch forth against
God (an expression not unlike to that Esa. 64.6. We all do fade as a leaf, and
our iniquities like a wind have taken us away) yet it may be better understood
of the breath of Gods mouth (as referring to that which was said before verse.
25. He stretches forth his hand against God, etc.) by the breath of his mouth
shall he go away, that is, after that God has thus blasted his prosperous
estate, he shall at last utterly cut him off and send him packing away by the
breath of his mouth, that is, by his decree, or by the blast of his
indignation, which is the same that the prophet elsewhere says, Esa. 11.4. He
shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips shall he slay the wicked; and which Eliphaz himself had said before, chap.
4.9. of which see the Note there. And very probable it is that Eliphaz does the
rather use these expressions of flame and fire, and the breath of his mouth, as
in reference to the fire that had consumed Jobs cattle and servants, and to the
wind that had blown down the house upon his children.

Verse. 31. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity; for vanity shall be
his recompense.] As if he should have said, if any wicked man hopes or thinks
it shall be well with him, he is certainly deceived; and therefore let not such
a one trust in such vain hopes, or in any vain thing whereon he builds his
hopes, his sinful courses, his present prosperity, riches, or honors, any
humane counsels or means; for if he does he shall find that these things will
prove vain and nothing worth, and so vanity and misery shall be his recompense.
And herein it seems Eliphaz covertly strikes at the confidence Job had
expressed, chap. 13.15, 16. Though he slay me yet will I trust in him; but I
will maintain mine own ways before him. He also shall be my salvation, etc.

Verse. 32. It shall be accomplished before his time, etc.] This may be read, It
shall be cut off before his time, and then it must be referred to the tree,
whereto he had compared the wicked man, verse. 30. saying, the flame shall dry
up his branches, (which may seem the more probable because of the following
clause here, and his branch shall not be green) and then the meaning is, that
the wicked man shall die an untimely death; or else to the wicked man's trusting
in vanity, or the vanity whereon he trusts, whereof he had spoken in the words
immediately foregoing, and then the meaning is much to the same effect, to wit,
that the wicked man's confidence shall be cut off and come to nothing before his
time, that is, before his days be expired, or by his untimely end. But if we
read it, as it is in our Bibles, It shall be accomplished before his time, then
it must be referred to the last words of the foregoing verse, Vanity shall be
his recompense, and so the meaning must be that the recompencing of vanity to
him that trusts in vanity shall be accomplished before his time, that is,
before his days be accomplished, he shall live to see his pride have a fall,
his own eyes shall behold the vanity of his confidence, or in the cutting him
off before his time, this shall be accomplished; and his branch shall not be
green, that is, nothing that he possesses or undertaketh shall prosper; or,
his children shall be in a withering condition.

Verse. 33. He shall shake off the unripe grape as the vine, etc.] That is, the
wicked man shall be as the vine that shakes off her unripe grapes, and as the
olive tree that casts off her flower; or, God shall shake off his unripe
grapes, as the unripe grapes of a vine are shaken off, etc. But however that
which Eliphaz intends here is, either that his children shall die in their
young and tender years, or at least that they shall die an untimely death (for
because of the sad end of Jobs children Eliphaz is still harping upon this
string) or rather that all his substance, his hopes and endeavors, shall
betimes be blasted, and shall never come to maturity.

Verse. 34. For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, etc.] That is,
though hypocrites have never so great families and attendants, though they have
never so many companions and friends, they shall all be cut off and so their
house shall become desolate: and fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery,
that is, the houses of bribe-takers; or the houses that are filled with
bribery, or built by bribery, or the gain of any such like course of injustice
or deceit.

Verse. 35. They conceive mischief and bring forth vanity, etc.] That is, they
conceive mischievous devices, they plot mischief in their minds against others,
but in the conclusion all these devices prove vain and ineffectuall, and
usually bring mischief upon themselves. Indeed this clause may be read also
thus, They conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity, as we find it also
expressed, Isa. 59.4. and then the meaning must needs be, that they contrive
mischief against others in their mind, and then act that which they have so
conceived. And accordingly we must conceive of the last clause, and their belly
prepares deceit, to wit, that it is meant either of the wicked man's contriving
in his mind how he may deceive others, or else of his plotting those things in
his head, whereby whilst he thinks to hurt others he does only in the
conclusion delude and deceive himself.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 2. I Have heard many such things, etc.] In these first words of Jobs
answer, either he taxes his friends, and Eliphaz in particular, who had last
replied upon him, for running over the same things again and again, even to
weariness and irksomenesse, and those too such things as he had heard many and
many a time from others, and which therefore he knew as well as they, as that
God is just, and that God does use to destroy wicked men, and to pour forth his
wrath upon them even here in this world, etc. (Job would have them know that
his case was so extraordinary, that such extraordinary things as they had so
often repeated did no way suit his condition) or else for the bitterness of
their language. Eliphaz had in his last words very terribly set forth the
vengeance of God upon wicked men, and that as applying all to him; whereupon
Job answers, I have heard many such things, for such terrors and threatenings,
and scornful exprobrations I have had enough of them, but not a word of true
comfort; whereupon he adds, miserable comforters (or as it is in the margin)
troublesome comforters) are ye all, to wit, because in stead of comforting him,
for which they pretended they came to him, they had rather added to his
afflictions, and had rather increased then allayed his sorrows. And herein it
is likely that he had respect to that which Eliphaz had said, chap. 15.11. Are
the consolations of God small with thee? for it is as if he said, They are poor
consolations which I have received from you, who have all with so much
bitterness and scorn thunderd out the judgments of God against me, as against
a base hypocrite, and so in stead of comforting me have indeed done what in you
lay to drive me to despair.

Verse. 3. Shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou
answerest?] That is, that thou should thus reply upon me again the second
time? Or, that thou should answer me after this manner, as thou have done?
That which he demands of him under these words what emboldeneth thee? may be 1.
Whether he had any thing farther to say, whether he had any other arguments to
bring, which had so much strength or solidity in them, that thereby he should
be encouraged to answer again; (thereby implying that hitherto there was no
force of reason in any thing he had spoken) or 2. Whether he knew any thing by
him, that should embolden him thus to charge him with hypocrisy; or 3. Whether
any thing he had spoken had given any such just advantage to Eliphaz, that
thereby he should be encouraged to reply again upon him? or whether he thought
by this renewed onset to weary him out, and make him yield at the last.

Verse. 4. If you were in my souls stead, I could heap up words against you and
shake mine head at you.] That is, if you were in that distress that I am in, I
could multiply harsh and bold uncharitable speeches against you, as you have
done against me; (it is an easy matter for men in prosperity to make large
declamations against those that are in misery) yea I could in a way of scorn
and derision shake my head at you, for that this last clause must be thus
understood is evident, because usually in the Scripture the shaking of the head
is mentioned as a gesture of despite and scorn, as 2. Kings 19.21. The
daughter of Zion has despised thee and laughed thee to scorn, the daughter of
Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee, etc. and so also Psalm. 22.7. Mark
15.29. Lam. 2.15. and in many other places.

Verse. 6. Though I speak, my grief is not assuaged; and though I forbear; what
am I ^ased?] Expositours have found it very hard to say how these words come
in, in this place. Some conceive that having said in the foregoing verse, that
had they been in his condition, and he in theirs, he would have spoken
comfortably to them, and thereby would have allayed their grief, I would
strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should assuage your
grief, because they might have replied upon him, If you be so good at
comforting others, why do you not apply these consolations to your self? to
prevent this objection, he answers, that his condition was so miserable, and
the hand of God was so heavy upon him, that whether he spoke or held his peace
it was all one with him, if he spoke it did not ease his grief, and pain, and
misery, and if he held his peace, his sorrow did the more burn and boil within
him. Again others conceive that having said how he would have comforted them if
they had been in such misery as he was, here now he shows how sad his condition
was, that had only such friends with him as did what they might to discourage
and discomfort him, Though I speak, says he, my grief is not assuaged, that
is, if I pour out my complaints to you, or seek to justify my self, you then
allege, that these miseries are an evident proof that I am a wicked man, and
that thereupon it is that God does proceed in such extremity against me, and
though I forbear, what am I eased? that is, though I speak not but keep in my
grief, that does me no good, because then you take my silence as an
acknowledgement of my guilt, and so break forth the more violently against me.
And this I take to be the most probable dependence of these words upon that
which went before.

Verse. 7. But now he has made me weary, etc.] That is, God has made my life
wearisome to me; for that this is meant of God is evident in the following
clause, where by an Apostrophe he turns his speech directly to God, thou have
made desolate all my company, which he says because God had slain his children
and many of his servants, as is related in the first chapter, and his wife and
friends had either forsaken him, or carried themselves as enemies to him. And
thus now he breaks forth into a large and patheticall description of his
miseries; the drift whereof is, either to manifest what just cause he had to
complain so bitterly as he had done, thereby to move God and his friends
especially to pity him, and not to be so harsh against him as they had been, or
else to disprove what Eliphaz had with many flourishing words sought covertly
to prove in the foregoing chapter, namely that God does only pour forth his
wrath upon wicked men as he had done upon Job; for whilst Job acknowledges
here that his condition was just such as Eliphaz had described the wicked man's
to be (to which end he uses many of the very same expressions speaking of
himself, which Eliphaz had before used, as here saying thou have made desolate
all my company in reference to that which Eliphaz had said, chap. 15.34. the
congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate) and yet afterward maintains that
notwithstanding he was not a wicked hypocrite, verse. 16, 17. On my eyelids is
the shadow of death; Not for any injustice in mine hands; also my prayer is
pure, etc. by this instance of himself, who being a man that feared God, was
yet outwardly in as sad a condition as any wicked man could be, he quite
overthrows all that Eliphaz had said.

Verse. 8. And thou have filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against
me: and my leanness rising up in me, bears witness to my face.] Eliphaz
having set forth the prosperity of the wicked man by his fatness, chap. 15.27.
He covers his face with his fatness, and makes collops of fat on his
flanks, Job here on the contrary sets forth his misery by his leanness and
wrinckles, his body being consumed by those extremities of pain, and sickness,
and sorrow which he had undergone, and so his skin shrivelled and wrinckled
thereby; Now for the better understanding of this, we must know; first, that he
uses this expression that his wrinckles and his leanness did bear witness
against him, either because they did abundantly testify how exceeding grievous
the miseries were which he had suffered; or else because consequently in the
apprehension of his friends they did witness against him, that by his
wickedness he had provoked God to such wrath and indignation against him, as
is noted before upon a like expression, chap. 10.17. 2. That for that phrase he
uses of his leanness rising up in him, my leanness rising up in me bears
witness, either thereby is meant only that his leanness was in him a witness
against him, according to a like expression, Matthew. 11.11. Among them that are
born of women there has not risen a greater then John the Baptist, for there
has not been a greater then John the Baptist, or else he does allude to the
rising up of witnesses when they address themselves in the place of judgment
to give witness against a man, or else he has respect to the staring out of
his bones in a ghastly manner because of his leanness, in regard whereof it
might be the better said, that his flesh consuming, his leanness did rise up
in him; and 3. It is said, that his leanness did bear witness to his face,
because there it was most apparent to the eyes of all men, and did openly as it
were bear witness against him.

Verse. 9. He teareth me in his wrath who hates me; he gnasheth upon me with
his teeth, etc.] Most of our best Expositours hold, that as in the former
verses, so here also, Job still speaks of God, expressing his indignation
against him, and his severe dealing with him after the manner of men by these
words of tearing him in his wrath and gnashing upon him with his teeth. And if
we so understand the words, we must know that this language was the effect of
that distraction, that was upon his spirit by reason of the extremity of his
sufferings: it was the voice of his flesh not of Job himself, the voice of his
sense not of his faith. But because in the following verses it is clear that he
speaks of men that hated him, into whose hands God had delivered him that they
might afflict him; They have gaped upon me with their mouth, etc. God has
delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands of the wicked,
therefore it seems to me most probable which others hold, that he speaks here
of men that hating him did tear him in their wrath and gnash their teeth upon
him: and so we must also understand the last clause of this verse, Mine enemy
sharpeneth his eyes upon me, that is, mine enemies look grimly and fiercely
upon me. Because when men are inflamed their eyes will glitter and sparkle, as
it were, and their looks upon him, against whom they have conceived such
indignation, will be sharp and piercing, like a new whetted sword, they will
look upon him, as we use to say, as if they would look through him, thence is
this expression, Mine enemy sharpneth his eyes upon me.

Verse. 10. They have gaped upon me with their mouth, etc.] By this their gaping
upon him may be meant either 1. Their violent endeavoring his utter ruin, as
if he had said, they run upon me with open mouth as if they meant presently to
destroy me and eat me up; for so the same phrase is used Psalm. 22.13. They
gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion, or 2. Their
outcries against him, their clamorous contradictions, and revilings, and
reproaches wherein with full mouth they fell upon him; or 3. Their flouting and
deriding him, as Psalm. 35.21. Yea they opened their mouths wide against me, and
said, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it. And indeed to the same purpose also are
the following words, they have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully: for it
is not necessary that we should think because of these words, that his enemies
did indeed smite his aged, pale, and wrinckled face with their hands or fists:
in regard it is a proverbiall speech, whereby any reproachful or contemptuous
usage is meant, as we see Lam. 3.30. where these words, He gives his cheeks to
him that smites him are explained more clearly in the following words, he is
filled full with reproach; and 2 Cor. 11.20. where the Apostle would tell them
that they could suffer their false teachers though they used them never so
scornfully and disgracefully, he expresses it thus, ye suffer it if a man
smite you on the face. And indeed to imply this is the word reproachfully here
added they have smitten me on the cheek reproachfully; the meaning is, that
they had done him all the shame they might, and had used him with all the scorn
and contempt that possibly they could.

Verse. 11. God has delivered me to the ungodly, etc.] That is, to the Sabeans
and Chaldeans, chap. 1. and others that since Gods hand was so heavy upon him
had used him despitefully.

Verse. 12. I was at ease, but he has broken me asunder.] This Job adds because
in this regard his condition was far the sadder and the more to be pitied,
that having lived formerly in so great prosperity, free from cares, and griefs,
and fears, unexpectedly on a sudden all was destroyed and brought to nothing.
Neither is there any contradiction betwixt this, and that which he had said
before, chap. 3.26. I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I
quiet; for there Job speaks of the spiritual frame of his heart, to wit, that
he was not secure, though he was then free from trouble; but here now he speaks
of the temporal frame of his outward estate, in which he had ease, and was
free from trouble, no man molesting him.

He has also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, etc.] As before so
here also he uses the same expression, which Eliphaz had used before in
setting forth Gods dealing with wicked men, chap. 15.26. He runs on him,
even on his neck, etc. of which see the Note above verse. 7. As for the next
clause, and set me up for his mark. See also a former Note chap. 7.20.

Verse. 13. His archers compass me round about, etc.] The Archers he speaks of
are either those men, whom God had made use of for the afflicting of Job, and
to imply how many they were, and that every man almost friends and foes had a
fling at him, he says they compassed him round about; or else those diseases
which God had laid upon him, and then this compassing him round about implies
the variety of bodily infirmities, wherewith God had smitten him, and that
round about him, all his body over he was full of ulcers. As for the following
words, He cleaves my reins asunder, and does not spare; he pours out my
gall upon the ground; Some by the cleaving of his reins asunder understand,
that God had mortally wounded him, and that his miseries were incurable; others
that his strength was quite wasted and consumed, which lies chiefly in the
reins and loins of a man; and others that he was tortured with the stone in
the kidneyes, and so his pains were so extreme as if his very reins were
cleaving asunder, or at least that his sorrows and pains were most exquisite,
like the pains of those that are tortured with the stone: and by the pouring
out his gall upon the ground they understand, either that his extreme miseries
made him pour forth the bitterness of his spirit in bitter complaints, or else
that the wounds that God had given him were mortal and incurable. But I
conceive the drift of these words in general was to imply the exquisite,
incredible, and insupportable pains and sorrows he endured even in the inward
parts of his body, that his very bowels and vital parts were wrackt and torn
within him, so that the torment he endured was insufferable and that without
intermission or remission night or day.

Verse. 14. He breaks me with breach upon breach, etc.] That is, he heaps
afflictions, plagues, and miseries upon me thick and threefold, as we use to
say, one in the neck of another: which may be meant of those sad tidings that
were brought to him, chap. 1. one messenger coming in still with a fresh report
of his losses before the other had well made an end of speaking, or else of the
griefs and diseases which did every day still increase upon him, and the ulcers
that did continually break out a-fresh in his body. As for the following
clause, he runs upon me like a giant, therein he seeks to imply how
exceeding heavy Gods hand was upon him, and with what fury and unresistable
violence he proceeded against him.

Verse. 15. I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin, etc.] Some conceive that he
says of the sackcloth that he wore, that it was sowed upon his skin; because
it did cleave to his ulcerous body as fast as if it had been sown to his skin;
but I conceive this phrase, I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin intends no more
but this, that he had put on sackcloth sowed together next his skin, which
being full of boyles and sores, whether scabbed or raw, it must needs be very
terrible to him; and that hereby he seeks to set forth how he had humbled
himself under the hand of God, and that consequently he was not guilty of
advancing himself against God, as Eliphaz, had covertly charged him, making
that the cause why God laid his hand so heavy upon the wicked man, chap.
15.25. And to the same purpose also are the next words, and defiled my horn in
the dust; for thereby is meant either that he had sprinkled dust upon his head
(concerning which custom see the Notes Josh. 7.6.) or else rather, that he was
content, laying by all the thoughts of his former greatness, and pomp, and
glory, to sit down in the dust that he might humble himself before the
almighty; (for that the word horn is thus frequently used in the Scripture we
may see in the Notes upon 1. Sam. 2.1.) yea both these expressions concerning
his sackcloth, and his defiling his horn in the dust may be only used as
figurative expressions, to signify that he had greatly abased and humbled
himself, even as those do that cloth themselves with sackcloth, and throw dust
upon their heads. And thus, because men are wont the more to pity those that
are in affliction, when they see they are penitent, and do melt and humble
themselves under Gods hand, he uses this as another argument to move his
friends to pity him, and does covertly tax them of cruelty that could be so
harsh to one, whom they saw in so mournful a manner humbling himself under the
strokes of the Almighty.

Verse. 16. My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of
death.] By this shadow of death on his eyelids may be meant, either that
shadowy blackness or darkness, which will be on the eyelids of those whose
eyes are sunk in their heads by grief or sickness, as we see in the hollow
eyeholes of dying men, or of a dead man's scull, in allusion whereto it may be
called the shadow of death, or else that darkness and dimnesse of sight which
is also usually the effect of some extreme grief or exceeding much weeping, as
we see in that complaint of the Church, Lam. 2.11. Mine eyes do fail with
tears: for because such a mistynesse and dimnesse of sight does usually come
upon sick men when death approaches, even this also may be justly termed the
shadow of death.

Verse. 17. Not for any injustice in my hands; also my prayer is pure.] Not as
thinking himself free from all sins, but only from that gross wickedness and
secret hypocrisy wherewith his friends had charged him, Job here professes
his innocence in regard of his upright walking both toward God and toward
man; (and consequently that he knew that Gods hand was not so heavy upon him in
regard of any such wickedness that he had committed) 1. Toward man, in the
first clause, Not for any injustice in my hands, where by injustice is meant
all oppression, all fraudulent or unjust dealing whatsoever, and it may well be
that in clearing himself of this he had respect to that which Eliphaz had said,
chap. 15.34. The congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate and fire shall
consume the tabernacles of bribery. 2. Toward God in the second clause, also
my prayer is pure, whereby he meant that he did sincerely worship God as God
had appointed, and that his prayers proceeded from a pure conscience and faith
unfeigned, wherein also he might have respect to that bitter charge of Eliphaz,
chap. 15.4 yea, thou castest off fear and restrainest prayer before God. And
this he does, either thereby to move his friends to pity him, (for when
righteous men suffer much, that have not deserved it by any wickedness of
theirs, all men are the readier to commiserate their sufferings) or else to
disprove all that Eliphaz had said concerning the Lords punishing wicked men
only, as is noted before verse. 7.

Verse. 18. O earth cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.] A
Poetical and patheticall expression this is; and Expositours differ much in
their judgment concerning the meaning of it. Some take it to be an imprecation
wherein he wishes that his body might lie unburied after he was dead, if that
were not true which he had said concerning his innocence: and others take it as
an earnest asseveration, that he desired not to die as the bruit beasts do,
(which through guilt of conscience all hypocrites must needs desire) whose
bodies when they dye are covered in the earth there to rot and consume and
never to rise again, but that he certainly expected and earnestly desired the
Resurrection of his body, when he knew he should appear before God and his
innocence should be cleared. But I see not how according to either of these
expositions there can be a good sense given of the last clause, and let my cry
have no place. But two other Expositions there are given of these words, which
seem to me far the most pobable. The first is, that Job does herein profess
his desire that his calamities and the cause thereof might be made known before
the heavens and before all the world, O earth cover not thou my blood, that is,
cover not the blood and corruption that issues out of my ulcers; or rather,
hide not my misery, sorrows and sufferings, and let my cry have no place, that
is, let there be no place found that should hide my cry from coming up into the
presence of God: for this, they say, he desires, not so much that his miseries
might be known to men, as that God might take notice of them, and so might
judge and plead his cause against those that derided and falsely accused him.
The other is, that these words contain a vehement protestation of his
innocence. Having said in the foregoing verse that he suffered not for any
injustice in his hands, etc. because he had often thus professed his innocence,
and his friends he saw did not believe him, therefore he breaks forth into this
vehement and patheticall expression, O earth cover not thou my blood, that is,
if by oppressing the poor or any other way of injustice I have drawn the guilt
of blood upon my self, let not the earth cover or hide that bloody wickedness,
but let it be discovered, and let it cry to heaven for vengeance, as did the
blood of Abel against Cain; (whereto it is very likely that Job did allude; and
indeed oppression and such like bloudsucking sins are often intended in the
Scripture where it speaks of blood, as Habak. 2.12. Woe to him that builds a
town with blood and establishes a city by iniquity) and let my cry have no
place, that is, let not the cry of that my oppression find any hiding place,
but let it be known to God and man (and so indeed the word cry is sometimes
used in the Scripture, as Isa. 5.7. he looked for judgment, but behold
oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry) or rather, and let my cry
have no place, that is, when I cry in my extremities let not God nor man regard
it; yea and when I call to men for help, or pray to God for mercy, let me not
prevail either with man or God, but let just vengeance fall upon me according
to that, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me.

Verse. 19. Also now, behold, my witness is in heaven, etc.] This word also may
be referred either to his acquaintance, as if he should have said, though there
are many that if they would speak the truth can witness for me, that I have
lived holily and righteously, yet however my comfort is that God is my witness
that it is so; or else to himself, as if he had said, what I have protested
concerning mine innocence God also in heaven who from on high beholds all
things can and I know will witness for me that it is true.

Verse. 20. My friends scorn me* but mine eye pours out tears unto God.] That
is, God being my witness, who knows exactly the innocence of my life and the
sincerity of my heart, though my friends scorn and deride me, yet I can comfort
my self in God; to him I appeal who is my Judge, to him I look up, and with
tears do pour out my complaints and requests before him, who is indeed my only
stay and comfort.

Verse. 21. O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleads for his
neighbor.] This is in a manner the same that he had desired before, chap.
9.34, 35. and 13.3, and 20; concerning which see the several Notes there: only
these words may be understood as a desire, either that himself might plead his
cause with God, or else that some other might do it for him, and may imply his
hope that some body might be found that would undertake to maintain his
innocence, and then God passing judgment, either he should know wherein he had
erred, and so might amend it, or else by the judgment of God openly pronounced
he should be clearly acquitted before all that should hear it.

Verse. 22. When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall
not return.] Concerning this expression see what is noted before chap. 7.9, 10.
Neither is there any thing farther difficult in these words, but only their
dependence upon that which went before, wherein every Expositour is almost in a
several mind. Some conceive that these words are added by way of comforting
himself, in that by his death which hastened so fast upon him there would an
end be put to all his miseries. Others as an aggravation of his friends
cruelty, of which he had spoken before, verse. 20. My friends scorn me, etc.
because they took no pity of a man, ready as it were to give up the ghost.
Others, as an argument to move God to allay his miseries, and not to lay his
hand so heavy upon one that is dying already; Others by way of clearing himself
from not speaking sincerely in that protestation he had now made concerning his
innocence; for having death before his eyes, as ready immediately to seize upon
him, what likelihood was there that he should speak against his conscience?
Others as by way of correcting what he had spoken concerning his innocence; as
if he should have said, why do I stand protesting mine innocence or wishing I
might plead my cause with God? It is altogether in vain and to no purpose,
since I am in a manner a dead man already; And last of all, others conceive
that herein a reason is given, why he had desired in the foregoing verse that
his cause might be pleaded before God, to wit, because he perceived he had but
a short time to live, and he desired before his departure, that either he might
know what it was wherewith God had been provoked to deal so severely with him,
that so he might repent of it, or else that God might acquit him from that
wickedness and hypocrisy whereof his friends had accused him, that so he
might die in peace and leave a good report behind him, for the comfort and
edification of others of Gods people.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. MY breath is corrupt, etc.] Some read this as it is in the margin of
our Bibles, My spirit is spent, and so make his complaint to be, that his
vital spirits were in a manner quite wasted, and so consequently his life also
that was preserved thereby. But taking it as it is in our Translation, the
meaning must needs be, that his breathing was stopped and marred, or rather
that his breath was infected and stunk through some inward putrefaction; and so
some Expositours understand that also, chap. 19.17. My breath is strange to my
wife, etc. And indeed it is clear that the drift of his words here was to show,
that by the decay of his body he might plainly see that his death could not be
far off; to which purpose is that also which follows, my days are extinct,
that is, the light of my life is in a manner quite extinguished, according to
that Prove. 24.20. the candle of the wicked shall be put out. As for the last
clause, the graves are ready for me, the only doubt is why it is expressed in
the plural number. But for this to me it seems far most probable that his
meaning herein was plainly no more but this, that it would not be long ere he
should be lodged in some one of those houses of darkness, which are the last
home of all men living. As when it is said of Iehoram king of Judah that he was
not buried in the sepulchers of the kings, 2. Chron. 21.20. the meaning is only
that he was not buried amongst their sepulchers: so when here Job says, the
graves are ready for me, the meaning is only, that the place of burial, the
house of graves, as I may call it, was ready to receive him, to wit, because it
could not be long ere he should be carried thither.

Verse. 2. Are there not mockers with me? etc.] Here Job returns to complain of
his friends (as indeed men in affliction are wont sometimes to bend their
speech one way and sometimes another) inferring it as a strange thing, that
notwithstanding he was in so sad a condition, ready every moment as it were to
drop into the grave, yet they did nothing but mock and deride him; and so by
that means did what in them lay, continually to vex him and provoke him to
anger and indignation against them; for so much the following clause imports,
and does not mine eye continue in their provocation? to wit, that night and day
their scoffs and deriding of him did evermore afflict him; for by that
expression of his eye continuing in their provocation he sought to imply either
1. That the eye of his mind was continually upon their scornful carriage of
themselves toward him, the remembrance of their scoffs did continually molest
him, many times keeping him awake when he should have slept, and sometimes
perhaps troubling him in his very dreams; Or 2. That they did thus continually
provoke him to his very face, he was constrained to see himself continually
mocked and derided by them.

Verse. 3. Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee, etc.] A very obscure
passage this is, insomuch that amongst the several Expositions that are given
of it, it is very hard to say which is the right. Some conceive that Job speaks
here to Eliphaz, and desires that by a pledge and a surety he would give him
assurance, that he would refer his cause to Gods judgment, and that he would
make good what he had said, to wit, either concerning the wickedness and
hypocrisy wherewith he had charged Job, or concerning the certain prosperity of
the righteous and the calamities of the wicked, or else concerning that
flourishing prosperity which he had promised to Job, if he would repent and
turn unto the Lord; Lay down now, says Job, put me in a surety with thee, as
if he should have said, if you be so sure that I am a wicked man and an
hypocrite, and that therefore all these evils are come upon me that I suffer,
and that if I repent then I shall have all things according to my hearts desire
again, Lay down now a pledge or a pawn that shall be forfeited, if you do not
appear and make this good, put me in a surety with thee, that shall undertake
for thee that this shall be done, and so let our cause be pleaded before an
equal judge or umpire; and accordingly also they hold therefore that the last
clause must be taken, either as a challenge to the rest of his friends, that
they would, if Eliphaz would not, undertake this his challenge, who is he that
will strike hands with me? (for in those days they used to confirm any
agreement made between man and man by clapping or clasping of hands together,
thereby as it were binding themselves one to another, whence is that of
Solomon, Prove. 6.1, 2. My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou have
stricken thy hand with a stranger, thou art snared with the words of thy mouth,
etc.) or else as a denial that any surety could be found, that would upon
these conditions undertake for Eliphaz or his other two friends; who is he that
will strike hands with me? as if he should have said, I would gladly see the
man that would upon these terms make an agreement with me; but alas who is he
that will do it? Again, 2. Some think that as in the following verses, so here
also, Job directs his speech to God, and that (out of an over-violent desire to
have his innocence cleared, as being exceedingly net^ed with the unjust
aspersions which his friends had cast upon him) he does here as a man besides
himself press God to lay down a pledge, and to put in a surety that would
undertake for God, to wit, either that Jobs cause should be tried before Go^
and not men, and that God and not man should determine of it; or else that God
would condescend to have the cause between God and him equally argued and
heard, as between one man and another, and that God should stand to what was
determined after it had been thus argued, Lay down now, put me in a surety with
thee, as who should say, I know, O Lord, that poor mortal man cannot contend
with thee, and that if he should, he must needs be soon overwhelmed with thy
majesty and glory, and therefore I desire that thou would lay down a pawn
and put in a surety, who may undertake for thee, that laying aside thy majesty,
thou will suffer me to plead my cause with thee; and agreeably hereto they hold
that the last words are added to imply, either how desirous he was that such a
surety might be found that would undertake this for God, who is he that will
strike hands with me? or else how unlikely it was that any could be found that
would undertake it. 3. Because it seems very hard that Job should as it were
profess that he would not trust God without a pawn and a surety, and that he
should speak so immodestly and arrogantly to God, therefore some other
Expositours hold that Job desires God to appoint him a surety, that should
undertake for the clearing of his innocence against the calumnies of his
friends, or rather that should engage himself to plead both for God and him
against his unjust friends; and therefore they say it is said put me in a
surety with thee, that is, one that may be a surety both for thee and me:
whereupon he adds also, either to imply his desire that this might be, or his
fear that it would not be, who is he that will strike hands with me? And indeed
such a one as this Exposition intends, Elihu did afterward appear to be, when
he undertook to umpire the business betwixt Job and his friends. But now 4.
Others understand this of Christ the promised Messiah, Lay down now, put me in
a surety with thee; who is he that will strike hands with me? that is, let that
which I now desire be determined and established; appoint Christ who is with
thee in heaven, and has already agreed with thee to be the surety of poor
sinners, appoint him I say to plead my cause and to stand up for me as my
surety, and then I am sure no man will dare to contend with me. And indeed
these two last Expositions do best agree with the context.

Verse. 4. For thou have hid their heart from understanding; therefore shall
thou not exalt them.] That he might not be thought over-bold and over-confident
in desiring that his cause might be examined and tried, or in appealing as he
had done to God, from his friends, he gives in these words as a reason why he
did so earnestly desire this, and why he was so fearlesse of having his cause
any way tried, to wit, because God had hid their heart from understanding, that
is, he had hid understanding from their heart, he had given them over to
blindness of mind, how wise soever they thought themselves, to wit, in that
particular controversy which was now in debate betwixt Job and them; Gods
providence toward Job were mysteries, and riddles to them which they could
not unfold, and so accordingly they were in the dark, as concerning those
points which had been argued betwixt him and them, and were not able to discern
between truth and error, and therefore says he, shall thou not exalt them;
where by not exalting them is meant, either that God would not honor them with
letting them determine his cause, but would take the matter out of their hands
into his own, or at least put it into some other hand; or else that God would
not give them occasion to exalt themselves over him, by giving sentence on
their side; however they now tryumphed over him, as if they had got the
victory, yet when their cause came to be heard, he knew well that then God
would take his part against them, and determine the cause for him and not for
them, and then they should have no cause to exalt themselves.

Verse. 5. He that speaks flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his
children shall fail.] Concerning this expression of the failing of their eyes
see the Notes, chap. 11.20. and Deuteronomy. 28.32. the meaning is, that God will not
only punish such flatterers in their own persons, but even in their children
also, who through Gods just judgment do tread in their fathers steps. But the
great question concerning these words is, why Job speaks here of Gods punishing
those that flatter their friends, since his friends (of whom he is now
complaining) were so far from flattering him, that they did rather revile him
and falsely accuse him, and to this five answers may be given 1. That he may
therefore accuse them of flattery, because having always spoken him so fair in
the time of his prosperity, they were now so bitter against him in the hour of
his adversity. 2. That the flattery he intends was, that when they might so
plainly perceive that he was irrecoverably spent, a dying man, as we use to
speak, yet they could tell him such long stories of the prosperous estate he
should enjoy here in this world, if he would repent and seriously seek Gods
face and favor, as that his estate should be like the morning, that he should
outshine the very Sun, and be a great man again, chap. 5.19, 20, and 8.5, and
11.15, 16, etc. 3. That the flattery which here he covertly strikes at was, not
their flattering him but their flattering of God; if God would punish those
that flatter their friends, they could expect no better who to curry favor
with God, and under a flattering pretense of maintaining Gods justice, had most
unjustly condemned him; which is that wherewith he had before charged his
friends, chap. 13.8, 10. of which see the Notes there. 4. That he spoke not
this to charge them with flattery, but to clear himself from desiring to be
flattered; least they should think that he complained of their harsh dealing
with him, because he desired they should flatter him, to prevent this he gives
them to understand that he was so far from this, that he was assured that if
men flattered their friends God would destroy both them and their posterity,
and 5. That he spoke not this as a threat against his friends for their
flattering of him, but as a threat against himself in case he should have
flattered them; he would not have them offended at his plainness of speech in
reproving them, and telling them that God had hid their hearts from
understanding, etc. and that because he knew well how severely God was wont to
punish those that flattered their friends, not in their own persons only, but
also in their posterity.

Verse. 6. He has made me also a byword of the people, and a^ore time I was as
a tabret.] Here Job returns to his wonted complaints of the sad condition,
whereinto God had brought him. Reading the last clause as it is in the margin
of our Bibles, and before them I was as a tabret, it is as if he had said,
before their face or in their sight, they being witnesses of it, I was as a
tabret; or else it is to the same purpose with the first clause, He has made
me also a byword of the people (concerning which see the Note, Deuteronomy. 28.37.)
for the meaning is, that they played upon him as a tabret, or that they made a
laughing stock of him, deriding him and sporting themselves with his misery,
according to the like expressions which we find elsewhere, as Lam. 3.14. I was
a derision to all my people, and their song all the day, and Psalm. 44.13. Thou
make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and a derision to them that are
round about us. But if we read it as it is in our Bibles, and a^ore-time I was
as a tabret, then the meaning must needs be, that whereas formerly report gave
a pleasant sound of him to all men's ears, now men scoffed and flouted at him in
every place; Or, that now they talked reproachfully and scoffingly of him in
every corner, whereas in former times they rejoiced in his company, and it was
a delight to them to be where he was.

Verse. 7. And all my members are as a shadow.] As if he had said, My body is no
body indeed but as it were the shadow of a body; and this he might say, either
with respect to his exceeding great weakness, by reason whereof all the
members of his body were in a manner useless to him, they had the outward
appearance and shape of members, but they could not do the office of such
members, he could not make any use either of hands or feet, etc. or else
because his whole body was so consumed and wasted, that his members had as it
were no substance in them, they were so meager and wan that he looked more like
an apparition, then one that had a true body, and should his friends see him
they could not know him, but would take him for the shadow of Job, rather then
for Job himself. But now if you read this clause as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, and all my thoughts are as a shadow, then the meaning is, that his
thoughts did suddenly vanish and pass away as a shadow; and indeed men in
great distress are wont to be full of various distracting thoughts, their
minds running sometimes upon one thing sometime on another, which may well be
that which Job here complains of, to wit, that there was no stability in his
thoughts because of his miseries.

Verse. 8. Upright men shall be astonished at this, etc.] Some Expositours make
the sense of these words to be this, that even upright men shall be astonished to
see one, whom they judged a holy and righteous man, to be so severely punished,
and shall thereupon raise up themselves against him as against an hypocrite;
and accordingly also they expound the following verse, The righteous also shall
hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger,
to wit, that the righteous afflicted man, though thus misjudged by his godly
friends (which is indeed the sorest of all trials) shall for all this hold on
his way, and shall become more strict and more zealous in the ways of
godliness then he was before. But the commoner and as I conceive the better
Exposition is this, Upright men shall be astonished at this, that is, wise and
godly men (such Jobs friends were) shall stand amazed at my strange sufferings,
and shall hereupon condemn and deride me in my miseries, and that especially
upon this ground, that I should for all this persevere in my dependence upon
God, and maintain mine innocence and integrity against them; and the innocent
shall stir up himself against the hypocrite, that is, men of a holy life and
pure conscience shall hereupon rouse up themselves, to wit, either 1. To take
his part and maintain his cause against those hypocrites, that did so deride
and falsely accuse him, or 2. To oppose those base hypocrites, that by his
sufferings should take occasion to blaspheme God, to harden themselves in their
wickedness, and to make a mock of godliness, or 3. To encourage themselves by
this example not to faint in the like case, if it should come to be their
portion, but stoutly to maintain their integrity against those that unjustly
condemned them; And so likewise they understand the following verse, The
righteous also shall hold on his way, etc. to wit, that good and holy men will
not be beaten off from the ways of righteousness, by seeing them that walk in
those ways so sorely afflicted, despised, and derided, but will rather become
the more zealous, and gather the more strength hereby to comfort and encourage
themselves against such temptations. So that the drift of these words also was,
to show that his grievous miseries was no proof that he was a wicked man, and
that God has other holy ends for which he brings such sore calamities upon
men, besides the punishing of them for their sins.

Verse. 10. But as for you all, do you return and come now, etc.] This may be
either spoken by way of advice to his friends, do you return, that is, give
over this erroneous conceit which you have hitherto maintained, change your
minds, and come now, that is, close with me in that which I shall say, or
hearken to that which I shall now deliver: or else as a challenge farther to
argue out the business between them, (which seems the more probable because in
that sense this very expression, Return I pray you is used before, chap. 6.29.
of which see the Note there) But as for you all, do you return and come now,
that is, come and let us again argue the cause between us; were there never so
many of you, I challenge every one of you to prepare your selves and to allege
the utmost you can for the justifying of that you have undertaken to maintain:
for I cannot find one wise man among you, that is, in this particular you speak
not wisely, I shall easily make it appear that in this which you affirm, that
God would not afflict me thus were I not an hypocrite, you err grossly, and
speak as men that are altogether ignorant of the ways of God; And it may well
be which some think, that because Eliphaz had now returned, as I may say, to
reply upon him, and because he saw perhaps his other two friends eager to fall
upon him the second time, therefore it was that he now bids defiance to them
all, But as for you all, do you return and come now, etc.

Verse. 11. My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of
my heart.] As if he had said, what do you tell me of comfortable days? though
I have done what I could to comfort my self with hope and expectation of being
freed from the miseries which for the present I suffered, and with entertaining
purposes of doing this or that when I came to be in a better condition (as
indeed men in misery are wont to catch at any thing, that may give them any
hope of being delivered out of their troubles,) yet I see all is in vain, my
life is in a manner at an end, all the thoughts and purposes of my heart this
way are broken off, to wit, either by death which will put an end to them all,
or else by diverse other distracting thoughts, which my pain and other miseries
do continually suggest, and which will not suffer my thoughts to be long
steadfastly pitched upon any thing, especially any thing that should comfort me.
Now though some conceive that this is rendered as a reason, why they should
hearken to him and be warned by him, to wit, because being a dying man he had
not much more to say, nor was well able to utter what he had purposed to speak,
his pain and misery interrupting him, and the thoughts of his heart being
through distemper full of distractions; yet I rather think that the drift of
these words is clearly to show, how vain a thing it would be for him, a dying
man, to expect any such glorious condition here in this world as they had
promised him, if he would repent and turn again unto the Lord, and that because
this agrees fully with that which follows.

Verse. 12. They change the night into day, etc.] That is, these distracting
thoughts (of which mention was made in the foregoing verse) or my friends by
causing such distraction in my thoughts, make me pass the night without any
rest as if it were the day: the light is short because of darkness, that is,
the light of my joy is short because of the darkness of my afflictions; or
rather, the light is short because of darkness, that is, when the day comes it
seems presently to be gone again, so that I do very little enjoy the benefit of
the day, and that either because it seems over-clouded with the darkness of my
afflictions, or because I am straight way afraid of the dolefulness of the
night that is coming after it.

Verse. 13. If I wait, the grave is mine house; I have made my bed in the
darkness.] That is, if I should wait in hope to see an end of my miseries, yet
at last I am sure the grave must be my house, there in the darkness of the pit
I must lay me down to rest. Thus some Expositours understand these words. But I
rather understand them thus, If I wait, the grave is my house, etc. that is, if
I should wait for that glorious change to which you say God would restore me,
if I would repent and beg mercy at his hands, I should certainly flatter my
self in vain, and that because I am a dying man, and so the grave is the house
where I must immediately be lodged, and in the darkness thereof I am ready to
lay down my self to rest.

Verse. 14, I have said to Corruption, Thou art my father; to the worm, Thou art
my mother and my sister.] It is the opinion of a learned man, and not
altogether improbable, that because great men in those times had certain
vaults, where the bodies of all their family were successively laid, and placed
in such order, that when their children went in to them, they were able to say
which was their grandfather and grandmother, their father and mother, etc.
therefore Job to imply that he should not be buried in such a way of state, but
should be laid after the manner of meaner men in an ordinary grave, he says
here that in stead of being thus laid up with the ancestors of his family, he
should only have rottenness and worms for his father, and mother, and
sisters, in his burial place. But the more ordinary exposition of these words
I take to be the better by far, to wit, that Jobs drift therein is, as in
those before, to show that he was hopeless of life, and had in his thoughts
given up himself, and that willingly, to the grave, I have said to corruption,
Thou art my father; to the worm, Thou art my mother and my sister, as if he
should have said, In stead of those my near friends with whom I have lived, in
the house of the grave, whether I am going apace, corruption and worms are the
near allies, the father, mother, brothers and sisters with whom I must dwell;
And indeed to corruption and the worms he might the rather give these terms of
his nearest allies, because he himself had his original from the earth, and
was no better, in regard of that corruption whereinto he should be turned in
the grave, then the grave-bred worms. But however by these expressions Job
would show that he was so far from looking upon death as an enemy, or a
stranger, that he was upon fair terms with death as with his nearest alliance,
yea that he was well acquainted with death, and took delight and contentment in
death, as men do when after a long journey they return home to father, and
mother, and brethren, and sisters.

Verse. 15. And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it?] That
is, when I shall be thus laid in the grave, what will become then of the hope
you would give me of a prosperous estate here in this world, since doubtless
no man shall ever see me have a good day again here in this world? It is as if
he should have said, It had been fitter you should have propounded to me the
bliss and glory, which after death I might expect in heaven; for I were indeed
in a sad condition, if I had no more hope in heaven, then I can expect here in
this world.

Verse. 16. They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together
is in the dust.] Two several ways these words of Job may be understood, 1. As
an answer to the last words of the foregoing verse; having said there, As for
my hope, who shall see it? He answers himself here in these words, They shall
go down to the bars of the pit, etc. as if he should have said, I look every
hour to be laid in the grave, and therefore if there be any good to be hoped
for by me, I must expect it there, and so they that will see my hope must pass
through the gates of death, and go down with me into the grave, that so they
may there behold it, when we shall there lie at rest together in the dust, 2.
As a farther illustration of the vanity of those hopes, which his friends had
propounded to him, They shall go down, says Job, to the bars of the pit,
etc. that is, truly all the hopes that you have propounded to me, or that I can
conceive of living in prosperity again in this world, shall be all buried in
the grave, and there both I and they shall perish, when we shall all rest
together in the dust.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 2. THen answered Bildad the Shuhite.] As Bildad spoke next after
Eliphaz, when they first began to argue with him, so now again in replying, he
keeps his turn, and speaks next after Eliphaz, as he did before.

Verse. 2. How long will it be ere you make an end of words? etc.] Many learned
Expositours hold, that in this and the following verse Bildad speaks, not to
Job, but to his two companions Eliphaz and Zophar, or at least jointly both to
Job and them (and that because in the Original it is expressed indeed in the
plural number) and that the drift of these words is to blame them, because
they had hitherto multiplied words one against another, but all little or
nothing to the purpose, and that thereupon he adds the following clause, mark
and afterward we will speak, that is, let us be sure that we mark and well
understand one another, and then we may the better hope to carry on our dispute
to some good effect. But because 1. His joining his friends with himself in
that clause, mark and afterward we will speak, seems rather to imply that he
does not direct his speech to them. 2. His friends having still pleaded the
same thing against Job which he himself does here in his following speech, to
wit, that God does always destroy wicked men, there was no color why he
should blame his friends for multiplying words nothing to the purpose, and 3.
Job in the first words of his next reply seems directly to strike at these
words of Bildad, as spoken to him, chap. 19.2. yea, says he, How long will ye
vex my soul and break me in pieces with words? in these regards I rather think
that Bildad spoke this only to Job, and that it is expressed in the plural
number, either because there were some friends at this dispute, that sided with
Job though Job only spoke; or else rather because it was a propriety of speech
which the Hebrews used, to speak sometimes in the plural number though they
speak but to one; It seems therefore to me most probable, that Bildad did with
these words interrupt Job before he had made an end of speaking, and because
Job had been still larger in answering them then they had been in their arguing
against him, therefore he upbraides him for being so full of words, How long
will it be ere you make an end of words? as if he should have said, will you
never have done? How long will it be ere you give over this multiplying of
words, I say mere words, nothing to the purpose, and that have no substance nor
solidity in them? mark and afterward we will speak, that is, observe what we
say and then we shall willingly proceed to argue the cause farther with you.
And herein he does also covertly tax Job, that hitherto he had not well
observed or not well understood what they had said, and that thereupon it was
that he ran on, and would still defend his cause, though there was no
strength at all in any thing he spoke.

Verse. 3. Wherefore are we counted as beasts and reputed vile in your sight?]
As is noted in the foregoing verse, many hold that this also was spoken by
Bildad to his two friends; as if he had said, Why should you suffer your selves
to be thus scorned and despised, and that even to your faces? (for that must
needs be the meaning of those words and reputed vile in your sight?) But taking
it as spoken to Job, and that those words in your sight (which in the original
are expressed in the plural number) were spoken with respect to those
standers-by that sided with Job, as is said in the former verse, then the words
do clearly contain an expostulation with Job for slighting all that they had
spoken, wherefore are we counted as beasts and reputed vile in your sight? that
is, why are we scorned and despised, as if we were mere bruits that had no
understanding? And indeed many things Job had spoken whereto Bildad might have
respect in these words, as when he said that God had hid their heart from
understanding, chap. 17.4. and verse. 10. I cannot find one wise man among you;
and when he had termed them miserable comforters, chap. 16.2. and sent him to
the beasts to be instructed by them, chap. 12.7. Ask now the beasts and they
shall teach thee, etc.

Verse. 4. He teareth himself in his anger.] In relation to that which Job had
said, chap. 13.14. wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth? or to that which
he had said, chap. 16.9. He teareth me in his wrath who hates me, Bildad here
charge Job with this, that he did even tear himself in his anger; as if he
should have said, Whereas Job complains that his enemy that hates him teareth
him in his wrath, the truth is that he teareth himself, though he would seem to
deny it; and his meaning is, either that he carried himself like a mad man, who
in their distraction are wont often to tear not their garments only, but their
own flesh also; or else that through the impatience of his spirit, and his
inward vexing and fretting he did continually torture and tear himself.

Shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his
place?] Some Expositours understand the first clause thus, shall the earth be
forsaken for thee? that is, if you be cut off and perish, must all the glory of
the world needs perish with you? you make a do about your dying, as if the
whole earth would be left desolate and without an inhabitant, if you should be
taken away; why, what do you make of your self, that such a matter should be
made of it, that you are like to be laid shortly in the grave? Shall the earth
be forsaken for thee? if you die, must all the world needs die with you? But
the commoner and better exposition of these words is, that Bildad does here
check Job for maintaining that, which would overthrow the settled course of Gods
providence in the government of the world, Shall the earth be forsaken for
thee? etc. as if he had said, To justify you, who will not yield that your
wickedness has brought these miseries upon you which you now suffer, or
because of your complaints and outcryes, that you are innocent, and that you
are unmeasurably and unjustly afflicted, shall we say that Gods providence has
forsaken the earth, or that God scared by your clamours will overturn the whole
course of nature, which he has established by an unchangeable decree? Surely
the decree of God, that it shall be well with the righteous and ill with the
wicked, is as firm and sure, as that the earth shall be inhabited, and that the
rocks and mountains shall stand firm in their places; and therefore you may as
well hope that God should give over the government of the world, that the earth
should be forsaken or the rocks be removed out of their place, as that God
should prosper the wicked or make the righteous miserable. As when we talk of
those things, which we judge impossible, we use to say, Yes, shall we look for
stars in the sea or fishes in the heavens? so to imply how impossible it was
which Job maintained, that he was innocent notwithstanding Gods hand was so
sore upon him, what says Bildad, Shall the earth be forsaken for thee, and
shall the rock be removed out of his place? Job had given Zophar Bildads friend
such a sarcasticall check, chap. 12.2. No doubt but ye are the people and
wisdom shall die with you. And here now Bildad replies upon him with the like
kind of speech.

Verse. 5. Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his
fire shall not shine.] This is here set down as that unchangeable course of
Gods Providence, which as Bildad employed in the foregoing verse would not be
altered for Jobs sake, yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, etc. as
if he should have said, Never think that God will change the constant way of
his governing the world for you: yea, assure your self though the wicked man
may live in a glorious and prosperous condition, yet it shall not long
continue; this splendor of his shall quite be extinguished, so that there
shall not so much as a spark of it remain: all his designs to keep up himself
in his former glory shall come to nothing. Concerning this metaphorical
expression of light for prosperity. See the Notes also upon 2 Samuel 22.29* and
Esth. 8.19.

Verse. 6. The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall be
put out with him.] That is, all the honor and bravery of his household and
family shall be turned into woe and misery, and the glory that he has raised
shall in and with himself expire and come to an end. And indeed if by the
putting out of the wicked man's candle (or lamp) be meant, not only that his
prosperity should be turned into misery, but also that himself should be cut
off by the hand of God, it is very probable that Bildad might herein allude to
that which Job had said, chap. 17.1. My breath is corrupt my days are extinct,
and meant hereby to let Job know, that therein it fared no otherwise with him,
then all wicked men must expect to fare.

Verse. 7. The steps of his strength shall be straightened.] There are two
particulars may be employed herein, to wit, 1. That the misery that should at
last befall the wicked man should make him leave that pride of his stately
going, which he used whilst he was in the height of his former power and glory,
and 2. Principally that he should not carry on his affairs with such speedy
success as formerly he had done, but in every thing he undertook, yea when he
was carrying on his designs with greatest strength, he should fall into
troubles and meet with unremoveable streights and difficulties, concerning
which see the Note also, 2 Samuel 22.37.

Verse. 8. For he is cast into a net by his own feet, etc.] Thus he compares the
wicked man to some wild beast, some beast of prey: and affirms that through his
brutish blindness he should even throw himself into dangers and mischiefs;
and then the following clause, and he walks upon a snare is added, either to
imply that it is no wonder he is so caught, and that because wherever he goes
he is in continual danger of some mischief or other; or else to imply that
striving to get out of the snare wherein he is caught, he should only farther
entangle himself, falling still into more and more snares every step he takes.

Verse. 9. The grin shall take him by the heel, etc.] That is, he shall be
suddenly and unexpectedly entangled when he was most confident of his safety
because of his great power, and riches, and the wise ordering of his affairs;
and the robber shall prevail against him, that is, shall overmaster, and
destroy him. And it is likely this is here added, because robbers used to lay
snares and traps for them that passed by; and when they were taken therein then
they fell upon, them and slew them: and that he had respect herein to those
plundering Sabeans and Chaldeans, that had robbed Job of his cattle.

Verse. 10. The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the
way.] The meaning of this is only thus much, that the wicked man is always in
danger of hidden mischiefs, which he never foresees or fears. But yet some
conceive that he the rather speaks of a snare laid for him in the ground,
either as alluding to the custom of robbers in those times, who used to lie
lurking in holes, and dens of the earth, and so were as a snare in the ground,
leaping out on a sudden from thence and surprising them that passed by; or else
to imply that it was a deadly snare, and such as should lay him in the dust, in
the grave.

Verse. 11. Terrors shall make him afraid on every side and drive him to his
feet.] Because Job had complained of the terrors wherewith he was often
affrighted, chap. 7.14. Thou scarest me with dreams and terrifyest me through
visions, and chap. 6.4. The terrors of God do set themselves in array against
me, therefore does Bildad mention this here as one of the judgments which God
brings upon the wicked man, to wit, that he should be so affrighted with
variety of terrors from God, from Satan and his own conscience, that they
should make him run up and down as a distracted man, desiring any where to hide
himself but not knowing where. And thus as before he compared the wicked man to
beasts in regard of the nets, snares, and traps that are laid for them, so here
he compares his terrors to hounds wherewith such beasts are pursued by
huntsmen, which appears the more clearly by the following expressions.

Verse. 12. His strength shall be hunger-bitten, etc.] Some understand this of
the consumption of his wealth, His strength, that is, his great and mighty
estate, shall be hunger-bitten, shall wast, and consume, and be eaten up; Again
others understand it of his children, His strength, that is, his children, (who
are the strength of their fathers according to that Psalm. 127.4. As arrows are
in the hand of a mighty man, so are the children of the youth, and that Genesis
49.3. where the firstborn is called the beginning of the fathers strength)
shall be hunger-bitten, that is, shall pine away for want of food. But because
in the following verse he speaks of the wasting of the wicked man's own
strength, I conceive it is so also to be understood here, to wit, that though
the wicked man be never so great, yet God would bring him to that condition
that he should even famish for hunger. And accordingly also we must understand
the following clause, and destruction shall be ready at his side, that is,
sudden and unavoidable destruction shall wait continually upon him, ready every
moment to seize upon him.

Verse. 13. It shall devour the strength of his skin, etc.] By the strength of
his skin is meant the flesh and fat of all his members, which bears up his skin
and makes it look fresh and fair, to which some add also the sinews and bones:
and that which Bildad says shall devour the strength of his skin is that
destruction mentioned in the former verse, destruction shall be ready at his
side, or the famine and hunger, whereof it is also there said that his strength
shall be hunger-bitten. And the same I conceive is meant also by the firstborn
af death in the following clause, even the firstborn of death shall devour his
strength; for though by the firstborn of death some conceive the devil is
meant, because he was the first condemned to die, or because he had the power
of death, Heb. 2.14. and generally Expositours hold that thereby is meant the
bitterest, cruellest, terriblest, and strongest of all deaths, that which
amongst all the ways of dying carries away the pre-eminence, which is the
strength of death and has in it a double portion of dying, when the agonies of
death are most dreadful upon a man, so that all the while he is dying, he is
as one that is tortured upon a rack; (and indeed because the firstborn had a
double portion, and were the chief among their brethren, and were esteemed the
strength of their parents, Genesis 49.3. Reuben thou art my firstborn, my might,
etc. therefore the strongest and chiefest of all things whatsoever are usually
termed the firstborn, as Esaias. 14.30. the poorest and most beggarly of men
are called the firstborn of the poor) yet I conceive that principally Bildad
intended hereby that one particular way of dying, which indeed must needs be of
all the most grievous, to wit, when men die by famine or hunger, being starved
to death for want of food.

Verse. 14. His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, etc.] That is,
say some Expositours out of his body; his bodily strength whereon he trusted
shall be utterly destroyed; Or, every thing wherein he placed any confidence
shall be utterly rooted out of his dwelling place, namely his riches, children,
etc. and it shall bring him to the king of terrors, that is, this rooting his
confidence out of his tabernacle, or his broken confidence, the despair he
shall fall into upon the rooting out of his confidence, shall bring him to the
chiefest and greatest of all terrors, or to death, which is indeed to a
natural man the most terrible of all terribles, as a heathen could say, and so
consequently also to the devil, who in regard of the terrors wherewith he at
last affrights those wicked men, whom at first by his flattering temptations he
drew into sin, and in regard of those eternal torments wherewith he shall
torment them, may well be called the king of terrors.

Verse. 15. It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his, etc.]
That is, the king of terrors mentioned in the foregoing words; Or rather,
destruction, misery, and want, (whereof he had spoken before verse. 12.) shall
dwell in his tabernacle. As in reference thereto he had said before, verse. 13.
It shall devour the strength of his skin, so in reference thereto again he
says here, It shall dwell in his tabernacle because it is none of his, that
is, Destruction shall take possession of his dwelling place, because he got it
by unjust means, and so indeed in right it is none of his. As for the following
clause, brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation, the meaning of it is,
either 1. That God should utterly burn up his dwelling place, to wit, either
with storms of thunder and lightning from heaven, which is of a sulphurous
nature, as by the savor thereof may be sometimes discerned, or with very
showers of fire and brimstone; or 2. That God should make the place of his
habitation barren and desolate, salt and brimstone being usually esteemed
signs and causes of barrenness in a land, according to that Deuteronomy. 29.23. The
whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not sown nor
bears, nor any grass grows therein, and this may seem the more probable
because of the word scattered which is here used, brimstone shall be scattered
upon his habitation; or 3. That God should destroy him and his with some
strange and horrible judgment, as once he did Sodom and Gomorrha; for thus
(as in allusion to that) the Scripture is wont to express unusual and
stupendous judgments, as Psalm. 11.6. upon the wicked he shall rain snares,
fire, and brimstone, and a horrible tempest; and so again, Ezekiel. 38.22. and
that Bildad did allude to that destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, we may the
rather think because Job and these his friends dwelt not far from those parts
and lived not long after the time when those cities were destroyed, so that the
memory of that judgment must needs be fresh amongst them. And yet withal it
is likely that he did covertly also put Job in mind how his cattle and servants
were consumed with fire from heaven, chap. 1.16.

Verse. 16. His roots shall be dried up beneath; and above shall his branch be
cut off.] This may be inferred as an effect of that which he had said before,
brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation, to wit, if that be understood
of the barrenness of the land wherein he dwelt. But I conceive the plain
meaning of these words to be this, that he shall utterly be destroyed root and
branch* he and all that belongs to him, according to that, Mal. 4.1. All that
do wickedly shall be stubble; the day comes that shall burn them up, says the
Lord of hosts, it shall leave them neither root nor branch; for the wicked man
is here compared to a blasted tree, as before, chap. 15.30. of which see the
Note there.

Verse. 18. He shall be driven from light into darkness, etc.] Herein may be
comprehended, that by the miseries that God shall bring upon him, he shall be
violently turned out of a prosperous condition into an estate of dismal and
doleful distress, and dishonor, and sorrow; but yet doubtless the chief
thing intended herein is, that he should be at last also driven from the light
of this world into the land of darkness, the grave, yea into that utter
darkness of hell: for therefore to explain these words is that following
clause added, of being chased out of the world.

Verse. 19. He shall neither have son nor nephew, etc.] That is, he shall leave
no posterity behind him, neither son, nor sons son; wherein he plainly strikes
at Job, that had lost all his children.

Verse. 20. They that come after him shall he astonished at his day, as they that
went before were affrighted.] At his day, that is, the day of his destruction,
that observable day, when God shall at length render to the wicked man
according to his works, according to that, Psalm. 137.7. Remember, O Lord, the
children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; and Psalm. 37.13. The Lord shall laugh
at him; for he sees that his day is coming: The meaning therefore of these
words is, that the judgment of God upon the wicked man shall be so grievous
and fearful, and thereupon so notorious, that it should be famous in
succeeding times, and the very report of it should astonish those that live
then, though they never saw it, even as it did affright those that went before,
or, that lived with him, who were eyewitnesses of the vengeance that was
inflicted on him.

Verse. 21. Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place
of him that knows not God.] That is, of every ungodly man; concerning which
see the Note, 1 Samuel 2.12. It is as if he had said, Certainly, as sure as God
is just, this is and this will be at last the portion of all wicked men and
hypocrites, that do not truly fear God; to this their stately dwellings shall
at last be brought, and to this all their great wealth and pomp shall come; and
therefore do not deceive thy self Job; by thy present condition it is evident
what thou have been; and if thou will not hearken to thy friends to repent and
turn unto the Lord, thus as all other wicked men do, thou must expect to end
thy days.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 2. HOw long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?]
Because Bildad began his Reply with that disdainful expostulation, How long
will it be ere you make an end of words? chap. 18.2. Job, addressing himself
here to answer him, begins after the same manner, and retorts the expostulation
upon him and his other two friends, Nay, says he, How long will ye vex my
soul, and break me in pieces with words? therein giving them to understand, how
his soul was vexed and his heart torn within him, and even broken to pieces
with the bitterness of their words, as knowing well that all they had spoken
of wicked men they intended of him, so that all his bodily sufferings were not
so bad to him, as those their sharp reproaches, wherewith his very soul was
galled and wounded, and so consequently also upbraiding them hereby for their
uncharitableness and cruelty, that could one after another lay on such load
upon one that was already in such a sad afflicted condition, and willing them
as it were to consider whether he deserved to be blamed, for not giving over
speaking for the justifying of himself, or they for not giving over to cast
such unjust reproaches upon him.

Verse. 3. These ten times have ye reproached me, etc.] That is, many times,
again and again: see the Note, Genesis 31.7. You are not ashamed that you make
your selves strange to me; or as it is in the margin, that you harden your
selves against me; in which words he blames them, and that as for a fault of
which they might well be ashamed if they had any shame in them, to wit, either
because they were so hard-hearted as to use him so reproachfully being in so
sad a condition, and never to regard the mournful complaints whereby he had
endeavored to move them to pity; or else (if you read this clause as it is in
our Bibles) because having been his old acquaintance and friends, they carried
themselves toward him, as if they had been mere strangers to him, both in that
they showed no more love to him, nor did no more compassionate him in his
miseries, then if they had been mere strangers; and likewise in that a
stranger, that had never known any thing of his close and strict walking with
God in a holy and righteous life, could not have censured him more uncharitably
then they had done, who had long intimately known, and had been often
eyewitnesses of his religious and just conversation.

Verse. 4. And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remains with my
self.] The meaning of these words any one would take to be clearly and plainly
this, Be it indeed that I have erred, Suppose, though I cannot yield indeed
that it is so, that I have done some evil through ignorance or infirmity
wherewith God has been provoked to this displeasure against me; or suppose
that I have now in my arguing with you spoken something that is not fitting,
mine error remains with my self, I suffer for it and not you, or I am like
to smart for it and not you, and therefore you need not trouble your selves
with it. Indeed because this is usually the speech of men desperately wicked,
when they shake off the reproofs of those that wish them well, Trouble not your
selves any more with me, if I do any thing I should not do, it is not you but
I that must suffer for it; and so it could not well stand with the piety of Job
to answer thus, therefore some Expositours give another sense of these words,
which is this, And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remains with
my self, that is, suppose that my life has not been in every respect such as
it ought to have been, or that in my pleading with you I have maintained any
thing that is false and erroneous, truly in this error I do and must for any
thing I see still remain, since you have no way convinced me, nor informed me
better; Or thus, suppose that in pleading my cause against you, I have
forgotten my self, and spoken something unadvisedly, my fault herein must lie
upon my self; but what is this to the purpose, for that which is the great
Question between us, whether or no the miseries I now suffer be laid upon me
for my former wickedness; you quarrel at me for being so full of words and so
violent in my discourse; but what is this to the question in hand? But yet,
considering 1. That the best are sometimes overborn with temptations and
passions in such great distresses as Job was now in, and the drift of this book
is to set down as well how he was tempted, as how he did suppress and overcome
his temptations, and 2. That his aim in these words was not to reject any just
reproof or admonition of his friends, but to tax them for their bitter reviling
speeches, I see not but that the first exposition is most approveable, And be
it indeed that I have erred, mine error remains with my self, as if he
should have said, Though I have erred, it is nothing to you, let me alone to
bear what God has laid upon me, and do not you add to mine afflictions by
deriding and flouting me, and charging me with many false devised calumnies.
Because they had alleged nothing that had any solidity in it either to comfort
or convince him: therefore he wills them to consider that though he had erred,
if it were so, he smarted for it, and this could give them no just ground to
use him so as they had done; so that he speaks this, I say, as taxing the
frivolousnesse, and bitterness of that which they had spoken, and as
professing that it was more easy for him to endure what he suffered, then to
hear their flouts and reproachful speeches.

Verse. 5. If indeed ye will magnify your selves against me, and plead against
me my reproach, etc.] By their magnifying themselves against him is meant, that
being in a prosperous and flourishing condition themselves, they did proudly
insult over him that was in misery, and as it were trample upon him; and by
pleading against him his reproach, is meant their alleging against him, as the
only argument whereby they sought to prove him a wicked man and an hypocrite,
the heavy punishments which God had inflicted on him; for these they are which
he terms his reproach, because with these they reproached him, as making them
such clear evidences of his former wickedness. The greatest difficulty in
these words is, why upon this he says here, he inferres that which follows in
the next verse, If indeed, says he, ye will magnify your selves against me,
and plead against me my repreach, that is, if ye be indeed seriously resolved
to triumph over me, and to plead the judgments that God has laid upon me
thereby to prove me a wicked man, then Know now that God has overthrown me,
and has compassed me about with his net: And to this there may three answers
be given, 1. That by alleging this of Gods dealing with him he sought to
imply, that the grievousnesse of his sufferings might well wring from him those
complaints, which they judged so excessive. and that therefore they had no
cause so to triumph over him as they did. 2. By putting them in mind that it
was God that had brought those miseries upon him which he now endured his aim
was to imply, that when God did correct a man thus, he did it not that others
should insult over him and vex him with scornful and reproachful speeches,
but rather that they should pity him and comfort him, and take warning thereby
to look to themselves, that the same judgments were not inflicted upon them
too, and 3. That he first yields in these words, that it was true indeed that
God had dealt with him just as they had said God used to deal with wicked men,
and therefore whereas Bildad had talked so much of the nets, and snares wherein
wicked men were taken, he uses here the same expression, know now that God
has overthrown me and has compassed me with his net, and then afterward
prove, that yet notwithstanding it did not follow thence that he was a wicked
man.

Verse. 7. Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard, etc.] The original
word here translated wrong may also be translated violence; and then the
meaning may be only this, that he cried out of the violence of Gods proceedings
against him, in that the miseries he had brought upon him were so exceeding
great; but reading it as it is in our Bibles, Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I
am not heard, etc. then the meaning must be, that he cried out of the injuries
that were done him by men, the robbers that had spoiled him of his estate, or
his friends that insulted over him and divided him in his misery, and vexed him
and reproached him, as he had before complained. Some Expositours I know
understand it, that he had complained bitterly of wrong done him by the Lord,
in that the miseries he had laid upon him were no way proportionable to any
offense he had committed against God, making this the height of his misery,
that though he cried out of these things, yet neither God nor man regarded his
cry nor afforded him the least comfort or help; And all they say for Job herein
is, that in this his corruptions did too far prevail over him, as over the
best they will sometimes do in the hour of temptation. But methinks it is too
harsh to charge this upon Job, and thus to understand his words; neither is
there any just reason that can be given, why it may not be understood only of
the wrong that had been done him by men.

Verse. 8. He has fenced up my way that I cannot pass, etc.] That is, he has
brought me into inextricable miseries, out of which there is no hope nor
possibility to escape; and to the same purpose is the following clause, and he
has set darkness in my paths, that is, I cannot see which way to turn my
self, to wit, either because he was so amazed with his sorrows and terrors, or
because his troubles were so desperate. The like expressions Job had used
before, chap. 3.23. of which see the Note there.

Verse. 9. He has stripped me of my glory and taken the crown from my head.] By
his glory and his crown some understand his children, according to that, Hos.
9.11. their glory shall flee away as a bird; from the birth, and from the womb,
and from the conception, and that Prove. 17.6. childrens children are the crown
of old men; Some his wealth, and great estate, according to that Genesis 31.1.
where Jacobs riches are called his glory (of which see the Note there) and that
Prove. 14.24. the crown of the wise is their riches; some the dignity and
authority which formerly he had in the place where he lived, as having born
some place of magistracy amongst them, whence it is that he says afterward
chap. 29.7., etc. when I went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared
my seat in the street, the young men saw me and hid themselves, etc. some the
good report and esteem he had before amongst all that knew him, whereof he was
now stripped; as being despised and in great disgrace, every one accounting him a
wicked man and an hypocrite. But I conceive the words must be understood
generally, to wit, that God had bereaved him of all that had formerly been an
honor and an ornament to him.

Verse. 10. He has destroyed me on every side, etc.] That is, every way, and in
every thing: and therefore he adds, and I am gone, that is, I am in a manner a
dead man, there is no hope of me: for so we find the same phrase used, Psalm.
39.13. O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no
more; yea because of the following clause, and mine hope has he removed like a
tree, it may seem that in these words, he has destroyed me on every side, he
alludes to those, that when they intend to grub up a tree by the roots, do dig
up the ground and hew it round about on every side; and so thereupon inferres
that there was no more hope of his recovery here in this world, then there was
of a tree dug up by the roots.

Verse. 11. And he counts me unto him as one of his enemies.] That is, He does
not correct me as a father, but deals with me as if he looked upon me as an
enemy. And this is one thing for which Elihu condemns Job, chap. 33.8, 10. I
have heard the voice of thy words, saying, -- he counts me for his enemy. Yet
the words do not impart, that God concluded that Job was his enemy, but that he
proceeded against him as if he had taken him for an enemy.

Verse. 12. His troops come together, etc.] Having in the foregoing verse said
that God counted him as an enemy, here he proceeds accordingly in the same
metaphorical expression, and shows how God did as it were lay siege against
him, His troops come together (which is meant not only of the Chaldeans and
others that had robbed him of his estate, but generally of those armies of
Afflictions that did together break in upon him) and raise up their way against
me, to wit, as pioners are wont to make ways even, and large, and passable for
armies that are to march that way, or as soldiers are wont to cast up
trenches, and to raise up batteries and galleries, that they may get in to a
city which they have besieged, and encamp against me round about, that is, they
block me up from, all possibility of escape and hope of relief; for all these
figurative expressions are to set forth, how very many, how violent, and of how
long continuance his afflictions were, encamping about him as soldiers in a
siege.

Verse. 13. He has put my brethren far from me, etc.] Even this may be added
also with respect to the forms metaphor: as if he should have said, My
brethren, friends, and others that should have been as auxiliary forces to have
aided me in my streights, God has also quite taken off from helping me: they
come not near me, or their hearts are alienated from me.

Verse. 15. They that dwell in my house, and my maids count me for a stranger.]
If amongst those of his house he comprehended those also, whom by way of
hospitality he had entertained and harbored amongst those of his family, his
complaint is herein the juster and fadder, that they to whom he had shown so
much mercy or kindness should so little regard him; and of his maids he makes
particular mention, because they in regard of their sex being naturally of a
more tender and pitiful disposition, it was the more strange that they should
carry themselves so strangely and unmercifully toward him, regarding him no
more then if they had no relation at all to him.

Verse. 16. I called my ser^ant and he gave me no answer, I entreated him with
my mouth.] That is, When I called my servant, so far was he from doing what I
would have had done, that he would not vouchsafe to give me an answer; yea
though instead of commanding him, I entreated him, not by others sent to him,
but with mine own mouth, all this would do no good, even to my face he would
slight and scorn me.

Verse. 17. My breath is strange to my wife, etc.] Almost all Expositours
understand this of his wives loathing to come nigh him, because of the ill
savor of his breath by reason of the putrefaction of his lungs and other
infirmities that lay upon him. But I rather conceive that by his breath is
meant the words he spoke to her, his complaints and entreaties, (to which also
may be added his sighs and his groans) My breath is strange to my wife, as if
he should have said, even when I speak to my wife I spend my breath in vain,
she that lay in my bosom regards not my complaints and entreaties, my sighs
and cries, no more then if she had been a mere stranger to me: And indeed so
much is clear by the following clause, where he adds, by way of explaining what
he had said before, that his breath was strange to his wife, though I entreated
for the childrens sake of mine own body, that is, though I besought her even
for the conjugall bonds sake wherewith we were tied together, and for the
childrens sake which God had bestowed upon us, as the pledges and means of our
mutual love one to another. Indeed a great question it is amongst Expositours,
what children these were for whose sake Job should beg for respect from his
wife in this time of his misery, since at the very first of his troubles both
his sons and daughters were slain by the fall of the house upon them where they
were feasting together; and to this some say, that he had other little children
that were not then slain; and others, that it is meant of his childrens
children. But because the Text, seems expressly to mention all his store of
children where it faith that he had seven sons and three daughters, chap. 1.2.
(which were all cut off together) and 2. Because in many passages Job seems to
complain that God had rooted out all his posterity, therefore I rather think
that he meant this of those his children at first mentioned; nor can I see why
it should seem strange, that he should mention the children God had given them
whilst they lived together as man and wife, as an argument whereby to persuade
her not to despise him, though at the time when he spoke this God had taken
them away.

Verse. 18. Yea young children despised me, etc.] This may be read as it is in
the margin, yea the wicked despised me, this being a sore affliction to the
righteous servants of God, when they are made a laughing stock to an ungodly
crew; But reading it as it is in our Bibles, yea young children despised me, by
young children we must understand those that we call young ones or youths, the
younger sort of men, see the Note 1 Kings 3.7. or at the utmost boys and
girls, not the young sort of children. And we must know that even this is
mentioned as an aggravation of his misery, 1. Because children are naturally
more pitiful to them that are in misery, and withal afraid to despise grave
and aged men, and 2. Because it must needs very much vex and fret such men when
every boy and girl shall despise them. As for those words I arose in the
following clause, I arose and they spoke against me. Some think that thereby is
meant that so soon as he showed himself, perceiving in what a condition he was
in, they presently began to revile him, and to speak against him what they had
heard others say; some again think the meaning to be this, that though he arose
up as by way of respect to them, yet they despised and reproached him; others,
that when he arose to go away from them, (as not able to endure such contempt,
and yet not willing to contend with them) as soon as his back was turned he
might presently hear how they did reproach and revile him: and others, that
when he arose to reprove them for despising him, then they spoke against him.
And indeed these three last Expositions I conceive the most probable.

Verse. 19. All my inward friends abhorred me, etc.] It is in the original, the
men of my secret, that is, those to whom I imparted all my secrets, and they
whom I loved, to wit, most dearly, are turned against me. In this doubtless he
aims particularly at his three friends, as upbraiding them for dealing so
unfriendly yea unmercifully with him.

Verse. 20. My bone cleaves to my skin and to my flesh, etc.] Reading this
clause according to the Translation that is set in the margin, My bone cleaves
to my skin, as to my flesh, the meaning is clear, to wit, that he was so pined
away, that being nothing but skin and bones, his bones did now cleave to his
skin, as formerly they did to his flesh. And thus I conceive the words must be
understood, though they be read as they are in our Bibles; yet some would have
them understood thus, My bone cleaves to my skin and to my flesh, that is, to
the skin of my flesh, or the skin of my body; or to my skin, which is my flesh:
for so that which is translated Psalm. 102.5. My bones cleave to my skin, is in
the original, My bones cleave to my flesh. As for that which follows, And I am
escaped with the skin of my teeth, it is all one as if he had said, that to say
true he had no other skin left but the skin of his teeth, to wit, his lips (for
so some understand it) or the skin of his gums, the skin of his body being all
over rather a scab then skin, as being overspread in every part with boiles and
ulcers; And therefore indeed some Expositours say, that when the Devil filled
the body of Job with sores and ulcers, he left his lips and other the
instruments of speech free, purposely that he might be able with his mouth to
blaspheme God.

Verse. 21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, etc.] As if
he should have said, If you will approve your selves friends as you pretend to
be, let this which I have said move you to pity me and comfort me, and do not
still condemn me for an hypocrite, and add affliction to the afflicted. As
for the reason that is added, for the hand of God has touched me, see the
Notes, chap. 1.11, and 2.5.

Verse. 22. Why do you persecute me as God and are not satisfied with my flesh?]
This which Job here upbraids his friends with, to wit, that they persecuted him
as God, may be understood two several ways, either 1. That when God afflicted
him, they did so too; they did as it were join with God in afflicting him, and
making his life burdensome to him: when God punishes any man or men, though
the punishments be never so justly inflicted, it is the duty of those that
behold them thus punished to pity them, and be tender over them; neither must
they by any means insult over them, but rather, reflect upon themselves, and be
afraid of themselves, as considering that God may as justly lay his hand upon
them, as he has done upon these whom they behold in such misery. Now that
therefore for which he blames his friends here may be only this, because when
Gods hand was heavy upon him, they instead of pitying him did also set
themselves against him, and by their hard usage and bitter reproaches did add
to his affliction, forgetting themselves to be men subject to the same
miseries; or 2. That they did afflict him in the same manner, as God did, to
wit, in that, 1. As God did persecute him incessantly and without intermission,
bringing calamities upon him one in the neck of another, without affording him
any breathing time, so did they follow him with reproach upon reproach, and
censure upon censure, not yielding him any rest: and 2. In that they persecuted
him as an enemy, as God did, and in as heavy a manner; As God had laid load
upon him so did they; as God had appeared in a way of wrath against him, so did
they: and so he does as it were intimate that their scorns, and scoffs, and
calumnies were as grievous to him, as all the other miseries that God had laid
upon him: or 3. That they arrogated that to themselves which belonged only to
God, to wit, either because they did in so masterly a manner condemn him for
an hypocrite, which none could know but God only, who is the searcher of the
heart and of the reins; or else rather because they did causelessely persecute
him; why do you persecute me as God? as if he had said, However God in regard
of his absolute Sovereignty over men may deal with them as seems good in his
own eyes, and so may lay what afflictions he pleases upon me, merely because
it is his will so to do, though there were no other cause at all; yet you have
no such power over me; and therefore show why it is that you do thus persecute
me; what? will you make your selves Gods? And then for the next clause, wherein
he charge them that they were not satisfied with his flesh, Why do ye
persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? the drift thereof I
conceive is to imply, either that it was a high degree of cruelty in them, that
not content with the grievous miseries he had endured in his body, even to the
utter wasting and consuming of his flesh, (besides that he was stripped of all
other outward comforts whatsoever) they should also seek as they had done, to
wound and afflict his spirit also; as if he had said, Though God afflicts my
mind and my soul, and has filled my soul with terrors, yet why should you
force on my affliction as far as God does? or else, that in regard they were
not satisfied with all those insufferable miseries that he lay under, but did
still prosecute him with so much bitterness, they were herein like beasts of
prey, that when they have eaten* the flesh of the poor creatures they prey
upon, cannot be satisfied therewith till they have quite devoured them, and
after they have eaten the flesh do also gnaw and crush the bones asunder. And
indeed all cruel oppression, and crushing of the poor and afflicted, is
usually expressed in the Scripture by that phrase of devouring them and eating
up their flesh, as Psalm. 27.2. My foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, and
Gal. 5.15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.

Verse. 23. O that my words were now written, oh that they were printed in a
book, etc.] Though some refer this particularly to that following passage,
verse 25. wherein he makes indeed a most clear and glorious confession of his
faith in Christ his Redeemer, and his hope concerning the resurrection of the
dead, and life eternal, worthy to be taken notice of by all that should live
in succeeding times, yet I rather think he meant it of all that he had spoken
in that dispute that had been betwixt him and his three friends, yea and of all
that he should afterward speak. To show, how clear his conscience was, and how
confident he was of the justice of his cause, and to manifest withal that he
had not spoken so rashly and unadvisedly, and much less so desperately and
blasphemously, as they pretended he had, (though some words might slip from him
in his passion that were not altogether to be justified) he wishes that his
words were written and printed in a book, etc. For hereby he intimates that he
was so far from declining the judgment of any man living, that he was
willing it should be known both to the present and future ages, as being
assured that whoever in succeeding times should read what he had suffered, and
what had passed betwixt him and his friends, they would pity his condition, and
acquit him from all those false accusations they had charged upon him. Yea and
therefore he wishes that his words were not only written and printed in a
book, but also verse. 24. that they were graven with an iron pen and lead, in
the rock for ever: And however some Expositours understand this, that herein he
wishes that his words were graven with an iron pen in plates or lea^s of lead,
yea in the rock for ever; yet others think that according to our translation
the ground of this expression must needs be, either that in those times they
were wont to make their graving tools of iron tempered with lead as now a-daies
they are tempered with steel; or else that when they desired to grave any thing
in stone for a perpetual monument, they used to cut the letters with an iron
pen or graving tool, and then to fill up the cuts or furrows of those letters
with lead that they might be the more plain and legible, and that hence he
speaks of having his words graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for
ever.

Verse. 25. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth.] Some of our best Expositours (as Calvin, Mercer and
others) understand this merely of Gods delivering Job out of that sad and
forlorn condition wherein he now lay, to wit, that he knew that however he was
little better at present then as a man that is dead and buried, yet he had a
Redeemer that should rescue him at length out of this condition, even the
ever-living God, who is the first and the last, Esa. 48.12. and therefore shall
be after all men are vanished and gone, and shall show forth his power in the
quickening and reviving of poor men, dust and ashes, even when they are fallen
into the lowest and most desperate estate and condition. And indeed it cannot
be denied 1. That God is many times called our Redeemer, in the Scripture, as
Esa. 63.16. Thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer. 2. That an estate of
extreme misery and affliction is often expressed in the Scripture by that of
death; men in such a condition are often spoken of as dead men, yea as men that
are buried and turned into dust, and that to imply that such a condition is to
men as bitter as death, that it bereaves them of all the comforts of this life,
and is past all hope of recovery. I was, says the Apostle 2. Cor. 11.23. in
deaths often. And so Psalm. 88.4, 5. I am counted with them that go down into the
pit -- free among the dead, and Psalm. 22.15. Thou have brought me, says David,
into the dust of death, and 3. That the deliverance of such men out of such an
extreme low and forlorn condition is often termed a quickening, and a reviving,
and a raising of them up from the dead, as Psalm. 71.20. Thou which have showed
me great and sore troubles shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again
from the depths of the earth, and Isa. 26.19. speaking of the bringing home of
the Jews out of Babylon, Thy dead men, says the Prophet, shall live; together
with my dead body shall they arise; awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust.
See also Psalm. 85.6, and Hos 6.2. But yet 1. Because Job had hitherto
disclaimed all hope of being delivered out of that forlorn condition wherein he
lay, and of being restored to any estate of prosperity and happiness again
(though his friends had often assured him, that if he would repent, it would be
so) affirming that his hope was gone, and that he was in a worse condition then
a tree that is cut down, of which there is hope that it may sprout again. See
chap. 16.22, and 17.1, 11, 13, etc. and therefore it is no way probable, that
he should be now on a sudden raised to such a height of hope concerning Gods
raising him to such a prosperous condition, contrary to all his former
discourses; and 2. Because there are some passages in the following verses,
which cannot well be understood of a resurrection of his outward estate, as,
that it is spoken of as a strange thing, that he should see his Redeemer with
the same eyes that he had then, and some other of the like nature, therefore, I
say, if we jointly consider of that which is said here with that which follows
in the two next verses, I cannot see how it can be otherwise understood then of
Christ the promised Redeemer, who indeed is most properly termed our Goel, as
it is in the original, our Redeemer (it is the same word that is used Levit.
25.25. for the next kinsman that was to redeem the estate of his decayed
brother: of which see the Note there) and that because he taking our nature
upon him, became, as it were, our near kinsman, our brother, Heb. 2.11. flesh
of our flesh and bone of our bone. So that I conceive the drift of Job in these
words was, by this profession of his faith to prove, that notwithstanding his
sufferings and miseries were so grievous, as he had now acknowledged, yet he
was far from being a wicked man and an hypocrite, as they had charged him to
be; I know, says he, that my Redeemer lives, that is, I that am so severely
condemned by you, and am now in such a miserable condition, even I do certainly
believe, that there is a Redeemer to come, that he is my Redeemer (for there is
much emphasis in that word my) and that he lives, as being the ever-living God,
the first and the last, yea the fountain of life to all that shall believe in
him, and so shall one day redeem my person from destruction and maintain my
cause against all those false aspersions you now cast upon me. And then for the
last clause, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, either
it is meant of the second coming of Christ to judgment, to wit, that he should
then appear upon earth, and that as a conqueror, trampling upon the grave as a
conquered enemy, and raising all flesh by his almighty command out of the dust,
yea and as a judge appearing in his glory, to pass sentence upon all both
quick and dead; or else (which some rather think, and it seems very probable)
it is meant of his first coming, (as the following words in the next verses are
meant of his second coming,) to wit, that in the latter days (that is, in the
days of the New Testament,) this his Redeemer should be made man, and in man's
nature should live and dwell upon the earth, and being there slain should rise
again, and stand again upon the earth tryumphantly, and so should, as the
Redeemer of his people, vanquish death and accomplish the work of man's
redemption. And indeed that the days of the Gospel, from the time of Christ's
incarnation to the end of the world, are frequently called in the Scripture the
latter days, or, the last days, cannot be questioned, see Isa. 2.2. Hos. 3.5.
1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1. of which, two reasons are usually given, to wit, 1.
Because all was then accomplished, which had been prophesied concerning the
work of man's Redemption; that was the perfection of all times, or as the
Apostle calls it, Gal. 4.4. the fullness of time, and 2. Because the whole time
of the worlds continuance being divided into three great Periods, the 1. From
the creation to the Law; the 2. From the Law to Christ's Incarnation; the 3.
From that to the day of Judgment, this which contains all the days of the
Gospel is the last of the three. But however very observable it is which some
Expositours have noted, to wit, that Job was so strengthened and cheared up
with the consideration of this which here he says, concerning the hope he had
in his Redeemer, and concerning the resurrection of his body, and the bliss he
should then enjoy, that after this we meet not with any word he spoke, arguing
any such fainting and impatience of spirit, as many which before this came from
him.

Verse. 26. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God.] Though being laid in the grave worms must destroy not my skin
only but even this whole body, (such as it is rather the shadow of a body, then
a body indeed) yet by that my Redeemer, who shall arise from the grave and live
again in despite of death, even this my body when dead shall be raised again,
and reunited to my soul, and then to my great joy in my flesh face to face I
shall see God, and so shall enjoy the presence of my God and my Savior for
ever and ever. As is noted in the foregoing verse, some indeed understand this
of Gods delivering him out of his present afflctions, to wit, that though his
skin and flesh were at present eaten up as it were with worms, yet God would
restore his flesh again, and so in his flesh he should behold God manifesting
himself as a father to him. But I say the words are far clearer if we
understand them of his seeing God at the resurrection.

Verse. 27. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold and not
another, though my reins be consumed within me.] Even this also some understand
of his seeing God to his great advantage, raising him from the sad estate
whereinto he had cast him, and restoring him to a comfortable condition again;
therefore those words and mine eyes shall behold and not another, though my
reins be consumed within me, they understand thus, that though his reins, that
is, all the strength and vigor of his body were in a manner utterly consumed,
his body being little better then a rotten carcass, yet he would look to God
and his eyes should be fixed upon him in hope and expectation of help and
deliverance, and not upon any other* But still I say, I rather understand all
these passages of his hope of seeing God when his dead body should be raised up
at the general Resurrection. And so taking the words as meant of his seeing
God at the Resurrection, we must know, 1. That he says, whom I shall see for
my self, because he should see him for his own advantage, as his own God, and
his own Savior, not as the wicked should see him, namely, as reconciled to
others, not to them, as a Redeemer to others not to them; and 2. He says that
his own eyes should behold him, and not another, to set forth, that he should
not at the Resurrection have a new body created, but that he should be raised
with the very same numericall body, wherein he had formerly lived upon the
earth: and then 3. That the last clause, though my reins be consumed within me,
may be meant either of the present consumption of his body, or else of the
utter wasting of his body in the grave, to wit, that though he was so wasted
that his very inmost parts his reins were consumed, and much more would be
consumed when he came to rot in the grave, yet he knew well that at the
Resurrection he should be raised up perfect again, and then with those his eyes
he should behold his Redeemer. I know that some Expositours do otherwise
understand this last clause, that at the Resurrection he should behold his God
and Redeemer to his great happiness and comfort, though his reins were
consumed within him, that is, though when he came to live with God in heaven
there should then be an end of all his natural desires. But the former
exposition I judge far the better.

Verse. 28. But ye should say, Why persecute we him, seeing the root of the
matter i^ found in me?] If we read this last clause as it is in the margin, and
what root of matter is found in me? the meaning is then plain, to wit, that
there was no cause in him why they should persecute him as they did. But
reading it as it is in our Bibles, seeing the root of the matter is found in
me, it is very hard to say what Job intended hereby. Some would have these last
words, seeing the root of the matter is found in me, to be a part of the
recantation which Job here advises his friends to make, as concerning their
violence against him hitherto, to wit, that they should not only say, why
persecute we him? but also that they should every one of them severally add by
way of judging themselves, seeing the root of the matter is found in me; that
is, seeing the fault is in me; I have by my groundless surmises and
jealousies, and unjust censuring of him provoked him to passion in his great
distress, and so have been the cause of all these hot debates we have had with
him. But the truth is that the words can hardly be drawn to justify this
Exposition. And almost all Expositours agree in this, that in the first clause
Job tells his friends, that in reason they ought to check themselves for
persecuting him as they had done, and that then in the second clause a reason
is given by Job, why they ought so to check themselves, to wit, because the
root of the matter was found in him, as if the words had been transposed thus,
But seeing the root of the matter is found in me, ye should say, why persecute
we him? Well, but yet still this passage is very obscure, because it is so hard
to say what he meant by this the root of the matter is found in me, every
Expositour almost being herein of a several judgment. for 1. Some understand
hereby the sound and solid reason wherewith he had maintained his cause, and so
they make the sense of these words to be this, that they might well condemn
themselves for persecuting him as they had done, since all things being well
weighed, they could not but see, that the cause which he maintained had a root
of unquestionable justice in it, it was well grounded, neither had he spoken
any thing for which he had not brought very sound and substantial arguments
and reasons, 2. Others by the root of the matter understand his sufferings, or
the inward sense he had of the evils which lay upon him, as if he had said,
There is no reason in the world why you should persecute me as you do, seeing
the root, the foundation of all our arguing is found in me, that is, I am he
that suffer the miseries, about which there have been such disputes between us;
and so they make this passage parallel with that above, verse. 4. And be it
indeed that I have erred, mine error remains with my self. 3. Others take it
thus, You ought not thus to persecute me, seeing if you search the matter to
the root and the foundation, it will be found that I am innocent, and that
there is therefore some other cause of my misery, which is hidden from you, and
that it is not for any wickedness of mine, as you would have it, that God has
brought these calamities upon me. 4. Others again conceive that by the root of
the matter is meant the integrity and sincerity of his heart toward God, which
was the root both of that profession of godliness which he had hitherto made,
and of that confidence wherewith he had now pleaded his cause before God; or
else his faith whereby he was rooted in God, and which was the root from whence
had sprung the purity of his conscience, the holiness and uprightness of his
life and conversation, and those words of truth, which he had uttered hitherto
in the defense of himself; and so they conceive Jobs plea in these words to be
this, that seeing the profession which he had made of his innocence was not a
counterfeit, vain, ungrounded flourish, but was the fruit of that sincerity and
faith unfeigned, that was rooted in his heart, it was an act of most gross
injustice and arrogance in them, so to persecute, to censure and revile him as
they did. And last of all, many hold that it was his faith in Christ his
Redeemer, and his hope of seeing God face to face at the Resurrection of the
dead, whereof he had in the foregoing words made such a glorious profession,
which here he terms the root of the matter that was found in him; and so they
make the drift of these words to be this, that in all reason it was fit they
should blame themselves for persecuting him as they had done, even because of
this profession he had made of his faith, seeing this faith in the Redeemer is
the root of all true religion and piety, and the very ground work and
foundation of salvation, neither can there be any danger of condemnation for
him, that has this faith rooted in his heart.

Verse. 29. Be ye afraid of the sword, etc.] As if he should have said, If not
out of pity to me, yet at least for fear of the sword of Gods vengeance upon
your selves, give over your bitter calumnies and cruel dealing with me.
Because you are at ease and free from all afflictions, you make nothing of
passing most uncharitable censures upon me, and threaten me continually with
the vengeance of God; but take heed, you had best look to yourselves, since
there is doubtless a sword of divine vengeance, which for your unjust and
cruel dealing with me, that am in so sad a condition, may soon make you as
miserable as I am. As for the words that follow, for wrath brings the
punishments of the sword, though some understand this of God, to wit, that when
God is provoked to wrath by such iniquities as these, wherewith he had charged
his friends, it brings the sword of his just vengeance upon me; yet I rather
think Job meant it of the wrath of his friends against him, to wit, that such
wrath and fury as that, wherewith they had broken out against him, does usually
bring the wrath of God upon men; that ye may know, says he, there is a
judgment: the meaning whereof is, either that when the sword of Gods vengeance
should fall upon them, then they should by experience find that there is a just
God that judges the earth, that does order and govern all things wisely and
justly here in this world, a God that would judge those that did so unjustly
judge others, and that would severely punish those that did so unmercifully
add affliction to the afflicted; To which some add also, that by that present
judgment upon themselves, they might know there would be hereafter a day of
general judgment, when God would judge the world in righteousness, and so
the sin of those that do here judge their brethren unrighteously should be both
discovered and punished; Or else that Job gave them this warning, that knowing
now (which men are apt to forget) that there is a God that will thus judge the
actions of men, they might take heed of provoking him to wrath, that so they
might not come to know it experimentally hereafter.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 2. THen answered Zophar, etc.] This is the second, and indeed the last
reply of Zophar, who now as before took his turn in the third place; for though
Eliphaz and Bildad did afterward reply again the third time upon Job, yet
Zophar after this spoke no more. And observable it is that notwithstanding Job
had in the foregoing chapter made such a sad relation of the woeful condition
wherein at present he was, chap. 19.6. etc. and had so earnestly besought his
friends, that they would take pity of him, verse. 21. and had made such a full
and glorious confession of his faith, verse. 25, 26, 27. and had threatened them
with the sword of divine vengeance, if they proceeded on still with such fury
against him as they had done, yet all this moved not Zophar, but that he again
fell upon Job with as much violence as ever.

Verse. 2. Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make
have.] It seems Zophar did here interrupt Job before he had made an end of
speaking, and so in these words he gives a reason why he could no longer keep
silence; Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make have,
as if he should have said, Whereas I resolved to have replied no more, or
whereas I was desirous to let you go on without interrupting you, till you had
made an end of your own accord (as I know civility requires I should do) truly
that which you have spoken has stirred up those thoughts in me, that do even
compel me to speak; do what I can I am not able still to bear what I hear,
nor to forbear uttering what I have thought to say; being as one in travel, I
must not stay any longer, but must however it be taken break in upon you. And
so this word ( therefore) may be either referred, 1. In general to all that
Job had answered in the foregoing chapter, either by way of justifying himself,
and professing his hope of beholding to his joy, his Redeemer, when his dead
body should be raised from the grave, or by way of blaming his friends for
their unfriendly and unmercifull dealing with him; as if he had said, Finding
how erroneous thou still art in this great point of Gods dealing with man,
therefore I could not forbear but I must again answer thee. Or 2. More
particularly to those severe censures which he had passed upon them for their
dealing so harshly with him; which may seem the more probable, because in the
following verse he seems to make these censures (which he terms reproaches)
the ground of this his Reply, I have heard, says he, the check of my reproach,
and (therefore) the spirit of my understanding causes me to answer; Or else 3.
It may be referred yet more particularly (as many hold) to the very last words
that Job had spoken, chap. 19.29. There Job had warned his friends to take heed
least the sword of divine vengeance did not fall upon them for their fury and
wrath against such a distressed afflicted man as he was; for, says he, wrath
brings the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment:
Now Zophar being exceedingly netled with these words, breaks out presently as
in relation thereto, Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this
I make have, as if he should have said, Whereas you think to stop our mouths by
threatening us with the judgments of God, so far am I from being terrified
herewith, that this above all forces me to speak, so that now I am not able to
hold my peace any longer: And three reasons may be conceived why Zophar should,
upon those words above others, be so much stirred in his spirit, that he could
no longer forbear. 1. Because he might judge this most insufferable, that he
that lay under such judgments of God himself, should yet be so confident that
he was in the right, as to threaten them with the judgments of God for
speaking against him; perceiving how he wrongfully applied the judgments of
God, it was time to make him s^ his error herein. 2. Because he might
apprehend, that he had now a notable advantage to convince him from his own
words, since if wrath brings the punishments of the sword (as Job said) what
cause had he to be afraid of this sword of divine vengeance, that had in so
much fury and wrath uttered so many bitter speeches against God, and so
scornfully despised the admonition of his friends? and 3. Because he might be
eager to put him in mind, that if there were judgment and a sword of divine
vengeance for wicked men, he might thence know what himself was, whom this
sword of God had already so sorely wounded. However observable is the
expression which Zophar here uses, My thoughts cause me to answer; for hereby
he would seem to imply, that though he should speak zealously, yet he should
not speak rashly, because he had seriously be thought himself of what he meant
to say.

Verse. 3. I have heard the check of my reproach, etc.] That is, the checks and
taunts wherewith to my reproach thou have upbraided me, and scorned the truth
of God which has been spoken to thee; for though some Expositours refer this
particularly to that sharp expression of Job, chap. 19.23, why do ye persecute
me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? as if he should have said,
What? Do you charge me with persecuting you, with eating up your flesh? Are you
not ashamed to cast such base reproaches upon us? And others to that before
mentioned verse. 29. where he had threatened them with the sword of divine
vengeance; yet I should rather understand it generally, either of Jobs
stiffenesse in maintaining still the truth of his cause, and the innocence of
his person, which Zophar esteemed a reproach to them; or of all those tart
passages in Jobs speeches, wherewith Zophar apprehended himself to be
reproached, he still applying that to himself, which Job had spoken in common
to them all. As for the following clause, and the spirit of my understanding
causes me to answer, by the spirit of his understanding may be meant, either
the spirit of God enlightening his mind, and causing him to understand, or his
soul by which he was enabled to understand, or the force and strength of his
understanding, or the highest, and chiefest, and most refined part of the
understanding, that which is most free from the dregs of passion; But however
doubtless the drift of Zophar in this expression was, either to imply that he
meant to answer Job with reason, and understanding, and not in passion and
anger, as Job had still replied upon them; or else rather to show that the
reason why he could not forbear speaking any longer, was because he did clearly
understand, that it was the truth which they maintained against Job, and was
able by evident reason to convince him, of his folly in reproaching his friends
as he had done for that which they had spoken, and of the wickedness which
they had charged him with.

Verse. 4. Know thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth, etc.]
As if he should have said, I appeal to thine own conscience; can thou be
ignorant of that which the experience of all ages has approved to be true,
ever since God first made man and placed him upon the earth? to wit, (as it
follows in the next verse) that the tryumphing of the wicked is short, and the
joy of the hypocrite but for a moment? And well it may be, that when Zophar
spoke this he had in his thoughts, how God punished Cain the son of Adam, and
Ham and his cursed posterity immediately after the flood.

Verse. 6. Thaugh his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach
unto the clouds.] That is, though he overtop all men in riches, honors,
authority, and high esteem, and be gotten up to the highest pitch of outward
prosperity and glory, insomuch that hereupon he exalts himself in his pride as
a little God upon earth, and think his condition as unchangeable as the
heavens; we have the like expression Matthew. 11.23. And thou Capernaum, which
art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to hell.

Verse. 7. Yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung, etc.] This expression
of Zophars may imply three things, to wit, 1. That God should slay him and so
he should become a loath some stinking carcass, his body being turned wholly to
rottenness and putrefaction. 2. That when God began to execute his judgments
upon him, he should become loathsome, base, and abominable unto all men, so
that none should vouchsafe to save him, but he should be cast out with the
detestation and abhorring of all, and 3. That he should perish utterly both he
and his, according to that which is said of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.10. I will
take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man takes away dung, till
it be all gone (concerning which see the Note there)* And likely enough it is
too, that Zophar might herein allude to the dunghill whereon Job now sat, chap.
2.8. and to the complaint he had made in the foregoing chapter, that God had
stripped him of his glory, and taken away the crown from his head, and that all
his nearest friends, etc. despised him and stood aloof from him, and so
intimated to him that it was not strange at all that it was thus, since it was
the usual portion of the wicked man thus to perish as his own dung, that is,
man's dung, the most loathsome of all dung. And to the same purpose is the
following clause, they which have seen him shall say, where is he? for this
implies 1. That he should be utterly cut off and not be seen any more, and 2.
That they that had seen him with admiration in his height of prosperity, should
wonder to see afterward how on a sudden he was quite perished and gone, not so
much as any memorial being left of him, and should speak of him in a way of
scorn and contempt.

Verse. 8. He shall fly away as a dream, etc.] That is, he shall suddenly perish
and come to nothing: for by the flying away of a dream is meant, either the
utter forgetting of a dream, when a man dreams and waking on a sudden, it is
gone and there is no remembrance at all left of it; or else the vanishing away
of those appearances and visions, which the fancy presents to a man in his
sleep; look as when a man dreams of great treasures, or dainty feasts, or other
things, but on a sudden the dream vanishes, and so when he wakes all comes to
nothing, there is no such thing as he dreamt of (which is sweetly expressed by
the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 29.8.) so shall it be with the wicked man, his
prosperity shall suddenly vanish to nothing, and so he shall utterly perish.
Job had wished chap. 19.23, 24. That his words were written, that they were
printed in a book, that they were graven with an iron pen in the rock for ever;
perhaps in allusion to this Zophar here tells him, that instead of being thus
remembered in after times, he should so utterly perish, that there should be no
memorial left of him, no more then there is of a dream when it is quite
vanished and gone.

Verse. 9. Neither shall his place any more behold him.] This may be meant of
those amongst whom he had formerly lived, to wit, that the men of his place
should never see him or observe him any more; or else of the place it self
wherein he had lived, concerning which see the Notes chap. 7.10, and 8.18.

Verse. 10. His children shall seek to please the poor, etc.] If we read this
clause as it is in the margin of our Bibles, The poor shall oppress his
children, then the meaning is, either that the poor should by violence take
from his children, what he had by fraud or oppression taken from them; or that
his children should come to such extreme poverty and misery, that even the
poorer sort of people should be able to oppress them. But if we read it as it
is in our Bibles, His children shall please the poor, then the meaning must be,
either that his children (forced thereto by the sentence and for fear of the
sentence of the judges, or otherwise) should labor to appease the poor, by
restoring to them what their father had unjustly taken from them; or else that
they should fall into such lamentable beggary and want, that they should be
glad to curry favor with poor men, that from them they might get some small
succor. As for the second clause, And his hands shall restore their goods,
that is added to show, that many times not the children of the wicked man, but
the wicked man himself is forced to restore the goods he has unjustly wrested
from the poor: And yet it is not necessary that this should be limited, at
least to the wicked man's restoring to the former owners what he had unjustly
taken from them: for even first when he dies and so must part with, and deliver
up all that he had so injuriously gotten, or 2. When others shall by force or
oppression wrest from him what he had by the same evil means wrested from the
poor, or 3. When by his own improvidence or folly he shall wast what he had
with such greediness and cruelty raked out of the estates of the needy, in all
these respects it may be figuratively said, that his hands restore their goods.
And so this may be added as a reason of his childrens poverty, mentioned in the
foregoing clause, to wit, that he could not leave them the goods he had gotten
so ill, being forced as is before said to restore them again.

Verse. 11. His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down
with him in the dust.] Two several ways this may be understood; for 1. The
meaning may be that in the sins of his youth, he perseveres even to his old
age, the sins into which he fell in his youth being inwardly settled and rooted
in him, as if they were soaked into his bones and marrow, shall be as strong in
him, and bear as full sway over him in his old age, as they did in his youth;
and so it shall lie down with him in the dust, whereby is meant, either that he
shall die in his sin without repentance and without pardon, and so his sin,
though nothing else, shall go with him to the grave, the guilt of sin lying
still upon him, eating his flesh and damming his soul; or else that all his
violence, and oppression, and other sins shall there have an end together with
himself, there they shall as it were perish with him, and be buried in the
grave. And 2. By the sin of his youth may be meant the punishments of his
youthful sins; and then the sense of the words is this, that God should punish
him in his old age for the sin of his youth; only this expression of his bones
being full of the sin of his youth may also imply. 1. The grievousnesse of the
plagues wherewith he is punished for the sins of his youth, whether we
understand it of bodily punishments or of the pains of a tortured conscience,
to wit, that they should seize upon the whole man, and as it were shake and
break his very bones within him; for thus sore sufferings and torments are
usually expressed in the Scripture, My bones are burnt as an hearth, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 102.3. and again Psalm. 109.18. As he cloatheth himself with
cursing like as with a garment, so let it come into his bowels like water and
like oil into his bones. 2. That they should be abundantly poured forth upon
him, and 3. Perhaps also the quality of them, that his body yea even his very
bones should be rotted with the luxury and intemperance of his youth; and
accordingly then the meaning of the last clause which shall lie down with him
in the dust is plain and easy, namely that these punishments should never
leave him till they had brought him to the grave.

Verse. 12. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, etc.] This may be meant
generally of any wickedness whatsoever, which the wicked man commits; or
particularly of the wickedness of oppressing the poor, and wresting their
estates unjustly from them; and so the full drift of this passage is this, that
though wickedness yield much sweet delight to the corrupt nature of man for a
time, yet afterward it will work him extreme pain and sorrow, and in the
conclusion will certainly destroy him. Though wickedness be sweet in his
mouth, that is, though a wicked man may take as much delight in his
wickedness, as a sensual Epicure may take in some poisoned sweet meat, that
at first may exceedingly please his taste, though he hide it under his tongue,
and verse. 13. Though he spare it and forsake it not, but keep it still within
his mouth, that is, though he be loath to confess, condemn, repent of and
forsake his sins, but seeks by many deceitful ways and pretenses to excuse
them (and so may the more properly be said to hide them under his tongue) that
he may still continue to delight himself therein, even as a glutton will not be
brought to spit out the sweet meat that he has in his mouth, yea is loath
presently to swallow it down, and therefore eats it sparingly, champing it and
rolling it up and down in his mouth, and so lets it go down by little and
little, that he may the longer please his palate with the sweet taste of it, yet,
verse. 14. his meat in his bowels is turned, that is, it is turned to be quite
another thing then it seemed to be in his mouth, it is the gall of asps within
him, that is, his sin will at length prove bitter to him (as we see in
nature, that those meats that are sweetest to the taste turn most to bitterness
and choler in the stomach) yea it will bring miserable pains and torments upon
him, both in regard of outward punishments which God shall inflict, and inward
torture of conscience wherewith he shall be vexed, and so shall at length
utterly destroy him, even as the sweet meat which did so please the glutton,
when it is gotten down into the stomach, does there cause most griping
insufferable torments and at last kills him, to wit, as being mixed with the
most violent incurable poison, the poison of asps, which is here called the
gall of asps; either because the gall of those serpents is their poison, or
rather because his poison proves as bitter in the operation of it, as the meat
wherewith it was mixed was sweet to the taste.

Verse. 15. He has swallowed down riches and he shall vomit them up again,
etc.] The riches which he has gotten with so much greediness he shall with no
little anguish and shame part with again, as men that have overladen their
stomachs, or rather that have eaten some poison or other, are wont soon to
vomit it up again, not only the poison it self, but all besides that is in
their bellies: so shall it be with the wicked oppressor; either by the
terrors of his own conscience, which shall make him even sick of what he has
so unjustly gotten, and restless till he rid himself of it, or by some other
means, God shall forceably bereave him, not only of his ill gotten goods, but
of all his estate besides.

Verse. 16. He shall suck the poison of asps; the vipers tongue shall slay him.]
That is, it shall be with him as with a man that is poisoned with the most
violent and incurable poison, the poison of asps or the tongue of the viper, to
wit, in regard of his vomiting up the ill gotten goods he has swallowed down,
or in regard of the torment he shall endure, and that it shall at last bring
him to a miserable end.

Verse. 17. He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and
butter.] As if he had said, When the wicked man has gotten a great estate by
rapine and oppression, many flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, he is then
ready to promise himself abundance of felicity and content, that he shall take
in the enjoyment of these things, how he will feast himself, and how he will
swim in all kind of pleasures and sweet delights; but all this shall prove but
a dream, he shall not enjoy the least of this which he has fancied to himself.
Some, I know, understand this thus, that he shall not have the least share in
that plenty of good blessings, which God promised to his people; as conceiving
that Zophar herein alluded to that promise made to Abraham of the land of
Canaan, as of a land flowing with milk and honey: yea some understand it of his
never seeing those infinite joys, which God has reserved in heaven for the
portion of his people, according to that expression Psalm. 36.8. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou shall make them
drink of the river of thy pleasures. But the first Exposition I take to be far
the best.

Verse. 18. That which he labored for shall he restore, etc.] That is, That
which he has gotten with much ado, and a great deal of pains, in the ways of
oppression and fraud, he shall be forced to restore, or shall part with it
again, (see the Note verse. 10.) yet this may also comprehend what he has
gotten by his labor in an honest way, and so may be added purposely to imply,
that in revenge of his rapine, he should be stripped not of his ill-gotten
goods only, but also of that which he had gathered together by his lawful
labors. As for the following clause, and shall not swallow it down, it is not
contrary to what he had said before, verse. 15. He has swallowed down riches,
and he shall vomit them up again; because the meaning here is only, that God
should suddenly ease him of all that he had greedily gathered together; before
he had well swallowed it down, he should be forced to vomit it up again; it
should never be converted to his own personal benefit, or the benefit of his
family. According to his substance shall the restitution be, and he shall not
rejoice therein, that is, he shall be fully as poor, as before he was rich and
great; or rather he shall, by way of Gods forcing restitution from him, part
with all that he has even to a very farthing, and so as he has beggered
others, he shall be utterly beggered himself, and little joy he shall have of
all that he has scraped together.

Verse. 20. Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly.] That is, he shall
scarce at any time enjoy the least hearts-ease; to wit, either because of his
insatiable thirst after riches, or his carking care to keep what he has
gotten, or rather because of the terrors of his conscience for his ill-gotten
riches, or because of those continual vexations wherewith he shall be hourly
pursued, for the daily loss of that which he had taken such pains to get.

Verse. 21. There shall none of his meat be left, etc.] Some read this, as it is
in the margin, There shall be none left for his meat, etc. as if he had said,
He shall have none of his posterity left to eat what he leaves behind him, and
so there shall be none to look for his goods when he is gone. But it is better
translated, as it is in our Bibles, There shall none of his meat be left, that
is, he shall not have so much as a crust left to feed himself; therefore shall
no man look for his goods, that is, his children or friends need not trouble
themselves to gape after or strive for his goods when he is gone, because there
shall be nothing left for them; Or, there shall no man seek to rob or spoil
him, as formerly, because he shall have nothing left for himself.

Verse. 22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in streights, etc.]
Two several ways this may be understood: to wit, 1. That in the fullness of
his prosperity he shall be in as great streights as the poorest, either because
of terrors of conscience, or because of his continual fears of loosing what
he has gotten, or because of the unquietness of his spirit, in regard of his
greedy covetous desires, as not having yet what he would have. Or 2. That when
he has gotten such abundance, that, with the rich man in the Gospel, he begins
now to say, Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry, then on a sudden the wrath of God shall fall upon him, and
by means thereof he shall come into great streights and troubles: for thereto
agrees also the following clause, every hand of the wicked shall be upon him;
that is, every ungodly, unconscionable man, even those happily that were before
his friends or servants, shall oppress and spoil him; and so he shall be
crushed as he before crushed others, and as his hand was almost against every
man, so every man's hand shall be against him.

Verse. 23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his
wrath upon him, etc.] That is, when he thinks to sit down in quiet, and to
satiate himself in the enjoying of what he has gotten, before he can do it,
God shall pour out his judgments upon him, the sad effects of his fierce fury
and indignation; which is compared to a shower of rain in the following clause,
and he shall rain it upon him, to wit, 1. because the judgments should come
upon him from heaven; 2. because they should come upon him suddenly and with
great violence, as showers of rain usually do in the midst of a fair day; 3.
because they should seize upon him on every side in great abundance, as when a
man is all over wet with a shower of rain; and 4. because they cannot be
prevented or kept off, no more then the rain can be stopped that it shall not
fall from the clouds. The expression is much like that, Psalm. 11.6. Upon the
wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest. As for
the last clause, wherein it is said these judgments of God should be poured
upon him while he is eating, that is added as an aggravation of the misery of
the wicked man, that these judgments should come upon him when he is or would
be most free, and fearlesse, and pleasant; even as it is said of the
Israelites, when they lusted for flesh, and God gave them quails, Psalm. 78.30,
31. that while their meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon
them. And it may well be that Zophar had respect therein also to the death of
Jobs children, by the falling of the house upon them, where they were eating
together.

Verse. 24. He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall
strike him through.] That is, God fighting against him as a man of war, he
shall be so pursued with his judgments, that seeking to avoid one evil, he
shall fall into another, or seeking to avoid a lesser evil, he shall fall into
a greater; as when a man flees from the iron weapon, the sword or the spear,
(against which a man well armed may more probably defend himself) and then an
arrow from a bow of steel strikes him through, the stroke thereof being
unresistable and deadly.

Verse. 25. It is drawn and comes out of the body, etc.] This is meant, I
conceive, of the sword of Gods indignation, or of the arrow shot out of the bow
of steel, mentioned in the foregoing verse; and the words may be understood two
several ways: first thus, It is drawn, that is, it is drawn out of the
sheath, or out of the quiver, and comes out of the body, that is, being thrust
or shot at the wicked man, it pierces him through and through, and so comes
out of his body; and so the drift of these words must be to show, that when God
begins to avenge himself upon the wicked man, he will be sure to strike home,
he will soon make an end of him: or secondly thus, It is drawn and comes out
of the body, that is, after the wicked man is stricken through with it, being
drawn it comes forth out of his body: to which purpose also is the following
clause, yea the glistering sword comes out of his gall, that is, it pierces
through his very entrails; and the meaning is, that with terrible judgments
(for that is intended in the glistering of the sword) God would irrecoverably
destroy him. Neither can it well be questioned, but that in this expression
Zophar did purposely aim at that complaint of Jobs concerning Gods dealing with
him, chap. 16.13. He cleaves my reins asunder, and does not spare; he pours
out my gall upon the ground. As for the last words, terrors are upon him,
thereby is meant, that when God shall thus begin to contend with him, partly by
the affrightments of his own guilty conscience, and partly by the severity of
Gods proceeding against him, as apprehending that he means to slay him, or that
he has already given him his deaths wound, he shall be even overwhelmed with
terrors and fears.

Verse. 26. All darkness shall be hid in his secret places.] There may be
several expositions given of these words, and all very probable: as 1. That by
his secret places is meant the places where he hides and stores up his wealth;
and so the meaning of these words should be this, that all sort of calamities
should be stored up together with his treasures; as if he should have said, The
wicked man shall never enjoy his wealth, because the wrath of God shall rest
upon it. 2. That by his secret places is meant his heart or soul; and so the
meaning of the words to be this, that all kind of dismal fears, and terrors,
and despairing thoughts shall fill his heart and possess his soul, and 3. That
by his secret places is meant whatever places he should go to, or means he
should use to hide or secure himself from danger; and then the meaning of these
words is this, All darkness shall be hid in his secret places, that is,
wherever, or by what means soever the wicked man shall seek to hide or secure
himself, the darkness of all kind of terrors and fears shall still go along
with him, yea the darkness of all kind of grievous calamities shall even there
seize upon him. But this last I take to be far the best Exposition.

A fire not blown shall consume him.] That is, say some Expositours, a soft
gentle fire, to wit, judgments that shall consume him secretly, by degrees,
and as it were without any noise. But rather by a fire not blown is meant a
fire not of man's kindling, and that needs not man's blowing, because it will be
sure to burn fiercely enough without that: Or, sudden unexpected judgments,
which come upon men in some strange manner, no man knows how; they are consumed
thereby, but no account can be given by whom or by what the fire was kindled.
Some understand it of the eternal unquenchable fire of hell, which indeed
would agree well with the words; for there needs no bellows to kindle that
fire, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone shall kindle it, Isa.
30.33. But it appears not any where else, that Jobs friends do ever speak of
any other but temporal judgments. Again, others understand it metaphorically,
of a burning fire of terrors kindled in the conscience; and others likewise of
fire sent immediately from God, such as was that wherewith Sodom and Gomorrha
was consumed, and that which burnt up Jobs sheep and servants, chap. 1.16. as
we see that Jobs friends are often wont closely to hint unto him the
judgments, that had fallen upon him and his. But I conceive it may be
understood more generally, either of the wrath of God it self, which is the
kindler of all penal fires, or of any grievous judgments wherewith God in his
wrath does usually consume wicked men; for any sore calamities sent from God
are often in the Scripture compared to fire, as in Ezekiel. 20.47. Behold, I will
kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every
dry tree; the flaming flame shall not be quenched, etc. but especially, as is
before said, of strange, sudden, and unexpected judgments.

Verse. 27. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity, etc.] That is, judgments
coming from heaven upon him shall proclaim him to be a wicked man. And it may
be Zophar did hereby intimate the strange fire and wind whereby Jobs cattle and
children had been consumed. And the earth shall rise up against him, to wit, as
an enemy, or as a witness, when all earthly things shall be ready to execute
Gods vengeance upon him. Yea and because Job chap. 16.18, 19. had appealed to
heaven and earth for the justifying of himself, O earth cover not thou my
blood, and my witness is in heaven; therefore in reference thereto it may well
be conceived, that Zophar here tells him that both heaven and earth should
testify against him, and should condemn him.

Verse. 28. The increase of his house shall depart, etc.] That is, both his
posterity and estate shall be transmitted into other hands, or they shall
suddenly perish and come to nothing, see 2 Kings 20.17: and his goods shall
flow away; of which the meaning may be, either that they should be suddenly
gone, or that they should wast away by little and little, as some waters do
insensibly ebb and sink by little and little.

Verse. 29. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, etc.] As Bildad before
concluded his reply upon Job, chap. 18.21. Surely such are the dwellings of the
wicked, and this is the place of him that knows not God; so does Zophar also
here conclude his, This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the
heritage appointed unto him by God: as it were purposely to imply, that however
angry Job had seemed to be that Bildad should so peremptorily conclude, that
such misery was always the portion of wicked men, yet he both did and would
maintain the truth of that which Bildad had said. This is the portion of a
wicked man from God, etc. that is, this is the mess which God serves in to
their table, these are the miseries which befall wicked men, and that not by
chance, but by the just and unresistable appointment of God; men may bless
them, but God will surely curse them: they may have great inheritances, and
oppressing others may divide the spoil amongst themselves; but this is that
which God has allotted them for their portion, and which they shall be at last
as sure of, as of their just inheritance.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 2. HEar diligently my speech, and let this be your consolations.] As if
he should have said, You pretend that you came to comfort me; but indeed you
have added to my affliction. Well, yet if ye would but now at length give me
the hearing with patience and meekness, and observe diligently what I shall
say, not interrupting and slighting me as you have done, this should be to me
instead of your intended consolations, or, I would take it as an evidence that
you did indeed seriously desire to comfort me. And this he doubtless spoke,
because Zophar had immediately before interrupted him, and would not suffer him
to go on to speak out his mind: and withal to imply how confident he was of
his cause.

Verse. 3. Suffer me that I may speak, etc.] That is, Let it not be burdensome
to you to hear me a while; yea though that which I shall say should prove
irksome and troublesome to you, yet bear with me, and do but patiently suffer
me to speak my mind. And this he might the rather press, because his friends
had often taxed him for speaking too much, as we may see chap. 11.1. and 15.2.
And after that I have spoken, mock on; which last words are added, not as
giving way that they should mock him in his misery, or deride those words of
truth which he should speak; but to imply that he verily hoped, that if they
would hear him speak, he might convince them so that they would soon give over
mocking (for this his confidence in what he had to say was a good inducement to
move his friends to hear him;) or at least, if that could not be, that he was
then resolved to bear what he could not help, and as near as he could that he
would not be troubled with their scoffs.

Verse. 4. As for me, is my complaint to man? etc.] As if he should have said,
No, I do not bemoan my self to man, but to God; though I speak to you, yet it
is out of a desire to approve my self to God, that God may hear, and that God
may help. And if it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled? that is, if
my complaint were to man, I should then indeed have cause enough to be
troubled: God is the searcher of the heart, and knows my innocence; men know it
not, and therefore pass uncharitable censures upon me: In God there is much
mercy and pity; man is merciless and cruel: God can help me and ease me of my
troubles; man neither can help, nor will comfort me. Some, I know, understand
this otherwise, to wit, as if he proved his hope in God by his enduring those
insupportable miseries that lay upon him, If it were not so, why should not my
spirit be troubled? as if he should have said, Had I not hope in God, how could
I have sustained my self all this time? Many deaths would have been easier to
me then that which I have suffered; and therefore, that I have not been quite
overwhelmed before this time, but do still cleave to God, and trust in him, it
is surely an argument that I have a greater support to bear up my spirit, then
any thing in man could afford: and therefore, since you see that I plead my
cause as before God, I beseech you hearken to me. But the first Exposition
agrees best with the words.

Verse. 5. Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth.] This
may be understood, as if he had said, Mark me, and you will be astonished, and
will lay your hand upon your mouth; or else plainly, as is expressed in the
words, by way of counsel, Mark me, and be astonished, etc. Some refer those
words Mark me to the miseries he suffered; others to the blamelesnesse of his
conversation in former times; others to that which he meant immediately to say
concerning the prosperity of many desperate ungodly men: But I conceive it is
best to comprehend them all in those words, Mark me, and be astonished, and lay
your hand upon your mouth; that is, whereas you slight what I suffer, and make
nothing of it, do but weigh well the insupportable grievousnesse of my
miseries, and withal how innocently and uprightly I have formerly lived, and
do but then also compare herewith that which I shall now say concerning the
prosperity of many atheistical ungodly wretches, and then even with
astonishment admire the wonderful proceedings of God in his Providence, to
wit, that such vile wretches should live in such height of prosperity, and that
one that has lived as I have done should be so sorely plagued as I have been;
and be silent, do not run on in judging so rashly as you have done, that all
who are thus afflicted must needs be wicked men: for that by laying of the hand
upon the mouth is meant a resolution of being silent, and a restraining of our
selves from speaking what we are otherwise inclinable to say, is evident in
other places, where the same phrase is used, as chap. 29.9. The Princes
refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth; and Pro. 30.32. If thou
have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought evil, lay
thine hand upon thy mouth.

Verse. 6. Even when I remember, I am afraid, and trembling takes hold on my
flesh.] Some Expositours refer this likewise only to the remembrance of his
grievous sufferings, and so conceive that the drift of Job herein was to imply,
that if the remembrance thereof did so afflict him, it were a sign of too much
inhumanity in them, if they could see their friend in so sad a condition, and
not be moved with it. But I rather think that it must be referred to all for
which he said in the former verse that they might be astonished; Even when I
remember I am afraid, etc. that is, when I remember what I shall now tell you,
to wit, how it fares many times with those that are most desperately wicked,
and withal how I have endeavored to approve my self to God in all my ways,
and what notwithstanding I have now suffered, I am afraid, and my very flesh
does tremble to think of it, nor know I what to say of these hidden ways of
Gods proceedings.

Verse. 7. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea are mighty in power?]
Job propounds this by way of Question, Wherefore do the wicked live? etc.
either to imply how strange it seemed to him that God should so prosper wicked
men, and that he could not conceive wherefore it should be; according to that
of the Prophet, Ier. 12.1. Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?
wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? or else as by way of
replying upon that, which his friends had so often objected concerning the
judgments of God upon wicked men; If God does so certainly punish all wicked
men here in this world, and them only, that I must be judged a wicked man,
because the hand of God is so heavy upon me; if when the wicked are in a
prosperous condition, it never lasts long, (as Zophar had immediately before
said, chap. 20.5. that the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of
the hypocrite but for a moment, and verse. 8. that he shall fly away as a dream,
etc.) why then, says Job, wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea are
mighty in power? that is, wherefore is it that many times they live in health
and pleasure even to old age, and are usually men of mighty estates, and of
greatest dignity and authority in the places where they live?

Verse. 8. Their seed is established in their sight with them, etc.] This is in
answer to that which Zophar had said to the contrary, chap. 20.10. His children
shall seek to please the poor; and Eliphaz, chap. 15.33. He shall shake off his
unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off his flower as the olive.

Verse. 11. They send forth their little ones like a flock, etc.] This may imply
their being trained up under guardians and guides, and their unity amongst
themselves: and their children dance, to wit, as young cattle, calves, and
lambs, and kids are wont in a kind of wantonness to skip and leap; whence are
those expressions, Psalm. 29.6. He makes them also to skip like a calf, and
Psalm. 114.4. The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs.

Verse. 13. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the
grave.] That is, they go away in a trice, they do not lie long in a wearisome
languishing condition before they die, nor undergo any of those sore pains and
conflicts in their death which most men suffer; and so as they lived, so they
die, without any great trouble. It is the same, as many think, with that which
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 73.4. there are no bands in their death.

Verse. 14. Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us, etc.] The meaning of
this is, that because of their prosperity they despise God; they say unto God,
Depart from us, etc. If they say not so much with their mouths, yet the
horrible profaneness of their lives discovers that they think so in their
hearts, or is in effect all one as if they thought so, since those that should
harbor such thoughts in their hearts could not live more atheistically then
they do: which agrees with that of the Apostle, Tit. 1.16. They profess that
they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient,
and unto every good work reprobate. And the drift of this is to show, that even
the worst of wicked men do often live in such exceeding great prosperity, as is
before described.

Verse. 16. Lo, their good is not in their hand, the counsel of the wicked is
far from me.] The judgment of Expositours is very different concerning the
drift of these words. Some take the first clause as spoken ironically, Lo,
their good is not in their hand; as if he should have said, By this which I
have said concerning the usual prosperity of ungodly men, you see how unsound
that is which you have maintained, to wit, that their good is not in their
hand, but that God does always strip them of the goods they have unjustly
gotten. And then for the second clause, that is added, they say, by way of
preventing an objection, to wit, that if wicked men fared so well, then it
would be his best course to walk in their ways: that his friends might not
object this, he adds, the counsel of the wicked is far from me; as if he
should have said, I would be loath to have their prosperity upon those terms, I
have always abhorred and do still abhor the thoughts and courses of such
profane men, and far be it ever from me to desire a share in their pomp by
treading in their steps. Again, others understand it thus, Lo, their good is
not in their hand, that is, it was not their own hand, their own wisdom or
industry that got them those goods they enjoy, or raised them to such a
prosperous estate, but it was the hand of God that conferred these things upon
them: and therefore we see that God does many times exalt and prosper the worst
of men: and then for the next clause, they say that is added, to show how
foolish and wicked a thing therefore it is in such men as he had spoken of, to
carry themselves so scornfully and insolently toward God; the counsel of the
wicked is far from me, that is, I am therefore far from thinking as wicked
men do, that ascribe all they have to themselves, according to that of the
Assyrian, Isa. 10.13, 14. By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my
wisdom, for I am prudent, etc, and thereupon carry themselves so impiously
toward God, as if they were not beholding to him for any thing they had, nor
did expect or look for any favor from him. But then lastly there is another
Exposition, that is far more generally approved, to wit, that this is added,
to discover the folly of wicked men in setting themselves in such defiance
against God, as he had in the foregoing words described, in whose power it is
to cast them down from their prosperous estate, even whenever he pleases;
Lo, their good is not in their hand, that is, though they carry themselves thus
presumptuously, it is not in their power to keep what they have gotten, God can
easily strip them of all, and cast them down from their lofty condition: and
thereupon he inferres the next clause, the counsel of the wicked is far from
me, so far am I from envying their prosperity, that I would by no means be in
their condition; I never did nor ever shall approve of their ways. And thus
these words are as it were a transition to that which follows, concerning Gods
punishing of wicked men.

Verse. 17. How often is the candle of the wicked put out? and how often comes
their destruction upon them?] Job seems clearly in these words to allude to
that which Bildad had said, chap. 18.5, 6, The light of the wicked shall be put
out, and the light of his fire shall not shine, etc. and again verse. 12.
Destruction shall be ready at his side: but yet what his drift in these words
was is not so clear. For some conceive this question must be resolved
negatively, how often is the candle of the wicked put out? etc. that is, surely
it is not often thus; though sometimes indeed it is thus, yet so far is it from
being always thus, that truly it is not often thus; the candle of the wicked
is not often put out, nor comes their destruction often upon them, to wit,
from heaven. And thus, they say, Job confutes what his friends had maintained,
concerning the certain destruction of wicked men here in this world, as before
by affirming that they lived usually in a most prosperous estate, so here also
by denying that they were usually cut off and destroyed, as his friends had
again and again affirmed. Again, some resolve it affirmatively, how often is the
candle of the wicked put out? etc. that is, very often does God put out the
candle of the wicked. Having said in the foregoing verse, that it is not in
their power to keep themselves in that prosperous condition which a while they
have enjoyed, he makes that good now, by showing that God does often eclipse
their glory, and destroy them miserably: and so he yields, as far as truth
would permit, to what his friends had affirmed, to wit, that God did often
destroy wicked men; though withal he denies that it was continually and
ordinarily so. So that Job does not here contradict what he had said
immediately before, concerning the prosperous estate of wicked men, nor does he
grant that which his friends had maintained: for by showing that wicked men do
sometimes prosper exceedingly, and are at other times grievously punished, he
does sufficiently disprove what they had said, that wicked men are always
punished here in this world, and clears it fully, that we cannot judge whether
men be wicked or no by their outward condition. And indeed, according to our
Translation, I see not how this clause can be otherwise understood, because in
the following words he proceeds farther to set forth, how God poures forth his
wrath upon wicked men.

God distributeth sorrows in his anger.] That is, he gives unto every wicked
man his portion of plagues and sorrows, out of those treasures of wrath, which
he has in store for the ungodly; and so in this Job might have respect to that
wherewith Zophar had concluded his last reply, chap. 20.29. This is the portion
of a wicked man from God, etc. But withal this word ( distributeth) may
likewise imply, 1. that God gives them their portion herein proportionably,
according to their several deserts; 2. that often he punishes them diversely,
some by one judgment, and some by another; and 3. that he also punishes the
same persons diversely and at diverse times, sometimes one way and sometimes
another, partly with temporal punishments here in this world, and partly with
the torments of hell in the world to come.

Verse. 18. They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff etc.] That is,
they shall be destroyed and come to nothing, be they never so great, and
strong, and mighty, easily, suddenly, unresistably and irrecoverably; yea and
all their great wealth shall be scattered as it were into a thousand hands. But
withal we may note, that by comparing the wicked to stubble and chaff, Job
implies likewise how saplesse and fruitless they are, as being void of all
goodness; how light and unstable in all their ways, quickly carried away with
any wind of doctrine, and with every blast of Satan's or the worlds temptations;
and lastly, how base and worthless, and how little God esteems of them.

Verse. 19. God lays up his iniquity for his children; he rewards him, and
he shall know it.] This last clause, he rewards him, and he shall know it,
may be understood, as the former, of the Lords punishing the wicked man in his
children, to wit, that by punishing them he rewards the wicked man according
to his wickedness: and he shall know it, to wit, because it shall be done in
his lifetime; for his greater vexation he shall before he dies see the
judgments of God fall upon his children, and his conscience shall tell him
that it is for his wickedness that they are punished. Or else it may be meant
of the punishments wherewith he shall be punished in his own person, thereby
farther to aggravate the misery appointed pointed for the wicked man's portion,
he rewards him, that is, he does not only recompense his sin upon his
children, as was expressed in the first clause, but also upon himself in his
own person; and he shall know it, that is, he shall know that the evil which
befalls him is the just vengeance of God upon him.

Verse. 20. His eyes shall see his destruction, etc.] This may be also meant,
either of his own personal ruin, or of the joynt-ruine both of him and his,
even all that he has. As for the following clause, and he shall drink of the
wrath of the Almighty, the meaning of that is, that God should pour out his
wrath with many sore punishments in a full measure upon him; and the
metaphorical expression he uses seems to imply, that the pains and terrors
thereof should enter into his very bowels, and that he should become as a man
that is drunk and mad with the sore calamities that God should bring upon him:
yea purposely, I conceive, God is here expressed by this name ( Almighty) to
imply how grievous and insupportable those plagues must needs be, that were
inflicted by the wrath of an Almighty God.

Verse. 21. For what pleasure has he in his house after him, when the number of
his months is cut off in the midst?] This is added, either 1. as an
aggravation of the wicked man's misery, when he himself is cut off by the
revenging hand of God, especially if it be done in the flower of his age, to
wit, that all the pleasure he took in thinking how great and honorable his
house and family would be when he is gone, does then come to nothing; or 2. as
a reason why the wicked man shall surely be punished, not only in his children
after his death, but also in his own person, as was said in the foregoing
verse, to wit, because being dead himself, the misery of his children cannot
then trouble him; or else 3. as a reason why God does destroy the wicked man's
children whilst himself yet lives, as was said before verse. 19. to wit, because
being once dead, he neither takes any delight in the welfare of his posterity,
nor consequently is at all troubled with any miseries that they then suffer;
yea because wicked men do not usually take any thought, what shall become of
others when they are dead, so it may go well with them in their own days, let
their posterity after them shift for themselves.

Verse. 22. Shall any teach God knowledge? etc.] They carry themselves as if
they meant to teach God wisdom and knowledge, that murmr against any of his
proceedings, as when he prospers the wicked or afflicts the righteous, or that
prescribe God the way of his judgments, to wit, whom, and when, and how he
shall punish; which they do that limit God, by maintaining that he cannot
punish the righteous or afflict the godly. Of this therefore it is that Job
here complains, alleging it as a high degree of impudence, that man, who walks
so much in the dark, and has all the knowledge he has from God, and whose
wisdom at the best is mere folly in comparison of Gods unsearchable wisdom,
should yet dare to teach God what he should do: and so he covertly taxes his
friends of this arrogance, in that they did as it were set a law to God, by
condemning him for a wicked man because of his grievous calamities, as
concluding that God could not in justice either suffer the wicked to go
unpunished, or afflict the righteous. Now the reason that he gives, why it is
such arrogance for any man to carry himself so as if he would teach God
knowledge, is in the last words, because God judges those that are high, shall
any teach God knowledge? seeing he judges those that are high; that is, seeing
he is, as Solomon also faith, Eccles. 5.8. higher then the highest, the supreme
judge of the whole world, who rules and governs those that are highest amongst
men, and that exalt themselves most in their eminency, princes, and kings, and
emperors, yea the very angels themselves in heaven. And indeed three things
are employed herein, from whence it may be strongly inferred, that we ought to
adore and admire the works of God we understand not, and not to judge them
according to the rule of our reason; to wit, 1. that it must needs be a high
degree of presumption, to question his wisdom who is so infinitely far
above all the creatures; 2. that it cannot be reasonably thought that he should
fail in the government of men, who rules and governs those glorious and holy
spirits the angels in heaven; and 3. that being the supreme Governor of the
world, the King of kings and Lord of lords, yea the Lord of the angels, he must
needs be infinite in wisdom, yea the absolute rule of all wisdom and
justice, and therefore unquestionable.

Verse. 23. One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet,
etc.] To prove the unsearchablenesse of Gods proceedings, and that it is not
possible to judge what men are by that which God does to them here in this
world, Job here instanceth how differently God deals with two several men both
in their life and death, and yet how after death they are both alike laid in
the grave, and there seems to be there no difference at all. Of the first he
says here, One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet;
that is, he lives in a full estate, and in much quiet both of body and spirit,
and so he dies also in abundance of all things, when he seemed to be as
healthful and strong as ever, and had as much cause still to desire to live as
ever: and then again, verse. 24. His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are
moistened with marrow; that is, there is not the least decay in his body, only
God is pleased suddenly to take him away by death; or, his milk-pails are full
of milk (for so this clause may be read, as we see in the margin of our Bibles)
and his bones are moistened with marrow, that is, he has a full estate and a
healthful body (for if we read it thus, by his milk-pails full of milk must be
meant his plenty of all outward riches and pleasures.) Of the other man he
says, verse. 25. And another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never
eats with pleasure; that is, he lives and dies in great misery, under very
bitter and woeful pressures both of mind and body, having scarce ever enjoyed
one good hour in his life, or ever eaten one bit of meat with any pleasure or
comfort. And then concerning both these jointly together he concludes, verse.
26. they shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them; that
is, however differently God dealt with them before, yet after death they are
both alike laid in the grave; and therein there seems to be no difference, even
the rich man that lived so prosperously, and that was formerly clad so richly
and gorgeously, shall then have no other covering, but that of dust and worms,
as has also the poor man. This, I take it, is the meaning of these words. But
now of what sort of men this instance is to be understood, and to what purpose
it is alleged, is somewhat more questionable. Some say that Job meant, that
one man being a wicked man lives and dies in a prosperous condition, an^
another being a godly man lives and dies in extreme misery; and will have his
drift in this instance, to show how unsearchable Gods proceedings are, in that
God should deal so well with the wicked, and so ill with the righteous. Others
hold that the words must be understood of two wicked men; and that the aim
therefore of this instance is to show, that there can be no judging whether men
be wicked or no by that which outwardly befalls them, because God deals so
differently with wicked men, sometimes blessing them, and sometimes punishing
them. But I rather think, with others, that it is meant of any two men, equally
good or bad; and that hereby he shows Gods absolute Sovereignty is in
disposing of men as he pleases, and how unsearchable his proceedings are, in
that two men, one whereof deserves no more good nor ill then the other, should
be so differently dealt with both in life and death, and yet after death both
should be alike laid in the grave.

Verse. 27. Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which you wrongfully
imagine against me.] That is, I know the injurious thoughts and imaginations
which you harbor in your hearts concerning me, to wit, that in all that you
have said concerning the destruction of wicked men, you have still aimed at me
and my children, though you have not named us; and that you peremptorily
conclude within your selves, that I am a wicked man, because the hand of God is
so heavy upon me.

Verse. 28. For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? etc.] Some understand
this of Jobs eldest son, whose house it was that was blown down upon him, his
brethren and sisters, chap. 1.18, 19. and that Job charge his friends, that
in relation hereto they did in their thoughts thus insult over him, where is
the house of the prince? that is, what is now become of the house of that young
gallant, your son and heir? Did not that exemplary judgment plainly discover
the wrath of God against you and yours? But I rather think it is meant of Job
himself: where is the house of the prince? that is, what is now become of the
house of Job, that mighty man of estate, that lived formerly like a prince? As
if they should have said, You see that after all the pomp wherein he has
lived, God has at last utterly overthrown his house and family, and so has
justly given him the reward of his wickedness. And then for the following
clause, and where are the dwelling-places of the wicked? either it is meant of
Jobs children, as if he had said, Has not God destroyed both him, and his
wicked brood too, his children? or else of all wicked men in general, and is
added to the former clause, to imply that this which had befallen Job, was
indeed the constant portion of all wicked men.

Verse. 29. Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their
tokens?] Some think that from the foregoing verse unto the end of the 33.
verse, Job goes still on in setting out the injurious thoughts which his
friends had concerning him; and accordingly therefore they understand these
words as the thoughts of Jobs friends, arguing as it were with others
concerning him, Have ye not asked them that go by the way? etc. that is, It is
certainly notorious to every one that goes by the way, and if such were
enquired of, they would readily answer, that the things which have befallen Job
are the just vengeance of God upon him for his wickedness: nor can it be
denied, these things being the clear marks and tokens of Gods wrath. But I
rather take these words, with that which follows, to be Jobs answer to those
injurious thoughts concerning him, wherewith he had charged his friends in the
foregoing verse; Have ye not asked them that go by the way? etc. By them that
go by the way may be meant travelers, and then the drift of the words must be
all one in effect as if he had said, You, my friends, insult over me, as a
wicked hypocrite, because of the ruin of my house and family; but if you would
ask those that by traveling through many places and countries have the more
experience and knowledge, they would readily tell you, to wit, that which I
have hitherto maintained, that the righteous are often afflicted, and the
wicked are often in a prosperous estate, or (as follows in the next verse) that
the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction, etc. Or, by them that go by
the way, may be meant the ordinary common sort of people, (as before Judge.
5.10. of which see the Note there) as if he had said, Do but ask any of the
common sort of people that go up and down by the way, any that you shall first
meet with, not any one of them but will tell you this which I now maintain, and
will be able to make it good out of their own observation: to which purpose is
that which follows, and do ye not know their tokens? for by their tokens is
meant the proofs and examples which they could allege to prove the truth of
this, to wit, that the righteous do often suffer many grievous pressures, and
that the wicked live often in great pomp and prosperity: and that expression it
seems Job purposely uses, as alluding to the marks and tokens which men are
wont to observe as they travel, that they may be sure to go in the right way,
thereby to imply that such men could as readily allege convincing evidences
hereof, as they could tell the marks of ways that lead to such or such a
place; do ye not know their tokens? that is, can ye deny, or, can ye be
ignorant of those things which every man can allege, to prove that which I say
concerning the prosperity of wicked men? etc. I know some understand these
words otherwise, and do ye not know their tokens? that is, do ye not understand
that their present prosperity, riches and honors, are sure tokens that there
is wrath that abides them hereafter? But I prefer the former Exposition.

Verse. 30. That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction, etc.] This is
that which Job says they might learn of them that go by the way, to wit, that
wicked men are many times not punished, but even when judgments fall upon
others they escape, as being reserved to the day of destruction, that shall yet
at last come upon them.

Verse. 31. Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what
he has done?] Some Expositours understand these words as spoken of God, Who
shall declare the way of God to his face? etc. Because concerning that which
was said in the foregoing verse, that the wicked is reserved to the day of
destruction, etc. some might argue in their minds, why this should be so, as
judging it a strange thing in the way of Gods proceedings, that God should so
long spare wicked men, and let them flourish and prosper, when he meant to
destroy them at last, and why he should not rather cut them off immediately
without any such delays; therefore by way of preventing these secret cavils
that might arise in men's minds, these words are added, who shall declare his
way to his face? that is, when God deals thus with wicked men, forbearing them
for a while, who shall challenge God for this, and boldly argue the matter with
him, demanding a reason of him why he does so? who shall repay him what he has
done? that is, who shall retort that upon God which he has done? or, who shall
reply upon him for this? where is the man that dares be so bold as to do this?
And thus they would make these words to be parallel with those other passages,
chap. 9.12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who shall say to him,
what do thou? and chap. 23.13. But he is in one mind, and who can turn him?
what his soul desires, even that he does: and verse. 22 of this chapter, Shall
any teach God knowledge, seeing he judges those that are high? Thus, I say,
some understand these words of God. But questionless they are rather spoken of
the wicked man; who shall declare his way to his face? As if he should have
said, So far a while does the wicked man seem to be from bearing the just
reward of his wickedness, that no man dares declare his way to his face, that
is, no man dares to his face tell him of his faults, or no man dares show him
whether his wicked courses will at length bring him; and much less dares any
man appear as a witness to accuse him, or as a judge to condemn him, and so to
repay him what he has done, that is, punish him for his wickedness.

Verse. 32. Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and remain in the tomb.] I
find the opinion of Expositours very different concerning the dependence of
these words upon that which went before. They that take these words to be a
part of those injurious thoughts, which Job tells his friends they harbored in
their hearts concerning him (as is noted before verse. 29.) understand them as
inferred upon the foregoing verse, thus, Though no man dares meddle with him,
yet God shall bring down his pride by his judgments, and so shall lay him in
the grave; and then they say these words, and remain in the tomb, are added, to
imply that then he is quite cut off from ever returning to that pomp and plenty
wherein he had formerly lived in the world. But now they that take these words
to be spoken by Job as in his own person, understand them otherwise, even as a
farther declaration of the wicked man's prosperous condition, to wit, that
though he exalts himself so in his pride, that no man dares tell him of any
thing he does amiss, or though he be above the reach of man to control or
punish him, (as was said in the foregoing verse;) yet does not God take him in
hand, but he shall be brought to the grave, that is, dying not a violent, but a
natural death, he shall be carried to his grave with great magnificence, pomp
and state, and so shall have an honorable and solemn burial, and shall remain
in the tomb, to wit, free from all fear of any the miseries which here in this
world others undergo. This last clause, and shall remain in the tomb, is
translated by some according to the strict letter of the original Hebrew,
which is put into the margin of our Bibles, and shall watch in the heap. And if
we should so read it, we must know that this expression might be used, in
reference either to the dead bodies of great men, which being set upright in
vaults, and being so embalmed and spiced that they were kept from putrefaction,
as it was the custom in those times, seemed as it were to be living men, and
looked as if they stood to keep continual watch in that place; or else to
those statues and Representations of the dead, which were placed upon their
tombs, or set up in presses near to their tombs, (as we see the use is also in
our times) which being as far as art could reach made to the life, had also
the appearance of watchmen, that were set to watch in those heaps.

Verse. 33. The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, etc.] They that
take these words still to be a part of the injurious thoughts of Jobs friends
against him, do accordingly understand them thus, That the wrath of God should
lie so heavy upon him, that death should be most welcome to him, or that he
should then be glad to lie in a slimy pit, to wit, the grave, that was formerly
scarce content with a princely palace: and the reason why he expresses the
grave by these words, the clods of the valley, is because their burying-places
in those times were usually in the lowest dales and valleys. But I rather
conceive that these words are still a continuation of Jobs reply to the
injurious thoughts of his friends; and then this phrase, the clods of the
valley are sweet to him, do only imply, either his continuance for ever there,
(for it is an argument that we take much sweet delight and content in a place,
when we stay long in it) or else that there he sleeps quietly and sweetly, as
it were, free from all cares and fears, and from all danger of worldly
troubles and sorrows. And as for the following words, and every man shall draw
after him, as there are innumerable before him, they are added to imply, that
his death cannot be reckoned as an effect of Gods wrath upon him, since herein
he goes the way of all flesh; all men living, the righteous as well as the
wicked, either have gone, or shall go this way. And this expression, And every
man shall draw after him, is grounded upon this truth, that every man living
does every moment, as his life wastes away, draw nearer and nearer to the
grave. We use to say of men lying at the point of death, that they are drawing
on; but it is true also of all that live, that they are still drawing on to
their end, and hasting to the grave, there to overtake that innumerable
multitude that is gone before them.

Verse. 34. How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there
remains falsehood?] That is, what a vain thing is it in you, to think to
comfort me, by telling me that if I will repent me of my wickedness, God will
certainly restore me to a prosperous condition, since, as you see, that which
you have maintained concerning the misery of wicked men, and the flourishing
estate of the righteous, is apparently false, and all your arguing is grounded
upon errors and mistakes, both concerning God and concerning me. The same
errors and falsehoods which Jobs friends had maintained in their first dispute
with him, the same they had again maintained in the second; though they
multiplied answers, yet they mended them not: and therefore it is that he said,
that in their answers there remained falsehood.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. THen Eliphaz the Temanite answered.] Thus taking his turn to speak,
this was his third, and indeed his last Reply upon Job.

Verse. 2. Can a man be profitable to God, as he that is wise may be profitable
unto himself?] Some understand this of profiting God by way of teaching him.
Because Job had said (and his friends took it as spoken in a way of
complaining) that wicked men did often live pleasantly, and die peaceably, and
were buried gloriously, whereas the righteous were usually in a very distressed
condition; therefore to this Eliphaz (say they) replies, Can a man be
profitable to God? etc. that is, Can you help God, by teaching him how he
should better order things in the government of the world? A man by his
wisdom may direct himself in his affairs; but can he profit God by directing
him? No surely. But Job himself had immediately before condemned this
boldness, chap. 21.22. Shall any (says he there) teach God knowledge? and
besides, it seems clear, I conceive, by the following words, that it is meant
of man's profiting God by his righteousness; to wit, that though a man be never
so righteous, his righteousness can bring no advantage to God. And this he
alleges in the beginning of his reply, either to intimate that Job did not
well, to carry himself so as if God were obliged to him for his righteousness,
as if he thought there was reason that if he had offended God in some
particulars, yet God should pass by that, and not punish him for it, and that
because in other things he had deserved better at Gods hands, then that he
should so afflict him as he did; or else to imply, that if it should be granted
that he were righteous, yet it was a vain thing to boast of his righteousness
before God, since God could no way reap any benefit thereby: yea in the last
clause, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself, Eliphaz seems to
upbraid Job, that his righteousness was neither profitable to God, nor to
himself neither, because it secured him not from the judgments of God; meaning
hereby, that he was doubtless an hypocrite, and not righteous indeed.

Verse. 3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? etc.] As
if he had said, It is no pleasure to him that thou art righteous, to wit, in
regard of himself, or of adding any thing to his happiness. As for the
following clause, or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect? some
by making his ways perfect understand, his pretending or pleading that his
ways were perfect, and so make the meaning to be, that this was so far from
being an advantage to God, that it was indeed a great dishonor to him, because
it did plainly charge God with injustice, for laying his hand so severely upon
a righteous innocent man: but I conceive that thereby is only meant his walking
in an upright and perfect way, and so the second clause to be fully the same in
effect with the first.

Verse. 4. Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into
judgment?] That is, God does not reprove thee, to prevent thee that thou
should not first reprove him; Or, God does not so severely contend with thee
and punish thee, because he is afraid of thee, as tyrants are wont to crush
those whom they fear, as we see in Pharaoh, and Herod, and many others: as if
he had said, As thy goodness cannot profit God, so neither can thy wickedness
hurt him; and therefore it is in a way of justice to punish thee for thy
wickedness, that God proceeds thus against thee, and not for fear of thee, to
wit, least if he should let thee alone, thou should become either so
over-good that he could not reward thee or so overgreat that he could not
punish thee. And it is like that Eliphaz does the rather use this expression,
because Job had formerly said, that by the afflictions he had brought upon him,
God did as it were set a watch over him, chap. 7.11.

Verse. 6. For thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught, etc.]
Though the words in this and the following verses seem expressly to charge Job
with the particular gross enormities therein mentioned, yet doubtless the
meaning of Eliphaz was only to conclude, that in some such way as these here
mentioned, he had provoked God, or else he would never have laid such unusual
calamities upon him. It is therefore as if he had said, Bethink thy self, Job;
for of these wickednesses that I shall now mention, or of some such like, thou
art certainly guilty: thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught. And
here by taking a pledge from ones brother, may be meant the taking a pledge
from a poor neighbor, yea it may be from ones nearest allies: yea by saying
thou have taken a pledge, he might imply that he had not only received such a
pledge, as his brother did of his own accord tender to him, but had also gone
into his house, and had taken there what he pleased, it may be by force; which
is an over-rigorous proceeding with one that is in streights, even by the light
of Nature, and was therefore forbidden by the law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 24.10, 11.
for which see the Note there. And then by taking a pledge for naught, is meant
the taking of a pledge without any just cause: which may be done, either when
men take a pledge notwithstanding they are otherwise sufficiently secured for
that they lend; or 2. when they will not restore the pledge, more worth then
the debt, though the debt be paid, to wit, because they charge them that pawned
the pledge with more then indeed they owe them, or allege that the pledge is
forfeited, the money not being brought in time, or some such like pretense,
which the prophet calls withholding the pledge, Ezekiel. 18.16; or 3. when men
take a pledge from such poor wretches whom in charity they ought freely to
relieve. And to the same purpose is the following clause, and stripped the
naked of their clothing: which they may be said to do, that do not give
raiment to those that want it, but especially they that 1. make men naked by
taking their cloths from them, according to that expression, Hos. 2.3. lest I
strip thee naked; or 2. that are so greedy of a pledge, or so griping in any
other way of oppression, that they take away the garments of those that have
scarce a coat to put upon their backs; for such in the Scripture are termed
naked, 1 Cor. 4.11. even to this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and
are naked, and Jam. 2.15. If a brother or sister be naked, etc. And this was
also forbidden in Moses's law; see the Note, Exodus 22.26. yea under this one
particular, of stripping the naked of their clothing, the taking away of all
other necessaries from the poor may be comprehended; for by clothing in the
Scripture is sometimes meant all necessaries useful for the poor, as we see
Isai. 3.6. Thou have clothing, be thou our ruler.

Verse. 7. Thou have not given water to the weary to drink, and thou have
withholden bread from the hungry.] That is, thou have not relieved the poor in
their wants: yet herein lies the chief emphasis of this charge, that he had not
given them so much as a draught of water, or a bit or crust of bread.

Verse. 8. But as for the mighty man, he had the earth, and the honorable man
he dwelt in it.] The meaning is, either that Job gave to the mighty and
honorable the land which he had unjustly taken from the poor; though he
despised the poor, yet great and mighty men might have any thing of him; or
that when the poor and the mighty man came before him in judgment, merely in
favor to the mighty and honorable man, he passed sentence for him, and so he
unjustly carried away the poor man's estate. Yet some understand these words as
spoken of Job in a third person, as in a way of scorn, But as for the mighty
man he had the earth; as if he should have said, Great Job by his might and
power had all under his command, and got all the country about him into his
possession, and yet notwithstanding he could spare nothing to the poor, but did
rather make use of his power to oppress them.

Verse. 9. Thou have sent widows away empty, etc.] This also may comprehend many
several ways of hard dealing with widows: as 1. that he unjustly seized upon
their estates, and so turned them away empty; or 2. that when they came to him
for aid against their oppressors, he did not right, but sent them away with
hearts void of comfort, and disappointed of their hope; or 3. that when poverty
made them seek relief from him, he turned them off with neglect and hard
language, and would give them no succor. And to the same purpose is the
following clause, and the arms of the fatherless have been broken: for thereby
is meant his oppression of the fatherless, to wit, by bereaving them of the
means they had for a livelihood, or by crushing those that were likely to
defend and support them, or any other way; or at least his suffering them to be
oppressed by others.

Verse. 10. Therefore snares are round about thee, etc.] Thus Eliphaz applies
that to Job, which Bildad had said concerning wicked men in general, chap.
18.8, 9, 10, 11: concerning which see the Notes there.

Verse. 11. Or darkness, that thou can not see, etc.] Some understand this
thus, that besides his outward plagues, God had stricken him for his sins with
such blindness and confusion of mind, that he understood not either why these
judgments were come upon him, or what to do that he might be freed from them:
and accordingly they also understand the following clause, and abundance of
waters cover thee, to wit, that he was in these calamities as a man under
water, so amazed and stupefied, that he knew not which way to turn himself. But
it may as well be meant of the darkness of his outward calamities, so
perplexing him, that he could not see which way to go to help himself;
according to a like expression, chap. 19.8. concerning which see the Note
there. And so also the last clause may be understood, to wit, that he was
overwhelmed with a multitude of grievous miseries, that like waters came
rushing in upon him with unresistable violence.

Verse. 12. Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the
stars how high they are, etc.] Expositours do very much differ in their
judgments, concerning the dependence of this and the following verses upon
that which went before: for though all agree in this, that in the following
verses, And thou say, How does God know? can he judge through the dark
cloud? etc. Eliphaz charge Job with nourishing impious and atheistical
thoughts in his heart concerning God, to wit, that God does not know, or does
not mind what is done by men here upon the earth, and that his ground of
charging Job thus was, because he had maintained that wicked men do usually
live and die in a prosperous condition, and godly men on the other side do as
usually endure all kind of misery and sorrow; yet concerning these words that
are prefixed in this 12 verse, the judgment of Expositours is, I say, very
different. Some take these words to be a part of that mimeticall expression,
wherein Eliphaz would set forth the impious thoughts of Job concerning God, Is
not God in the height of heaven? etc. as if he should have said, You, Job,
think with your self, Alas, God dwells above the stars in the highest heavens,
and we see how exceeding high the stars are, and therefore doubtless God does
not govern the world here below. But it being so clear, that Eliphaz does not
begin to set forth the impious thoughts of Job concerning God, till the
following verse, as is clear by the words, And thou say, How does God know?
etc. I cannot see how this verse can be made a part thereof. First therefore,
some conceive that these words are alleged by Eliphaz, as the ground of those
impious thoughts concerning God, wherewith he charge Job in the following
verse, Is not God in the height of heaven? etc. as if he should have said, It
is true that God dwells above in the highest heavens, and we see indeed that
the stars are of a mighty height, and hereupon now thou say in thine heart,
How does God know? etc. 2. Others hold, that in these words Eliphaz seeks to
imply how incomprehensible God is, thereby covertly reproving Job for his
rashness in judging of Gods works, Is not God in the height of heaven? and
behold the height of the stars, how high they are; as if he had said, If the
stars be so high, that we cannot see how many, or of what bigness they are,
how can we then comprehend the wisdom, power and justice of God, who is above
the stars, even higher then the highest heavens? But instead of inferring this
from Gods being on high, you, Job, infer atheistical conclusions concerning
God; thou say, How does God know? etc. 3. Others take these words to be
prefixed as an expression of the omniscience of God, Is not God in the height
of heaven? and behold the height of the stars, how high they are: as if he had
said, God is infinite, and from the throne of his majesty in the highest
heavens he sees and governs all things that are here below: if the stars
that are so high do from thence shine upon us, is it not easy thence to
conclude that God from on high does behold all things that are done upon the
earth? and that hereupon, in the following verse, he upbraids Job with the
impiety of his thoughts, And thou say, How does God know? etc. and 4. Others
say, that Eliphaz, having in the foregoing verses charged Job with many
grievous sins, advises him here to remember that there was a most high God,
before whom he must expect to give an account for these things that he had
done; and in expressing this he mentions the height of the heavens, above which
God sits in the throne of his majesty and glory; because, though God may be
seen in every creature that is here below, yet the height and glory of the
heavens must needs above other things strike men with an apprehension of Gods
transcendent majesty. And then, in the following verses, they say that Eliphaz
shows, how instead of being awed thus with the consideration of Gods dwelling
on high, he took occasion from thence to conclude, that surely God did neither
see nor regard what was done upon the earth, And thou say, How does God
know? can he judge through the dark cloud?

Verse. 14. Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not, and he
walks in the circuit of heaven.] This phrase of Gods walking in the circuit
of heaven is used to imply, either that God there delights himself in the
glorious works which his own hands have there made, (as when a man walks about
in his grounds and gardens, or as when a prince walks about in some goodly
palace that he has built) and so minds not those things that are done below;
or that he is taken up with the care of governing and ordering the heavens, (as
when a man walks about in his own possessions, or in some other place whereof
he has the charge, to search and see what is fit to be done) and so being
busied in those things, he cannot mind these things that are beneath: for the
mention that is made here of the circuit of heaven seems purposely to imply,
that in so vast a circuit as that of the heavens God had enough to do, though
he troubled not himself with those things that are done here in this world.

Verse. 15. Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?] By the
old way which wicked men have trodden is meant, either the miserable end which
of old, even from the first, has ever at last befallen wicked men, (as death
is called the way of all the earth, Josh. 23.14.) the course which God has at
last taken with them; or else the way of profaneness, wherein wicked men have
of old in all ages walked, to wit, that not minding God they have taken liberty
to do what they list themselves, as if God regarded not what men do here
below: yea particularly it may be meant of the way of the old world, whom God
destroyed, as will be more evident in the following verse. And then by asking
whether he had marked the old way which wicked men have trodden, he demanded
whether observing their ways, he had not taken notice, that the wrath of God
has always at last fallen upon them.

Verse. 16. Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with
a flood.] If we understand this, (as most probably we may) of the destruction
of the old world, there is nothing difficult in it; for we know that their
foundation, that is, the earth whereon they lived, was overflown with a flood
of waters. But it may also be meant of wicked men in general, to wit, that in
all Ages they have been cut down out of time, that is, suddenly, even in an
instant; or by an untimely death, namely, when by the ordinary course of nature
they might have lived longer; or, before they could accomplish their hopes and
aims. And then for the second clause, whose foundation was overflown with a
flood, the meaning may be* that the wrath or judgments of God coming upon them
with sudden and unresistable violence, as an overflowing flood, did utterly
wash and sweep away their foundation, that is, those riches and honors which
they had already attained, and which they had laid as a foundation or
groundwork of a greater eminency which they aimed at; or, it carried away them
and all that they had, even to the very foundation, all their children, their
riches, their friends, their plots and designs, whatever was the support of
their lives and estates, or whereon they rested, as their foundation and refuge.

Verse. 17. Which said unto God, Depart from us.] Thus in a way of derision he
repeats the very words of Job, chap. 21.14. (of which see the Note there) but
in a contrary sense; as if he had said, These whose foundation is overflown
with a flood, are those that said unto God, Depart from us, and not those that
God prospers, as you affirmed.

Verse. 18. Yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel of the
wicked is far from me.] That is, as some say, yet thou affirmest, that in
stead of overflowing their foundation with a flood, God filled their houses
with good things, and withal boastest, that notwithstanding the counsel of
the wicked is far from thee. Thus, I say, some Expositours take these words
to be only a scornful rehearsal of what Job had said. But I rather think that
Eliphaz here expresses his own thoughts; and that the first clause, yet he
filled their houses with good things, is added, either as only to yield that a
while God did greatly prosper those whom yet afterward he destroyed, or rather
as an aggravation of their wickedness, both in that they could so unthankfully
despise God, who had given them outward blessings in so great abundance, and in
that they could so boldly deny the Providence of God, and slight him, as if he
could do nothing for them, when God had with so open a hand conferred many
good things upon them. And then for the following clause, but the counsel of
the wicked is far from me, therein he does again indeed reply upon Job in a
way of scorn, with the very same words which Job before had used, chap. 21.18.
(concerning which see the Note there) to wit, either as upbraiding him for
saying that the counsel of the wicked was far from him, when his thoughts of
God were the same with theirs, namely, that God minded not what was done here
in this world (which Eliphaz charged him with, because he held that God
prospered the wicked, and afflicted the righteous) and withal he was now a
sharer with them in their plagues; or else to intimate, that he had better
cause to say, that the counsel of the wicked was far from him, then Job had;
he might say it cordially, because he held that utter ruin would be their end,
but Job, though he professed so with his mouth, could not think so in his
heart, holding that they lived in greater prosperity then the godly did.

Verse. 19. The righteous see it, and are glad, etc.] That is, They evidently
see that at last accomplished in the destruction of wicked men, which they long
expected, and rejoice in it. For though it be unlawful to rejoice simply in
the destruction of the worst of men, especially if that joy arises from a
private grudge and desire of revenge, or from any secret hope that men may have
of any advantage that will thereby redound to themselves, according to that
Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, etc. yet certainly it is not
only lawful, but commendable to rejoice and triumph at the destruction of
wicked men, out of zeal for the glory of God, because thereby his power,
justice, truth, and holiness is manifested, and his tender care over his
servants, in taking their part against their wicked adversaries; and with
respect to the peace and welfare which may redound to the people of God by
their destruction.

And the innocent laugh them to scorn.] That is, They look upon them as such,
who justly deserve to be laughed to scorn, to wit, because their ways have
been so foolish and ridiculous, and because they are taken, through the
overruling providence of God, in their own craft, and are quite disappointed
of their designs and hopes.

Verse. 20. Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the
fire consumes.] That is, Whereas the estates of the righteous, which are
gotten in a just way, are not ruined (for they are the righteous with whom
Eliphaz here joins himself and his friends) Or, more generally, whilst our
life, and that whereby our life is maintained, and by which we and our families
do subsist, is not cut down, the fire of Gods wrath utterly consumes the
wicked, even all that is left of their families and estates, so that there is
no remnant nor memorial left of them, as it was in the destruction of Sodom
and her neighboring cities, whereto it is very probable that Eliphaz might in
these words have special respect. And indeed with the like phrase the prophet
Isaiah expresses the utter destruction of Babylon, Isa. 14.22. I will rise up
against them, says the Lord of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name and
remnant, etc. Now this Eliphaz inserts here, either as a reason why the
righteous rejoice and triumph when the wicked are destroyed, as he had said in
the foregoing verse, to wit, because God therein puts a difference betwixt the
wicked and them; or else, as an introduction to the following exhortation,
wherein he persuades Job to repent and turn unto God, whereas God spares the
righteous, and the fire of his wrath consumes the wicked, Acquaint now thy self
with him, etc.

Verse. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, etc.] That is, whereas thou have
despised God, and estranged thy self from him, and lived as if thou had
nothing to do with him; now address thy self to know him and his will
distinctly, to seek his favor, to walk with him, to be much in enjoying a holy
communion with him in meditation, prayer, and other holy duties, to serve him
as a master or father, and so to conform thy will to his in all things
whatsoever. As for the following words, either they are added as a part of the
advice which he gives Job, and be at peace, that is, pacify thy troubled mind,
and do not murmr against God as thou have done, but labor to make thy peace
with him; or else as a promise, Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at
peace, that is, then God will be at peace with thee, and thou shall live in all
prosperity.

Verse. 22. Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words
in thine heart.] See the Note, Deuteronomy. 6.6. Some would gather from hence, that
God had given his Law to Moses a little before this was written. But there is
no sure ground here for this inference; for by the Law may be meant any divine
declaration of Gods word and will, by what means soever it was done: It is
therefore all one as if he had said, As we would not have thee run on in a way
that is not good, trusting to thine own wisdom; so neither do we desire that
thou should depend upon our judgment, but that thou should follow the
counsel that God himself has given us.

Verse. 23. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, etc.] That
is, God will every day more and more make up all the breaches in thy estate,
thy glory, thy body, and thy children, till he has raised thee to a great
height of prosperity: see the Note, Exodus 1.21. As for the following clause,
thou shall put away iniquity far from thy tabernacle, that is inserted as a
conditional clause, to wit, that the truth of his repentance must be
manifested, by his abandoning all his former evil ways, and not suffering any
wickedness in any of his family (wherein he does also covertly tax Job, that
not only he himself, but his children also and family had lived lewdly and
wickedly; whence it was that both his children and servants were so strangely
destroyed:) Or else, it is added as a farther branch of the promises here made
to Job, upon condition of his repentance, to wit, that he should forsake all
his former sins, and reform his family (and indeed when men sincerely humble
themselves before God, and turn to him, he is wont thus by way of a blessing to
carry on the work of grace in such men;) and withal that he should remove
far from him all those plagues and punishments which hitherto had lain upon
them. For by iniquity in the Scripture is usually meant the punishment of
iniquity: see the Note, Genesis 4.7.

Verse. 24. Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, etc.] That is, in mighty
abundance. It may indeed also be read, as it is in the margin, Then shall thou
lay up gold on the dust, and so the meaning may be, that he should have gold in
such abundance, that he should make no reckoning of it, it should be piled up
or shovel'd up in heaps on the ground, or it should lie thrown up and down on
the ground as if it were nothing worth; yea, say some, he should have such an
infinite plenty of gold, that he should build his house, yea the very
foundations of his house with gold in stead of stone, (an hyperbolicall
expression) or at least that he should make his pavements with gold.

Verse. 25. Yea the Almighty shall be thy defense, etc.] That is, he shall
protect thee and thy estate; his providence shall once again be as a hedge
about thee. This also may be otherwise read, as in the margin, yea the Almighty
shall be thy gold, that is, thou shall have that which is better and more
precious then the most precious gold; Gods love and favor shall be to thee in
stead of gold, and shall make thee richer and happier then all the gold and
silver in the world can make thee And then for the following clause, And thou
shall have plenty of silver, that is in the original, and thou shall have
silver of strength; but the meaning is only this, that he should have store of
silver, and that it should be a strength to him.

Verse. 26. For then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, etc.] This
word ( for) may be taken with reference to the foregoing promises made to Job
concerning temporal blessings; and then the drift of these words is all one as
if he had said, Surely God will not withhold from thee these outward blessings,
seeing he intends to give thee that which is infinitely better, even delight in
himself. But I rather think that this is added as a farther encouragement to
win him to that duty of repenting and returning to the Almighty, to which he
had before advised him, namely, that whereas now he was continually vexed with
inward troubles of mind, then he should have sweet delight in the Almighty; to
wit, in the assurance of his love and favor, whereof all the outward blessings
he should bestow upon him should be comfortable pledges, and so likewise in
walking with him, and in doing him service. As for the following words, and
shall lift up thy face unto God, see the Note on chap. 11.15.

Verse. 27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
thou shall pay thy vows.] This last clause, and thou shall pay thy vows, may be
added to imply, 1. that Gods hearing his prayers should be manifested, by his
doing that for him which he had begged of God, and thereby giving him occasion
to pay the vows that he made when he put up his prayers: 2. that he should have
continual cause of rejoicing and praising God: 3. that God should bless him
so that he should be able to pay his vows: and it may be also 4. that it should
be of Gods grace that he should be willing to pay his vows, when God had
satisfied his desires.

Verse. 28. Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
thee, etc.] That is, Thou shall but say the word, and it shall be done; what
thou shall determine to do, through Gods blessing thou shall accomplish; or,
what thou shall determine to desire of God, resolving through faith that it
will be done, it shall be made good to thee according to thy faith: (which may
seem the more probable, because in the foregoing words he had spoken of Gods
readiness to hear his prayer.) And then for the following clause, and the
light shall shine upon thy ways, the meaning of that must be, that by the
counsel of Gods spirit, and by the blessing of Gods providence, he should be
directed and prosper'd in all his undertakings, and should take great delight
and contentment in what he did or had done. And very likely it is, that Eliphaz
opposed this to that complaint of Jobs, chap. 19.8. He has fenced up my way
that I cannot pass, and he has set darkness in my paths.

Verse. 29. When men are cast down, then thou shall say, There is lifting up,
etc.] This some Expositours understand thus; when men are cast down or
destroyed by the judgments of God, then thou shall say, there is, or there was
a lifting up of the spirit, a proud heart that was the cause of this
destruction, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 16.18. Pride goes before
destruction. Others again understand it thus; When men are overthrown with Gods
judgments, yet thou shall be preserved or lifted up, or thou shall say, Yet I
am lifted up; behold, God has spared me in this common destruction, and in
stead of casting me down, he has exalted and lifted me up: Or, thou shall
comfort thy self with assurance, that God will again lift thee up. Again,
others give this sense of the words; When men are humbled under the mighty hand
of God, and cast down with grief and sorrow for their sins, then thou shall
assure them that God will raise them up again? Last of all, others give this as
the meaning of the words; When men are cast down under grievous calamities, as
now thou art, thou shall from thine own experience assure them, that if they
repent and turn to the Lord, he will lift them up again; yea and, in the
confidence hereof, thou shall pray unto God that he would raise them up from
their low condition: and hereto agrees the following clause, and he shall save
the humble person, that is, God, moved with thy prayer, shall save the man that
is brought to so low and poor a condition, or the man that is humbled under his
miseries.

Verse. 30. He shall deliver the island of the innocent, etc.] That is, God will
remove his judgments from a whole country, for the sake of a few righteous
ones that are in it: which Eliphaz in the next words applies to Job, and it is
delivered by the pureness of thy hands; that is, if thou purgest thy self from
thy sins by repentance, so shall it be with thee, thou shall deliver the whole
country where thou live from calamities that otherwise would come upon it,
because God will spare it for thy sake; Or, by the pureness of thy hands
lifted up in prayer unto God, it shall be delivered. And indeed God does often
spare whole kingdoms for his poor servants sake: but yet Eliphaz was deceived,
if he intended to say that it is always thus, as is evident by that which God
says concerning the land of Israel, Ezekiel. 14.14. (where there seems to be an
allusion to this very place) Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job,
were in it, they should deliver but their own souls.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 2. EVen to day is my complaint bitter, etc.] That is, still and still I
do and must complain bitterly: and no wonder, my stroke is heavier then my
groaning, that which I suffer exceeds my complaint; concerning which see the
Note, chap. 6.2. And thus does Job covertly imply, that hitherto neither
Eliphaz that replied last upon him, nor any of the rest, had spoken any thing
that did in the least satisfy his mind, or allay his sorrow, but rather they
had much imbittered his spirit. And therefore indeed, if we mark it, in this
Reply of Jobs he does not vouchsafe, as it were, to speak any more to his
friends, as concluding there was no hope of convincing them, but addresseth
himself either to speak to God, or to bemoan himself to himself.

Verse. 3. O that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his
seat!] That is, the seat of God. For, either because he had heard Eliphaz lay
such foul things to his charge, as he had done in the former chapter, after all
that he had formerly said to clear himself, therefore he now again wishes that
he might plead his cause before God, before him who knew what he suffered, and
would compassionate him because of his sufferings; or else, because Eliphaz had
advised him, to acquaint himself with the Almighty, and to make his peace with
him, telling him what great things God would do for him, if he would thus
repent and turn to him, therefore he professes here how glad he would be that
he might appear before God, as knowing that he should find God at peace with
him, whatever they thought, and should be able to justify himself against them
before his tribunal. O that I knew where I might find him! etc. He speaks here
of God after the manner of earthly princes and judges, who sit in judgment
sometimes in one place and sometimes in another; and the drift of his words is
only to show, that were it a thing to be hoped, that God would appear in a
visible manner, and so he might plead his cause before God, as men do before an
earthly magistrate, he could be very glad of it, and would willingly present
himself before his Judgment Seat, to answer for himself, against the false
accusations of his friends. So that this is no more then what he had often
wished before, as chap. 9.34, 35. chap, 16.21. and 17.3. concerning which see
the No^es there.

Verse. 5. I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what
he would say unto me.] That is, Being confident of the justice of my cause, and
therefore not fearing any thing; having in order opened the cause before God,
which has been pleaded betwixt me and my accusers, and having with store of
arguments maintained mine integrity before him; I would see what God would
answer to the arguments that I should bring for my self, and what he would at
last determine in the cause: I would study to understand what he should say,
whether by way of approbation or reproof, and would quietly submit thereto. And
thus he implies, that he doubted not but God would acquit him, and would make
known why he had brought so great calamities upon him. Yet because of those
words, and understand what he would say to me, some would have this employed
also, that God would clearly and perspicuously make known his mind to him,
whereas he scarce knew what to make of all that his friends had said to him.

Verse. 6. Will he plead against me with his great power? No, but he would put
strength in me.] By his great power may be meant, either that absolute power
whereby God may do with his creatures whatever he pleases, and that justly
too; or that infinite power, before the consuming terror whereof such a poor
creature as he was could never stand, especially if God should proceed in
extremity with him, and deal with him according to the rigor of his justice:
and accordingly the meaning of these words must be, that he was confident,
either that God would not proceed with him according to his absolute power over
his creatures, making his own will and pleasure the only reason why he laid
such heavy judgments upon him, or else that God would not overwhelm him with
the terror of his Majesty and glory; which was the condition that Job formerly
propounded, where he desired he might have liberty to plead his cause before
God, chap. 13.20, 21. (concerning which see the Note there.) And hereto indeed
the last clause seems best to agree, No, but he would put strength into me;
that is, in stead of crushing and overwhelming me by his glorious power, he
will rather sustain me, that I may be able to stand and plead my cause before a
God of such Majesty.

Verse. 7. There the righteous might dispute with him, etc.] That is, The
righteous may boldly plead their cause before God in such a way of judgment,
where God will not stand upon his absolute power for the punishing of men, but
will only deal with them according to the revealed rule of his justice, in
regard of the Covenant of mercy he has made with them, and where God will as
it were lay by his Majesty and glory, and admit a poor man to plead his cause
before him, as if he were pleading before a man as himself. And this he applies
to himself in the following words, so should I be delivered for ever from my
judge: the meaning whereof is, that if God, his judge, before whose tribunal
he had desired to plead his cause, would hear him with such gentleness, and
proceed with him in that manner he had now expressed, by him he should be for
ever acquitted, and should not fear to be condemned by him; and consequently
also, he should be delivered from the false accusations of those that now did
most unjustly both judge and censure him.

Verse. 8. Behold, I go forward, and he is not there, etc.] That is, whether I
go forward or backward, neither way can I make that discovery of God that I
desire. And so it follows, verse. 9. I go on the left hand, where he does work;
as if he should have said, Seeking him out by taking notice of his works: but I
cannot behold him; that is, even there I cannot discern him: he hides himself
on the right hand, that I cannot see him; that is, if I look for him on the
right hand, there also he is hidden from me. I know that many learned
Expositours do hold, that by forward here is meant Eastward, (because, say
they, man is considered here as setting his face toward the rising Sun) and by
backward, Westward; and so by the left hand, the North, and by the right hand,
the South. And accordingly they also hold that Gods working is particularly
mentioned, where Job speaks of the left hand, that is, the North, I go on the
left hand where he does work, because the Northern parts of the world are more
inhabited and better peopled then the Southern are, and the people there are
also more civilized, more understanding, ingenious, and active for all things
then the other are. But methinks this is somewhat nice and curious. That which
is said before to be the ground of this expression, is I think sufficient. But
however, questionless, that which is here said in both these verses, is added
in relation to that he had said before, verse. 3. O that I knew where I might
find him! etc. and may be understood first of the invisibility of God; and so
the scope may be, to show, that though he had wished he might appear before
Gods tribunal, yet he did not think that God was visibly to be seen, as
earthly Judges are, but knew that God was every where present, though no where
to be seen as man is: and 2. of the incomprehensiblenesse of Gods ways and
judgments, to wit, that which way soever he turned himself, he was not able to
comprehend any of Gods judgments, or to find out God by any of his works;
(concerning which see a former Note upon a like place, chap. 9.11.) or 3. of
Gods refusing to answer his desire by manifesting himself to him in any outward
apparition, as a judge offering to hear and determine his cause; and so it is
all one as if he had said, I may wish thus to appear before God, that I may
plead my cause before him; but, alas, I do not find that God intends me any
such favor; he hides himself from me in this regard, and which way soever I
look, I find not the least likelihood, that God will vouchsafe to give me such
a hearing!

Verse. 10. But he knows the way that I take, etc.] The inference of these
words upon that which went before is very questionable: but two opinions
concerning this I find most probable. The first is, that these words are here
added to clear himself from a false conceit, that upon his former words his
friends might entertain in their thoughts concerning him; and so that the
meaning of these words is, as if he had said, Though I say that I can no where
find God, that I may plead my cause before him, yet I am far from the
atheistical thoughts of those profane wretches that say, God knows not what
is done here in this world: for, sure I am, that though I cannot find him, yet
he knows me and all my ways; which makes me also confident, that, knowing
mine innocence, he only intends to try me by these calamities he has laid upon
me. The second is, that this is added here, to show the reason why he desired
to plead his cause before God, or to show, that though there was no hope of
appearing before the invisible God in a visible manner, after the way of
pleading before the tribunal of an earthly judge; yet he might safely appeal
to God to pass judgment in his cause, and that because he was sure that God
knew him exactly; and therefore though earthly Judges, not knowing men, may
upon false information err in judgment, yet so it could not be with God:
whereupon he also adds, when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold;
where by Gods trying him may be meant, either a judicial trial, by hearing
him plead his cause, or a trying him by the afflictions wherewith he had
exercised him; and so the drift of these words may be, to show how confident he
was, that after trial he should not be found such dross as his friends would
make him, but pure gold, and that God meant no more to destroy him by these
calamities he had brought upon him, then the goldsmiths means to burn up the
gold that he puts into the fire, for the trying and purging of it.

Verse. 11. My foot has held his steps, etc.] This Job adds, as by way of
protesting against those wicked practices wherewith Eliphaz had charged him,
chap. 22.5. and by this, my foot has held his steps, is meant, either that he
had endeavored to imitate God in his holiness, justice, mercy, etc. according
to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear
children; or else his strict treading in those steps which God in his law had
prescribed him: so that the next words are a mere explanation of these, his way
have I kept, and not declined.

Verse. 12. Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips, etc.]
That is, I have not upon any pretense fallen off from doing what he has
commanded me, to the utmost of my power, but rather have fully and constantly
cleaved thereto. I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary
food; that is, I have more earnestly desired them, more diligently sought them,
more heartily delighted in them, more highly prized them, more carefully stored
them up in my heart, then my necessary food which I cannot be without, or my
appointed portion, as it is in the margin, that is, my daily food appointed for
me, and consequently then any thing that is most requisite for me. And thus Job
expressly answers that advice which Eliphaz had given him, chapter 22.22. Receive,
I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart, (of
which see the Note there:) affirming that he had always done this, whatever he
might judge of him because of his afflictions.

Verse. 13. But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? etc.] That is, Who can
make him go back from what he has resolved upon? Some understand this of the
immutable perseverance of God in his love to Job; as if he had said, Though at
present I can discern no token of his love and favor toward me, yet he is, I
know, the same toward me that he always was, a gracious and loving father,
and there is no turning him from those thoughts of love that he has always
born me. But more generally and better it is, by others, understood of the
unchangeablenesse of God in all his counsels, and that it is here inserted, to
show that it was no wonder that God dealt so severely with him, notwithstanding
he had endeavored to yield obedience to God in all things, But he is in one
mind, and who can turn him? as if he should have said* But, alas, be I never so
righteous, or let me say what I will and can for my self, when he has
determined to do any thing, he is constant in his purposes, and will do, as
he justly may, whatever he pleases. For Job does not charge God that he dealt
with him as tyrants use to do, that will do what they list, without regarding
what is just or unjust; but only acknowledges Gods absolute Sovereignty over
men, whereby he may do whatever he pleases in the world, and yet does always
what is just, though men cannot comprehend the reason of his proceedings.

Verse. 14. For he performs the thing that is appointed for me, etc.] Here Job
applies that to himself, which in the foregoing words he had delivered more
generally: and accordingly some understand it of Gods performing the good he
had intended him; which cannot well agree with that which is added in the
following verses, concerning his fears and terrors. It is better therefore, by
the most, expounded of Gods unchangeable proceeding to do to him whatever he
had determined: For he performs the thing that is appointed for me; that is,
what according to his just Prerogative he has determined to do unto me in
this way of afflicting me, that he does and will perform. And hereto agrees
the following clause, and many such things are with him, that is, with him with
whom I have to do. And the meaning may be, either that God had many such like
calamities and miseries, as those were which he had already suffered, which he
might farther bring upon him, and wherewith it was like he meant yet farther to
exercise his graces, and to purge-out his corruptions; as if he had said, I do
not perceive that God has yet done with me; it may be there are yet other
sorrows appointed for me: or, that be does many such things to others as well
as to him, the cause whereof is hidden from us; as if he should have said, It
is not my case alone, many such things he both decrees and executes, he usually
deals thus with men in an unsearchable way according to his absolute
Sovereignty, proceeding oftentimes with great severity against men, when yet he
loves them, and means them good.

Verse. 15. Therefore am I troubled at his presence; when I consider, I am
afraid of him.] In the foregoing chapter, when Eliphaz had charged Job with
many gross sins, he added verse. 10. Therefore snares are round about thee, and
sudden fear troubles thee: Job therefore, say some Expositours, as in answer
hereto, professes here that his terrors did arise, not from any guiltiness
of conscience, but merely from the consideration of the majesty of Gods
presence, his absolute power in doing what he pleases to men, and the
unsearchablenesse of his judgments. But however, clear it is that he ascribes
his fears to that absolute and unresistable power and Sovereignty whereby God
does to men whatever he pleases, whereof he had spoken in the two foregoing
verses; to wit, because, observing that God proceeded with him after this
manner, he might well fear how far God would go on in laying his hand so
sorely upon him. And withal herein he might also intimate, how far he was
from holding that God could not see and consider what was done here in the
world, as Eliphaz had seemed to charge him, chap. 22.13. and that when he
desired that he might plead his cause before God, it was in hope that God would
not overwhelm him with the terrors of his Majesty, as he had before expressed,
chap. 13.21.

Verse. 16. For God makes my heart soft, etc.] That is, By these heavy
calamities brought upon me, he has made my heart weak and faint; it melts
away like wax before the fire: which makes me the readier to fear that still
more miseries are coming upon me.

Verse. 17. Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither has he
covered the darkness from my face.] That is, Because he did not cut me off
before these calamities came upon me, nor by these calamities which he has
brought upon me, nor has yet afforded me any release from my miseries: and
hereby he intimates his fears, that he was hitherto preserved from utter
destruction, that he might be reserved to farther miseries, which was that
which did so exceedingly perplex him; for that by darkness he means his
grievous calamities, see 1 Samuel 2.9.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. WHy, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know
him, not see his days?] 1. By this, that times are not hidden from the
Almighty, is meant, that God knows all times, and all things that are or
shall be done in time. 2. By they that know him are meant the godly, that love
and fear God, according to that, Psalm. 36.10, O continue thy loving-kindnesse
to them that know thee! and 3. By this, that they see not his days, is meant,
that they see not the noted and memorable days wherein God does his great and
famous works, either of mercy or judgment; or more particularly, the days of
his executing vengeance upon wicked men here in this life, which indeed are
usually by way of eminency called in the Scripture Gods days, as Isa. 2.12.
The day of the lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,
etc. and so in many other places. The drift of these words is, to show that God
does not always punish wicked men here in this world, as Jobs friends had
maintained he did. For the proving whereof, as he mentions many sorts of lewd
men that live in peace and prosperity, and are never punished here in this
world, so before this enumeration of such profane ones as go unpunished, he
prefixeth the words of this verse by way of introduction; the meaning whereof
may be thus set forth: Seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, that is,
seeing God knows all times, and consequently both the times how long men are
to live in the world, and when is the fittest time and opportunity to punish
wicked men, so that no wicked man can slip out of the world unknown to God, or
before the time that God intended to punish him, why do they that know him, not
see his days? that is, why do the righteous servants of God, that walk with
him, and observe his dealings, and to whom God is most ready to reveal himself,
as to his bosom friends, not see the days of Gods punishing wicked men here
in this life? The sum of this introduction is therefore briefly this; that if
God did constantly determine to punish all profane ungodly men in this world,
since he knows the times how long they are to continue here, and so cannot be
disappointed by their unexpected dying, he would certainly take the fittest
time to do it: and so the godly should observe the time when, and the manner
how God always punishes wicked men, and so should infallibly know by Gods
dealing with those upon whom God lays his hand, whether they are wicked men or
no.

Verse. 2. Some remove the landmarks, etc.] Here Job begins to reckon up the
foul enormities of those that yet often go unpunished here in this world; and
mentions in the first place the removing of landmarks, this being in all ages,
and amongst all nations, even by the light of nature, esteemed an execrable
wickedness, and therefore also forbidden in Moses law, Deuteronomy. 19.14: under
which also all other unjust encroachings upon other men's estates may be
comprised, according to that, Prove. 23.10. Remove not the old landmark, and
enter not into the fields of the fatherless. And to this he adds, they
violently take away flocks and feed thereof: and if we read the last clause as
it is in the margin of our Bibles, and feed them, it is doubtless added to
show the impudency of such men, that when they have driven away other men's
cattle, do not kill them, or sell them away, to conceal their rapine thereby,
or to supply their necessities, but putting them into their own pastures do
openly there feed them, as if they were their own: and withal their impunity;
God never calls them to a reckoning, but they quietly enjoy what they have so
unjustly gotten.

Verse. 3. They drive away the ass of the fatherless, etc.] Ass here may be
put for asses; or, this may be intended as an aggravation of the wicked man's
oppression, that though the fatherless have but one ass, yet he sticks not to
spoil him of it. And the like may be said of the following clause, They take
the widows ox for a pledge. Ox here may be put for oxen: but however it is to
the same effect. For because the widows oxen are so necessary for the ploughing
of her ground, and other such like employments, and of a yoke of oxen if one be
taken away, the other becomes useless, it being a most unmercifull act to take
that for a pledge without which the poor man cannot live, and therefore
forbidden in Gods law, Exodus 22.26. (concerning which see the Note there;)
hence it is that this is mentioned here as such a high degree of wickedness.

Verse. 4. They turn the needy out of the way, etc.] Expositours find it hard to
determine what is meant here by turning the needy out of the way. Some
understand it of causing the needy, by their oppressions, to take lewd and
unwarrantable courses to help themselves; so turning them out of the way of
righteousness, which God has prescribed them. 2. Some understand it of
turning the needy out of the way of justice, to wit, either by overawing them,
so that they dare not appear in judgment against them; or else by obstructing
the ways of justice so by their great power, that the needy are thrust from
their right, and can find no way of righting themselves: and so they make this
place parallel with that, Amos 2.7. they turn aside the way of the meek. 3.
Others conceive it is meant of those that by their robberies do so infest the
highways, that the very poorest, because of their cruelty, are afraid to
travel in the ordinary way, and therefore seek out secret by-waies whereby
they may safely pass. 4. Others apply it to those that by their oppressions
and hard dealing with the poor, do turn them out of the way of their
livelihood, the way of exercising their trade and profession, and force them to
hide themselves; as when by taking those things as pawns from them, which are
absolutely necessary for the exercise of their callings, or by any other way of
cruel usage, they are disabled from going forth to their work, and from
following their ordinary employments. And 5. others hold, that by turning the
needy out of the way is only meant, that they are by the unjust dealing of
their oppressing neighbors put to such shifts, that they scarce know which way
to turn themselves, and cannot in a manner be suffered to live by them. And
indeed with these two last Expositions the following clause does best agree,
the poor of the earth hide themselves together: the meaning whereof doubtless
is, that by the oppressors enlarging of their estates and other unmercifull
dealings, the needy are many times forced to run together into holes and
corners to hide themselves, and to crowd together in any corner like bees in a
hive, and scarce dare show their heads abroad amongst others. See 1 Samuel 14.11.
and Heb. 11.37.

Verse. 5. As wild asses in the desert go they forth to their work, rising
betimes for a prey, etc.] Some understand this of the needy, mentioned in the
foregoing verse, that are turned out of the way by their great oppressors; to
wit, that being forced to fly into the desert, they do there live more like
beasts, even like wild asses, then like men, going forth to their work, to wit,
to that toiling and moiling labor wherein they are made to drudge for others,
or to seek a poor livelihood for themselves, rising betimes for a prey, that
is, to gather here and there, or any way to seize upon somewhat wherewith to
satisfy their hunger: and accordingly also they understand the following
clause, the wilderness yields food for them and for their children; that is,
all the food they have, is what they can get in the wilderness. But now the
most of Expositours understand this of those that oppress the poor and needy,
or of the mighty robbers that were in those times, to wit, that they were like
wild asses in the desert, in that they were a company of fierce, savage,
untamed men, sons of Belial, that would be in no subjection to any laws or
government, but exercised all kind of violence and rapine upon those that were
near them, and lived like beasts in that regard; they go forth to their work,
rising betimes for a prey, that is, every day they ramble up and down
diligently, to rob and make a prey of all that come near them, which is their
only work and employment: and so also they understand the following clause, the
wilderness yields food for them and for their children; that is, they and
theirs live by rapine, as others by their grounds which they till and dress;
or, in the wilderness, by their robberies and murders, they provide for them,
their children and servants, not caring what becomes of others.

Verse. 6. They reap every one his corn in the field, and they gather the
vintage of the wicked.] Even this likewise some understand of the poor, to wit,
either that they are glad to work for their mighty taskmasters, in reaping
their corn and gathering their vintage; (for in this sense it may be said, that
they reap every one his corn, either because they reap every one that parcel
of corn which is allotted them for their task, or because they are forced to
reap their own corn, not for themselves, but for the oppressor that has taken
their fields by force from them) or else that by way of forraging for
themselves, here one cuts down the corn in one field, and another the corn in
another field, and gather the vintage of their wicked oppressors, which they
thought to have had for themselves. But this too the most Expositours
understand of those great oppressors and robbers, of whom Job had spoken in
the foregoing verses, to wit, that they reap the corn, and gather the vintage,
of the fields and vineyards which they had wrung by unjust violence from the
right owners, or that they pretend some title or other to any man's corn and
vintage which they have a mind to, and take it away by force from them; which
is expressed in the last clause by those words, and they gather the vintage of
the wicked; either 1. because it was gotten wickedly: or 2. because they
condemn those for wicked men whom they so oppress, and under that notion take
their inheritance from them, as Ahab did the vineyard of Naboth: or 3. because
in their oppressions they spare not the vineyards of those that are as wicked
as themselves; and so one wolf makes a prey of another.

Verse. 7. They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, etc.] See the Note,
chap. 22.6.

Verse. 8. They are wet with the showers of the mountains, etc.] That is, the
poor, mentioned in the foregoing verse, that are stripped of their clothing,
are exposed to wet, whilst they work abroad in the fields for their great
lords, or whilst they wander up and down in the desert to provide for
themselves; and embrace the rock for want of shelter, that is, hide themselves
in the holes of rocks for want of other shelter, and are glad and joyful of
such a refuge, which this phrase of embracing the rock may seem to imply. We
have the like phrase, Lam. 4.5. they that were brought up in scarlet, embrace
dunghils, that is, are forced to sit or lie upon dunghils.

Verse. 9. They pluck the fatherless from the breast.] And this not only they
might be said to have done, that took them from the breast to sell them for
bondslaves; but they likewise that took away their mothers or nurses, to make
slaves of them, or that forced them to leave their sucklings to go and work in
their fields or vineyards, and it may be to wean them before they would have
done it, that they might be fitter to toil and labor for them; and those also
that by starving their mothers or nurses, disabled them that they could not
give their little ones suck. For the following clause, and take a pledge of the
poor, see the Note chap. 22.6.

Verse. 10. They cause him to go naked without clothing, etc.] That is, the
poor man mentioned in the foregoing verse, whom they had taken for a pledge,
they would force him to work for them, and yet not afford him necessary
raiment. And then it follows, They take away the sheaf from the hungry; that
is, from the hungry poor they take away that little corn which they had gotten
for the nourishment of them and theirs, happily that one sheaf of gleanings which
with much pains they had gathered: Or else the meaning may be, that they would
not suffer their poor hungry harvest-men to taste the least of the corn which
they reaped and gathered in for them; an act of great inhumanity, though it
were to a beast, as is evident by that law, Deuteronomy. 25.4. Thou shall not muzzle
the ox when he treads out the corn.

Verse. 11. Which make oil within their walls, and tread their wine-presses, and
suffer thirst.] Some understand this of griping oppressors; who will scarce
taste of the blessings they enjoy in greatest plenty. But the words seem clearly
to hold forth the contrary, to wit, that it is spoken of the poor that are
oppressed. And it may be understood either of those that make wine and oil in
their own houses, and yet afterward have not wherewith to quench their thirst,
namely, because they are presently forced to sell all away to pay their debts,
or else because spoilers come straightwaies upon them and carry it all away; Or
else of the poor laborers, that make wine and oil in great men's houses, and
yet are ready to perish for thirst, to wit, not only because their wages are
not paid them, at least not in time, or because they allow them wages whereon
they cannot live; but also because they are not allowed to quench their thirst
with that they provide for their great Masters. And well may this be mentioned
as a high degree of wickedness, as is noted above verse. 10. that they should
suffer them to be hungry and thirsty, at the very time when they toiled and
moiled to prepare for them such choice dainties, and should be hard-hearted to
the poor, when they receive so liberally from God.

Verse. 12. Men groan from out of the city, etc.] As if he should have said,
These things are thus not only in the country, in desert and solitary places,
but also in cities, the places where seats of justice are usually erected; they
are not only done in secret, but openly: the groans and cries of the oppressed
are openly heard in the cities, and the soul of the wounded cries out; that
is, the men that are wounded in their very souls because of the oppressions of
the wicked, and the wrong that is daily done them, or, the men that are wounded
and slain by the overbearing power of tyrants and oppressors, do in their
grief, or whilst they are dying, complain bitterly of what they suffer, and cry
unto God for vengeance; Or it may be meant, that the blood, or the souls of
those that are wounded and slain do cry for vengeance, as is said concerning
the blood of Abel, Genesis 4.10. (of which see the Note there) and the souls of
the Martyrs slain by their cruel persecutours, Revel. 6.9, 10. Some understand
the first clause particularly of those that grieve and groan in the city,
because of those grievous oppressions which they hear the poor endure in the
country; and some apply both clauses to the groans of such as inhabit cities,
when they are straightened and damnified, and sometime, if they stir forth a
little, wounded and slain by those field-robbers, whereof Job had spoken in the
foregoing verses. But I conceive it must be taken generally of the groans and
complaints of all that are oppressed in cities, whatever their sufferings and
oppressions be. As for the last clause, yet God lays not folly to them, it is
that for which Job had alleged all that he has hitherto spoken of profane
wicked men; to wit, that though their wickedness be so great, and the
oppressed cry to God against them, yet many times God does not in the least
punish them for the evil they commit, and so stop them in their foolish and
wicked ways, but suffers them to run on in their lewd and sinful courses.

Verse. 13. They are of those that rebel against the light, etc.] This I
conceive is primarily meant of that natural light, whereof Job speaks also in
the following verses; for against this light it may be said that they rebel,
because they hate and abhor it: they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in
the paths thereof; that is, they are birds of darkness, they spend their days
most in the dark, and take little or no pleasure to be in the light. Having
spoken before of open oppressors, now he comes to speak of those that sin more
secretly and closely. But yet secondarily it must questionless be understood
of spiritual light, to wit, that they rebel against God the father of lights,
against the light of nature, and against the light of Gods word and spirit: and
that 1. Because men's seeking darkness and secrecy when they sin, is an
argument that they rebel against the light of their own consciences; and 2.
Because this their sinning so wilfully and desperately, not of ignorance, is
mentioned here as a great aggravation of their wickedness, and that which
makes it far more strange that God should spare them. And indeed even in
regard of this light it might be well said, that they know not the ways
thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof; because they do not approve of, nor
delight in, nor will walk in those ways to which by this spiritual light they
are directed: at least if they sometimes do something that the light directs
them, yet to be sure they will not make it their constant course, they will not
abide in those ways.

Verse. 14. The murderer rising with the light, kills the poor and needy,
etc.] This is meant either directly of those that do purposely go forth to
kill such as they have conceived malice against; and then the next clause, and
in the night is as a thief, must be understood thus, that in the night he seeks
to slay those he hates secretly, as in the day he seeks to do it by open
assault; or, that having shed the blood of men in the day, in the night he
seeks to hide his head, as thieves are wont to do: or else of robbers and
highway men, as we use to call them; and that both because robbers are
frequently also murderers, and likewise because by robbing and spoiling them of
their estates, they do in a manner shorten their days; and then the meaning of
the last clause is this, and in the night is as a thief, that is, as he robs
openly by day, so he is a close pilfering thief by night: for this word ( as)
does not always import a likeness only, as we see Joh. 1.14. and we beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the father.

Verse. 16. In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for
themselves in the daytime, etc.] That is, those wicked ones of whom he spoke
verse. 13. that rebel against the light. It cannot be so properly meant of
adulterers, of whom he had spoken in the words immediately foregoing (they are
usually let in by agreement, or have some closer way of getting in to satisfy
their lust, and are seldom wont to dig through houses, or break in by force;)
and therefore it must be understood of another knot of wicked wretches, to wit,
of thieves, who are wont indeed to view the houses by day which they purpose to
rob, to observe the strength of the house, and which way they may get in with
most ease and advantage, and then accordingly break into them by night. As for
the last clause, they know not the light, see the Note verse. 13.

Verse. 17. For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death, etc.] That
is, most hateful and terrible: to wit, both because coming suddenly upon them,
before they have fully accomplished their wickedness, they are vexed to be so
crossed in their intended evil; as also because they are afraid they shall be
discovered, surprised, and taken: which the following words do more clearly
hold forth, if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.

Verse. 18. He is swift as the waters, etc.] A most knotty place this is,
insomuch that we can hardly find any two Expositours that are in every regard
of the same mind in giving the sense of the words: and yet all agree, that Job
speaks here still of those wicked wretches that rebel against the light, of
whom he had been speaking hitherto, though he speaks of them sometimes
indefinitely in the singular number, He is swift as the waters, and so verse.
20, 21, etc. and sometimes in the plural number, their portion is cursed in
the earth, and so verse. 24, etc. It is not to be wholly slighted which some
say, that Job having before spoken of the thief at land, digging through
houses, he now speaks also of the Pirate, that robs by sea; he is swift as
the waters, to wit, when he is in chase of any ship that he seeks to make a
prey of; their portion is cursed in the earth, that is, they that live at land
curse them, because they are ever and anon so exceedingly damnifyed by them; he
beholds not the way of the vineyards, that is, having once tasted the
sweetness of sea-robbing, he will no more live at land, to toil and moil in
dressing vineyards. But there are three other Expositions which seem to me the
most probable. First, some conceive that these words do farther set forth the
wickedness of these desperate wretches: He is swift as the waters, that is,
they pursue their wicked designs with full sail, they are as prone and forward
to do evil as water is to run downward, and as speedy and swift in doing evil,
as the waters are in gliding away from one place to another; which agrees with
that which Solomon says of such kind of men, that their feet are swift in
running to mischief, Prove. 6.18. their portion is cursed in the earth, that is,
the places where they choose to live, as fittest for them that intend to live by
robbery and spoil, are forests and deserts, that are cursed with barrenness,
Heb. 6.18. he beholds not the way of the vineyards, that is, they love not to
live by honest labor, as by ploughing and dressing the vineyards, but by
thieving and robbery, and therefore the way of the vineyards is no place for
them. Again 2. some understand these words of the fears of wicked men, and
their seeking to hide themselves: having said in the foregoing verse, if one
know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death, he adds here, He is
swift as the waters; that is, when they are in danger to be discovered and
apprehended, they slip away, as nimbly as the water glides away in a river, nor
can stay long in any place, but fly all company, by reason of the terrors that
are continually upon them: their portion is cursed in the earth, that is, they
seek to hide themselves in woods, and rocks, and deserts, as before is noted;
Or, they live a most miserable base life, not only in regard of the
desolatenesse and the solitariness of the places where they live, but also
because of the terrors wherewith Cain-like they are continually perplexed. He
beholds not the way of the vineyards, that is, they fly so speedily away,
that they have not so much time as to visit their houses, or to see their
vineyards; Or, they live a solitary sad life in deserts and mountains, and
enjoy not the pleasure of gardens and vineyards as other men do; Or rather,
they flee not to the vineyards, that are places always frequented, as being
usually planted near to cities, and where all the year long there is still some
company, either working, or ^ending them, or walking for their pleasure; in
such places as these they dare not be seen. And then 3. many understand them of
Gods punishing such wicked men; He is swift as the waters, that is, they pass
away, to wit, by death, suddenly and irrecoverably, as waters in rivers run
swiftly away, and come back no more; see the Note, Genesis 49.4. their portion is
cursed in the earth, that is, their habitations shall be destroyed by the
magistrate when they come to apprehend them, or when they are cut off by
sentence passed upon them; Or, their inheritance in the land is barren, covered
over with weeds and briars; Or, they are cursed even here while they are upon
earth, where they seem to live in a very happy condition; because the curse of
God shall be at last upon all their earthly concernments, (and perhaps their
posterity too) either by wasting and consuming it, or by causing all that they
have to tend to their hurt. He beholds not the way of the vineyards, that is,
they fly not so far as the vineyards, though usually in the suburbs of the
cities, before they be apprehended and taken; Or, even their vineyards are so
cursed with barrenness, that they take no pleasure to visit them and to look
upon them. And if it be objected, that if we understand these words thus, that
which Job says here should contradict what he had said before, concerning
wicked men's running on unpunished, and living in a prosperous condition; see
the answer to this in the Note, chap. 21.17.

Verse. 19. Drought and heat consume the snow waters; so does the grave those
which have sinned.] That is, As the earth, when it is dry by the heat of the
weather, does soon drink up the waters of the melted snow that lay unmelted all
the winter; so does the grave at last swallow up the wicked, when they had run
on in sin to that very time. And I conceive that doubtless the drift of the
words is, to show, that after those wicked wretches had lived such an
abominable and damnable life, as he had now described, yet they died at length
an ordinary natural death, as other men die, without the least visible sign
of the vengeance of God upon them, more then there is in the death of other
men. Job had in a manner said the same before, chap. 21.13. concerning which
see the Note there. For whether by their passing away as the snow-waters, is
meant their dying suddenly, or their wasting away by degrees, the aim of the
words is certainly to show, that they are gathered to the grave at last as
other men are. We have the like expressions, Psalm. 58.8. As a snail which
melts, let every one of them pass away; and Psalm. 68.2. As the wax melts
before the fire, so let the wicked perish. And this Exposition is indeed most
suitable to the scope of Job in this place, which is to show, that God does not
manifest his wrath against all wicked men, neither whilst they live nor when
they die. But yet some learned Expositours do rather take the words to be a
description of the sad conclusion and miserable end of sinners, wicked and
ungodly men, to wit, that they are for their sins cut off in a way of wrath;
and whilst the righteous in death triumph over death, and cannot be cut off
from their spiritual bliss, death does absolutely triumph over the wicked,
and does wholly consume and swallow up them and all their happiness.

Verse. 20. The womb shall forget him, etc.] That is, His wife, or rather his
mother, and so consequently all his dearest and nearest friends, shall utterly
forget him; Or, He shall perish and be forgotten, as if he had never been
conceived and born into the world. Some conceive that this, as that did in the
foregoing verse, referres to the easiness of the wicked man's death, as the
cause why his friends the sooner forget his death; they shall not be grieved or
troubled at his death, because he died so easy a death: to which purpose is
that also which follows, the worm shall feed sweetly on him, that is, (say
some) It shall be sweet and delightful to him that the worms feed on him, (an
expression like that, chap. 21.33. the clods of the valley shall be sweet unto
him, concerning which see the Note there) Or rather, the worms shall make a
sweet banquet of him; he that had wont to feed on sin, and to make a prey of
others, shall then become a prey to the worms, to whom his flesh shall be
sweet-meat. The sum of all is, that he shall fare no worse in the grave then
others fare. He shall be no more remembered, that is, there shall be no
remarkable stroke of judgment in his death to make him be talked of, when he
is gone; and wickedness shall be broken as a tree, that is, as an old rotten
tree does wast and moulder away piece-meals and by degrees, till it be at last
quite gone, so shall the wicked man wast and consume away by degrees. But then
again others understand this also of the misery and wretchedness of wicked
men in their death; The womb shall forget him, that is, his nearest relations,
as they were weary of him whilst he lived, so being dead they shall scarce
ever mind him, or think of him more: he shall be no more remembered, that is, he
shall never be mentioned with honor, but his name shall rot amongst men, or he
shall be forgotten as a man not worthy to be thought of; and wickedness shall
be broken as a tree, as a barren and unfruitful tree is cut down or grubbed up
by the roots, or as any other tree is violently shivered in pieces and thrown
down by a tempest, or as a rotten and worm-eaten tree is easily broken or blown
down by the wind, and then never sprouts up again; so wickedness, that is,
wicked men (according as we find the like expression Psalm. 107.42. and all
iniquity shall stop her mouth) after they have flourished a while in their
wickedness, shall be suddenly taken away by death, and be cut off from amongst
the living.

Verse. 21. He evil entreats the barren, that bears not; and does not good
to the widow.] But rather hurt. Under these two particulars, of evil entreating
the barren, and doing no good to the widow, all oppression of the needy and
helpless is comprehended: and evil entreating the barren is made one of the
great oppressions of the wicked, because therein they did afflict those that
were in a sad afflicted condition before, and that had no children to rise up
in their defense: and if it be meant of the hard usage of their own wives when
they were barren, whom they should have comforted, and who dare not mutter
against them, this must needs implie the greater cruelty. Some conceive that
this is added, to show why the wicked, when they are dead, are no more minded
nor remembered, as is said in the foregoing verse, to wit, because they were
such merciless wretches whilst they lived, evil entreating the barren, etc.
But I rather conceive that Job here returns to set forth the wickedness of
those wretches, whom notwithstanding God suffers to live in prosperity, till
they come at length to die in an ordinary way, as other men do.

Verse. 22. He draws also the mighty with his power, etc.] Some understand
this of Gods punishing wicked men, to wit, that when he begins to contend with
the wicked, he subdues or brings under the mightiest of them as well as the
meanest; and so also they understand the following clause, he rises up, that
is, God rises up to contend with wicked men; and no man is sure of life, no
man can secure himself against the killing stroke of Gods indignation, or the
discovery of Gods indignation makes every man afraid of his life. But the tenor
of the words shows clearly that Job still proceeds to describe the
wickedness of wretched men, whom God notwithstanding prospers. He draws also
the mighty with his power: the meaning is, either that by his power he procures
the mighty to side with him, judges, and magistrates, and great men, and so
this makes him terrible to others, he rises up, and no man is sure of life; or
else, that he draws the mighty, to wit into his net, according to that, Psalm.
10.9. he does catch the poor when he draws him into his net; when he has
crushed the poor by his oppressions, then, encouraged hereby, he lays wait
also for the mighty, and subdues them, and brings them into subjection to him,
even magistrates also and judges, whereby likewise he subverts all public
order and government: he rises up, and no man is sure of life; that is, if any
man rise up to oppose this oppressor, he shall but ruin and destroy himself
thereby; or, Though the oppressor rises up to make a Covenant of peace with
men, yet they are all of them for all that afraid of their lives; there is no
assurance in any vow or oath, whereby he engages himself: Or rather, he rises
up to contend with the mighty, and the terrors of death presently seize upon
them all. But if we read this last clause, as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, He rises up, and he trusts not his own life, either it is meant of
the oppressed, to wit, that he rises up, namely, to sue for favor to the
oppressor, or to fly from him, but do what he will, he trusts not his own
life, but gives himself for a dead man, because of the over-bearing power of
his adversary; or else of the oppressor, to wit, that when he rises to
contend with the mighty, or every day he rises, he is afraid of his own life,
being still jealous, as tyrants are wont to be, that some body or other will
kill him.

Verse. 23. Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he rests, yet his
eyes are upon their ways.] Some Expositours understand this thus; that though
the oppressed give gifts to the oppressor, that he may thereby purchase his
peace, or, though the oppressor grants this to the oppressed, that he shall
live in peace and safety by him, and thereupon he rests upon this his covenant
and promise, that he will surely be as good as his word; yet the oppressor
keeps his eyes upon these to whom he has thus engaged himself, and watches
all their ways, and if he can but get the least advantage against them, will
be sure to crush them. But there are several other Expositions given of the
words that seem far better then this; to wit, 1. that though God gives to the
oppressor that which may well in outward appearance secure him in peace, and
he rest hereon, yet it is not because God is ignorant of his wicked courses,
seeing Gods eyes behold all his ways: or 2. that though God lets him live in
safety, and he rests hereon with great security, yet Gods eyes are upon his
ways to favor him and to bless him: or rather 3. that though it be given of
God to wicked wretches that they live in peace and prosperity, and they
resting hereupon are confident they shall never be moved, yet God takes strict
notice of all their wicked ways, that he may be sure at last to charge them
all upon them, and that he may take the fittest time to destroy them.

Verse. 24. They are exalted for a little while, etc.] to wit, both in estate
and mind; but are gone and brought low, they are taken out of the way as all
other; that is, for all their greatness, on a sudden God pulls them down, and
they are gone and laid in the grave, as other men, and often after the same
manner as others are, and cut off as the tops of the ears of corn; that is, as
high as they bear their heads, they are cut down as the corn in harvest, to
wit, easily and in a trice, or not by any notorious judgment, but by an
ordinary natural death, when they come to ripeness of years, as the corn is
ripe in harvest. The drift of the verse may be to show, either that God cuts
off the greatest of wicked men many times by a sudden stroke of judgment; or
else rather, that after all their horrid wickedness, they are cut off by death
in an ordinary way as all other men are.

Verse. 25. And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech
nothing worth?] That is, If it be not as I have said, that God many times
prospers the wicked, and afflicts the righteous, let any man that will,
undertake to confute what I have spoken.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. THen answered Bildad, etc.] Eliphaz having replied the third time
upon Job, chap. 22. it was now Bildads turn, who still spoke next after
Eliphaz, to reply again upon him; which therefore he does in this Chapter, but
very briefly: either as finding Job too strong for them; or as not having any
thing in a manner to say, but what he and his friends had said before; or
rather, as concluding that, because of Jobs obstinacy, it was in vain indeed
to talk any farther to him, there having been abundantly enough already said to
him, but that nothing would convince him; which may be the cause also why
Zophar, who should have replied in the third place upon Job, spoke no more at
all.

Verse. 2. Dominion and fear are with him, etc.] Because of these words with
him, some limit this to the Lords exercising of his Sovereigntie, and the
manifestation of his dreadful Majesty in the heavens, his dewlling place, to
wit, that he rules the Angels in heaven, and that his presence there is so full
of Majesty, that those holy spirits out of reverence and fear do cover their
faces before him. But I conceive the words must be understood more generally;
Dominion and fear are with him, that is, God is the Sovereign Lord over all, he
it is that governs all things, and has absolute power over all things in
heaven and in earth; yea and in regard of this his Majesty and power a
terrible God he is, and justly to be feared of all. But why does Bildad speak
of this here? I answer: Some conceive, that because Job had affirmed, that many
wicked men run on in their lewd courses even to their dying day, and are never
punished, therefore Bildad, as apprehending this to be in effect a denial of
the power, justice, and providence of God, does here set forth with what
unresistable authority and power God does rule and govern the whole world;
thereby to intimate, that it is not therefore possible that he should suffer
such wicked wretches to pass always unpunished. But I conceive there are two
other ways, wherein Expositours do better set forth the aim of Bildad in these
words: to wit, first, that he does here set forth the infinite power, and
Majesty, and goodness of God, that having afterward therewith compared the
baseness and weakness of man, he might thence infer, how impossible it was
that so poor a wretch should be found just before such a glorious God, and
thereby condemns Job for justifying himself: or 2. that Bildad does here speak
of Gods supreme Sovereigntie, and dreadful power and Majesty, thereby to
discover the folly and arrogance of Job, in desiring so earnestly that he might
plead his cause before God. Job had indeed in the beginning of his last answer
protested, with a little too much confidence and boldness, that there was
nothing he desired more, then that he might answer for himself before Gods
Tribunal, chap. 23.3, 4, 5. O that I knew where I might find him, that I might
come even to his Seat: I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth
with arguments; I would know the words which he would answer me, etc. Now
though after this Job said much also, to prove that the wicked many times live
and die in a flourishing condition, whilst the righteous are sorely oppressed
and distressed; yet when Bildad came now to reply upon him, not being able to
answer what he had said concerning the prosperity of the wicked, and the
afflictions of the righteous, he gives not the least touch upon that, but as
flying upon him for his confidence in desiring to plead his cause before God,
as not doubting but that there he should be able to justify himself, he tells
him here of the Sovereigntie and dreadful Majesty of God, and seeks thereby
as it were to strike Job with the fear of his glorious Majesty and absolute
power; and to intimate how strange it was, that he should dare so fearlesly to
challenge God, as it were, to answer him, or that he should hope that God would
lay by his Majesty and glory, that he might come and plead his cause before
him, alluding to that which Job had said chap. 23.6. Will he plead against me
with his great power? No, but he would put strength in me. As for the next
clause, he makes peace in his high places, either first, it must be meant of
the heavens, and those that inhabit those heavenly places, as opposed to the
world here below, to wit, that whereas here, by reason all things are
corruptible and subject to change, and by reason of the wickedness of the
devils and men, the elements and those things that are made thereof seem to be
opposite one to another, and to fight one against another, and there is
continually much rebellion against God; in the heavens it is quite otherwise,
there is nothing but quietness and peace. And this too may be spoken, first,
with respect to the Angels; of whom though there be a numberless number, and
though they have differing ministries and imploiments, yet they are by the
mighty power of God so established and ordered, that they all sweetly agree
amongst themselves, and do all unanimously the will of their creator; they
neither contend one with another, nor much less dare any of them contend with
God: and hereby Bildad might imply, what an arrogance it was in Job to think of
contesting with God, which the Angels themselves dare not do. 2. It may be
spoken with respect to the stars and heavenly Orbs: though the heavens be of
such an incomprehensible vast bigness, and are whirled about daily with such a
strange swift violence, though the stars be infinite in number, and though the
orbs have their different and contrary motions, some moving far faster then
others, some going one way and some another; yet they all observe the order,
both for time and place, that God has set them, in so much that there is not
the least jarring amongst them, they do not in the least cross or hinder one
another, but move all with one sweet consent according to the course that the
Almighty has prescribed them. Or 2. it may be meant of the upper regions of
the air, to wit, that when all things are there tempestuous and stormy, God,
when he pleases, does presently quiet them, and make all calm. Or 3. it may be
meant of the constant accomplishment of Gods will by all the creatures in the
world: he makes peace in his high places, that is, God in his dewlling place
does rule all things in a steadfast order; yea even here below, where there
seems to be most confusion and rebellion against God by reason of sin, yet all
things are so overruled by him, that nothing is done but according to his
determinate counsel and will, and all is carried on for his glory. And this is
added to make good the former clause, that Dominion and fear are with him, that
is, to show that God rules all things, and that this all-wise and almighty God
is therefore to be reverenced and feared of all.

Verse. 3. Is there any number of his armies? etc.] Whether we understand this
particularly of the Angels, or of the stars (which are both sometimes styled
Gods armies or host, as Genesis 32.2. and Deuteronomy. 4.19. and are indeed innumerable)
or else of all the creatures in general, which are all Gods host (of which see
the Note Genesis 2.1.) doubtless it is alleged to set forth the glorious Majesty
of Gods Dominion, who is thus magnificently attended with such numberless
armies, and likewise his incomprehensible wisdom in the governing of them;
and withal to discover the desperate boldness of those that dare contend with
him, who has such innumerable armies at his command, to fight against them,
and destroy them.

And upon whom does not his light arise?] The meaning of this may be, that 1.
God causes the Sun to shine upon all, according to that, Matthew. 5.45. He
makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good; or 2. that he does behold
and know all things, that nothing is covered in darkness in regard of God, but
all things are light and manifest before him; or 3. that the light of his
wisdom shines upon all, in that the ways of Angels and men, yea the
operations of all the creatures are admirably directed and ordered thereby; or
4. that God is good unto all, in that all the good the creatures enjoy does
proceed from Gods favorable goodness shining down upon them: Angels and men
have the light of their reason and understanding from God, and both they and
other creatures have their life (which is their light Joh. 1.4.) and their
being from him; neither have they any thing from themselves, but all is derived
unto them from him, who is the father of lights, Jam. 1.17. This last I
conceive is chiefly here intended. But however this is doubtless added, to set
forth Gods dominion over all things, how wonderful, dreadful, and
unquestionable it is, and consequently how desperate a thing it must needs be
for any man to contend with him.

Verse. 4. How then can man be justified with God? etc.] That is, Seeing God is
so dreadful in all these regards, how can man hope to justify himself before
God, by pleading with him, or to maintain that his sins deserve not so heavy
punishments as God has inflicted on him? Thus Bildad it seems understood Jobs
words, chap. 23.10, 11, 12. and thence he presses him with this absurdity. See
the Note, chap. 9.20. How can he be clean that is born of a woman? See the
Notes chap. 14.14. and 15.1, 4.

Verse. 5. Behold even to the moon, and it shines not; yea the stars are not
pure in his sight.] Some understand these words thus: that if God give a charge
to the moon and the stars that they should not shine, they shall be straight
quite void of light; and therefore much more is the Lord able easily to crush
man, whatever he is, if he should offer to contend with him, man having no
power but what he has from God. But I rather conceive it is meant of the
transcendent purity, and brightness, and glory of God above that of the moon
and stars, and so is parallel with that, chap. 15.15. yea the heavens are not
clean in his sight, of which see the Note there: And then this expression,
Behold even to the moon, etc. must be understood as if he had said, Look up to
the moon, and you shall see it shines not, to wit, in comparison of God: or
thus, Pitch your thoughts upon any of the creatures that have any shining
brightness in them, beginning with those things that are below, gold, and
silver, and precious stones, etc. and so ascending up even to the moon (which
is particularly mentioned, and not the Sun, either because it is the lowest of
the planets, and surpassing man in glory, or because we can better behold her
brightness, and was therefore for her brightness usually called the Queen of
heaven, Ier. 7.18.) and so from thence upward to the stars, which are in an
orb above all the planets (and so even the Sun is comprehended too) and, alas,
the brightness of all these is infinitely short of the purity and resplendency
of God: Or lastly thus, Behold, take all the bright shining lamps of heaven,
descending from the highest even to the moon, the last and lowest of all the
planets, (and so also the Sun is included too) and their brightness and purity
is nothing to that of Gods; they shine not, but are unclean, if compared with
God. Some indeed add that the stars may be said to be unclean, because by the
fall of man even they have contracted defilement, and so are blemished, and not
wholly free from pollution in Gods sight. However the drift of these words is,
to show how foolish a thing it was in Job, in the confidence of the brightness
of his conversation, to contend with God, before whom the heavenly lights are
no other then as clouds and darkness.

Verse. 6. How much less man, that is a worm? etc.] That is, How much less can
man be compared with God, who is so far inferior to those heavenly lights for
purity and brightness? even no better then a worm, especially if compared with
God, a weak, base, unclean thing, made of corruption, and sure at last to
become worms meat, subject continually to dangers, as worms, whom every foot
may crush, and of themselves utterly unable to defend themselves. See the Note,
chap. 4.19.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 2. HOw have thou helped him that is without power? etc.] Job here
answers Bildad, and that somewhat tartly, because he had spoken so
impertinently, pressing still those truths concerning the infinite Majesty,
power, and justice of God, which he did never deny, and that not for the
comfort of Job, but rather to drive him to despair. The words must be
understood as spoken ironically; and that either as spoken by way of upbraiding
Bildad, for undertaking to plead Gods cause for him, (according to that he had
said before, chap. 13.7, 8.) and doing it withal so sillily, How have thou
helped him that is without power? etc. as if he had said, If God be of such
infinite Majesty and power as you have spoken, why do you think so highly of
your self, as to undertake to plead for him? sure you think that God has no
power to help himself, and is not able to plead his own cause, and therefore
you step in to his aid: and how effectually have you done it! if you mark it,
you have done it to great purpose, God is much the better for this help that
you have afforded him: Or else as in relation to Job himself, How have thou
helped him that is without power? etc. as if he had said, You have come a long
journey purposely, as you pretended, to comfort a poor, fainting, helpless
man; and have you not done it, think you, to the purpose? you make account you
have done great wonders; but, alas, what am I the better for all that you have
spoken? The truth is, it had been better for me if you had never come near me.
And indeed this I take to be the true meaning of the words. As for that phrase
in the last clause, of saving the arm that has no strength, see the Note,
chap. 4.3.

Verse. 3. How have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? etc.] This also
is spoken ironically. And because they that speak that in defense of God and
his works, which God never intended, do thereby as it were counsel and advise
God what he should say or do, therefore many Expositours do also understand
these words, as if Job did herein upbraid Bildad for undertaking to teach God,
How have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? as if he should have said,
You think that God is not wise enough to order his affairs in the government of
the world without your advice; and oh what admirable wise and solid counsel
have you given him! and accordingly also do they understand the following
clause, and how have thou plentifully declared the thing as it is? as if he had
said, by way of scorn, you have now fully informed God how he ought to sway the
affairs of his kingdom. But I rather think that Job speaks this also as in
reference to himself, How have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? as if
he had said, Sure you take me to be a man void of all wisdom and
understanding, and so in pity to me have given me counsel: But, alas, if I be
so, surely I am not like to be much the wiser for this counsel that you have
given me: and how have thou plentifully declared the thing as it is? as if he
had said, You have now indeed hit the nail on the head, you have fully and
convincingly opened the cause between God and me; and how? by speaking that
which is nothing to the purpose, and by taking a great deal of pains to inform
me of that which I knew before as well as your self.

Verse. 4. To whom have thou uttered words? etc.] This also was spoken either
(as some think) as in relation to God, To whom have thou uttered words? that
is, Is it to God you have addressed your words in this which you have spoken?
and if so, have you considered who he is to whom you have spoken? what? will
you undertake to teach the omniscient and all-wise God? which is the same in
effect with that he had said before, chap. 21.22. of which see the Note there:
Or else, as in relation to Job himself, To whom have thou uttered words? as if
he had said, Do you consider who I am, and in what condition I am? have you
uttered words suitable to and fit for a man in such a sad distressed condition
as I am? or, To whom have thou uttered words? is it not to one that knows
these things as well as your self? what do you take me to be? think you that I
am so silly and ignorant, that I know not these things that you have uttered?
It is the same he had said before, chap. 12.3. of which see the Note there. As
for the following clause, and whose spirit came from thee? it is expounded by
Commentatours many several ways; of which three are most probable. First,
some understand it thus, whose spirit came from thee? that is, Did not God give
thee that life and breath whereby thou have spoken? and will thou teach him who
gives thee life and breath, and who is the father of the spirits of all flesh?
2. Some make this to be the sense of the words; whose spirit came from thee?
that is, who is it that has taught you these high mysteries? Did you speak
them of your self, and had you them from any body else? or do you think that
the spirit of God did dictate them to you? No, doubtless, such impertinencies
were never of Gods spirit, but of your own. And 3. others give this to be the
meaning; whose spirit came from thee? as if he had said, whose spirit have thou
revived by this which thou have spoken? Surely not mine. Because when men's
fainting spirits are revived by the consolations of a friend, they seem to
receive a new life, as it were, and spirit from those that have thus cheared
them up; therefore in stead of saying, whom have thou revived or comforted with
thy words? he expresses himself thus, whose spirit came from thee?

Verse. 5. Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants
thereof.] or, with the inhabitants thereof. Here Job begins to show, that he
could say as much or more of the infinite power and the all-ruling Providence
of God, as Bildad had said; and to that end at first he instanceth in this,
that Gods Providence extends it self to the very bottom of the sea, where he
forms not only the fishes that are to live there, but also diverse dead things,
as all kind of minerals, coral, pearls, amber, together with diverse plants and
herbs that grow there.

Verse. 6. Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no covering.] As if he
had said, You, Bildad, told me, that God makes peace in his high places; but I
can add hereto, that Gods providence extends not only to the high places in
heaven, but also to the low places and depths in hell. By destruction here
almost all Expositours understand the place of destruction, to wit, the place
of the damned; and then if by Hell in the first clause the same be meant, then
the second clause is but only a repetition of what was said in the first. But
by Hell others understand the grave, and consequently also all the hidden lower
parts of the earth; and then the meaning is this, that God beholds all
things, even the grave and hell, and all the lowest parts of the earth, he sees
all that the grave has devoured, and beholds what becomes of every part of
man when the grave has consumed him, and what the damned in Hell both do and
suffer. And thus he confirms what Bildad had said chap. 25.3. (understanding
it, as many do, of Gods omniscience) upon whom does not his light arise? yea
probable it is that Job the rather mentioned this, to imply to his friends that
in regard of this omniscience of God, it would be a joy to him to appear before
God, who knew him better then they did: and withal to wipe off that aspersion
Eliphaz had cast upon him, chap. 22.13. And thou say, How does God know? can
be judge through the dark cloud?

Verse. 7. He stretches forth the North over the empty place, etc.] The meaning
of this is, either that God stretches out the heavens from one Pole to another
over the region of the air, (for the North, that is, the Northern part of
heaven, the Hemisphere of the Arctick or Northern Pole, is here figuratively
put for the whole heaven, because that part was nearest the climate where he
dwelt; and the region of the air is called the empty place, because the air is
as nothing, and what has nothing but air in it we count empty, at least it is
as nothing in regard of bearing up and supporting the heavens;) or else, that
God stretches out the heavens even to the Northern pole, where the earth under
it is uninhabited, and is therefore called here the empty place, meaning that
Gods providence orders all things that are done there, according to that, chap.
38.26. where God is said to cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is; on
the wilderness, wherein there is no man. And then in the next place, the earth
is said to hang upon nothing, either in relation to the center of the earth,
which is said to be through Gods appointment the cause of the stability of the
earth in its place, in regard all heavy things round about press thither, and
yet is but an imaginary thing, indeed nothing; or else in relation to the
earths hanging in the midst of the air, having nothing to support it, but Gods
almighty power.

Verse. 8. He binds up the waters in his thick clouds, etc.] That is, By a
divine force he keeps them within the clouds, which himself has made to be as
it were the bottles of heaven, as they are called chap. 38.37. and the cloud is
not rent under them; that is, the waters do not break through with their
weight, and fall down all together, but are let out by degrees, as through a
strainer or watering-pot, when and how God is pleased.

Verse. 9. He holds back the face of his throne, and spreads his cloud upon
it.] The highest Heaven is the throne of God, Esa. 66.1. and is so called,
because there he manifests himself, as princes do upon their thrones, in
greatest majesty and glory: and then the full discovery of that infinite light
and glory wherein God dwells, is the face of his throne, which in this life is
hidden from the best of his servants. Or else the clear and bright outside of
heaven, which appears to the eye of man that looks up thither, is the face of
his throne: and then therefore God holds back the face of his throne, when,
as it is in the next clause, he spreads his cloud upon it, that is, when he
withdraws it from the sight of man by overspreading it with clouds. See the
Note, 2 Samuel 22.12.

Verse. 10. He has compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night
come to an end.] That is, as long as this world shall last: and it is said that
God has compassed the waters with bounds, both because he did at first dispose
of the waters in those hollow places and channels of the earth, wherein they
are now held, (of which see the Note, Genesis 1.9.) and also because by his
Providence he does still keep in the unruly waves, not suffering them to break
out beyond the bounds whereto God has confined them.

Verse. 11. The pillars of heaven tremble, and are astonished at his reproof.]
That is, When God shows himself in his indignation, in thundering and
tempestuous storms or earthquakes, the very heavens seem as affrighted, to
tremble as if the foundations thereof were shaken, yea the whole Universe seems
to be moved, as a house built upon pillars totters when the pillars thereof are
shaken, so that one would think that heaven and earth would come together. Some
by the pillars of heaven here understand the angels; others the strength and
powers of heaven; others those high mountains and hills which stand up in the
air, as pillars supporting the heavens, and whereon the heavens to the eye of
man seem to lean and rest, and are therefore called the foundations of heaven,
2 Samuel 22.8. of which see the Note there: but the first Exposition is most
generally approved.

Verse. 12. He divides the sea with his power, etc.] Some Expositours
understand this of Gods dividing the Red sea before the Israelites when he
carried them out of Egypt; and accordingly also they understand the following
clause, and by his understanding he smites through the proud, to wit, that God
by his wisdom drawing their enemies into the Red sea, as into a net, did
there destroy that insolent tyrant Pharaoh, and with him those proud Egyptians
that followed him. But I cannot conceive that Job intended any such thing,
because first, it is generally held that Job lived long before Moses time; and
2. he seems all the way here to speak of the ordinary continual works of Gods
providence, and not of any such unusual and extraordinary work: and therefore
it is not said that he divided, but he divides the sea with his power. Nor is
it much more probable that others say, that by these words, he divides the sea
with his power, is meant, that God causes the waters of the sea through the
earth to rise up in several fountains and springs, and so divides it into
several seas, and rivers, and brooks. The true meaning of these words I
conceive is this, that God divides the sea, that is, he breaks the waves
thereof, and causes them to cleave in sunder, and so to fight and dash one
against another, to wit, when in tempestuous weather he makes such gulfs in
the sea, the waves standing up like mountains on each side of them, that the
very foundations of the earth seem to be discovered, as is expressed 2 Samuel
22.16. of which see the Note there: and accordingly we must understand the
following clause, of Gods stilling the sea again when it is thus tempestuous,
and by his understanding he smites through the proud. For though some by the
proud here understand the whale, and that the rather, because the whale is
elsewhere called a king over all the children of pride, chap. 41.34. and is
many times cast up in great tempests, and left dead upon the land, yet I rather
think that by the proud is meant the proud sea, according to a like expression,
chap. 38.11. where God says of the sea, here shall thy proud waves be stayed;
and so the meaning is, that when the sea swells and rages, and lifts up his
proud waves as it were unto the clouds, God presently subdues and stills the
proud sea, and makes it lie down as still as a dead man does when he falls
down, being smitten through by the sword or arrow of his enemy.

Verse. 13. By his spirit he has garnished the heavens, etc.] Because in the
foregoing verse Job had spoken of stilling the tempestuous sea, therefore some
conceive here he shows how this is done, to wit, by a sudden clearing of the
heavens: By his spirit he has garnished the heavens, that is, By a fair gale
of wind he drives away the clouds, and then the garnishing of the heavens with
innumerable lights is evidently seen. But because our Translatours have
rendered the words, not, he does garnish, but, he has garnished, therefore I
rather understand it of Gods creating the Sun, Moon, and stars at the first; By
his spirit he has garnished the heavens, that is, by his own essential power,
or, by his holy spirit, he has adorned the heavens with many glorious lights.
As for the following clause, his hand has formed the crooked serpent, some by
the crooked serpent understand that meteor sometimes seen in the air, which
naturalists call the flying serpent; and others, those celestial circles or
spears, which are involved one within another, as a serpent wrappeth up
himself in many folds, or else some of the Constellations of heaven; as some
understand it of the Zodiac, which goes athwart the heavens; others of that
which is called via lactea, the milky way; and others of that Constellation
near the Northern Pole, which from its fashion or figure is called the Dragon
or Serpent, that divides the two Bears with its tail; which may seem, I
confess, the more probable, because of the joining of this with that foregoing
clause of Gods garnishing the heavens. But yet, because it may well be
questioned, whether those figures of the heavenly Constellations which
Astronomers have fancied, and the names which thereupon have been given them,
were so ancient as the days of Job; I think it far more probable, which
others say, that by the crooked serpent is meant all kind of serpents that
crawl upon the earth, or all kind of sea monsters that are in the Ocean; or,
more particularly, the Whale, which is indeed elsewhere also called Leviathan,
the piercing serpent, or, the Bar-like crooked serpent, Isa. 27.1; who
thereupon do make the general drift of these words to be this, that as God
made the beauteous lights of the heavens above, so he also made the most
deformed and harmfull creatures that are on the earth, or in the sea below, and
that in both God has manifested his almighty power.

Verse. 14. Lo these are parts of his ways, etc.] That is, his works, wherein
he comes forth, as it were, and manifests himself unto men: but how little a
portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand? Some
understand this last clause thus, It is very little or nothing to speak of that
we can hear from man concerning these wonders of Gods works, but if God should
speak of them himself, who could endure or understand him, when he should
thunder out these things in his mighty power and Majesty? Others understand it
properly of the thunder, which is indeed very terrible to all the creatures
here below, to wit, that none can understand whence it is, or how it is done.
But the best Exposition of the words I conceive is this, that by the thunder of
his power is meant figuratively, either the might, and excellency, and terror
of Gods power, to wit, that it is incomprehensible, or else (which is much to
the same effect) the declaration or sounding forth of Gods power by the voice
of all his works of Creation, according to that, Psalm. 19.1. The heavens
declare the glory of God, etc. which, because of its glorious excellency, and
force, and terror, is called the thunder of his power; and because none can
sufficiently understand so much of the mighty power of God as is taught us by
the Creatures, therefore it is said, the thunder of his power who can
understand? And indeed, in our ordinary speech, we use to say a man thunders
it, when he speaks with mighty eloquence, vehemence and power; and chap. 39.25.
the tumultuous noise of an army ready to the battle is called the thunder of
the Captains. And thus has Job shown that he could say as much of the terrible
might and Majesty of God as Bildad had said.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. MOreover Job continued his parable.] What is meant by a parable, see
in the Note, Numb. 23.7. It was now Zophars turn to reply upon Job the third
time, as Eliphaz and Bildad had done; and it seems that Job was silent a while,
expecting his reply: but when he saw that neither he nor any of the other two
offered to reply again upon him, (which was either because they had nothing
farther to object against Jobs defense, or because they saw him so stiff, that
they judged it in vain to talk any farther to him) then Job began again to
plead his cause, much after the same manner as before; addressing his speech to
them all jointly together, and that with some more courage then formerly, and
as one that did in a manner triumph over them, as is expressed in the five
following chapters.

Verse. 2. As God lives, who has taken away my judgment, and the Almighty,
who has vexed my soul, etc.] To assure his friends that he would speak nothing
but the truth, that so they might the more regard what he said, and that by
this solemn calling* God to witness of the truth of what he spoke, he might
win them to credit what he should say concerning his integrity, which by no
other arguments he could hitherto bring them to believe, Job here swears
solemnly by the living God, that (as it follows in the two next verses) as long
as he breathed, his lips should not speak wickedness, nor his tongue utter
deceit. As for that clause which he adds, concerning Gods taking away his
judgment, and the Almighties vexing his soul, As God lives, who has taken
away my judgment, etc. some hold that he adds that as in relation to their
opinion, As the Lord lives, who, as you think, has taken away my judgment,
etc. but then others say, that by Gods taking away his judgment he meant,
either that God had not judged him according to his righteousness and
integrity, or that God had bereaved him as it were of his righteousness, in
that he had not cleared his innocence, to the stopping of the mouths of those
that falsely accused him, but rather, by the severity of his proceedings
against him, did seem to judge him to be a wicked wretch and an hypocrite, as
they had censured him to be; as where Gods people are charged with saying, Isa.
40.27. My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my
God, because they thought that God did not regard them as his people, in taking
their part against their enemies: or else (as some conceive) that the Lord had
abridged him of his right, in that he was not admitted to plead his cause
before God, as he had often desired he might do. So that he does not expressly
accuse God of dealing unjustly with him, but only complains that God had not
dealt with him according to the ordinary way of his proceedings with men,
whereby his integrity was hidden and overclouded; neither could he perceive
what the cause should be why Gods hand was so heavy upon him. And in the oath
he takes here, this he interposeth, who has taken away my judgment, and has
vexed my soul, either to imply how safely they might believe, that he would do
what he now engaged himself, seeing he durst, appeal to that God as a witness,
who had hitherto dealt so severely with him; or else to intimate, that though
God seemed to condemn him by the heavy pressures he had brought upon him, yet
that should not make him cast off his confidence in God, or yield himself to be
an hypocrite.

Verse. 4. My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.]
This Protestation of Jobs, Expositours understand diversely. For first, some
take it generally thus, that he would speak nothing falsely or dissemblingly,
but would speak the truth from his heart: Secondly, others understand it as if
he had said, that no severity of Gods proceedings with him, nor no unjust
censures of theirs, should make him utter a word whereby he might discover
himself to be either a profane wicked wretch, or a dissembling hypocrite: and
3ly. (which I like best) others give this to be the meaning, that he would not
wickedly, either for fear or flattery, betray the truth, or lie against his own
conscience, by yielding to those false accusations which they had passed upon
him, which he knew to be false.

Verse. 5. God forbid that I should justify you, etc.] To wit, by speaking or
doing any wicked thing, which may seem to justify or make good those unjust
censures of wickedness or hypocrisy, which you have passed upon me; or rather
by yielding to that which you have said, that God for my wickedness and
hypocrisy has brought these miseries upon me.

Verse. 6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, etc.] That
is, I have hitherto constantly persevered in a way of righteousness, and so I
will still; or rather, I have hitherto resolutely maintained my integrity, and
still I will maintain it: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live;
that is, my conscience shall not upbraid me for that which, were I guilty of
it, would indeed be a shame and reproach to me, to wit, either for speaking or
doing wickedly, or else rather for denying mine integrity.

Verse. 7. Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that rises up against me as
the unrighteous.] This is also diverse ways understood by Expositours. Some say
that Job here speaks ironically, and by the wicked unrighteous man means
himsef; as if he should have said, You judge me a wicked ungodly man, because
of the extreme afflictions that lie upon me; but as sad as my condition is, so
much good I wish my enemies that rise up against me, that I could be glad that
they were in no worse a condition, then that poor wretch whom you so harshly
condemn as a wicked man. Others again hold, that those that had robbed him of
his estate, and other ways wronged him, are the enemies he here speaks of, and
so make the sense of the words to be this, Let those that robbed me and wronged
me be looked upon as wicked ungodly men: I for my part am no such man. Others
again conceive, that by his enemies and those that rose up against him, Job
meant these his friends, and so give this to be the sense of the words, Let
those that condemn me for a wicked man, because of mine afflictions, bear the
brand of wicked men, and not I that am innocent of those things they charge me
with: as if he should have said, They that oppose the truth which I have
maintained, that causelessly condemn me for a wicked wretch, they deserve to be
judged wicked men better then I do: only some, to allay the sharpness of such
a censure, say that Job does not absolutely condemn them for wicked men, but
only affirms that there was more of wickedness in that which they did, then
there was in any thing they could fasten upon him, Let mine enemy be as the
wicked and as the unrighteous; according to a like expression, chap. 2.10. Thou
speak as one of the foolish women. And lastly, others, most probably,
conceive that in these words Job gives a farther proof of his integrity, Let
mine enemy be as the wicked, etc. as if he had said, Though the wicked may live
I know in a very prosperous condition, yet so far am I from liking their
ways, that I could wish mine enemy no greater mischief, then that he should be
a wicked man, or that God should deal with him as he will certainly deal with
the wicked. And indeed the like expressions we often meet with, as 2 Samuel 25,
26. Let thine enemies and they that seek evil to my Lord be as Nabal: and so
also 2 Samuel 18.32. and Dan. 4.19.

Verse. 8. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when
God takes away his soul?] The scope of these words, together with the
following verses, is, either to show how far he was from being a wicked
hypocrite, as they had judged him to be, by declaring what thoughts he had of
the wretched condition of such men, to wit, that when God comes to seize upon
them by the harbingers of death, and to take or pluck away their souls, though
they had gained never so much before, and so thereby God seemed to prosper
them, they must needs be then in a hopeless and comfortless condition,
because all that they placed their hopes in, their wealth, and friends, and
other things shall fail them; and whereas they promised themselves long life,
and much pleasure in their estates, they shall find their hopes herein
disappointed, and in God, who then shows himself an enemy, they can have no
confidence: Or else, to prove that his friends might have discerned a
difference betwixt him and hypocrites, even in these sad calamities that had
befallen him, and therefore had no cause to censure him so harshly; to wit,
because though outwardly it fares alike with the righteous and the hypocrite,
yet their carriage of themselves in the hour of adversity is very different,
the hypocrite not having then any hope in God, when God summons him by death,
which the righteous have: from whence he intimates, that since he in his lowest
estate did still hope in God, and pray to God, and desired to plead his cause
before God, they might hereby plainly perceive that he was not an hypocrite.
And to the same purpose is that which follows.

Verse. 9. Will God hear his cry, when trouble comes upon him?] That is, when
either trouble and terrors of conscience, or any outward distress do seize
upon him.

Verse. 10. Will he delight himself in the Almighty? etc.] That is, when he sees
that he is likely to be taken away from all the comforts he enjoyed here, will
he then comfort himself in God alone, as acknowledging him to be alone an
all-sufficient ground of joy and comfort? or, though Gods hand be never so
heavy upon him, will he notwithstanding still cleave to God, and delight
himself in him, as knowing that God is well pleased with him? will he always
call upon God? that is, not only in adversity, but in his prosperity too? and
so also not only in prosperity, but in times of distress too? yea though his
afflictions be never so sore, and of never so long continuance?

Verse. 11. I will teach you by the hand of God, etc.] Some translate this, as
it is in the margin of our Bibles, I will teach you being in the hand of God,
and so take the sense of the words to be this, that whereas hypocrites in
distress have no hope in God, it was not so with him; for though he were at
the present under the afflicting hand of God, he would teach them better. But
taking the words as they are in our Bible, the meaning must be either thus, I
will teach you by the hand of God, that is, God assisting me, or by Gods
special inspiration, I will teach you; as where the prophet says, Isa. 8.11.
the Lord spoke to me with a strong hand, and instructed me: or else thus
rather, I will teach you by the hand of God, that is, I will teach you by
showing you the mighty power of God, and the glorious works of his hand, to
wit, what are the usual dispensations of his Providence both toward the
righteous and toward the wicked. And hereto agrees the following clause, that
which is with the Almighty will I not conceal; that is, I will not conceal the
decrees and judgments which God daily executes in the world, sometimes
prospering, and sometimes punishing both the wicked and the righteous. And
indeed of all these he speaks in his following discourse; and this he premiseth
beforehand, either that he might quicken their attention, by showing what
great and high things they were, of which he meant to speak; or else thereby to
give them to understand, that he should plainly discover by the usual ways of
Gods proceedings, that there is no judging of men by their outward condition.

Verse. 12. Behold, all ye your selves have seen it, etc.] As if he should have
said, You are learned wise men, men that observe the ways and works of God, at
least such you boast your selves to be; and therefore herein I dare appeal to
your selves, concerning the truth of that which I have said, and that which I
shall now farther say; you your selves have known it, and have seen it so in
your own experience. But what was it they had seen? Some refer it to that
which he had said concerning his innocence; some to that foregoing observation
of his, that he had not carried himself in his distress as hypocrites used to
do: But I conceive it is best referred to that which he meant now to teach
them, as he had said in the foregoing verse, concerning Gods dispensing the
same, both blessings and afflictions, to the wicked and to the righteous; This,
says he, ye your selves have seen; and then he adds, why then are ye thus
altogether vain? that is, why do you so vainly conclude that God always
punishes wicked men, and prospers the righteous, and thereupon condemn me for
an hypocrite? why do you multiply words nothing to the purpose, not giving any
one solid answer to that which I have objected, and yet persevere in condemning
me upon grounds so palpably false?

Verse. 13. This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of
oppressors, etc.] Zophar had said the very same in effect, chap. 20.29. of
which see the Note there; and therefore some think that Job, in this and the
following verses, does only allege what his friends had said, and that to show
why he had charged them in the foregoing verse, that they were altogether vain,
to wit, that they had said, This is the portion of a wicked man with God, etc.]
But I doubt not but Job delivers this as his own judgment. And yet he does not
hereby recant what he had formerly said concerning the prosperity of the
wicked, nor yield to that which his friends had hitherto maintained, to wit,
that God does always manifest his indignation against wicked men by punishing
them here in this world; only to clear his meaning in that he had said
concerning the prosperous condition of the wicked, to show that he was willing
to yield to all that was truth in that which his friends had said, and that so
much he was able to say as well as they, he grants them here thus much, that
indeed many times the prosperity of the wicked did end in extreme misery;
though they might long live free from punishment, yet often that befell them at
last, even here in this world, which God, who is Almighty, had appointed them
for their portion and inheritance, and therefore the mightiest of these
oppressors are not able to resist it: and then afterward he adds, what it was
wherein he opposed his friends, to wit, that it was not always thus, but that
many times on the other side in his secret wisdom, whereof he speaks much in
the following chapter, the righteous were afflicted sorely, whilst the wicked
lived in great prosperity.

Verse. 14. If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword, etc.] Against
which, though they be never so many, they shall not be able to defend
themselves: and so that which might seem to the wicked man at first a pledge of
Gods favor, shall be found at last to have been given merely for the increase
of his future misery, that he might have many children to be devoured by the
sword, to wit, the sword of Gods vengeance, or rather the sword of an enemy;
for the following clause makes this later Exposition the more probable, and his
offspring shall not be satisfied with bread, that is, they shall not only live
in penury and want, but shall even perish by famine.

Verse. 15. Those that remain of him shall be buried in death, etc.] That is,
those of his children and childrens children that remain, and are not cut off
by sword or famine, shall die yet of some other disease, and so shall be
buried; though they lived as if they should never die, yet they shall be buried
in death, that is, they shall die, and being dead shall be buried. I know there
are diverse other Expositions given of these words: as thus, they shall be
buried in death, that is, they shall die, and rot when they die, and that shall
be all their burial, according to that Jer. 16.4. Or, they shall be buried in
death, that is, whilst they are yet dying, before the breath be well out of
their bodies, at least so soon as ever they are dead, they shall be presently
clapped into the grave, without any funeral rites and solemnities; Or, they
shall be buried in death, that is, so soon as they are dead, they shall be
buried in oblivion, their name and memory shall be buried with them; Or, they
shall be buried in death, that is, in the grave, which is called the chambers
of death, Prove. 7.27. But the first Exposition is, I conceive, as the plainest,
so the best. And as for the following clause, And his widows shall not weep, it
is expressed in the plural number, his widows, either because they had in
those times many wives, or else because it comprehends the widows of the wicked
man's whole family: and by not weeping is meant, either that through extreme
penury they should not be able to make any funeral for him; or else that
indeed they should not mourn for his death: and that either because their
miseries should be so many and so exceeding great, that being as it were
stupefied thereby they should not be able to weep; or else rather because they
should be indeed glad that they were rid of him.

Verse. 18. He builds his house as a moth, etc.] It may be said that the
wicked man builds his house as a moth, 1. because he builds it with much
pains and skill, as the moth makes her nest: 2. because he does even wast
himself in the doing of it, even as a moth makes her bag or silken woolly nest
out of her own bowels: 3. because he builds his house with the spoil and ruin
of others, as the moth eats the garment where she builds her nest: But 4. that
which I conceive is chiefly intended is, because though he builds his house,
as if he hoped to dwell there for ever, yet both he and it shall suddenly be
destroyed, as when the moth is quickly brushed or shaken out of the garment,
where she had made her nest. For upon the like ground, Bildad had before
compared the wicked man's house to the house of a spider, chap. 8.14. of which
see the Note there. And to the same purpose in the next clause it is said, that
it shall be as a booth that the keeper makes: For if it be meant of those that
are set to keep a vineyard or a garden of fruits, they use only to make some
slight booth of the boughs of trees, and perhaps stolen out of the neighbors
hedges or woods, which, so soon as the fruits are fully ripe and gathered, and
the keeper gone, are quickly broken down and burnt up by the poor, or fall down
of themselves: and if it be meant of those that keep cattle, their booths or
tents seldom stand so long, because they so often remove to seek for fresh
pasture.

Verse. 19. The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered, etc.]
That is, He shall die as others, but he shall not be buried as others, at least
not with the solemnity of friends attending him to his grave. For that by being
gathered is meant buried, we may see in many other places; as where it is said
of Aaron, Numb. 20.26. he shall be gathered and shall die there, and of Josiah,
2 Kings 22.20. I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered
into thy grave, and of the Jews, Jer. 8.2. they shall not be gathered neither
buried, they shall be for dung upon the face of the earth. And hereto agrees
also the following clause, he opens his eyes, and he is not: for though,
because this is mentioned after his death and burial, therefore some
Expositours understand it of the wicked man's soul after it is parted from his
body, to wit, that he then sees with the eyes of his mind, that he is cut off
from the land of the living; yet I think we may better take it as a farther
amplification of that which was said already in the foregoing clause, he
opens his eyes, and he is not, that is, whilst he is looking about him, and
beholding with much joy the riches he has stored up for many years, in an
instant he is gone; or thus, He opens his eyes lying on his deathbed,
looking about for help, ease or comfort, but in stead thereof he perceives
himself a dead man, ready to be taken from all his comforts; or thus, Being yet
in his former condition, in the twinkling of an eye he is taken away.

Verse. 20. Terrors take hold on him as waters, etc.] That is, when God brings
his judgments upon him, and especially when he sees death approaching, the
terrors of an evil conscience, yea many and manifold affrightments besides
shall suddenly, unexpectedly and unresistably surprise and overwhelm him, as
when an unexpected flood of waters breaks forth upon men, and overwhelms them.
We have had formerly expressions much like to this, concerning which see the
Notes chap. 18.11. and 20.25. and 22.11. And doubtless of this affrighting
evil must the following clause be understood, a tempest steals him away in
the night; that is, the wrath of God, or some grievous judgment from God comes
upon him with unresistable violence, when he least thinks of it, (as it were in
the night) and carries him away, to wit, out of the world, or out of that
pompous condition wherein he lived.

Verse. 21. The East wind carries him away, etc.] This is also meant, as the
foregoing clause, of the wrath or Judgments of God; which are compared to the
East wind, because that wind in those Eastern countries used to be most
violent, and is therefore called the wind of the Lord, Hos. 13.15.

Verse. 22. For God shall cast upon him, and not spare; he would fain flee out
of his hand.] That is, God, in this tempest of his wrath, shall shower down
Judgments upon him as thick as hailstones, without showing him any more pity,
then he has formerly shown to others; so that though he would fain flee from
his vengeance, yet he shall not be able.

Verse. 23. Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his
place.] To wit, by way of wonder, derision and scorn; but especially by way of
rejoicing, that the world is rid of such an oppressing miscreant, and that the
just judgments of God are at last executed upon him: for in these regards men
are said to hiss and clap their hands, in other places of Scripture, as Lam.
2.15. All that pass by clap their hands at thee, they hiss and wagge their
head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city that men call the
perfection of beauty? etc. and so also Ezekiel. 25.6. and 1 Kings 9.8.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. SVrely, there is a vein for the silver, and a place for the gold,
where they fine it.] To wit, which men, by the natural wisdom which God has
given them, do search and find out for their use, though they lie deep in the
earth, many times under hills and mountains; and being so far out of sight, and
so hard to be discerned where they are, one would wonder how they should be
discovered. The greatest difficulty is to know, what it is that Job aims at in
those words of his set down in this chapter, and what dependence they have with
that which went before. Some conceive that Jobs drift here is to show, that
though worldly men do gather all variety of earthly treasures, yet the godly
have a treasure above all these, which is true wisdom, consisting in the
knowledge and fear of God, verse. 28. Others hold that Job labors to make out
this, that if God disposes of all things with great wisdom, and there is
nothing done to any of the creatures without just reason, much less can we
think that God would punish man causelessly. Others again say, that having set
down in the foregoing chapter the miserable end of those foolish men, that
sought by wickedness to make themselves great, here now he shows the reason,
why such men did not seek after true wisdom, to wit, because they knew not
where it was to be had, namely with God, and so set their hearts merely upon
earthly things. But that which I find both most commonly, and most probably
held by Expositours concerning the scope of this chapter, and the connection
thereof with that which went before, is this, that having in the foregoing
chapter yielded, that God does often bring ruin upon wicked men here in this
world in the conclusion, in this chapter now he undertakes to show, that yet
notwithstanding the wisdom of God in many other strange dispensations of his
Providence is altogether unsearchable, (as namely when he does sometimes on the
other side prosper the wicked and afflict the righteous) thereby to prove that
his friends were altogether vain, as he had said, chap. 27.12. in judging so
peremptorily that he was wicked, because of his afflictions; as if there could
not be in these proceedings of God with him a secret depth of wisdom, which
they were not able to dive into. Only for the farther illustration of the
unsearchablenesse of Gods wisdom, first he shows here, in the beginning of
the chapter, what deep secrets of Nature man by his wisdom has searched out,
instancing in the finding out, the melting and fining the several minerals,
that lie deep and hidden in the bowels of the earth; and then afterward adds
verse. 12. that though the most hidden secrets of nature are thus found out by
the wisdom of man, yet the wisdom of God they cannot search out, But where,
says he, shall wisdom be found? etc. where by wisdom is meant the wisdom
of God in his unsearchable ways, as when he prospers the wicked, and afflicts
the righteous, etc.

Verse. 2. Iron is taken out of the earth (or dust) and brass is molten out of
the stone.] That is, Iron is taken out of a brittle kind of earth, wherewith it
is mixed; and brass out of the stone wherewith it is, as it were,
incorporated: it is commonly called the Cadmian stone, as being a hard mass
like a stone, and mingled with stone.

Verse. 3. He sets an end to darkness, etc.] Some understand this of Gods
putting an end to the darkness of the night, by causing the light of the day
to succeed in the room thereof: and others understand it generally thus, that
man, by the natural wisdom that God has given him, discovers and finds out
the most hidden and unknown things. But the most Expositours hold, that Job
still proceeds to speak of that choice art of discovering and drawing forth the
minerals that are in the bowels of the earth, yea and perhaps in the sea also.
He sets an end to darkness. It is spoken either of man, to wit, that men by
going into those mines which they have dug deep in the earth, with candles
or torches in their hands, do there discover those minerals, which had from the
creation lain hid there in darkness; or that by fetching them out thence, they
bring those treasures to light, which had been always before hidden in
darkness (for though there be no express mention made of man in the foregoing
verses; yet because in that which he had said before concerning the taking of
gold, silver, iron and brass out of the earth, his meaning was, that those
things were done by man, therefore as in relation still to man, by whom those
things were done, he adds these words also, He sets an end to darkness:) Or
else it is spoken of God, to wit, that He, namely by man as his instrument, and
by the art and skill that he has given to man, puts an end to darkness,
that is, as is before said, by discovering to man, and bringing forth to open
view by the skill and industry of man, those precious minerals, that lay so low
in the dark bowels of the earth, that one would have thought it impossible they
should ever have been discovered. He puts an end to darkness, and searches
out all perfection: that is, by searching he finds out and brings to light all
the perfection of nature; or, those things which are most precious and
hardliest found, man discovers perfectly. The phrase may imply both the
preciousnesse of those things that are found out, and likewise the bringing of
them to their full perfection; and the drift of all is still to show, that all
finite things man is able to comprehend, only the wisdom of God is
incomprehensible. As for the following clause, the stones of darkness and the
shadow of death, thereby is meant either those gems and precious stones, which
are indeed of all other things most highly prized, and therefore may be
mentioned here as the perfection of nature, or else any mineral stones, yea
and even those flints and rocky stones which they dig through, that they may
come at the mineralls: all which may be called stones of darkness and the
shadow of death, because they lie hid in the dark bowels of the earth, where
never light was seen; and perhaps because those that descend into those dark
and deadly vaults of the earth, are exposed there to manifold dangers of death.
But what is meant by the darkness of the shadow of death, see more fully in
the Note, chap. 3.5.

Verse. 4. The flood breaks forth from the inhabitant; even the waters
forgotten of the foot, etc.] A very hard place this is, and therefore
Expositours differ much concerning the meaning of it. But because the drift of
the Chapter is clearly to show, that however man, by the wisdom that God has
given him, is able to find out many secret things, and to effect matters of
great wonder, yet he is no way able to comprehend the unsearchable wisdom of
God; therefore there are only two Expositions which to me seem probable, as
being agreeable to the general drift of Job in this place. The first is, that
it is meant of men's finding out the way to turn the waters of rivers into other
channels, or of draining lands that are overflown and drowned with waters: for
by the flood that breaks forth from the inhabitant is meant, either the
streams that break through or over the banks of the Sea or rivers, and so
overflow those grounds which were dry land, good pasture or arable before, and
are said to break forth from the inhabitant, because they break forth from the
inhabitants that dwell on the banks of those rivers, or notwithstanding all
that the inhabitants can do to damme them or keep them up, and drown some
adjoining grounds, where the foot of man never trod on water, or where never
man remembered any such flood of waters before, and are therefore termed
waters forgotten of the foot; and then the draining of these grounds, by
carrying these waters away in channels dug for that purpose, is expressed in
the following words, they are dried up, they are gone away from men: Or by the
flood that breaks forth from the inhabitant is meant that torrent of waters,
which breaks forth from rivers, or overfloweth grounds in those new channels,
which are made by the inhabitants thereabouts for the diverting of those rivers
some other way, or for the draining of those fenny grounds; which waters are
therefore called the waters forgotten of the foot, because when they are thus
carried some other way, men walk dry-foot over those old channels, where the
rivers did formerly run, or over those grounds that had been long drowned under
water, as if they had forgotten that ever there had been waters there, and so
the grounds are then made habitable, dry, and useful for seed or pastorage,
from whence they had no benefit before: which is intimated in the last words,
as a matter of wonder, they are dried up, they are gone away from men. The
second Exposition is, that here an instance is given of a wonderful
difficulty, which those that work in mines underground do sometimes meet with,
which yet the wisdom of man finds a way to overcome, to wit, that when men
are digging in those mines many fathom under ground, a flood of waters
sometimes breaks out upon those poor wretches that dwell there in those dark
caves of the earth, though they do what they are able to prevent it, even a
flood of waters which the foot of man never waded nor came near, and whereof
they had not the least knowledge, The flood breaks out from the inhabitant,
even the waters forgotten of the foot; but yet, by the art and industry of man,
laboring day and night by engines made with wheels, these waters are drawn up
in huge leather vessels made of Ox hides, and there above ground are poured
forth and carried away, they are dried up, they are gone away from men.

Verse. 5. As for the earth, out of it comes bread, and under it is turned up
as it were fire.] As if he should have said, And thus man, by the wisdom and
skill which God has given him, gets bread out of the upper part of the earth,
(and it may be spoken with reference particularly to that land spoken of in the
foregoing verse, which by his art he has drained from the waters) and then out
of the bowels of it he gets other precious things. For by as it were fire in
the last clause must needs be meant either the materials of fire, as coals,
brimstone, etc. or metalls that are to be melted and fined in the fire, or
rather glittering gold, and sparkling precious stones, which for their
splendor, when they are dug up, seem to have the appearance of fire. I know
that there are some Expositours that do far otherwise understand this place,
holding that Job speaks here of the strange and wonderful works of God, to
wit, that in the same place he has made the upper part of the earth fat and
fruitful for the yielding of corn, and the under part of it nothing but veins
of sulphur and such like: or that the Lord makes that land sulphurous, hot and
fiery, and therefore barren, which yielded before exceeding good corn. But the
first Exposition is clearly the best.

Verse. 6. The stones of it are the place of Saphires, and it has dust of
gold.] That is, out of the stone-quarries therein they get Saphires, and out of
the mold thereof they gather gold, dust of gold or gold ore.

Verse. 7. There is a path which no fowl knows, and which the vultures eye
has not seen, etc.] Though some conceive the meaning of these words to be
this, that men search for precious minerals in those desolate places, which
neither bird nor beast will come near, because of the sulphurous smell that is
there; yet I rather think that they are a poetical expression of the
inaccessiblenesse of those ways, which men by digging and mining pass
through, to find out those minerals and precious stones which they seek after,
to wit, that they are paths which never creature found out before: fowls that
will be flying into any place, yea even those that are most quick-sighted, as
vultures and others, could never discover these secret paths; and those savage
beasts, lions and such like, that use to find out the secretest and deepest
caves and dens of the earth to hide themselves in, did never set foot there:
for that also is added in the following verse, the lions whelps have not
trodden, nor the fierce lion passed by it.

Verse. 9. He puts forth his hand upon the rock; he overturneth the mountains
by the roots.] As before verse. 3. so here also, in these three following
verses, some Expositours hold that Job speaks of several great and wonderful
works of God; as first here, that God sometimes by terrible earthquakes rendeth
rocks in sunder and overturneth mountains; secondly verse. 10. that he causes
rivers many times to break forth out of flinty rocks, and that there is nothing
hid from him; and thirdly verse. 11. that often times he dries up rivers, and so
discovers what before lay hid there under deep waters. But, as is before noted,
it is far more agreeable to the scope of Job, to understand all these
passages of those things which are done by the wisdom and skill which God
gives to man: as first, that he puts forth his hand upon the rock, etc. that
is, man in searching for minerals and precious stones cutteth his way often times
through the flint or rock, and overturneth mountains by the root, to wit,
either by digging them down to the very bottom, and carrying them away, or
rather by mining under them, whereby the foundations indeed of mountains are
removed, and sometimes at length the mountains themselves do sink down into
them: secondly, verse. 10. that he cutteth out rivers among the rocks; whereby
may be meant, either that when rivers have rocks on each side of them, there
being no other way to drain them, man cutteth channels through the very rocks,
that so the waters may be carried away thereby, and so the precious things that
lie in the bottom of the old channels may be discovered; or else, that when
men are working in mines underground, they cut passages through hard rocks many
times, to wit, either to convey away those floods and torrents of waters that
there break in upon them, and hinder their work, or else to convey some streams
of waters thither from other places, to set their water-mils on work, whereby
they wash the ore wherein the gold and other minerals are found, etc. and so
his eye sees every precious thing, that is, he discovers all the precious
things that ly hid in the bowels of the earth: and 3ly. verse. 11. that he
binds the floods from overflowing; which may be meant either of man's
artificial stopping any chinks or clefts in the gutters and troughs, wherein
they convey rivers from one place to another, that so the waters may not issue
forth; or of his damming up rivers from turning into their old channels, when
he means to divert them some other way, or from overflowing their grounds in
times of great rain; or rather of his stopping and binding up the waters from
breaking in upon them, when they are digging in their mines: and thus the
hidden treasures that lie in the bowels of the earth, or under deep waters, are
brought forth for the use of men, and the thing that is hid brings he forth
to light.

Verse. 12. But where shall wisdom be found?] In these words Job has
reference to those words in the beginning of this Chapter, Surely there is a
vein for the silver, etc. as if he had said, Though the most hidden and secret
things in nature may be searched out by that Reason and understanding which God
has given man, yet there is a wisdom which is altogether unsearchable by
humane Reason. And by wisdom here is meant, either that supernatural
knowledge of God, and the way he has appointed for the salvation of men, which
can never be known but by revelation from God; or the knowledge of the secret
counsels of God in the ways and works of his providence, as why he often
prospers the wicked and afflicts the righteous, which man by no art or skill of
his can ever comprehend.

Verse. 13. Man knows not the price thereof, etc.] That is, It cannot be
purchased at any rate (as being indeed* of invaluable worth) nor does man know
where to get it: as is more fully expressed in the next words, neither is it
found in the land of the living, that is, no man can possibly find it out, to
wit, as being kept secret in the bosom of God, or only by God revealed unto
men.

Verse. 14. The depth says, It is not in me; and the sea says, It is not in
me.] By the depth, as it is here distinguished from the sea, we must needs
understand either deep rivers, or the waters that are under the earth, or else
rather the depth of the earth it self; as Psalm. 75.20. there is express
mention made we see of the depths of the earth. But however the meaning of this
clause is, either that man cannot find out wisdom, though he travels by land
or by sea never so far; or rather, that it cannot be found either in the
entrails of the earth, or in the bottom of the sea, as gold and silver, and
other costly minerals and precious stones many times are.

Verse. 15. It cannot be gotten for gold, etc.] See the former Note, verse. 13.

Verse. 17. The exchange of it shall not be for jewels (or vessels) of fine
gold.] The price whereof is much enhaunsed many times by the curious
workmanship thereof.

Verse. 19. The Topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it.] That is, even those gems
that are the more esteemed, because they are fetched from a far country.

Verse. 20. Whence then comes wisdom? etc.] See the former Note, verse. 12.

Verse. 21. Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from
the fowls of the air?] Though we read the last clause, as some do, and kept
close from the fowls of heaven, yet that it should be meant of the angels in
heaven seems to me very improbable. Rather I conceive the meaning of the whole
verse to be, either that man can no where find out this supernatural wisdom,
as he does many of the secrets of nature, minerals and precious stones, etc.
and so this clause, that it is kept close from the fowls of the air, is added
to imply, that as it cannot be found in the depths of the earth or sea, as he
had said before, so neither in the regions of the air above, (no where under
heaven, no where but in the bosom of God;) so that though men could mount up
into the air, and from thence behold all things on the earth, as the
quick-sighted fowls of the air do, yet they could not thereby discover this
wisdom: or else more generally, that no creature can attain to this wisdom,
farther at least then God is pleased to reveal it to them; nature is a mere
stranger to it, and therefore it is hid from all creatures high or low,
whatever they are.

Verse. 22. Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our
ears.] The meaning is, that though they had heard some talk or mention of
wisdom, yet that was all, they were never able fully to find it out. Some by
destruction and death, understand the devils and damned in hell; others the
souls of the Saints departed, to wit, that even when they are no longer clogged
with earthly bodies, and so are the freer to search after wisdom, they were
never able fully to comprehend it; yea and others understand it more generally
yet, of all men that have lived formerly from the first creation, and are now
dead, to wit, that they were never any more able to find out this wisdom of
God, then those that are now living: though formerly they lived many years, and
so had great advantage to gain more wisdom then others, and though some of
them were in their times men of great wisdom, as the Philosophers and others,
yet this supernatural wisdom of God they were never able to comprehend; that
which they had was but a shadow of wisdom, as far short of true wisdom,
as the fame of a thing is short of the thing it self. But lastly, others
understand by destruction and death, hell and the grave, or rather the depths
and bowels of the earth and sea, and so make the meaning to be this; that
though there the fame of wisdom has been heard, to wit, because the
providence of God extends it self to the ordering of all things there, yet
there this supernatural wisdom cannot be learnt or found. And this
Exposition I conceive most probable, and judge this which is said here to be
much the same with that before, verse. 14. The depth says, It is not in me.

Verse. 23. God understands the way thereof, and he knows the place
thereof.] If we conceive that Job speaks here of that supernatural knowledge
of God and the way of salvation, which is indeed the only true wisdom of man,
the meaning then must needs be, that God only knows how this is to be
attained, because God must reveal it to man, or he can never attain it: But if
we understand it of the secret wisdom of God in the government of the world,
as questionless Job intended it, then the meaning of the words is, that God,
and he only, understands where this wisdom is, because it rests only in his
own bosom; he fully knows all the ways of his Providence, to wit, how and why
all things are done, as why the wicked often prosper, and the righteous are
afflicted, which are all to man altogether unsearchable.

Verse. 24. For he looks to the ends of the earth, etc.] That is, he beholds
all things not only in heaven, but also throughout the world, to wit, that he
may order and dispose of them, as seems good unto himself: and this Job
alleges as an evident proof, that therefore God must needs perfectly know the
cause of all things that are done in the world, which are hidden from man. And
indeed this place makes it clear, as I conceive, that the unsearchable wisdom
Job speaks of in this chapter, which is known only to God, and which man cannot
attain, is that of his counsels in all the ways and works of his Providence.

Verse. 25. To make the weight for the winds, and he weighs the waters by
measure.] The meaning is, that God does appoint and order such a quantity and
measure both of the winds and waters (whether we understand it of the rain that
comes down from the clouds, or of the waters that are in seas, rivers, brooks
and springs upon the earth) as may serve just for the accomplishment of what he
has purposed with himself, whether for judgment or mercy: that either the
winds or waters are more or less in one place or in another, it is not by
chance, but by the Providence of God, who sees well and understands all that he
does.

Verse. 26. When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of
the thunder, etc.] The drift of these words is, to show that the unsearchable
wisdom, whereby God governs the world and the fullness thereof, was with God,
and therefore known to him from the beginning of the world, yea even from
eternity. When he made a decree for the rain, etc. that is, when from all
eternity he decreed, or when at the first creation he established an order how
the rain should come to be bottled up in the clouds, when and where, in what
measure and how long, it should be afterward poured down upon the earth; and
so likewise concerning the lightning and the thunder, and all other things
whatever.

Verse. 27. Then did he see it, etc.] That is, then did he exactly know and
understand that unsearchable wisdom of his, whereby the world has been ever
since governed; and declare it, that is, (if we refer it to the creation of
the world) then did he in part discover this his wisdom by the admirable
works which he made, and the order which he appointed to them, or (if we
refer it to his eternal decree) then did he determine how it should by his
works be declared to men and angels; (and if we read this clause, as it is in
the margin of our Bibles, and did number it, the meaning is, that he did
particularly order, and manifested it severally in every thing that he made:)
he prepared it, yea and searched it out; that is, he decreed all things
thereby, and established them in a most excellent manner, as when things are
done upon the most exact search and enquiry. I know, some Expositours
understand these two verses, as they do all that went before, concerning that
knowledge of God and of the way of salvation, which is the true wisdom of
man, and so give this as the meaning of the words, that this wisdom was from
the beginning known of God, and ordered by him to be the wisdom of man, and
accordingly was by him discovered to man, partly by his works, and partly by
his word, which otherwise they could never have known: But the first Exposition
is by far the best.

Verse. 28. And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord that is wisdom,
etc.] As if he should have said, And thus has God reserved to himself the
wisdom of his governing the world, as a secret which man can never attain;
and the wisdom which he has appointed him to seek after, is to learn to fear
him and to keep his Commandments. And with this Job concludes his discourse
concerning the unsearchable wisdom of God, partly thereby to condemn the rash
censures of his friends, and partly to show that he had thus always
endeavored to be wise, though they judged otherwise of him, and neither had
nor would hereafter search into Gods secrets.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. MOreover Job continued his parable.] See the Note, chap. 27.1.

Verse. 2. Oh that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved
me.] To wit, from those miseries which are since come upon me. And this Job
might add, not so much by way of desiring the recovery of his former
prosperity, as to imply that he was not ashamed of his former prosperity, as if
he had not behaved himself therein as became a man that feared God, but could
wish with all his heart that it were now with him in every regard as it was
then: thereby condemning his friends for passing such uncharitable censures
upon him, as if by his secret wickedness in the days of his prosperity, he
had provoked God to bring those miseries upon him which of late he had endured.
But if we take the words so, that therein he did indeed wish that he were in
the same prosperous condition wherein he had been formerly, this he might
lawfully desire, so it were with submission to Gods will, and without any
murmuring against that which God had laid upon him; and withal, his drift in
mentioning this might chiefly be to imply, how unwarrantably they judged of him
by his outward condition, since they might as well conclude that he was a
righteous man and beloved of God because of his former prosperity, as that he
was a wicked man and hated of God because of his present afflictions; as
likewise to intimate, that in this regard his present miseries were the
greater, because he had formerly lived in such a prosperous condition.

Verse. 3. When his candle shined upon mine head, etc.] That is, upon me,
according to that Prove. 30.6. Blessings are upon the head of the just, that is,
upon the just. Yet in this phrase there may be also an allusion to the lifting
up or setting up of torches or candles on high, because thereby they give the
better light to men. However by the time when the candle of God shined upon his
head, is meant the time when the Lord favored him and prospered him
apparently, and when he did by his providence and the counsel of his spirit
guide and direct him in all his ways. And to the same purpose is the following
clause, when by his light I walked through darkness; for thereby is meant,
either that God prospered him when times of great distress lay upon others, or
that through Gods favor he lived free from affliction in this world, the vale
of tears and land of darkness and sorrow, or that God directed him in the most
intricate difficulties that ever he met with. See the Notes, 2 Samuel 22.29. and
Esth. 8.16.

Verse. 4. As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my
Tabernacle.] That is, when that special and singular love which God did bear
me was plainly manifested, by the great blessings he daily afforded to me and
mine; Or, when God by his secret providence did protect, and by the secret
counsel of his spirit did direct both me and my family: For all these may be
termed the secret of God, as likewise Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him; and in other places.

Verse. 6. When I washed my steps with butter, etc.] That is, when I enjoyed the
choicest of Gods blessings in greatest abundance. We have the like expressions,
Genesis 49.11. and Deuteronomy. 33.24. concerning which see the Notes there. Yet the last
clause, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil, may imply not only abundance
of oil, as where streams of water come gushing forth out of rocks; but also
that the barrenest places yielded him plenty: for which see the Note, Deuteronomy.
32.13.

Verse. 7. When I went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat
in the street.] As by the gate is meant the place of judicature, (see the Note
Genesis 22.17.) whether Job used to go in great state and honorably attended; so
also by the street is meant any place of public concourse, where when the
people met together about public affairs, Job, as being a chief magistrate,
had a seat prepared for him against he came thither.

Verse. 8. The aged arose and stood up.] That is, as I passed by, or when I came
in place where they were, the aged arising stood up; or, rising from their
seats, they continued standing, whilst I was present.

Verse. 9. The Princes refrained talking, etc.] That is, they were silent
presently when I came in presence; or, they still gave way to me to speak, and
would not speak themselves when I was by: which is also expressed in other
words in the following clause, and laid their hand on their mouth, of which see
the Note, chap. 21.5. Yet some add farther, that by putting their hand upon
their mouth, the princes gave a sign to others to be silent too.

Verse. 10. The Nobles held their peace, etc.] To wit, when Job was by, or began
to speak: and their tongues cleaved to the roof of their mouth; that is, they
were as mute as if it had been so; or, they durst not speak for fear.

Verse. 11, When the ear heard me, then it blessed me, etc.] That is, they that
heard me speak commended me for that I spoke, pronounced me blessed, or desired
God to bless me: and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me; that is, as
any saw me, they testified of me, how righteous and good I was in all my ways.

Verse. 12. Because I delivered the poor that cried, the fatherless, etc.] As
if he had said, It was not for my riches and greatness that every one spoke
well of me; but for the good I did, and that especially to those from whom no
requital could be expected. And thus he confutes that slander of Eliphaz,
chap. 22.9. Thou have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless
have been broken.

Verse. 13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me.] To wit,
because I helped those that were like to be utterly undone, and rescued those
that were in the way of perishing, from the oppression of such as would have
ruined them; Or, because I pardoned those that were condemned to die.

Verse. 14. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgment was as a
robe and a diadem.] As if he should have said, Whereas magistrates use to wear
robes and diadems, and other glorious ornaments, to make them to be honored
and reverenced amongst the people, the ornaments wherewith I sought to adorn my
self were justice and judgment; and they were indeed an honor and glory to me
both with God and man. His just dealing in that office of magistracy whereto
God had raised him, he might compare to a garment which he put on, and
wherewith he clothed himself, first, because it was not natural to him, he was
born naked of any such clothing; secondly, because it was manifestly to be seen
in all his actions, as a man's garments are visible to every one that looks on
him; thirdly, that he took as much care to do justly, as a man does to dress
himself, and did as much delight in all righteous dealing, as men do in costly
attire. But that which is first mentioned, was chiefly, I conceive, intended by
Job.

Verse. 15. I was eyes to the blind, etc.] This may include many particulars: as
first, that he took order that the blind should have all requisite help
afforded them; secondly, that he instructed those that were ignorant, who are
indeed spiritually blind, according to that which the Apostle spoke to the Jew,
Romans 2.19. thou art confident, that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a
light of them which are in darkness; thirdly, that he counseled and directed
those that for want of wisdom knew not many times, both in public and
private affairs, which way to turn themselves; and fourthly, more particularly,
that when poor simple men had any cause pleaded before him, who, not
understanding their own cause, were in danger to be gulled and deceived by
those that would yet seem to plead for them, he used to help such simple souls,
discovering for their benefit the justice of their cause, which they were not
able to make good themselves. And agreeably hereto we must also understand the
second clause, and feet was I to the lame; to wit, either of bodily lamenesse,
that he provided that such poor wretches should not want help, or secondly, of
men figuratively lame, that is, poor weak men, that are not able as it were to
stand of themselves, or manage their affairs, that he supported and aided them.

Verse. 16. I was a father to the poor, etc.] That is, I helped them, and
counseled them, and supplied them with all things that were necessary for
them, and that with the care and affection of a father. As for the following
clause, and the cause which I knew not, I searched out, it may imply two
remarkable acts of justice in Job: to wit, first, that he did not content
himself with righting those that complained to him of wrong that was done them,
but by search and enquiry found out those that were injurious in their
dealings, and called them to an account, and so relieved those that durst not
complain; and secondly, that when any cause was brought before him, he durst
not be rash in passing judgment, nor would suffer those that were the
wrong-doers to carry the cause by any false dealing, but did always weigh well
every circumstance, that there might be nothing which he did not thoroughly
understand.

Verse. 18. Then I said, I shall die in my nest.] That is, I shall die peaceably
at home in my bed, in a good old age, having my children and family about me.
Nor does this contradict that which he said before, chap. 3.25, 26; that which
I was afraid of is come unto me; I was not in safety, neither had I rest, yet
trouble came. For as that did only imply, that he grew not carnally secure upon
his prosperity, but still looked upon all creature comforts as mutable
uncertain things; so this does only imply, that finding himself in such a
prosperous condition through Gods blessing upon him and his, it seemed to him
most probable and likely (at least such thoughts did sometimes come into his
mind) that surely he should continue settled in that estate, till he came at
last to die in his nest: which he the rather thought also, because his
conscience testified with him, that he had always sincerely endeavored to
walk uprightly before God, and so had not that cause of being perplexed with
continual fears of a dismal change, as wicked men have, that enrich and raise
themselves by unlawful means. And this he now alleges, as that which made
his misery now the more bitter and insupportable, and showed how wonderful and
unsearchable the ways of God were, that notwithstanding this, he should now be
brought into so low and sad a condition.

Verse. 19. My root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night upon
my branch.] That is, through the grace of God planted in my heart, and the
blessing of God upon me and mine, and all that I did, I was in great
prosperity, like a flourishing tree planted by the waters, and having it is
branches refreshed every night with dew from heaven.

Verse. 20. My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand.] That
is, my prosperity, wisdom and strength was daily increased: For by the bow in
the Scripture is usually meant a man's strength; for so we see the continuance
of Joseph's strength is expressed, Genesis 49.24. But his bow abode in strength,
etc. See also 1 Samuel 2.4.

Verse. 21. Unto me men gave ear and waited, etc.] That is, they waited both
till I spoke, and whilst I was speaking, though I was never so long, as longing
to know my advice, and to hear my judgment, and expecting nothing from me but
what was full of wisdom and justice.

Verse. 22. After my words they spoke not again, etc.] To wit, neither by
gainsaying any thing I said, nor by adding any thing which they conceived was
wanting in that which I had spoken: and my speech dropped upon them; that is,
it was to them as a sweet shower of rain that distills gently upon the earth,
and soaks into it; it was most pleasing, welcome and profitable, chearing and
refreshing the minds of the hearers, and every way beneficial to them. See the
Note, Deuteronomy. 32.2.

Verse. 23. And they waited for me as the rain, etc.] Most Expositours hold,
that by the rain in this first clause is meant the rain which fell with them in
Autumn, (when in those parts their new-sown seed was in danger to be spoiled
for want of rain) which is usually in the Scripture called the first or the
early rain, Deuteronomy. 11.14. Jam. 5.7. and that because the later rain seems to be
opposed hereto in the following clause, and they opened their mouth wide as for
the later rain. But however the meaning is, that they did as eagerly long to
hear him speak, as men long for rain in those times when they most need it, and
have been longest without it; and did as greedily gape after his words when he
began to speak, as the husbandman, or the chapped earth it self gapes after the
rain, yea even after the later rain; which is that which falls in the spring,
and was most necessary in those countries for the ripening and plumping of
their corn, which began then with them to be nigh unto harvest.

Verse. 24. If I laughed on them, they believed it not; and the light of my
countenance they cast not down.] Some understand this thus, that no body would
believe that which was spoken before them, if Job by a smile seemed but to
suspect that there was no truth or fair dealing in that which was said; and
that on the other side, when he gave any approbation to that which was spoken,
by the cheerfulness of his countenance, those that stood by slighted it not,
but observing by his looks what his judgment was, they also approved it. But
others take it thus, If I laughed on them, they believed it not; that is, they
had such a high opinion of my gravity, that if I spoke any thing in a jeasting,
pleasant manner, or did any other way show my self cheerful and familiar with
any body, they could scarce believe that I laughed when I did laugh; what I
spoke in jest they would think I spoke it in earnest, at least that there was
somewhat in it more then they discerned, nor durst they thereupon carry
themselves in a familiar and jeasting manner to me again: and to the same
purpose also is the following clause, and the light of my countenance they cast
not down; for the meaning is, that when he so carried himself, no man, by
taking offense at him, caused him to change his countenance; or, that they did
not slight any look of his, but took a smile from him as a great matter; or,
that his familiar carriage toward them did not embolden them to reverence him
ever a whit the less, at least to do or speak any thing that should grieve or
anger him, or make him ashamed, and so overcloud his countenance. The
expression is much like that, Genesis 4.5. Cain was very wroth, and his
countenance fell.

Verse. 25. I chose out their way, and sat chief, etc.] Two ways this is
understood: First, that he appointed them what course they should take, and
which way they should go, in any business they had to do, and was still the
chief man in all their meetings: or secondly, that he usually went amongst
them, and was familiarly conversant with them; and yet this did not make them
despise him, but still he was all in all amongst them, and advanced as the
chief man wherever he came. As for that which follows, and dwelt as a king in
the army, as one that comfort the mourners, the meaning of the first clause,
I conceive, is unquestionably this, that he was obeyed and honorably attended,
and his house resorted to, more like a king in an army, then a private man or
an inferior magistrate, (and he compares himself to a king in an army, rather
then in any other place, because there the attendance of kings uses to be
greatest, the obedience of soldiers is most observable, and the resort of
company for advice and dispatch of business is most frequent.) But then the
meaning of the last clause is more questionable, and as one that comfort the
mourners; for either that may be added in reference to the former clause, to
wit, that he was as a king that comfort the army, when by some distress or
disaster they are discouraged and dejected; or else the meaning may be, that
men flocked after him far and near, as they are wont to do to one that is
famous for his abilities to comfort those that are of a sad and drooping
spirit: and so, however, one chief thing which Job intended to imply in these
words may be, that notwithstanding the honor that was done him, he was ready
still to comfort any that were in affliction and sorrow.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. But now they that are younger then I have me in derision, etc.] This
is opposed to that which he had said in the foregoing Chapter, concerning the
great honor that formerly was done him both by young and old, to wit, that now
the younger sort despised him, whose fathers, says he, I would have disdained
to have set with the dogs of my flock, that is, to have made them my
dog-keepers, or to have set them with my dogs to keep my sheep: and to prove
how wretched, sordid, and base they were, he sets forth how exceeding beggarly
and worthless their fathers were; because usually such as the parents are,
such are the children, if not baser and meaner. And whereas this may seem a
high degree of insolency and pride in Job, that he should thus scorn and
despise the meanest that were in regard of their poverty; to this it is
answered, either that Job does here set forth the temptations wherewith he was
assailed, when he was so despised, which yet notwithstanding he resisted and
overmaster'd; or rather that Jobs aim in these words was, not to show how he
was affected toward those that did so shamefully despise him in his misery,
but only to set forth what base contemptible men they were that did so
scornfully use him; and that not only for their extreme wretchedness in regard
of their outward condition, but especially also for their sloth, and other base
qualities, to wit, that they were such, that a man would have been loath to have
joined them with the meanest and lowest in his family, nor could have thought
fit for the basest services wherein he could employ them.

Verse. 2. Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old
age was perished?] To wit, because though they had lived long, yet they had so
wasted their time in sloth and wickedness, they had neither the wisdom nor
experience of old age; and so they were fit for no employment, as being
impotent by reason of age, and withal wholly void of that wisdom of the
aged, that might have made amends for their bodily weakness.

Verse. 3. For want and famine they were solitary, etc.] That is, Being in
extremity of want, and scarce knowing where to fill their hungry bellies, they
were forced to fly into solitary and desolate places: Or, they were dark as the
night (as it is in the margin of our Bibles,) that is, they lived in caves and
woods, as dark as the night, not daring to show themselves in open view.

Verse. 4. Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots for their meat.]
Because such roots could not be gotten without some trouble, and being gotten
must needs be hard and unsavory meat, under these particulars here mentioned,
all other herbs and roots of the like nature are comprehended, which no man
would eat of, but those that were hunger-bitten and ready to starve.

Verse. 5. They were driven forth from among men (they cried after them as after
a thief) etc.] Either this is meant of men's hunting them back to their dens and
other solitary places, when at any time they brake out to rob and to steal; or
else rather it is meant of their first expulsion from amongst men, to wit, that
for their sloth, and other vile qualities, they were looked upon as men that
were likely to live only by filching from others, and so were driven into
desolate places, as not fit to live in any civil society, and hated, as if
they had been the veriest thieves in the world.

Verse. 7. Among the bushes they brayed.] That is, say some, when the bushes
pricked them. But the meaning rather is, that for hunger, thirst and cold they
brayed, being more like so many wild asses rather then men. See the Note, chap.
6.5.

Verse. 8. They were children of fools, yea children of base men, etc.] That is,
children of wicked, worthless, despicable men; see the Note, 2. Sam. 3.33.
they were viler then the earth, which we tread and spit upon; the meaning is,
that they were as base as base might be, men not worthy to go upon the ground.
That which is said in the five foregoing verses might be meant of those that
now derided him, or of their parents; but this seems rather to be meant of
those that so abused him.

Verse. 9. And now am I their song, yea I am their byword.] See the Note, chap.
17.6. and Deuteronomy. 28.37. And because this he charge upon them, of whom he had
said before that they were driven from amongst men, and lived in solitary
places, it seems that it was by Jobs authority especially they were cast out,
though all men were ready to contribute their help thereto; and that thereupon
they took now the advantage of his downfall from his former dignity, and coming
now without fear from those desolate places, did abuse him, and trample upon
him, as here is expressed.

Verse. 10. They abhor me, they flee far from me, etc.] That is, Because of
the extreme low condition whereto God has brought me, and the loathsomenesse
of my person, by reason of the ulcers and sores that are upon me, they stand
aloof from me by way of scorn and disdain, or as looking on me as some unlucky
and accursed thing. We have the like expressions before, chap. 19.13, 19. And
to the same purpose is the following clause, and spare not to spit in my face:
whereby is meant, either their loathing of him (for we spit at those things we
are scarce able to look at, to imply the rising of our stomachs against them;)
or their detesting of him, as an execrable wicked person; or their casting of
all kind of vile reproaches upon him to his face; or more generally, that they
used him with all kind of contempt and scorn. For though it may be understood
literally, to wit, that these base fellows did indeed spit in his face, because
spitting in the face was in those times an usual way of using men
reproachfully and despightfully, (as is evident Numb. 12.14. Deuteronomy. 15.9. but
especially Matthew. 26.67. where it is said of Christ, that they did spit in his
face:) yet here I take it rather to be a proverbiall expression, the meaning
whereof is, that they affronted him and abused him in the vilest manner they
could devise. There is the like expression before, chap. 16.10. of which see
the Note there.

Verse. 11. Because he has loosed my cord and afflicted me, they have also let
loose the bridle before me.] That is, Because God has deprived me of that
power and authority which I had over them, and has not awed their spirits to
fear and reverence me as formerly, therefore these base people do now with
unbridled rage abuse me to my face. In the first clause, the Lords bringing
down Job so low is expressed in those figurative terms, he has loosed my
cord: either first, because binding strengthens things, and loosing or
unbinding things weakens them, as we see in a bundle of sticks or sheaf of
corn, which have no more strength in them, if once the cord wherewith they were
bound be loosed or untied; and in the body of man, which is strengthened by the
binding of the limbs together with nerves and sinews, and is soon weakened if
they be loosed, whence is that expression concerning Belshazzer, that the
joints of his loins were loosed; and so to signify that God had bereaved him
of that might and strength he formerly had, he expresses it thus, he has
loosed my cord: or secondly, in reference to that he said before, chap. 29.20.
and my bow was renewed in my hand, that as there the continuance or increase of
his power was employed by the renewing of his bow, so here, by the loosing of
the cord or string of his bow, that is, the unbending of his bow, the weakening
of his power might be signified: or thirdly, because the authority of
magistrates, or the peoples reverencing them because of their authority, is the
bond of subjection, or the rains of government whereby people are awed and kept
in; whence is that, Psalm. 2.3. Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away
their cords from us (see the Note, chap. 12.18) and so by loosing his cord is
meant, that God had stripped him of the authority he formerly had, and made him
to be despised amongst the basest of men, and so now (says he) they have also
let loose the bridle before me, that is, they have let loose the rains to their
malice and wickedness, and give liberty to themselves, even to my face, to use
me as they please.

Verse. 12. Upon my right hand rise the youth, etc.] They are said to rise
against him upon his right hand, to imply, either first, their opposing him in
every thing he did, because the right hand is the instrument of working; or
secondly, their endeavor to weaken him, because in a man's right hand his
strength chiefly lies; or thirdly, the advantage they had over him, in regard
of the very low condition whereto he was brought, because the right hand is the
upper hand; or fourthly, that these youngsters, who were wont to hide
themselves for fear of him, as he had said before, chap. 29.8. did not now
abuse him secretly, and behind his back, but were ready at every turn to beard
him and oppose him to his face. And indeed the like expression is used
elsewhere upon most of these grounds: as where David says of his great enemy,
Psalm. 109.6. Set thou a wicked man over him, and let Satan stand at his right
hand; and Zach. 3.1. where Joshua the high priest was seen, and Satan standing
at his right hand to resist him. As for the following words, they push away my
feet, though some Expositours understand thereby that they bereaved him of his
estate, and of every thing else that might be any support to him, and of all
power to help himself; yet I rather take it to be a proverbiall speech,
signifying with what extreme contempt they abused him, that they sported
themselves with him, as those do that lay stumbling blocks in a poor man's way,
and trip up his heels. And then in the last clause, and they raise up against
me the ways of their destruction, they are compared to soldiers, that lay
siege against a place, (of which see the Note chap. 19.12. where there is the
like expression:) but the meaning is, that they sought by all means to destroy
him.

Verse. 13. They mar my path.] The meaning of this may be, either first, that
they cast an aspersion of hypocrisy upon all the ways of holiness and
righteousness wherein he had formerly walked; or secondly, that hating his
ways and courses, they sought to overthrow both him and them; or thirdly,
rather, that they had cut off from him all way of escape.

They set forward my calamity, they have no helper.] That is, they have none
amongst them that will help me, or there is none to help me against them. Yet I
acknowledge the most received Exposition of these words is, they have no
helper, that is, they need no body to animate and provoke them to these
mischievous courses against me; yea as base and mean as they are, against me
poor wretch they may easily prevail, and need no helper.

Verse. 14. They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters, etc.] That is,
Being deprived of my estate, authority and power, which hitherto kept them off,
and made them afraid to meddle with me, and God withal having withdrawn his
protection, which was that indeed that had hitherto secured me, they came in
upon me thick and threefold with all violence; even as soldiers that have
besieged any place, when they have made a breach, do rush in like a torrent of
waters, and bear down all before them. In the desolation they rolled themselves
upon me; that is, as soldiers break in through the ruins they have made in a
breach, so they, taking advantage of my downfall, come tumbling in upon me, as
the waves of the sea, or as stones that roll down from a steep hill* and with
all violence, acting mischief upon mischief, they do utterly oppress and
overwhelm me.

Verse. 15. Terrors are turned upon me; they pursue my soul as the wind.] That
is, the terrors of death, and of Gods wrath, which are worse by far then any
outward affliction can be, do often suddenly, violently, and unresistably
surprise, follow and pursue my soul. See the Note, chap. 6.4.

Verse. 16. And now my soul is poured out upon me.] That is, To my exceeding
grief I see the strength and courage of my soul, or the powers of my life spend
and run out apace, I faint and die away; through the continual wasting of my
spirits, I melt away in tears and sorrow, and my soul passes away out of my
broken body, as water runs out of a broken vessel. We have the like
expressions, Psalm. 42.4. when I remember these things, I pour out my soul in
me; and Lam. 2.12. their soul is poured out into their mothers bosom.

Verse. 17. My bones are pierced in me in the night season, etc.] That is, even
in the night, when others find some refreshing rest, my most inward parts are
in continual pain and anguish.

Verse. 18. By the great force of my disease is my garment changed; it binds
me about as the collar of my coat.] The meaning of this is, that by that
purulent bloody matter, which issued in great abundance out of his ulcers, his
garment was continually stained; and that being stiffened with that congealed
matter, it was as hard and straight round about his body, as the collar of his
coat was about his neck.

Verse. 19. He has cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes.]
Some Expositours refer this to the extreme contempt whereinto God had brought
him, to wit, that God trampled him down in the mire, that he was no more
regarded then the dirt under men's feet: and others refer it to the low and
weak condition whereto he was brought, in regard of his health, namely that he
was more like a dead carcass then a living man, no better then dust and ashes,
and as one that was already thrown down into the grave. But because in the
foregoing verse he had spoken of the filth of his ulcers, I rather conceive
that here also he intends his loathsome condition in that regard, to wit, that
he was no other to look on then a heap of mire, and as he had said before,
chap. 7.5. clothed with clods of dust; concerning which see the Note there.

Verse. 20. I ^ry unto thee, and thou do not hear me; I stand up, and thou
regardest me not.] Standing up is a gesture of those that pray, whence is that
Jer. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be
toward this people; and that Matthew. 6.5. they love to pray standing in the
Synagogues. So that the second clause may be no more then a reiterating of that
which, in other terms, he had said in the first clause. But yet some conceive,
that as by crying in the first clause he meant to imply his earnestness in
prayer; so also by standing up in the second place he employed, both his
eagerness to be heard, and his persevering still to press God, waiting for an
answer; and withal that he did in prayer present himself before God, to see,
as it were, if such a pitiful spectacle would move him to compassion: but that
all was in vain.

Verse. 21. Thou art become cruel to me.] That is, whereas thou were wont to
deal graciously and bountifully with me, now, contrary to thine own
disposition, and thy former dealings with me, thou seem more then severe,
even cruel in that which thou do unto me. Job therefore does not here
charge God with cruelty, but only affirms that his dealing with him carried the
resemblance of cruelty in it, to wit, in that he laid his hand so exceedingly
heavy upon him, and took no pity of him, when he saw him in such a sad
condition, nor regarded his submission and crying to him for mercy. And indeed
the Lord himself uses the same expression, speaking of the severity he had
used in the punishment of his own people, Jer. 30.14. I have wounded thee with
the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the multitude
of thine iniquity.

Verse. 22. Thou liftest me up to the wind, thou causest me to ride upon it, and
dissolvest my substance.] Three several ways these words may be understood:
to wit, first, that God had lifted him up to a great height of prosperity, that
afterward his fall might be the greater, even to the dissolving of his
substance, that is, to his utter ruin; and so he may allude to the lifting up
of any thing on high, as it were to the clouds, that so falling from thence it
might be dashed in pieces; or to the winds carrying up of the clouds on high,
which then fall down in showers of rain, and so come to nothing: secondly, that
he was in the judgment of reason as it were absolutely lost and gone, Thou
liftest me up to the wind, etc. that is, Thou do suddenly and speedily snatch
me away as with a whirlwind from amongst men, and thou dissolvest my substance,
that is, thou causest me to melt and wast away to nothing: or thirdly, that he
sets forth in the first words the miserable restlesnesse of his condition, to
wit, that he was so continually disquieted and distracted, through pain and
grief, both in body and mind, that he could be still in no place, nor could
ever find any rest in himself, but was like a feather or stubble, that is
caught up by the wind, and then driven and whirled about, sometimes one way and
sometimes another; insomuch that at last hereby his substance was dissolved,
that is, his flesh was quite spent and wasted, yea there was no soundness or
solidity left either in body or mind: and indeed some read the last clause, as
it is in the margin of our Bibles, and dissolvest my wisdom; and then the
meaning must needs be, that he was as a man that is moped, void of
understanding, not knowing what course to take, or which way to turn himself.

Verse. 23. For I know that thou will bring me to death, etc.] Some conceive
that Jobs drift in these words is, to intimate, that since he must needs die
ere long, therefore in the mean time he desired that God would let him be at
ease; as we see the same alleged, chap. 7.16. concerning which see the Notes
there. But I rather conceive that these words are added only to set forth, that
he looked upon himself as a dead man, one of whose recovery there was no hope.

Verse. 24. Howbeit he will not stretch forth his hand to the grave, though they
cry in his destruction.] Two Expositions are given of these words, which are
both very probable, (though they be indeed contrary one to the other;) in
regard ones hand may be said to be stretched forth to another, either for good
or evil. The one is this: Howbeit he will not stretch forth his hand to the
grave, that is, God will not save men from the grave, when the time comes that
he intends to bring them thither, or when he has brought them to the grave;
though they cry in his destruction, that is, though there be never such
mourning and lamentation for their death, or for their being in danger of
dying, or though they that are dying do never so piteously bewail their misery,
and do never so vehemently call upon God, when he destroys them: as if he had
said, As I know I shall die, so I know that being dead there is no hope of
being raised from the grave; thither all must come, and there they must all lie
till the general resurrection. The other Exposition is this, Though they, that
is, though men in that miserable condition that I am in, cry in his
destruction, that is, complain bitterly and cry out earnestly for ease and help
when God is destroying them, and thinks fit to make an end of them; yet this is
that which comforts me, that howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the
grave, that is, God will not afflict them any longer when they are in the
grave: And so I know it will be with me; though now I cry out, because of my
misery whilst he is destroying me, yet this comfort I have, that my miseries
will end with my life; when I am laid in my grave, whether I am hasting apace,
there he will no longer stretch forth his hand against me, there we shall all
be at rest. And this Exposition I take to be most agreeable to the Context in
this place.

Verse. 25. Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? etc.] This might be
added to imply, both that he could apprehend no reason why God had so sorely
afflicted him, and likewise that he could see no ground for that counsel his
friends had given him, to wit, that he should address himself to do that
which was good in Gods sight, and then God would again be favorable to him;
since this he had always formerly done, and yet these sad calamities had
befallen him. But that which I conceive Job meant chiefly to imply is, that in
regard he had been so compassionate to others, it was the stranger to him, that
he in his miseries should neither find man nor God ready to pity him, according
to that former complaint verse. 20. I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear me:
yet that so it was with him he shows in the following verse, when I looked for
good, (namely, because I had been so ready to pity others) then evil came unto
me; and when I waited for light, there came darkness.

Verse. 27. My bowels boiled and rested not, etc.] His meaning is, that his
inward parts were incessantly troubled within him; partly with the burning heat
of his disease, and partly with the grief and vexation of his mind. Some hold
that Job proceeds here still to express, how he was distressed for the
distress of others, to wit, that his bowels yearned over them that were in
misery, by means whereof he was continually afflicted for some or other. But
the first Exposition is most generally approved; and indeed it best agrees with
the following clause, the days of affliction prevented me, that is, they came
unexpectedly upon me; or they came upon me thick and threefold, so that I had
no breathing time to arm my self against them.

Verse. 28. I went mourning without the Sun, etc.] Even this verse also some
Expositours understand of his mourning for others that were in misery, to wit,
that he went mourning up and down for them, and that his sorrow was so great,
that he could take comfort in nothing, he seemed not sensible of the warmth of
the sun shining upon him; and that he stood up and tried in the congregation,
that is, that in public assemblies he bewailed their miseries, laboring to
stir up others also to take pity of them. But I rather take this also, as the
rest, to be an expression of his sad condition in regard of his own miseries:
and accordingly the first clause, I went mourning without the Sun, may be very
probably understood three several ways: to wit, either first, of his black
skin, that his body was clad all over with a black mourning skin in stead of a
mourning vesture, and yet it was not the scorching heat of the Sun, but the
strength of his diseases that had put this hue upon him; and so this should be
the same with that which is said afterward in plainer terms verse. 30. My skin
is black upon me: or secondly, of his solitariness, that being in much
heaviness, he avoided as much as might be the light of the Sun, and loved to
be alone by himself in the dark: or thirdly, of his sorrow only, that he was
always mourning, as being under the darkness of very sad afflictions, and not
having the least Sun-light of pleasure and comfort; and to the same purpose is
that which follows, I stood up and I cried in the congregation, that is, I
could not contain my self, but (which was a very unseemly thing in one of my
gravity and quality) I did even weep and howl in the very public assemblies of
people.

Verse. 29. I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls.] Or, ostriches,
as it is in the margin; and indeed so they must needs render the words, that
will have the meaning to be, as some would have it, that Job herein complains
of the mercilesnesse of those with whom he conversed, to wit, that they were
barbarously cruel to him, like dragons, yea like ostriches, that are cruel to
their own young ones. But rather, I conceive, he terms himself a brother to
dragons, and a companion to owls, because his condition was like to theirs, to
wit, either for that he was forsaken, and left in a desolate and solitary
estate, or because his complaints and cries, by reason of his extreme misery,
were like the howling and screeches of these creatures, which make in the
wilderness many times a very lamentable noise, according to that, Micah 1.8. I
will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls: and indeed the
phrase is much like this, which Solomon uses, Prove. 18.9. He also that is
slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great waster.

Verse. 30. My skin is black upon me, etc.] This may be meant of the blackness
of the scabs and scurf which were all over his body: but besides, even the skin
of a man's body may become black by extremity of grief and violent sickness;
whence is that, Lam. 5.10. Our skin was black like an oven, because of the
terrible famine; and that also of David, Psalm. 119.83. I am become like a
bottle in the smoke: see also the Note above verse. 28.

Verse. 31. My harp also is turned to mourning, etc.) Hereby is employed, that
not only his joy was turned into mourning, but also that those things which
formerly were used for his delight, did now only increase his sorrow.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 1. I Made a covenant with mine eyes, etc.] In this Chapter Job makes a
solemn protestation how piously he had lived, thereby to confute his friends
unjust censures, and to show how strange therefore it was, that he should be
brought into so sad a condition: and first he begins with this, how carefully
he had suppressed all carnal concupiscence, because this is the sin that does
usually surprise men in their youth. And this he expresses in these terms, I
have made a covenant with mine eyes, to imply, that he kept his eyes from
gazing upon any wanton object, with as much care, as men use when they are
bound to any thing by covenant; and perhaps also that he was on each side
careful, both that his eyes should not allure him to evil, and that he
likewise would not employ his eyes in any such dishonorable service. And then
for the following clause, why then should I think upon a maid? the drift
thereof is, to imply that as he watched over his eyes, so also over his
thoughts, that he might not think upon a maid, (and much less upon a married
wife, which would have been a far greater sin;) and that either because there
was the same ground for avoiding this evil of his thoughts, as for avoiding the
other of his looks; or because it would have been in vain to have set such a
strict guard upon his eyes, if in the mean season he should give liberty to
himself for such wanton and lustful thoughts; or because being so far
convinced of the evil of this carnal concupiscence, he durst not give way to
an evil thought, for fear of Gods wrath, why then should I think upon a maid?
as if he should have said, If I should, would not God have punished me for it?
The first clause I know may be understood generally, of covenanting with his
eyes against all that may be comprehended under that which Saint John calls the
lust of the eyes, 1 John 2.16; but commonly it is limited by Expositours to
looking after women.

Verse. 2. For what portion of God is there from above? and what inheritance of
the Almighty from on high?] Some Expositours understand this thus, that unclean
persons are no part of Gods portion and inheritance; or that they have no part
nor interest in God: But because of these expressions, from above, and from on
high, far more probable it is, that Job speaks here of a portion and
inheritance of recompense, which God from above shall allot to those that give
way to such lustful looks and thoughts, as he had mentioned in the foregoing
words: for what portion of God is there from above? etc. as if he should have
said, I dare not give way to such wanton looks and lascivious thoughts; for
though such as do so may escape well enough with men, that may never discern
nor suspect any thing amiss in them, yet what will God from above allot them
for their portion? which he answers in the following verse. See the Note, chap.
20.29.

Verse. 3. Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the
workers of iniquity?] That is, Is not this the portion of such wicked men, that
God does certainly at last destroy them, yea many times by some extraordinary,
unusual and unheard of judgment? according to that, Esa. 28.21. The Lord
shall rise up as in mount Perizim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of
Gibeon; that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his act,
his strange act.

Verse. 4. Does not he see my ways, and count all my steps?] That is, Not one
of them can slip by him undiscerned; he knows them as exactly, as if he numbered
them one by one. And this, concerning Gods seeing all that he did, he inserts
in this place, either first, to imply, that this made him wonder why God, that
knew him so thoroughly, should punish him so severely; or secondly, to show,
that in this profession which he made of his purity from all uncleanness, he
durst not affirm any untruth, since if he should, it could not be concealed
from God; or rather thirdly, as a reason why he durst not give way to any
lustful looks or thoughts, to wit, because though man could take no notice of
them, yet they could not be concealed from God.

Verse. 5. If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot has hasted to deceit.]
That is, If I have walked in any sinful course, and have greedily defrauded
those that I have had any dealings with; or, If I have dealt falsely,
dissemblingly, and deceitfully with any man whatsoever. By vanity may be meant
any sinful practice, and that because the expectation of men in such courses
will prove vain and deceitful; and so it is taken Prove. 13.11. wealth gotten
by vanity shall be diminished: but most commonly in the Scripture by vanity is
meant lying and dissembling, when there is no truth in that which men say or
do, but all is vain and deceitful; and therefore is vanity and lying so often
joined together in the Scriptures, as Psalm. 4.2. How long will you love vanity,
and seek after leasing? so also Prove. 30.8. and in many other places.

Verse. 6. Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine
integrity.] By being weighed in an even balance, he means his being tried
justly, to wit, whether his dealings with men had not been just, according to
the word and revealed will of God, (which is the balance of the sanctuary, the
only sure rule to discover what is just and what is unjust;) or, whether his
punishments were not greater then his offenses had been. So that his drift is
to profess, that he desired to be thoroughly tried, so it might be done justly,
to wit, by God, and not by man, of whose unjust censures he had too much
experience.

Verse. 7. If my step has turned out of the way, etc.] That is, If upon trial
it be found that I have lived wickedly, and dealt unjustly with men; and mine
heart walked after mine eyes, that is, if I have coveted that which I saw of
another man's, which is called the lust of the eyes, 1 John 2.16; and if any
blot has cleaved to my hands, that is, if I have run on in any sinful
practice, or, if I have greedily gotten, and unjustly kept any thing, by any
base unwarrantable way: And observable it is, that in that last clause he
speaks of such filthy lucre, as of pitch or some such thing, that will soon
cleave to and defile the hands of him that touches it. Some Expositours I know
limit this, which is here said, to his carriage of himself in the place of a
magistrate; If my step has turned out of the way, that is, If I have perverted
justice, and mine heart has walked after mine eyes, that is, if I have had any
respect to persons, and if any blot has cleaved to my hands, that is, if I
have taken any bribe. But the more general Exposition I judge the best. And
yet we must not think that Job intended hereby to clear himself of all sin, as
if he had never stepped awry: for the resolving whereof see the Note chap.
16.17.

Verse. 8. Then let me sow, and let another reap; yea let my offspring be
rooted out.] This last clause seems to be added, because it is usually to make
their posterity rich and great, that men seek gain to themselves in unjust
wa^es; which if I have done, says Job, it were just that I should have none to
inherit what I have gotten. But may some say, Job had now no children. I
answer, this might be meant of his childrens children; or of rooting out his
children hereafter, if he should have any; or the meaning may be only this,
that if he had never so great a posterity, it were just with God to root them
all out.

Verse. 9. If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, etc.] That is, If I have
been won by any woman to commit uncleanness with her, even when she may have
used all the art she had to entice and entangle me, as by her beauty, by her
wanton flattering words, which drop as an honeycomb, Prove. 5.3. by her
lascivious behavior, or any other of those wicked arts, for which the heart of
the whorish woman is said to be as snares and nets, Eccles. 7.26.

Verse. 10. Then let my wise grind unto another, etc.] That is, Let her become a
bond-slave to some other man, and be put by him to grind in a mill; concerning
which see the Note Exodus 11.5: or rather, Let me be paid in the same kind, let
my wife commit adultery with another man, yea let her be a common whore to many
(which also the following clause expresses more clearly, and let others bow
down upon her) as a mill that for hire receives and grinds the corn of all
comers. For indeed this phrase of grinding is a modest expression of that act
of uncleanness; and so we find it used in other writers, as in that of Horace,
alienas Permolere uxores.

Verse. 12. For it is a fire that consumes to destruction, etc.] Some
Expositours understand this thus, that the adultery of the wife does kindle in
her husband such fury and wrath, that as a fire it breaks forth to the
destruction of her and all that belong to her, of which see what Solomon says,
Prove, 6.34, 35. But the words plainly show, that he speaks of the sin of
adultery, to wit, that as it is as a fire in regard of its burning
concupiscence, so also as a fire it consumes all a man has, by reason of the
wrath of God, which usually pursues them that are guilty of it, though men wink
at it: it consumes a man's health, wealth, body and soul, and makes him burn at
last in hell fire unto eternity: and then, because God usually punishes this
sin more particularly, by cutting off the adulterers posterity, therefore he
adds the last words, and would root out all mine increase.

Verse. 13. If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant,
when they contended with me.] His meaning is, that though he might have stopped
their mouths with stripes, yet he gave them free liberty to speak for
themselves; yea perhaps sometimes when they contended with him, too malapertly
answering again, which is a sin in servants, Tit. 2.9. Now this was in Job the
clearer proof both of his innocence and gentleness, (if to his servants, much
more to others) because in those times their servants were usually perpetual
bondslaves, and both they and all that they had were so their masters, that
they might do what they pleased to them, even to the taking away of their
lives, and there was no calling them to an account for it.

Verse. 14. What then shall I do, when God rises up? etc.] As if he should
have said, God is no respecter of persons, he is far more above me, then I
could be above my meanest servant, and more power he has over me to crush me,
then I could have over them to oppress and crush them: now therefore, though
man should never question me for this, yet when God rises up, to wit, to call
me to an account and to punish me for dealing so harshly with my servant, when
he visits me, namely at the time when he brings any great calamity upon me,
at the hour of death, or at the day of judgment, what then shall I do? that
is, how should I carry my self toward God? I should not dare to look him in
the face, I should be afraid to appear in his presence; at least I should not
know what to answer him, not being able any way to excuse myself, nor knowing
why God should hear me, when I have formerly refused to hear my servants. See
Ephesians. 6.9. and Col. 4.1.

Verse. 15. Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb?] Here he affirms, first, that his servant was Gods
creature, as well as he; the same God made them both: secondly, that his
servant was a man, a reasonable creature, as well as he; they were both of the
same nature, and he was therefore a mortal creature no less then his servant:
and thirdly, that he and his servant were made after the same manner, and
fashioned in the same mold, and so were descended of the same stock. Which two
last some conceive are more fully expressed, if we read the last clause, as it
is in the margin of our Bibles, and did he not fashion us in one womb? But
however the drift of the words is, to imply that there was no cause therefore,
why he should tyrannize over his servant, or, that if he should so do, he that
made them both would plead the cause of his servant.

Verse. 16. If I have withheld the poor from their desire, etc.] To wit, by
detaining their pledge, or any thing else unjustly from them, or by refusing to
grant them any thing they desired of me, or which I knew they desired, though
out of modesty they did not ask it. As for that which is added in the next
clause, concerning the failing of the widows eyes, who indeed are apt to mar
their eyes with weeping, see the Note chap. 11.20.

Verse. 17. Or have eaten my morsel alone, and the fatherless has not eaten
thereof.] That is, If I have not imparted of my provision for the feeding of
the fatherless. Yet some add also, that by this expression of not eating his
morsel alone, he meant to imply, that even of that which was daintyest, that
which was provided for his own eating, as any occasion was, the fatherless had
a share.

Verse. 18. ( For from my youth he was brought up with me as with a father,
etc.] This clause some understand of fatherless boys: and then accordingly
the following clause they understand of the fatherless of the other sex, and I
have guided her from my mothers womb. But because there is mention made in the
foregoing verses of his respect to poor widows, and they are frequently joined
with the fatherless, therefore the last clause, and I have guided her, etc.
most Expositours understand of the widow: and so the meaning of this passage
is, that from his youth, yea from his very childhood, he used to be charitably
affected to the fatherless and widows; his natural inclination, which he had
from his mothers womb, seemed to carry him that way. Indeed Solomon tells us,
that much of a man's natural disposition to good or evil will often be
discovered even in his childhood; Prove. 20.11. Even a child is known by his
doings, etc. and therefore Jobs intent in these words might be to imply, that
even in his tender years he used to pity the fatherless and widows, and was
still ready to carry them home to his fathers house, and many ways to be
helpful to them.

Verse. 20. If his loins have not blessed me, etc.] That is, the loins of the
poor naked man, whom he had clothed. And the loins of such a man may be said to
bless him that covered them with raiment, either first, because they being
refreshed hereby, do move such a poor wretch to bless him that showed him such
mercy, as it is expressed Deuteronomy. 24.13; or secondly, because such a poor man
will bless him that clothed him with all his might and strength; or thirdly,
because such an act of charity does move God to bless him that did it. And so
the phrase is much like that Genesis 4.10. where the blood of Abel is said to cry
for vengeance.

Verse. 21. If I have lift up my hand against the fatherless, etc.] Some
understand this of the lifting up the hand by way of suffrage in giving his
vote against the fatherless, and others of lifting up the hand by way of
giving a sign to any at his command to fall upon them. But I rather take this
to be the plain meaning of the words; If I have lifted up my hand against the
fatherless, that is, If I have threatened, injured, or oppressed the
fatherless, or any other poor helpless creature; when I saw my help in the
gate, that is, when I saw well enough that the magistrates would, either for
favor or fear, take my part, and save me harmless.

Verse. 22. Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be
broken from the bone.] That is, Let some horrible judgment fall upon me, worse
then all I have yet suffered; let me rot in pieces, or be torn in pieces; or
let the arm that has been so lifted up against the poor, rot off from my
body, or let it wither or be disjoynted, and become useless. That he wishes
to himself is much like that which befell Jeroboam, 1 Kings 13.4.

Verse. 25. If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because mine hand had
gotten much.] To wit, as ascribing all I had to mine own wit and industry. For
men to rejoice with thankfulness, when the Lord blesses them with a great
estate, is doubtless praiseworthy; Deuteronomy. 12.7. Ye shall rejoice in all that
you put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the Lord your God has
blessed you. But that which Job here protests against is, rejoicing in the
greatness of his wealth carnally, inordinately and immoderately, as those do
that set their hearts upon their wealth, as if all their happiness consisted
therein; or that give themselves to live therewith in all kind of
voluptuousness.

Verse. 26. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the moon walking in
brightness, etc.] Many later writers understand this allegorically, as a
protestation against pride and arrogance of spirit, or against confidence in
his great wealth and power, or in his own works and innocence of life; as first
thus, If I beheld the Sun when it shined, etc. that is, If mine heart has been
exalted, and my looks stately and lofty, because of my greatness, or
transcendent holiness, so that I scarce deigned to look downwards upon other
men, as deeming my self some little God, and fitter to live with the Sun and
Moon then with mortal man; or secondly thus, If I observed and viewed with
delight the lightsome and glorious condition wherein I lived, (as indeed
usually in the Scriptures a prosperous estate is expressed by light, and the
bright shining of the heavens upon men;) or thirdly thus, If I beheld my gold
glorious and glittering as the Sun, or my silver bright as the moon: And
accordingly also they understand the following words verse. 27. And my heart
has been secretly enticed, to wit, to exalt my self in this my great wealth
and glorious condition, or to put my confidence therein; or my mouth has
kissed my hand, namely, by way of applauding my self, or ascribing these things
to my self, to mine own industry, endeavors, or righteousness: And so also
that which follows, verse. 28. This also were an iniquity to be punished by the
judge; for I should have denied the God that is above; to wit, that if he had
thus gloried or trusted in his greatness, or wealth, or righteousness, or
ascribed them to himself, it would have been a manifest deny all of God, (and
consequently an iniquity to be punished by the judge:) and indeed we see that
accordingly the Apostle says, that Covetousness is Idolatry; and Agur, Prove.
30.8. having disclaimed the desire of a great estate, adds verse. 9. lest I be
full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? But yet first, because Job
speaks of the moons walking in brightness, which is certainly meant of the
moons constant motion in the heaven, and cannot well be understood
allegorically, and secondly, because a man's pride of heart, or confidence in
his wealth or righteousness is a sin, known only to him that searches the
heart, and cannot therefore be called an iniquity to be punished by the Judge;
I rather conceive that these three verses are to be understood literally,
concerning the Idolatry of worshipping the Sun and moon, etc. If I beheld the
Sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness, and my heart has been
secretly enticed, etc. that is, If when I beheld those glorious lights of
heaven, the Sun and Moon, shining in their full brightness, without the
interposition of any clouds, and hereupon, to wit, by viewing their exceeding
brightness, and by other considerations of the manifold benefits which men
enjoy by their means, my heart has been secretly enticed, that is, my heart
has been inwardly moved to adore them, as Gods; or my heart has been
persuaded to worship them in secret (which may seem the more probable
Exposition, because he speaks of an offense punishable by man;) or my mouth
has kissed my hand, to wit, by way of external adoration, as the heathens
used to do, kissing as it were the light of the Sun and moon upon their hands,
because they could not kiss the Sun and moon themselves, concerning which see
the Note 1 Kings 19.18: This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge,
(as he had said before verse. 11. concerning adultery, to which this word (
also) has reference) for I should have denied the God that is above; to wit,
by making Gods of those Creatures. This is, I conceive, the plain meaning of
these words. I know some Expositours limit that which is said of beholding the
Sun when it shined, and the moon walking in brightness, to the welcome and
pleasing brightness of the Sun at its first rising, and to the moons shining
when it is in the full; (and indeed the heathens used to worship the Sun at his
rising, as did also the Idolatrous Israelites in Ezekiels time, Ezekiel. 8.16.
they worshipped the Sun toward the East;) but I see not but that it may be
extended more generally to the worshipping of the host of heaven, when at any
time they shined in their brightness.

Verse. 29. If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lift up my
self when evil found him.] To wit, by insulting over him, and trampling upon
him. A man may lawfully rejoice at the ruin of his wicked enemies, if he does
it with respect to the glory of God, and the good of the Church, and other such
like holy respects; Psalm. 58.10. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the
vengeance. But that which Job here protests against is, rejoicing at the
destruction or hurt of his enemies out of private malice, and desire of
revenge: and so also the words of the following verse must be understood,
Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin by wishing a curse to his soul.

Verse. 31. If the men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh!
we cannot be satisfied.] A very difficult passage this is; insomuch that though
there be four different Expositions given of it, yet it is not very easy to
say which of them is the most probable. First, some hold that Job having in the
foregoing verses protested, that he had not rejoiced at the destruction of his
enemy, nor wished him any hurt, here he adds how far he was provoked to the
contrary, to wit, because those of his own household were so enraged against his
enemy, and so greedy to be revenged on him, that they said amongst themselves,
Oh that we had of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied; as if they should have
said, we could even tear him with our teeth, and eat his very flesh, and yet
that would scarce satisfy our rage: all which notwithstanding Job contained
himself, and was so far from being stirred up by his household, that he rather
restrained them, as David did his servants when they would have provoked him to
have slain Saul, 1 Samuel 24.5. Now concerning this phrase of not being satisfied
with eating his flesh, see the Note chap. 19.22. Secondly, some understand it
thus, that the love of those of Jobs household was so impetuous and vehement to
him, that they thought they could have eaten his flesh; so sweet and
delightful he was to them, that they could not be satisfied with enjoying his
presence, but seemed to desire even to have him within them. And indeed though
this Exposition may seem somewhat harsh, yet we know that it is not unusual
for men to say even in a way of love, Methinks I could eat thee: and many
learned Expositours do thus conceive of these words; for thus, say they, Job
implies here how good and amiable he was to those of his own household; and then
he adds, in the following verse, how good he was to strangers. Thirdly, others
again, on the contrary, hold, that Jobs intent in these words was to show, that
some at least even of his own household were ready to say, that they could out
of hatred to Job eat his flesh without being satisfied, and that because he did
so continually day and night overburthen them, and weary them with the
entertainment of strangers in his house: for this they say is premised with
relation to that which follows in the next verse, The stranger did not lodge in
the street, but I opened my doors to the traveller. And fourthly, others,
though they conceive also that these words are premised with respect to that
which follows in the next verse, concerning his frequent entertaining of
strangers, yet not thinking it probable that Jobs servants should be so
inhumane to so good and gentle a master, as to wish they might eat the flesh of
his body, do rather understand these words, his flesh, of the flesh provided
for the feeding of himself and his guests, If the men of my tabernacle said
not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied: as if they had said,
Strangers are fed daily with the flesh he provides for his food, but we that
are of his own household, have scarce leisure to taste of his provision; we are
so continually employed in providing for, and attending upon strangers, that we
have not so much leisure as to satisfy our hunger. And indeed this last seems
to me the best Exposition.

Verse. 33. If I covered my transgressions, as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in
my bosom.] There are some Expositours that would have the drift of these words
to be this, that he had not been guilty of any such transgressions, that he
should need to dissemble or conceal them, or cover them with a vizar of
hypocrisy. But the words do clearly profess this, that where he was in a
fault, he had not gone about to hide it, as Adam did, or as men naturally are
wont to do, to wit, by excusing or denying it. And thus he intimates, that
what he had said in his justification, was not because he judged himself free
from sin: No, he knew that he had many ways offended God, and wherein he was
guilty, he was always willing to acknowledge it.

Verse. 34. Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families
terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the door?] By the
contempt of families may be meant, either first, the most contemned in any
family, the meanest and basest amongst them, the scum of the people; or
secondly, the contempt which he had brought upon any families; or thirdly, any
families contemning of him. But which way soever we understand that expression,
the drift of Job in these words is very obscure; and yet, according to our
Translation, there are only two Expositions that have any probability in them:
as first, that Job spoke this with reference to that he had said in the
foregoing verse, concerning hiding his iniquities; affirming, that he did not
hold his peace, or keep within door, forbearing to acknowledge his sin, lest
his contemning of families should be known, or lest any other sin of his should
be divulged amongst the multitude, yea even amongst the rascal crew of the
people, and so he should be scorned and contemned, and become a by word amongst
all the families that lived about him, his offenses were not of that nature;
but that he was willing, if occasion had been, to have gone forth and confessed
them openly before all men, even the most despised of all the people: or
secondly, that Job here protests, that he did never out of base cowardice and
fearfulness neglect to do his duty; Did I fear a great multitude, or did the
contempt of families terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the
door? as if he should have said, No, I did not; I did never forbear to reprove
sin, to defend the oppressed, or otherwise to speak what I deemed just and
equal; I did never forbear to go forth and show my self, or I did never slink
out of doors, and go away from the place of judgment, for fear of an enraged
multitude, or for fear of being contemned by families incensed against me for
that which I did, though they were of never so considerable quality or number.
And this indeed is the Exposition that is most generally approved; only some
alter it a little thus, to wit, that he did not in these words deny that he
kept silence, and went not out of the door, but only that he did it not for
fear; if he did hold his peace, and went not forth, it was not out of
timerousnesse, but for some other reason, as because he judged that the patient
bearing of injuries was the best way to overcome them, or some such like
motives.

Verse. 35. Oh that one would hear me! etc.] That is, Oh that any one would
undertake as a Judge to hear me plead the cause between God and me! behold, my
desire is that the Almighty would answer me; that is, my desire sincerely is,
that God, who has seen and known all my ways, and discerns what the thoughts
and intentions of the heart are, would satisfy me when I desire to know why he
has so sorely afflicted me, and would answer the arguments I shall bring to
prove mine innocence: (concerning which see also the former Notes chap. 9.34,
35. and chap. 13.18, 19, etc.) and that mine adversary had written a book; that
is, that any adversary of mine had brought in his accusations and allegations
against me in writing, that so I might know them, and answer them, as I could;
for such it seems was the custom of those times in all judicial proceedings.

Verse. 36. Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to
me.] In the first words, of taking it upon his shoulders, some conceive that
Job alludes to the writings that used to be fastened on the shoulders of
malefactors, wherein the cause of their suffering was written in great
capital letters, that all men might read it; and so that his meaning therein
was, that he would be glad that all men might see what could be said against
him. Others hold, that he alludes to men's taking up and carrying on their
shoulders those things which they do dearly prize and esteem; and so that he
meant, that this book of accusations brought in against him he should highly
prize, and should esteem it as some choice treasure, not doubting but that
thereby his innocence would the more clearly appear. And lastly, others think
that he alludes to the custom of carrying Ensigns and scepters on men's
shoulders, or any other signs of men's dignity or victory, according to that
Esa. 22.22. And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; and
so that Jobs intent in these words was, to intimate, that he was confidently
persuaded that if his adversary had written such a book against him, it would
be an honor and a glory to him, and withal a certain trophee of his victory
over his adversary; and that because all the accusations brought in against him
would be so apparently found to be lies and calumnies: and indeed the last
words, and would bind it as a crown to me, do clearly hold forth this to be the
meaning.

Verse. 37. I would declare unto him the number of my steps, etc.] That is, To
him that should thus undertake to hear, and give judgment in my cause; or
rather, To this mine adversary that had written a book against me, I would
truly declare all that I know by my self, faithfully relating to him (if that
might be any way a help to him) the whole course of my life. As for the
following words, as a prince would I go near unto him, the meaning is, either
that he would draw near to him that would undertake to hear, and give sentence
in his cause, as subjects to their Prince, wholly submitting himself and his
cause to his judgment; or else secondly, that he would draw near to this his
adversary that had written a book against him, as to some great Prince, that
is, that he would honor and reverence him, and have him in high esteem, even
out of respect of the good he had done for him; or else thirdly, (which seems
most clearly expressed in our Translation) that he as a Prince would draw near
to this his judge or adversary, that is, freely and without fear, with an
heroical and undaunted spirit, as one that was no way self-condemned, but
desirous to hear the worst that could be alleged against him.

Verse. 38. If my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof
complain.] The following imprecation verse. 40. Let thistles grow in stead of
wheat, etc. shows plainly that Job meant this of land that was his private
possession, and not (as some would have it) of a land subject to his
government, which should cry against him, because of his tyrannizing over the
inhabitants; for so he should wish that his country might be cursed of God, if
he had oppressed his country, which is a most absurd conceit. It must needs
therefore be meant of the land of his possession, thus, If my land cry against
me, etc. to wit, because I have gotten it unjustly, or because I have oppressed
my tenants therein, or because I have overtoyled the husbandmen employed in the
husbandry thereof, or detained their wages from them.

Verse. 39. If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, etc.] That is, not
having duly paid for the land, or not having justly paid my husbandmen, etc. or
have caused the owners thereof to loose their life, that is, those that were
formerly the true owners of it, (by direct putting them to death, as Ahab did
Naboth, or by heartbreaking oppressions) or those that were the occupiers of it
under me, by oppressing them to their utter undoing: Then (verse. 40.) let
thistles grow in stead of wheat, etc.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse. 2. THen was kindled the wrath of Elihu, the son of Barachel the Buzite,
of the kindred of Ram, etc.] This Elihu was, it seems, one of those that stood
by, and had heard all the dispute betwixt Job and his three friends; and
because he misliked what he had heard from both parties, when he perceived that
Job had made an end of speaking, and that his friends were resolved to make no
farther reply upon him, he stepped up, and undertook to deliver his judgment,
and as it were to determine and compremise the controversy betwixt them. Now
in setting down this, first this Elihu is described by the family from which he
was descended, to wit, that he was the son of Barachel the Buzite, that is, of
the family of Buz, who was the second son of Nahor the brother of Abraham, by
his wife Milcah, Genesis 22.20, 21. (for that I judge far more probable, then
that which some say, that Barachel should be called the Buzite, because he was
of the province or city of Buz in Idumea mentioned Jer. 25.23.) and of the
kindred of Ram, that is, of Abram; and this I hold too more probable, (because
he was the brother of Nahor, and for his eminency like to be expressed,) then
that this Ram should be, as others would have it, some obscure man of the stock
of Nahor: all which I conceive is thus punctually expressed, partly for the
greater honor of Elihu, because he spoke more prudently concerning Jobs cause
then his three friends had done; and especially to make it the more evident,
that the story of Job here related was a true, not a devised story. Secondly,
the cause of Elihu's speaking is mentioned, to wit, that his wrath was kindled,
namely against both parties. And thirdly, the reason hereof here is
particularly expressed: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified
himself rather then God: not because he had maintained his own innocence and
integrity against his friends, but because, though not in express terms, yet
in effect, he had justified himself rather then God, that is, he had taken more
care to justify himself, then to justify God; and in his eagerness to justify
himself, had charged God with injustice, to wit, in that he had, giving way to
his passion, with much bitterness complained of Gods dealing with him,
charging him in a manner that he had laid upon him far greater punishments
then his iniquities had deserved, and so had oppressed him with his majesty and
power; and in that he had over-peremptorily called God as it were to an
account, and challenged him that he might be suffered freely to plead his
cause, and that God would answer him. And then again secondly, verse. 2. Also
against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they had found no
answer, and yet had condemned Job; that is, because they had condemned Job for
a wicked man and an hypocrite, and yet had proved nothing against him, nor had
given any satisfactory answer to that which Job had alleged to make good his
innocence. It is evident therefore, that Elihu's aim was to show both Job and
his friends too wherein they had erred; though indeed toward Job he carries
himself far more mildly and equally, then his three friends had done. Many
Expositours, I know, hold that Elihu does condemn Job as sharply and
insolently, as the other had; and accordingly they conceive, that for this God,
when he began to speak, checked Elihu, in those words chap. 38.2. who is this
that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? But first, because it will
be found far more probable, that God spoke those words to Job, and not to
Elihu, secondly, because it is evident that Elihu no where charge Job for
being a wicked man and an hypocrite, as his friends had done, and thirdly,
because chap. 42.7. where the Lord condemns the three friends of Job, he speaks
not the least word against Elihu; therefore I rather conceive, that Elihu's
speech is full of gentleness and prudence, and that he only blames him for his
unadvised speeches in pleading his own innocence; and that though he seems to
misconstrue some things that Job had spoken, yet because he did this also out
of a holy zeal for Gods glory, therefore God did not so much as take notice of
this, to charge it upon him.

Verse. 4. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, etc.] That is, till Job had
finished his last long reply in the foregoing chapters, and so consequently all
the time that he and his friends had been arguing one against another; and
therefore the reason that is added has reference to them all, because they
were elder then he.

Verse. 8. But there is a spirit in man, etc.] Some Expositours understand this
of the holy spirit of God, to wit, that this it is, and not years, that makes
men wise: which they say is again more clearly expressed in the following
clause, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding: as if he
had said, I expected that multitude of years should teach wisdom; but now I
perceive that it is only the spirit of God in men that gives wisdom where he
pleases, and that he gives it many times to the young and not to the aged. But
because the first clause is so general, there is a spirit in man, I rather
conceive it is meant of the reasonable soul in man, thus, But there is a spirit
in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding; that is,
Though age be an advantage for the getting of knowledge, yet there is a spirit
of reason, understanding and judgment, in one man as well as another, and it
is God that by the inspiration of his spirit gives wisdom, especially in
spiritual things, wherever he pleases.

Verse. 11. Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons, whilst
you searched out what to say.] That is, I waited patiently all the time you
were speaking, expecting you would allege something against Job, that should
clearly prove what you had affirmed, to wit, that he was a wicked man, and that
therefore God had laid his hand so heavily upon him; and finding that you
strained your inventions to the utmost, to find out what you might say against
him, I diligently attended, and observed the reasons and arguments that you
brought against him. Now hence Elihu would infer, that it was most equal
that they should patiently hear him, as he had heard them; and the rather,
because he had well weighed their speeches, and had not rashly judged that they
had not convinced Job, as they ought to have done.

Verse. 13. Lest ye should say, We have found out wisdom: God thrusts him
down, not man.] These words, Lest ye should say, I conceive, have reference to
that he had said in the foregoing verse, there was none of you that convinced
Job, or that answered his words: and so the meaning is, either that Elihu had
confidently affirmed, that none of them had convinced Job, lest they should
say, We have found out wisdom; or that their not being able to answer Job,
and so Jobs getting the better of them, was of God, to show them the weakness
of that argument whereon they grounded their accusation of Job, lest they
should say, We have found out wisdom. And then for the wisdom whereof he
gives them warning not to boast, though some understand it of the wisdom of
keeping silence, and not replying any more upon Job, Lest ye should say, We
have found out wisdom; God thrusts him down, not man, that is, Lest ye
should say, We have done wisely in giving over talking any farther with Job;
whereas you blame us, because we did not answer, we say it was a point of much
wisdom, not to argue any farther with a man so obstinate; and that because
God thrusts him down, and not man, that is, Gods hand has or will humble him
sufficiently, and so we need not farther press upon him, so to add affliction
to the afflicted: yet I rather think it is meant of the wisdom of his friends
former arguing against Job, Lest ye should say, We have found out wisdom; God
thrusts him down, not man; that is, Lest ye should say, However you, Elihu,
deny it, yet we have sufficiently enough convinced him, and that there is so
much wisdom in the argument we have alleged against him, that all the world
is not able to answer it, namely, that God, who is omniscient, and infinitely
just and wise in all his ways, has brought these miseries upon him, and not
man, who may be deceived, and may judge unjustly; and therefore were he not a
wicked man, God would never have punished him, at least in such an
extraordinary manner.

Verse. 14. Now he has not directed his words against me, etc.] This might be
alleged to imply, that it could not be therefore any discontent that he had
taken against Job, that moved him to speak, but that it was merely out of zeal
for God and for the truth, and because his friends had not answered him aright:
to which purpose also is that which follows, neither will I answer him with
your speeches, that is, I will not answer him with railing, reviling and
scornful language, as you have done; nor will I take that course to convince
him, that you have taken, to wit, by condemning him to be a wicked hypocrite,
because Gods hand is so heavy upon him. It is evident in the following
Chapters, that Elihu urges many things that the other three had objected
before: but this is only in the way of reproving him for his impatient
murmuring against God, and not thereby to prove him an hypocrite, as the other
had done. Neither was it doubtless without the secret counsel of God, that
when Jobs spirit was almost overwhelmed, with the rough usage and the
peremptory uncharitable censures of his other friends, he should now be
reproved by one in a juster and more gentle way, that so he might be brought to
see wherein he had indeed offended, and yet withal his sorrows might be a
little abated.

Verse. 15. They were amazed, they answered no more, etc.] Here Elihu turns
himself on a sudden from speaking to Jobs friends, to speak to Job himself
concerning them, or rather to the standers by: and by their being amazed may be
meant, either that indeed they were amazed to hear Job so confidently still to
maintain his integrity, or only that they were silent, as men that stand
astonished are wont to be. Neither does Elihu speak this by way of a
vainglorious insulting over the other three friends of Job, but only to show
how he was driven to speak: They were amazed, they answered no more; as if he
should have said, I appeal therefore to all that stand by, whether it be not
very strange, that such wise men should have nothing to say to one so faulty as
Job has been, and whether I be not now at last necessitated to speak.

Verse. 16. They spoke not, but stood still, etc.] That is, They proceeded no
farther.

Verse. 17. I will answer also my part, etc.] That is, Having afforded them, out
of respect to their years, liberty to speak, as long as they had any thing to
say, now I shall also, as I hope I well may, take my turn to speak.

Verse. 18. For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constrains me.] That
is, I have much to say, and inwardly my spirit is moved with such vehemence to
speak, that I can no longer forbear. Neither yet does Elihu here in a youthful
arrogance oppose his fullness to their emptiness, that had no more to reply
upon Job; but only to justify himself for speaking, he affirms that by his
zeal for God and for the truth, yea and perhaps by an extraordinary inspiration
of Gods holy Spirit, he was so strongly moved to speak, that he could hold no
longer. He compares himself to a woman in travel, that is pained to be
delivered, or to bottels that are filled with wine, as it follows in the next
verse.

Verse. 19. My belly is as wine which has no vent, it is ready to burst like
new bottels.] That is, like bottels filled with new wine; or, like bottels
which new wine will burst asunder, yea though they be new bottels, (for indeed
the older the bottels are, the liker they are to burst asunder, when they are
filled with new wine; according to that of our Savior, Matthew. 9.17. Neither do
men put new wine into old bottels; else the bottels break, and the wine runs
out, and the bottels perish: but they put new wine into new bottels, and so
both are preserved.) However, the meaning is, that he did inwardly in his mind
even swell as it were with a desire to speak, so that he could forbear no
longer. Usually in the Scripture what is done inwardly in a man, to wit, in his
mind, it is said to be done in the belly, as before chap. 15.35. their belly
prepares deceit: and so it is here, My belly is as wine which has no vent,
that is, my mind is ready to burst with a desire to utter what I have to say,
even as wine which has no vent.

Verse. 20. I will speak, that I may be refreshed.) That is, to ease my mind.

Verse. 21. Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person; neither let me give
flattering titles unto man.] As if he should have said, Do not desire I should,
or do not think I will, out of fear or favor to either side, speak any thing
but the downright truth. By giving flattering titles unto man may be meant,
first, the applauding of men with the fawning terms of holy, wise, just, only
to curry favor with them, when we know they no way deserve such titles: and
secondly, the going about the bush, as we use to say, when we are to reprove
any man, or any evil that we discern in man, the doing of this covertly, and by
secret insinuations, rather then with plain and express terms; as when Jobs
friends would not directly tell Job that he was a wicked hypocrite, and that
therefore God had so destroyed him, but only expressing themselves in general
terms, This is the place of him that knows not God, and, This is the portion
of a wicked man from God, did yet intentionally strike at him: and thirdly, the
mincing of the matter, when we come to tell men of their faults, using
favorable terms, and not setting forth their sins in their proper colors; as
when Eli did so gently reprove the horrible villainy of his sons, 1 Samuel 2.24.
Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear. Now in all these respects
Elihu protests against this giving of flattering titles.

Verse. 22. For I know not to give flattering titles.] That is, I am not skilled
in the way of flattery; I never used to take this course, but have been always
wont to speak my mind clearly and plainly.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 1. WHerefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, etc.] Having in the
foregoing Chapter blamed Jobs three friends, here he turns his speech to Job,
whom principally he desired to convince; and with much gentleness and modesty
he begs audience of him, that so he might the more willingly attend to what he
would say: and by pressing him to hearken to all his words, he implies, first,
that he would not utter an idle frivolous word, nothing but what was worth his
attending to; secondly, that if he did not attend to his whole discourse, but
only here and there a snatch, that would be no advantage to him; and thirdly,
that he desired he would not interrupt him, till he had fully declared his
mind, and then he might answer freely what he had to say.

Verse. 2. Behold, now I have opened my mouth, etc.] That is, now that upon due
deliberation I have begun to speak. See the Note chap. 3.1.

Verse. 3. My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart, etc.] That is, I
shall speak truly what I think, and with a sincere desire of your good, not out
of hatred or partiality: and my lips shall utter knowledge clearly; that is, I
shall utter nothing but what I know to be true, and shall make it clear and
evident to thee that it is so.

Verse. 4. The spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has
given me life.] Some Expositours conceive that the drift of these words is, to
satisfy Job, that there was no cause why he should not carefully attend to
what he had to say; The spirit of God has made me, etc. that is, God has made
me, and given me a reasonable understanding soul, as he has to others, (in the
expression here used, there seems to be an allusion to that which is said of
the first making of man, that the Lord breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life, Genesis 2.7.) and therefore you have no reason to despise my words, since to
me, though young, God may reveal the truth, as well as to another. But I rather
conceive the drift of the words to be this: Job had often wished that he might
plead his cause with God, as chap. 16.21. and chap. 23.3, 4, 5. and in other
places; but yet still upon this condition, that God would withdraw his hand,
and not overbear, and daunt, and oppress him with his Majesty and power, as we
may find it clearly expressed chap. 9.34, 35. and chap. 13.20, 21, 22. Now
therefore Elihu tells him, that he would undertake, as in Gods stead, to plead
with him; and says he, I am a man as thou art, with whom thou may plead upon
equal terms, and need not be afraid: which is again expressed more fully
verse. 6. Behold, I am according to thy wish in Gods stead; I also am formed out
of the clay; that is, according: to thine own desire, I in Gods stead will
undertake to maintain his cause, who am a poor earthly man, as thou art: and so
verse. 7. My terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy
upon thee; which are almost the very words that Job had used in the places
before cited.

Verse. 8. Surely thou have spoken in my hearing, etc.] As if he should have
said, I do not charge thee, as thy friends have done, with secret wickedness
and hypocrisy; that which thou have professed concerning the holiness of thy
life and conversation, I conceive is true: all that I lay to thy charge is, the
unseemly and unreverent speeches that thou have uttered concerning God in my
hearing, which I am sure thou can not deny.

Verse. 9. I am clean without transgression, etc.] We do not find that Job ever
said thus much in express terms: but Elihu meant this doubtless of those
words of Job, which he took to be the same in effect, as those chap. 10.7. Thou
know that I am not wicked, and 13.18, 19, Behold, now I have ordered my
cause, I know that I shall be justified: who is he that will plead with me?
etc. and many others of the like kind, as we may find chap. 13.23. and 16.17.
and 23.10, 11, 12. and 31.6. Now, however some. Expositours conceive that Elihu
did misinterpret Jobs words, making account that Job did directly indeed
maintain, that he was pure and free from sin, whereas he only meant by those
speeches to justify himself thus far, that he had not been a wicked man and
an hypocrite, as his friends affirmed, and consequently, that it was not for
any such grievous enormities of his life, that Gods hand had been so grievous
upon him: yet because Job had so often in the hearing of Elihu clearly affirmed
the contrary to this, to wit, that he was a vile unclean wretch in Gods sight,
and that he nor no man else could possibly be justified in this regard before
God, nor could be able to answer one of a thousand of that which God could
charge upon him: (as we see chap. 9.1, 2, etc. and chap. 14.4. and in many
other places,) I cannot think that Elihu meant to accuse Job for boasting in
this sense, that he was void of all sin, and that there was no iniquity in him:
but only that out of an over-eager desire to maintain his innocence against the
calumnies of his friends, he had talked so much of that, in his expostulations
with God for dealing so hardly with him, and in his frequent protestations how
earnestly he desired that he might plead his cause with God, as if he thought
himself perfectly pure and spotless, and that God could not in justice punish
him as he had done. So that it is not for thinking himself clear from sin, or
for maintaining his integrity against his friends, that Elihu here reproves
Job; but it is for his alleging of this in a way of impatience and murmuring,
to the impeaching of Gods justice. And therefore though Jobs other friends did
seem to object the same thing to Job, that Elihu does here, as we see in that
of Zophar, chap. 11.4. Thou have said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in
thine eyes, and in many other places; yet they did it upon different grounds:
For his three friends upbraided him for boasting of his righteousness, because
they judged he played the hypocrite herein, being in truth a wicked man; but
now Elihu expostulates with him for this, only because by pleading his
righteousness in that manner as he did, he did in effect charge God with
injustice. Nor can it therefore be said, but that Elihu still holds to what he
had said to Jobs friends, chap. 32.14. neither will I answer him with your
speeches.

Verse. 10. Behold, he finds occasions against me, etc.] This also which Elihu
here charge Job to have spoken, we find not any where in express terms; but
some passages there are, which he might take to be as much in effect, as if he
had said, Behold, he finds occasions against me: as where he said chap. 10.6.
thou inquire after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin; and chap.
14.16. thou numbrest my steps: do thou not watch over my sins? and some other
such like expressions. As for the next clause, he counts me for his enemy,
this we find that Job said of God several times, as chap. 13.24. and chap.
19.11: and so also that which follows in the next verse, He puts my feet in
the stocks, he marketh all my paths, we have it in express terms chap. 13.27.
However that which he condemns Job for in these speeches of his is, that out of
the opinion he had of his own righteousness, he durst so presumptuously
complain of God, as if he had dealt cruelly with him.

Verse. 12. Behold, in this thou art not just, etc.] As if he had said, I deny
not but that thou art a holy, just man, and have lived so strictly and exactly
as thou have spoken; nor do I blame thee generally for all that I heard came
from thee; that thou should bemoan thy self for thy miseries, is not strange
at all; and in many things I acknowledge thou have spoken very well, both
concerning God and concerning man: but in this, that because of thy righteous
life thou have thus murmured against God, in this, I say, I am sure thou can
not be justified: and to all thy pleas concerning thine own righteousness and
Gods severe dealing with thee, I will answer thee, and this one answer may well
serve for all, that God is greater then man, that is, infinitely greater in
majesty, wisdom, power, justice, mercy, and in every other respect. And
indeed this did necessarily imply how unreasonable a thing it was, that man
should contend with God, and quarrel against God; first, because there must
needs therefore be more wisdom, justice and mercy in God, then there can be
in man, whereas he that complains of Gods dealings with him, does in effect
conclude, that there is more wisdom, and justice, and goodness in him, then
there is in God; secondly, because man therefore cannot comprehend the ways of
God, and so there may be much wisdom, and justice, and mercy in his
proceedings, which we cannot discern; thirdly, because there being such an
infinite disproportion betwixt God and man, it must needs be great arrogance in
man to contend with God, as if he were his equal; if he had to do with a man
as himself, he could do no more; and fourthly, because this greatness of God
implies his sovereignty over man as his creature, in regard whereof he may do
with man what he pleases; and it must needs argue boldness in man to contend
with God, as if he had no such power and authority over him. Now whereas it may
be said that Jobs three friends had often pressed Job with this greatness of
God, and the baseness of man in comparison of God: to this I answer, that they
alleged this, to infer from thence, that therefore Job was certainly a
wicked man; God being so infinitely wise and just, would not else have punished
him so severely: but now Elihu alleges it upon a better ground, only to
convince him of his fault in murmuring against God, and pleading so
peremptorily with him as he had done.

Verse. 13. Why do thou strive against him? for he gives not an account of
any of his matters.] That is, He is not to be called to give a reason of what
he does: his will is a law most righteous, and it is reason sufficient, that it
is his pleasure it should be so. And thus he covertly reproves Job for
complaining so often, that God had not made known to him why he used him so
hardly; as chap. 10.2, I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; show me
wherefore thou contendest with me: and in many other places.

Verse. 14. For God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not.] As if
he had said, For the truth is, that God does sufficiently make known to men,
sometimes by one means, sometimes by another, why he punishes them, and what
it is he would have them do, though men, through the ignorance, or pride, or
security of their hearts, perceive it not. It cannot therefore be said, that
God forewarns them not; God speaks once, yea twice, that is, again and again,
by several ways and means. We have the same phrase Psalm. 62.11. God has
spoken once, twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God.

Verse. 15. In a dream, in a vision of the night, etc.] This is mentioned, as
one of the ways whereby God warns men of their sins, either before, or when he
afflicts them. Indeed in those days of Job, before God had given men his
written word, such divine revelations were the chief way whereby he made known
his will unto men: and besides, it is probable that Elihu has respect herein
to that which Job had said, chap. 7.14. thou scarest me with dreams, and
terrifiest me with visions.

Verse. 16. Then he opens the ears of men, etc.] That is, Then he reveals
his will to men, by showing them their sins, and what he would have them do;
and causes them to attend to what is discovered to them, as coming from God.
As for the following clause, and seals their instruction, I conceive the
meaning of it to be plainly this, that he causes that instruction which he
affords them in such dreams and visions, to be surely imprinted upon their
minds. Yet I know many Expositours do otherwise understand it: as first, that
when God has thus declared to them his will, and warned them of their sins by
dreams and visions, then he seals those instructions by following
corrections, that is, he confirms and makes good what he had so spoken, he
makes them see the certain truth of that which he had so revealed to them; or
secondly, that he drives home the instruction given them, by assuring them in
the same divine revelations, as certainly as if he gave it them under his hand
and seal, that if they will not receive instruction, judgment shall follow.

Verse. 17. That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.]
That is, that he may take man off from those sinful courses upon which he was
fully bent, and cure him of his pride, to wit, that pride which is the root of
all evil, that makes men exalt themselves to the contempt of God, as if they
might do what they pleased themselves. For then may pride be said to be hid
from man, when he cease to be proud, and there is no more pride to be found
in him, but he is humbled, being as one that is ashamed and confounded in
himself, and blusheth even to hold up his face before God.

Verse. 18. He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing
by the sword.] That is, And thus by bringing him to repentance, he saves him
from that temporal and eternal destruction, which otherwise would have fallen
upon him: for by the pit may be meant both the grave and Hell; and by the
sword, the sword of Gods vengeance, both here and hereafter.

Verse. 19. He is chastned also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his
bones with strong pain.] This is mentioned, as another way whereby God speaks
to man, as he had said before, verse. 14. to wit, by the rod of correction, when
God strikes a man with some sore sickness; so that the multitude of his bones,
that is, every bone in his body (as many as they are) is tortured with pain.
And this Elihu the rather mentions, because this was Jobs case, who had often
complained that his very bones were pierced with pain, as we may see chap.
30.17, and in many other places.

Verse. 20. So that his life abhors bread, etc.] That is, his soul, as it is
expressed in the next clause, and his soul dainty meat; and the soul, we know,
is usually put for the whole man: and so the meaning is only this, that the
poor sick man abhorres all meat, even the daintiest that can be brought him.

Verse. 22. His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the
destroyers.] Some by the destroyers understand those paroxysms and pangs that
seize upon men when they are dying, and are usually counted the forerunners of
death; others, the angels, whom God many times imployes in cutting off men by
deadly plagues, as in that pestilence wherewith so many were so suddenly
destroyed in David's time, 2 Samuel 24.16; others, the worms, or whatever else
there is in the grave, that consumes the dead bodies that are laid there; and
others again conceive it is meant of the devils, who are wont to drag the souls
of wicked men to hell, when they die, and to torment them there. But I conceive
it is best to comprehend therein all that in death tends to the destroying of
men.

Verse. 23. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one of a thousand,
etc.] Some understand this of an angel sent from heaven to this sick man, (and
indeed in those times God did usually make known his mind to men by his holy
angels,) to wit, that if of those thousands of angels that attend upon God,
there be any one sent to him as a messenger, and interpreter of Gods will, to
show unto man his uprightness, then he will be gracious unto him, etc. But it
is far better understood of a prophet or man of God, sent unto him from God,
an interpreter, that is, one whose office and work it is to declare the will of
God to men, and that is then accordingly to make known to the sick man the
purpose of God in laying that affliction upon him, one of a thousand, that is,
one that will skilfully and faithfully deal with him, (and amongst a thousand
such a one is hardly to be found,) to show unto man his uprightness, that is,
to show to the poor sick man, how he must come to be presented righteous and
upright in the sight of God, to wit, that he must acknowledge his sins, lay
hold upon the promises of mercy made unto him in Christ, and so repent and turn
unto the Lord. I know there are some that do otherwise expound the last clause,
namely thus, to show unto man his righteousness, that is, to clear it to the
sick man, that God has dealt justly and equally with him. But our Translation
will hardly bear that Exposition.

Verse. 24. Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down
into the pit, I have found a ransom.] This some understand of the messenger,
the interpreter mentioned in the foregoing verse, to wit, that he is gracious
to the sick man, and says, namely in his prayer to God for him, Deliver him
from going into the pit; I have found a ransom. For though the last words can
hardly be applyable to man, yet the meaning they say is only this, that the man
of God alleges, that knowing by the revelation of Gods spirit, that there is
a ransom in the blood of the promised Mediator for poor sinners, he knew also
that God would be pleased to accept of this ransom in the behalf of this
penitent sick man. But I conceive it is far better understood of God, to wit,
that he is gracious to this sick man, when his messenger has brought him to
repent, and believe in Christ: and that thereupon he says, Deliver him from
going down into the pit; the meaning whereof may be, either first that God
determines, that he shall be delivered from the grave whereinto he was
dropping, and withal from the pit of eternal destruction; or secondly, that
he gives charge to the angel sent to him, that he should deliver him from his
dangerous sickness; or thirdly, that he enjoynes the man of God to deliver
him, that is, to assure him, that he shall be delivered, both from his present
sickness, and from hell hereafter; and that because God has found out a
ransom for him, which can be meant of no other but the blood of Christ.

Verse. 25. His flesh shall be fresher then a child's, etc.] To wit, By reason of
the cure of his sickness, and the reviving of his spirit by his assurance of
Gods love to him in Christ.

Verse. 26. He shall pray unto God, etc.] Whether this be meant of the sick man's
praying before or after his recovery, (which is questionable, though the last
be more probable) it is mentioned, doubtless, as a comfortable effect of the
sick man's reconciliation with God, to wit, that then he can go with confidence
to the throne of Gods grace, which before he could not; and that then God shall
be favorable unto him in hearing his prayers, which before he regarded not.
And to the same purpose is the following clause, and he shall see his face with
joy; that is, he shall with boldness and comfort look God in the face, who
before was a terror to him: (though some I know understand it otherwise, to
wit, that God shall look cheerfully and favorably upon him.) And then the last
words allege again the cause of this comfortable change: for he will render
unto man his righteousness; that is, the righteousness which he had lost by
sin, shall be restored in Christ; or rather, God shall deal with him according
to that present righteousness of his, when upon his faith and repentance he is
reconciled unto God.

Verse. 27. He looks upon men, etc.] That is, God looks upon men, as
desiring, longing, and waiting for men's repentance and salvation: and if any
say, I have sinned, etc. and it profited me not, that is, all the good I got by
it was, that I provoked God to lay his hand in great displeasure upon me; then
(as it follows verse. 28.) he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and
his life shall see the light: the meaning whereof is principally, that God will
deliver such a man from the grave, that he may again live comfortably here in
this world; though it may be also extended to the deliverance of his soul out
of hell, and bringing him to the light of Gods glory in heaven. But now if we
read these verses as they are in the margin of our Bibles, He shall look upon
men, and say, I have sinned, etc. He has delivere my soul from the pit, etc.
then they contain the sick man's confession of Gods dealing with him; to wit,
that being recovered, he looks upon others with pity, and out of a desire of
their conversion should acknowledge how he had sinned, and did thereby bring
Gods hand upon him, and how upon his repentance God showed him mercy again.

Verse. 29. Lo, all these things works God oftentimes with man, etc.] That is,
all these means does he use, many times bringing man to the grave, and then
raising him up again; and all this he does to save him from death temporal and
eternal, as it follows in the next verse, To bring back his soul from the pit,
etc.

Verse. 31. If thou have any thing to say, answer me, etc.] Having in the
foregoing verse desired liberty, that he might yet farther speak his mind to
Job, he interposeth this, that notwithstanding, if Job had any thing to answer
to what he had said, he was very willing he should so do: Speak, says he, for
I desire to justify thee; that is, I had rather thou should be justified,
then condemned, if thou art able to clear thy self.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 1. FVrthermore Elihu answered.] That is, when he perceived that Job made
no reply, (for it may well be that he began now to be convinced) he proceeded
to answer what Job had formerly spoken.

Verse. 2. Hear my words, O ye wise men, etc.] Hereby Elihu sought to imply,
first, that what he had to say, the wisest of them might with profit hear: and
secondly, that he would not be his own judge, but was willing to appeal to the
standers by, at least to those that were wise amongst them, concerning the
truth of that which he should say.

Verse. 3. For the ear tries words, etc.] As if he had said, For that which Job
formerly said is true, that the ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat:
see the Note chap. 12.11.

Verse. 4. Let us choose to us judgment, etc.] That is, Let us not judge rashly;
but let us state the question rightly, and then argue the cause: not with angry
language, nor by alleging any thing, wherein our consciences may tell us we do
misinterpret Jobs words, or merely cavil with him, or build upon uncertain
conjectures; but by clear and certain truths; and so let us choose and upon good
deliberation resolve upon that which is just and equal: Let us know among our
selves what is good, namely, whether Job or I be in the right.

Verse. 5. For Job has said, I am righteous, etc.] The same in effect he
objected against Job in the foregoing chapter verse. 9. (concerning which see
the Note there.) As for the following clause, and God has taken away my
judgment, this we find Job spoke in express terms chap. 27.2. But yet,
neither did Job intend thereby to charge God with punishing him unjustly,
(concerning which see also the Note there;) for then he had directly
blasphemed, and the Devil had gotten his will of him: nor do I think that Elihu
intended to charge him with this blasphemy, as his friends had done, as we may
see chap. 8.2, 3. and elsewhere. For Elihu judged more favorably of him, and
had professed before, chap. 32.14, that he would not answer him as they had
done. No; all that Elihu charge him with is, that by his pleading the
innocence of his life with such vehemence, and by his impatient complaints of
his sufferings, and of the Lords not discovering to him the reason thereof, he
did in a manner imply, that God had dealt unjustly with him.

Verse. 6. Should I lie against my right? etc.] Some Expositours say, that Elihu
in these words charge Job with saying, that God would have had him lie
against his right, or that unless he would do so he might not be suffered to
speak. But methinks he does plainly allude to that which Job had said, chap.
27.4, 5, 6, where he protested that he would not against his conscience condemn
himself. As for the next clause, my wound is incurable without transgression,
that Elihu seems to have gathered from that which Job said, chap. 6.4, and
9.17; concerning which see the several Notes there.

Verse. 7. What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning like water?] That is,
who scorneth and reproacheth not man only, but God too, with as much
greediness and delight, as thirsty men drink water, which neither for the
costlinesse of it, nor for the strength of it, they need drink sparingly. The
like expression we had before chap. 15.16. concerning which see the Note there.
Yet I know there are diverse learned Expositours that understand this otherwise;
to wit, that there was never man like Job, of such wisdom, and gravity, etc.
that by speaking such absurd and ridiculous things, did so expose himself to
the scorn and derision of all men, as if he were glad to swallow down all the
reproaches and scorn that could be cast upon him.

Verse. 8. Which goes in company with the workers of iniquity, etc.] That is,
Who carries himself so, as if he would be numbered amongst wicked men; because
he treads in their steps, and uses their language, whilst in the mean season
he stands so much upon his innocence and righteousness.

Verse. 9. For he has said, It profits a man nothing that he should delight
himself in God.] This Elihu would gather from those words of Job, wherein he
maintained that God does often afflict the righteous as sorely as the wicked,
and prosper the wicked as much or more then the righteous, as we may see chap.
9.22, and 21.7, etc. as likewise from those complaints of his, that God had
dealt so severely with him, who had yet endeavored in all things to approve
himself to God. Yet I conceive the utmost that Elihu intended here to charge
upon Job was, that by uttering these things in such an impatient manner, he
seemed to think that it was no advantage to a man to live holily and
righteously; not that he did indeed think so, or had in express terms said
so. Many things Job had spoken, wherein he had so clearly expressed his hope
and confidence in God, that Elihu could not have so hard an opinion of him:
only God would have Job reproved thus sharply, that he might see how much evil
there was in his murmuring against God.

Verse. 13. Who has given him a charge over the earth? or who has disposed the
whole world?] This is added, to prove what he had said in the foregoing verses,
namely, that there was no possibility that God should deal unjustly with any
man. Who has given him a charge over the earth? etc. as if he should have
said, God is of himself the supreme Judge and Governor of the whole world, as
being the sole Creator of it; he is not appointed thereto by any other Power
that is above him, who should give him in charge how he should govern the
earth, nor has he any counselor; but as in making he alone disposed all
things as they are, so he only disposes of them by way of Providence and
government, and therefore he cannot judge unjustly. And indeed the inference is
unquestionable, upon these three grounds. First, because there being none above
him, there is no danger lest he should deal unjustly, through being constrained
or overawed by any higher power, as amongst men inferior magistrates often
do. Secondly, because if there were none to give him a charge over the earth,
there was none whom he could offend in not following his charge; he was
absolute in his power, and might do with his own creatures what he pleased,
there being none that could say, Why have you done thus? I gave you no such
command. And thirdly, because the supreme Judge of the world, from whom there
can be no appeal, must needs be just by his nature and essence; or else there
were no assurance but that all things might be brought into utter confusion.

Verse. 14. If he set his heart upon man, etc.] To wit, to observe exactly all
that he does amiss, or, to destroy and cut him off: if he gather unto himself
his spirit and his breath, that is, if he call back to himself that soul, life
and breath, which he, as the fountain of life, has severally imparted to the
sons of men; (the phrase here used is much like that Psalm. 26.9. Gather not my
soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men;) all mankind must needs then
perish at once, and turn to dust, as it follows in the next verse, All flesh
shall perish together, etc. But why is this here alleged, how easily God can
in an instant destroy all mankind? I answer, farther to clear what was employed
in the foregoing verse, by affirming that God had no power above him, that had
committed to his charge the government of the world, but that the absolute
sovereignty thereof as he was the Creator of it was solely in himself, namely,
that God is most just, and cannot do wrong to any man whatsoever; (and that
upon the three grounds alleged in the foregoing Note,) as likewise also that
he is infinitely good and gracious, and cannot be cruel and tyrannical, as is
evident by his gracious supporting and continuing all things in their being so
long as he has done, whereas he could so easily in a moment bring all to
nothing.

Verse. 16. If now thou have understanding, hear this; hearken to the voice of
my words.] As if he had said, As thou art therefore an understanding man, Job,
observe this that I have spoken, and hearken to what I shall farther say.

Verse. 17. Shall even he that hates right, govern?] That is, If God be not
just, how can he govern the world? It is not possible that God should be
unjust, who is by his Nature and Essence the Judge of all the world, and has
absolute sovereignty over all things, and is to punish those that deal unjustly
with others. See the foregoing Notes, verse. 13, 14.

Verse. 18. Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art wicked? etc.] That is, It is a
thing both unseemly and unsafe to revile Kings and Princes, though men as our
selves, because God has made them his Vicegerents, and they are armed with
such power to take vengeance on them that do it; and must it not needs be then
an act of much more boldness and danger to speak evil of God himself? This
does not therefore prove, that those that are lawfully called thereto, may not
in a decent manner tell the greatest of princes of their faults: for the
prophets of God have done so to kings, Hos. 5.1; and there is a woe denounced
against them, that in a way of flattery do call evil good, Esa. 5.20. All that
can be rightly inferred from hence is, that it is dangerous to tax earthly
kings of the evil they have done, or at most that it is not lawful to revile
them, which indeed the law of God forbids, Exodus 22.28.

Verse. 20. In a moment shall they die, etc.] To wit, the Princes and rich men,
of whom he had said, in the foregoing verse, that God accepts not their
persons, nor regards them any more then the poor; God destroys them both
alike: and therefore it follows, and the people shall be troubled at midnight,
and pass away; that is, troubles shall come upon them, and so they shall be
surprised with terrors, when they are secure, and think nothing of any danger;
and shall pass away, to wit, into captivity, or rather into the grave; (for so
this phrase is used before, chap. 14.20.) and the mighty shall be taken away
without hand, that is, easily or without any humane help. God needs not raise
any armies, or employ his servants to destroy his enemies, as earthly princes
must do; he can do it by the ministry of angels; or if he does but blow upon
them, or withdraw the spirit that he has given them, it is enough.

Verse. 23. For he will not lay upon man more then right.] That is, he will not
lay to their charge any evil they are not guilty of, or rather, he will not lay
upon them any heavier punishment then their iniquities deserve.

Verse. 24. He shall break in pieces mighty men without number.] This is added
to show, that when God resolves to destroy men, he fears their number no more
then their greatness.

Verse. 25. Therefore he knows their work, and he overturneth them in the night,
etc.] That is, Hereby it is evident that he knows their works, and
consequently, that according to their deserts he cuts them off on a sudden,
when they think not of it, without any warning given, and without trying them
after the manner of earthly Judges.

Verse. 26. He strikes them as wicked men in the open sight of others.] As if
he should have said, Be they never so great, and in place of magistracy, the
Lords Vicegerents, yet being wicked men, and he knowing them to be so,
(whatever they may say, or others may think to the contrary) he accordingly
proceeds against them as wicked men, and punishes them openly, that others
may take warning.

Verse. 29. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he
hides his face, who then can behold him? etc.] Some understand the first
clause of Gods giving quietness to the oppressed, to wit, that if God will
give them rest by cutting off their oppressors, no power of man is able to
withstand it: and others again understand it of the Lords giving quietness to
the oppressors, to wit, that as long as God will have them run on in those
ways without molestation, no man shall be able to raise any trouble against
them. But I think it is better to understand it generally, that it is not
possible to trouble those whom God will have to be quiet, whether it be meant
of inward peace of conscience, or of outward peace and tranquillity; as on the
contrary, if God hides his countenance in displeasure, it is not possible to
turn away his displeasure, that so his face may be beheld with peace and
favor: whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only; that is,
and herein it fares alike, whether it be against one particular person, or
against a whole nation. I know that there are some Expositours that do
otherwise understand that clause, and when he hides his face, who then can
behold him? namely, that it is not to be expected, that any man will with a
favorable countenance behold him, from whom God hides his face; or, that if
God will not discover why he punishes men, no man can find out the reason of
it. But the first Exposition I conceive is the best.

Verse. 30. That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.] By the
hypocrite here is meant the oppressing King or ruler; and he is so called,
because such Princes do usually pretend that they seek only the good and safety
of the people, whereas indeed they mind themselves only, and the advancing of
their own covetous and ambitious designs, and make use of laws only as snares
to entangle the people. Having spoken in the foregoing verse of the
unavoidablenesse of Gods indignation, whether it be done against a nation, or
against a man only, here he instanceth how and why God is offended, and
proceeds accordingly, sometimes against one particular person, namely, when he
cutteth off some tyrannizing king; That, says he, the hypocrite reign not,
lest the people be ensnared: that is, lest the people should be still
continually ensnared, injured and oppressed, as they had too long before been;
or, lest the people should be ensnared with a thought that God regards not the
wickedness of men, by seeing such hypocritical oppressors run on in their
base courses without being punished: for so some understand the last clause.

Verse. 33. Should it be according to thy mind? etc.] That is, must not God do
any thing, but as you will advise him? must you prescribe God when, in what
manner, and how long he shall afflict you? He will recompense it, whether thou
refuse, or whether thou choose, and not I: that is, he will render to thee
according to the evil thou have done, whether thou be pleased or displeased;
whether thou do refuse the punishment he inflicteth, or whether thou do
accept of it, it is all one for that, he will do what he lists himself; nor
must I think of prescribing him what course he shall take with thee: for so
those words and not I must be understood. Therefore, says he, speak what thou
know; if thou have any thing to reply, speak freely.

Verse. 36. My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end, because of his
answers for wicked men.] That is, because of his answers whereby he has as it
were justified wicked men, to wit, by murmuring against God as they do, or by
affirming that good and bad fare alike, and God prospers the one as much as the
other. But what is meant by this desire of his, that Job may be tried unto the
end? I answer, that either his desire was, that God would continue his
afflictions upon him, till he had gotten the day of him, till he had attained
the end for which he afflicted him, namely, till he had brought him upon his
knees, and made him confess his fault, and yield under his hand, (and if we
understand it so, the words may well be read, as in the margin, speaking to
God, My father, let Job be tried unto the end, etc.) or else rather, (because
it seems somewhat hard that Elihu should tell Job, that his judgment was, that
his afflictions should be continued still upon him) that his desire was that
Jobs cause should be argued to the utmost, till he had not a word more to say
for himself.

Verse. 37. For he adds rebellion unto his sin, etc.] To wit, by murmuring and
quarrelling against God, when he punishes him for his sin, and by justifying
himself in the evil he has spoken: he clappeth his hands amongst us, to wit,
as some expound it, by way of anger and impatience at Gods dealing so hardly
with him, or rather, as by way of rejoicing and triumphing; and so the meaning
is, that he did openly before all their faces carry himself, as if he had
prevailed both against God and his friends in point of justifying himself.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse. 1. ELihu spoke moreover, and said.] See the Note chap. 34.1.

Verse. 2. Think thou this to be right, that thou saidest, My righteousness
is more then Gods?] We no where find that Job said this in so many words, nor
can it be imagined that Elihu could entertain such a thought of so righteous a
man as he took Job to be, that he should be so mad as to think that he was more
righteous then God: his meaning therefore was only this, that whilst he did so
confidently plead his own righteousness, and so bitterly complain of Gods hard
dealing with him, as chap. 19.6, 7. and chap. 23.3. and in many other places,
it was as much in effect as if he had said, that he was more just then God;
which he urges, that he might be the more ashamed of his impatience.

Verse. 3. For thou saidest, what advantage will it be unto thee? etc.] That is,
Thou saidest that it would be no advantage to thee, if thou were clear from
sin; as it follows in the next clause, where this is expressed, as it were, in
Jobs own words, and what profit shall I have if I be cleansed from my sin?
According to the usual form of interrogations, the first clause should also
have been expressed thus, what advantage will it be unto me? as is the second,
and what profit shall I have? etc. but in the Hebrew the persons are thus
usually changed. However the meaning is, that because he had said that it would
be no benefit to him, though he were never so righteous, God laying his hand as
sorely upon the righteous as upon the wicked, herein he made himself more
righteous then God. The very same Elihu had charged Job with chap. 34.9.
concerning which see the Note there.

Verse. 4. I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.] That is, thy three
friends, who by their silence seem now at length to be convinced, and to
consent to that which thou have spoken; or rather, all those that are thy
companions in these courses, wherein thou art so faulty, all that shall stand
upon such high terms of justifying themselves, and quarrelling against God, as
thou have done, though they be never so many. This last I conceive Elihu
intended, because it is clear, that Eliphaz had alleged the very same thing
against Job chap. 22.2, 3, which Elihu does here in the following words verse.
6, 7.

Verse. 5. Look unto the heavens, and see, and behold the clouds that are higher
then thou.] The drift of these words is to imply, first, that by beholding the
heavens, and considering the exceeding height thereof, yea even of the clouds,
though nothing so high as the heavens, he might see, first, that God was
infinite in all his excellencies, and therefore must needs be more righteous
then he was; secondly, that in regard God was of such infinite Majesty and
glory, it was fit that he should consider the infinite distance and
disproportion that was betwixt God and him, and so speak more modestly and
reverently of God* and thirdly, that if the heavens be so far above man's
reach, so high above him, that he can scarce see so far, then must God be
above his reach too, who has the heaven for his throne, Psalm. 11.4. his
dewlling place, 1 Kings 8.30. yea much rather must God be above his reach, who
is infinitely higher then the highest heavens: and so this makes way to that
which follows, that man therefore can neither hurt God by his wickedness, nor
benefit God by his righteousness, verse. 6, 7. If thou sinnest, what do thou
against him? etc. whereby he intimates to Job, that he had no cause to
complain, that his piety toward God and man was not regarded by God, since God
received no advantage thereby. The very same argument Eliphaz had used before,
chap. 22.2, 3. concerning which see the Notes there.

Verse. 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness
may profit the son of man.] That is, thy wickedness may hurt thy self, or such
sinful poor wretches as thou art, both in regard of their outward condition
and spiritual estate; and so also thy righteousness may benefit thy self or
others; but they cannot hurt or benefit God. And hereby he intimates, that Job
had no cause to complain that his righteousness was not regarded of God,
seeing it could be no advantage to him; nor to complain of his punishing him,
since God never punished man, because of any harm he had received by him, but
because he did not do what be enjoined him.

Verse. 9. By reason of the multitude of oppressions, they make the oppressed
cry, etc.] Some conceive that this is here added, to show the reason why God
often punishes men, though their wickedness is no way hurtful to him; to
wit, because it is hurtful to others, (as he had said in the foregoing verse;)
and so for this, as a just judge, he takes vengeance on them. But the better
connection of the words to that which went before I conceive to be this, that
having said in the foregoing verse, that man's wickedness may be hurtful to
men, though not to God, he here gives an instance of the hurt that man by his
wickedness does to others, namely, that tyrants do sorely oppress those that
are under their power: and so withal he takes occasion to show, that however
the oppressor be unjust, yet God is just, in suffering the oppressed thus to
cry under the hand of the oppressors, and not sending them help; and that
because though the oppressed howl and take on because of their pressures, they
cry out (says he) by reason of the arm of the mighty, yet they do not seek to
God, as they ought to do, as is expressed in the following verses. And thus
also there is an answer given to that which Job seemed often to complain of, to
wit, that God regards not the cries of the oppressed, as we see chap. 24.12.
and in diverse other places.

Verse. 10. But none says, Where is God my maker, that gives songs in the
night?] This is alleged as a reason, why though men under oppression do cry
out and take on grievously, as was said in the foregoing verse, yet God does
not regard it; (as Elihu says afterward verse. 12.) to wit, because for the
most part they do not say, Where is God my maker? etc. the meaning whereof is,
either that they are not thankful to God for the mercies and comforts they
enjoy, yea even in the midst of their greatest afflictions; or else, that
though they cry and howl because of their misery, yet they do not pray to God
for help, (for these words, Where is God my maker? seem rather an expression of
prayer, then of praise, according to that of Elijah, 2 Kings 2.14. where is the
Lord God of Elijah? at least they do not pray unto him in the right manner,
according to that expression, Hos. 7.14. they have not cried unto me with their
heart, when they howled upon their beds; they do not pray as those that
seriously consider that God is their maker, and therefore do believe that God
will take care of them, and are willing to submit themselves to his disposing:
and that God gives songs in the night; that is, either first, that he only can
give joy, even unto singing, in the darkest night of tribulation, stirring them
up by his spirit to praise him, when nothing is to be seen to quicken them in
this service; or secondly, that in the night season he gives them occasions of
rejoicing and praising God, in that he gives them rest, and watches over them
for their safety, when they are as dead men, not minding God; or thirdly, that
he comfort and cheareth up their spirits, even in the night, when men are
most exposed to dangers, and sorrow is wont to lie heaviest upon the heart, and
so they take the opportunity of the night season, when they are freest from
worldly cares and employments, with hymns and Psalms to praise God; whence is
that of David, Psalm. 119.62. At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee,
and Psalm. 42.8. the Lord will command his loving-kindnesse in the day time, and
in the night his song shall be with me. I know some Expositours have other
thoughts concerning this phrase of Gods giving songs in the night; as that it
is meant of Gods causing the cocks to crow, and nightingales to sing in the
night; or of his placing the stars to shine in the night, which in their kind
do praise God, or stir up men to praise him; or of Gods giving prophecies and
revelations by night, which used afterward to be expressed in songs. But the
former Expositions are far the better.

Verse. 11. Who teaches us more then the beasts of the earth, etc.] To wit, in
that he has endued men with reasonable souls, and accordingly makes known his
will to them many several ways. Now this is mentioned, as another argument,
whereby those that are under oppression should be stirred up to be thankful to
God, or rather with faith to call upon God for help; which if they did not do,
it was no wonder though God did not help them: and that not only because this
is a singular blessing to man, above all that God has done for the other
creatures; but also because in this regard man is able to search into the cause
of his sufferings, and to use means to appease Gods anger, and not only to do
what beasts may do, namely, to cry out to no purpose in the sense of the
miseries which they lie under.

Verse. 12. There they cry (but none gives answer) because of the pride of evil
men.] That is, Being crushed by the arm of their mighty oppressors, (as is
said before verse. 9. whereto this has reference) there or then they cry out,
because of the pride or insolency of wicked men that thus tyrannize over them;
but God regards not their cries.

Verse. 13. Surely God will not hear vanity, etc.] That is, God will not hear
vain ungodly men, men void of all true piety: or, God will not hear vain cries
and complaints, or the vain prayers of those that pray not in faith, whose
prayers are mere lip-labor, and a mere mocking of God, and therefore no way
likely to prevail with God. As for the next clause, neither will the Almighty
regard it, we may refer it either to such cries and prayers, that God will
not mind such vanity; or else to their sufferings, which make them cry and
pray, that though they be in never so much misery, he will not regard it.

Verse. 14. Although thou say, thou shall not see him, etc.] That is, thou
shall not be suffered to appear before him to plead thy cause, (which may have
respect to that which Job said chap. 23.8, 9.) or that thou shall perish, and
shall never see God come in graciously for thy preservation; (and indeed Job
had often complained that God regarded him not, as chap. 30.20, and in many
other places) yet judgment is before him, that is, God is exactly just, assure
thy self of that; though we may not happily discern it in all he does, yet he
does nothing unjustly: and therefore trust thou in him, that is, pray to him in
a right manner, and then wait upon him with assured expectation of a gracious
answer.

Verse. 15. But now, because it is not so, he has visited in his anger; yet he
knows it not in great extremity.] That is, Because Job prays not to God,
and trusts not in God, as he ought to do, therefore God has afflicted him
in great anger; and yet Job, though he be in so great extremity, understands
not Gods meaning herein.

Verse. 16. Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain; he multiplyeth words
without knowledge.] That is, whilst he prays not, but only complains of his
miseries, and all the while justifies himself, all this is spoken ignorantly,
and to no purpose.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse. 1. ELihu also proceeded.] See the Note chap. 34.1.

Verse. 2. Suffer me a little, etc.] Hereby he intimates, that he would be brief
in what he had farther to say for the justifying of God; and that because he
had already spoken a long time together.

Verse. 3. I will fetch my knowledge from afar, etc.] As if he should have
said, In declaring what I know concerning the Question in hand, namely, whether
thou have done well in charging God for dealing too severely with thee, I will
open the matter, as it were, from the very foundations. But yet what he means
by these words, from afar, it is not easy to determine. Some think that his
meaning was, that he would utter nothing but what by inspiration from God he
knew to be so: he would not speak what he in his reason might apprehend to be
right, but what he had by special enlightening from above, and therefore was
sure it was true. And then again, others understand it thus, that he would
fetch his proofs for the justifying of God from the eternal nature of God, or
from the works of creation, as we see toward the end of this chapter he argues
from those meteors of rain, thunder, and lightning, etc. and these things he
calls knowledge from afar, either because the things he meant to speak of
were of a high nature, far remote from us, and not easily comprehended by
humane reason; or, because they were such things as had been from the first
creation, yea (as concerning the nature of God) from all eternity; or, because
they might seem to be far from the matter in question, though indeed they
were principles and general grounds, from whence that truth, which he was to
maintain, might be unquestionably concluded and proved. As for the following
clause, and will ascribe righteousness to my maker; in these words my maker
Elihu implies, that in regard he had his being from God, he was bound to plead
his cause; and withal he might intend thereby, covertly to charge Job with
being ungratefully injurious to his Creator.

Verse. 4. For truly, my words shall not be false; he that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee.] This last clause many good Expositours understand of
God; and so hold that Elihu does hereby put Job in mind, either that he had to
deal with God, who was perfect in knowledge, as being omniscient, who could not
therefore through any mistake deal unjustly with him; or that God, who was
perfect in knowledge, spoke now to him by him, that he would not speak any
thing of his own head, but what he received by inspiration from God, in whose
stead he now spoke unto him. But more generally it is held, that Elihu does
modestly here speak of himself in the third person, as the Apostle also does 2
Cor. 12.2, 3. He that is perfect in knowledge is with thee; as if he should
have said, You have one to argue with you that is found in judgment, and
sincere in his intentions toward you, one that understands the cause we have
in hand thoroughly, and that will in all things deal uprightly with you.

Verse. 5. Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any: he is mighty in
strength and wisdom.] How Gods justice may be proved from his power and
wisdom, see in the Note chap. 9.4. Here these two are joined together, God is
mighty, and despises not any, to show, that as he needs not fear those that
are great, so neither does he despise either great or small, because of his own
supereminent greatness, he makes not so light esteem of any, as therefore to
afflict them causelessly, or not to care what injury he does them. And herein
also it may well be, that Elihu had respect to some speeches of Jobs, wherein
he might apprehend that Job had complained of God, that he carried all by his
absolute power, and that by reason of the dread thereof he could not plead his
cause before him; as chap. 10.3. Is it good unto thee that thou should
oppress? that thou should despise the work of thine hands? and chap. 30.21.
Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou opposest thy self
against me; and in diverse other places.

Verse. 6. He preserves not the life of the wicked; but gives right to the
poor.] That is, He does not safeguard them in favor, as esteeming them
precious in his sight, though he may see cause to keep them alive for a time;
but he pleads the poors cause against them, though a while he may let them be
oppressed.

Verse. 7. He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, etc.] That is, He
never forgets, nor forsakes them: but with Kings are they on the throne, yea he
does establish them for ever; that is, he continues them even unto death in
those places of dignity whereto he has advanced them, and often too their
children after them. As for the last clause, and they are exalted, the meaning
of that is, either that thus they are exalted, maugre all opposition that may
be made against them; or, that being thus advanced, they rise in power and
glory still more and more. Some understand it of their exaltation to heavenly
glory after death, and others of their being puffed up in their minds and
spirits: but the former Expositions are more probable.

Verse. 8. And if they be bound in fetters, etc.] That is, If the righteous,
whether those that God had exalted or others, come to be straightened with
affliction. It is probable that he alludes to that expression of Jobs, Thou
put my feet in the stocks, chap. 13.27.

Verse. 12. But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, etc.] That is,
God shall slay them in his anger; and they shall die without knowledge, that
is, in their folly, not knowing why Gods hand is upon them; or for their folly,
because they would not learn by Gods corrections. Yet most probably it is
thought by some, that Elihu still speaks here of the just, mentioned before
verse. 7. who indeed may be cut off by death for their folly, according to that
of the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.30, 31, 32. for this cause many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep; and that he speaks not of the wicked till the
following verse.

Verse. 13. But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, they grow more and more enraged against God. But rather the
meaning is, that they by their obstinacy and sinning more and more, yea even in
their afflictions, do treasure up wrath to themselves against the day of wrath:
they cry not when he binds them; that is, they call not upon God when he
afflicts them, as not acknowledging that God does punish them for their sins,
or being every way of irreligious and profane spirits.

Verse. 14. They die in youth, and their life is among the unclean.] Or, among
the Sodomites. The meaning is, that their life is cut off after the same
manner, as those are cut off that are most hateful to God and man, as being
most abominably wicked; namely, that they are punished with as much severity,
and are cut off by some vile and shameful death, and that in their young
years. And indeed some Expositours conceive that this last is solely intended
in these words; and so they conceive that the same thing that is affirmed in
the first clause, they die in youth, is repeated again in other terms in the
second clause, and their life is among the unclean, that is, they are cut off
amongst such as themselves, wanton youngsters, that live in all kind of
uncleanness. And some think also, that Elihu has reference in these words to
the destruction of Sodom.

Verse. 17. But thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked, etc.] That is,
thou have carried thy self as wicked men use to do, thy course has been just
like theirs; or, thou have judged as wicked men use to do, in censuring the
ways of Gods Providence toward thee. It seems to be the same in effect with
that which he had said before, chap. 34.8. that Job went in company with the
workers of iniquity: whereupon he adds, judgment and justice take hold on
thee; as if he should have said, you see what you get by speaking so
desperately of God; the just indignation of God has already seized upon thee.

Verse. 18. Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his
stroke.] That is, Because thou have shown such wrath and indignation against
God; or rather, Because, though God be very long-suffering and patient, yet
there is wrath with God, as well as mercy and patience; or, because Gods wrath
is already broken forth upon thee, take heed that thou do not provoke him
farther, even to the cutting of thee off.

Verse. 19. Will he esteem thy riches? no not gold, nor all the forces of
strength.] That is, As thou can not by thy wealth, so neither by any force or
strength be delivered, when once thou art cut off, or when once God has
determined to cut thee off.

Verse. 20. Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place.] There
are several Expositions given of these words, which being considered apart by
themselves the words would well enough bear: as first, that Elihu counsels Job
that he should not desire the night, as thieves and robbers do, that he might
do mischief therein, when poor men are usually cut off in their places, by
those that unexpectedly break in upon them: secondly, that he advises him not
to desire the night of other men's afflictions and tribulations, that taking
advantage thereof he should cut them off in the places where they live:
thirdly, that he calls upon him not to desire the night, as thinking to find
thereby some ease in his miseries, since there is no looking for ease, as long
as God is angry with him; and God even in a night does often cut off whole
nations, at least many people together, and therefore may easily cut off him:
and fourthly, that he wills him not to desire the night, that is, not to desire
to know the night, when people are cut off in their place; not curiously to
enquire into the cause of that judgment of God, when in a night sometimes
whole nations or multitudes of people are cut off in their place, they need not
be driven forth, or scattered abroad into strange countries, they melt away in
their own place: and hereby he would intimate, that Job should not make so
strange of it, nor be so eager to know, why he being a good man should be so
sorely afflicted. But because in the foregoing verses Elihu had warned Job to
take heed, that he did not provoke God utterly to cut him off, therefore I
rather think this to be the meaning of the words, Desire not the night, when
people are cut off in their place; that is, Desire not death, which is the
common passage of all men, and by the stroke whereof men are utterly cut off,
and so if they be not in the better condition do perish eternally: as if he had
said, so far you are from fearing Gods cutting you off, that you desire it;
but take heed of this, etc.

Verse. 21. Take heed, regard not iniquity, etc.] That is, affect not this
murmuring against God, and desiring death, and quarrelling against his
proceedings: for this have thou chosen rather then affliction; to wit, in that
he chose to contend with God, rather then patiently to bear his afflictions.

Verse. 22. Behold, God exalts by his power, etc.] This may be understood two
several ways: to wit, either that God exalts and magnifyeth himself or his
works by his power, that is, that by the manifestation of his almighty power
God shows himself to be a great God, and his works appear exceeding glorious;
and then the drift of this clause is to put Job in mind, that therefore there
is no reasoning nor contending with him: or else rather, that God does often by
his great power exalt those that are afflicted and cast down; and then the
drift of the words is, to intimate to Job, that God was able to exalt him, and
that if ever he were raised again from his low condition, it was God that must
do it; in regard whereof it was fitter that he should humble himself before
God, and seek his favor, rather then quarrel against him for that which he
had done to him. And then in the next clause it is said, who teaches like him?
either because God being omniscient, and knowing all things of himself, must
needs teach better then man that knows but in part, and as he receives from
others; or, because God enlightneth the mind, and effectually teaches the
heart, which no man can do; or, because God teaches men by the afflictions he
lays upon them: and then the drift of this last clause is to imply, that as
God is great in power, so he is of incomprehensible wisdom, and that men
should content themselves with that which God teaches, and not search into
those things which are above their reach; and especially, that it was a mere
folly to murmr against any of Gods proceedings, as if man could teach God how
to govern the world; and that Job might learn much by the afflicting hand of
God, if the fault were not in himself, yea that particular lesson, that none
could raise him but God, was clearly taught him, in that all the while he was
so impatient, he was still kept in such a helpless condition.

Verse. 23. Who has enjoined him his way?] This is alleged to prove that
therefore none can control or condemn what he does; concerning which see the
Note chap. 34.13.

Verse. 24. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.] That is,
Instead therefore of searching into Gods secrets, busy thy self rather in
magnifying those works which lie open to every man's view: and this may be meant
of the works of God in general, or of the heaven in particular, the meteors,
rain and thunder and lightning, whereof he speaks in the following verses.

Verse. 25. Every man may see it, man may behold it afar off.] That is, the
heaven; or it may be better understood of all the works of God in general, to
wit, that men may behold them, even those that are afar off, though indeed
they cannot perfectly understand them.

Verse. 26. Behold, God is great, and we know him not, etc.] As if he had said,
This you will find by observing diligently the works of God, to wit, that God
is incomprehensibly great, and that therefore it is not for man to blame any
thing that God does.

Verse. 27. For he makes small the drops of water, etc.] That is, He makes the
rain (which is by the heat of the Sun drawn up in vapors from the earth and
sea) to distill down by degrees in round small drops, according to the
proportion of the vapors that go up; and this is mentioned, as a work which
we are not able to comprehend. See the Note chap. 26.8.

Verse. 29. Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise
of his Tabernacle?] That which man cannot perfectly understand in the
spreadings of the clouds may be, either how far a cloud will spread when it
rises, or how the clouds come to be spread out in so vast an extent all the
heavens over, and that many times in a very different manner, some being clouds
without water, others yielding soft and gentle rain, others pouring forth
violent and stormy showers, some bringing winds with them, others frost, or
hail, or snow; and then by the noise of his Tabernacle, is meant the roaring of
the winds or thunder above in the clouds, Gods Tabernacle or pavilion, as it is
called 2 Samuel 22.12. of which see the Note there.

Verse. 30. Behold, he spreads his light upon it, and covers the bottom of
the sea.] This verse is diversely expounded. Some understand it plainly thus,
that God spreads his light over the clouds, Gods Tabernacle above, as they
are called in the foregoing verse, and withal covers the bottom of the sea
with waters beneath. Others conceive that El^hu speaks here of the sudden
changes that God often makes in the air; to wit, that sometimes, the thick
clouds being scattered, he spreads his light all over his Tabernacle above,
and makes the clouds that are there to be lightsome and bright; and then at
other times with clouds gathered together he covers the bottom of the sea,
that is, he covers all things with darkness even to the bottom of the sea:
a work the more wonderful, because the same Sun that dispels the clouds at one
time, does also gather them at another. And lastly, some give this to be the
meaning of the words, that God by the light of the Sun, or by the flashes of
lightening, which he scatters abroad in the clouds, does not only enlighten
the clouds above, but also causes it to pierce through the waters, even to the
covering or overspreading of the bottom of the sea with its light. And this
seems best to agree with our Translation.

Verse. 31. For by them he judges the people, he gives meat in abundance.]
That is, By these clouds, causing showers and thunder and lightening, God both
judges, that is, punishes the wickedness of men, to wit, by great floods,
which often destroy not only the fruits of the earth, but likewise men and
cattle, and also moistneth the earth at other times, and makes it yield an
abundant increase for the nourishment of man.

Verse. 33. The noise thereof shows concerning it, the cattle also concerning
the vapor.] That is, the noise of the wind or thunder in the clouds above
foresheweth the showers of rain that are coming; the cattle also by a natural
instinct discern the vapors ascending, and so foresee, and by several actions
and motions do as it were give warning to men of the wet weather that
approaches.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Verse. 1. AT this also my heart trembles, etc.] To wit, at the consideration
of that which he meant next to speak of, which is concerning the thunder, verse.
2. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, etc. Indeed this may have reference
likewise to that which went before in the former chapter, especially if that
which is said there verse. 29. and 33. concerning the noise in Gods Tabernacle,
be meant of the thunder. But this word ( also) At this also my heart trembles,
seems rather to imply, that he meant to allege another special work of God,
full of terror, whereof he had not spoken before.

Verse. 3. He directs it under the whole heaven, and his lightening unto the
ends of the earth.] That is, he causes the thunder and lightening to pass
from one end of the heaven to the other; as Christ says Matthew. 24.27. The
lightening comes out of the East, and shines even unto the West. Yet withal
those words, He directs it, seem also to hint to us, that the thunder and
lightening are guided by the special providence of God whithersoever they go.

Verse. 4. After it a voice roareth, etc.] For the lightening is seen before the
thunder is heard, though the thunder be before it: he thundreth with the voice
of his excellency; that is, with an excellent voice, or with a voice that
clearly discovers his transcendent excellency: and he will not stay them when
his voice is heard; that is, he stays not the lightenings, when once it begins
to thunder, but they are presently with us before the clap of thunder is heard;
or, he will not stay the storms of rain, (whereof he had spoken before chap.
36.27, 28.) but immediately after the thunder, they come pouring down in a most
vehement manner.

Verse. 5. God thundreth marvellously with his voice, etc.] This word
marvellously may not only have reference to that mavelous noise that the
thunder makes, but also to those strange effects of the thunder and lightening
observed by many; as that it will melt a sword in the sheath, or money in a
purse, and neither hurt the sheath nor the purse, break the bones in a man's
body, and kill a child in the womb, and yet not the least sign of hurt to be
seen outwardly, and many other effects of the like nature: To which also some
limit the following words, great things does he, which we cannot comprehend.
But that I conceive must be extended also to that which follows, concerning
snow and frost: for though philosophers do give the reason of all these things,
yet they do it but imperfectly, and there is much uncertainty in many things
they say; and, besides, why these things are done at such a time and in such a
place, rather then another, they can never give a reason.

Verse. 6. For he says to the snow, Be thou on the earth, etc.] This
expression, Be thou on the earth, may seem to imply, not only the coming of the
snow down upon the earth, but also its usual lying for a time upon the earth
before it melts away: likewise to the small rain, and the great rain of his
strength; that is, the great mighty showers of rain, which sometimes fall, or
those violent storms which discover the mighty strength of that God that sends
them.

Verse. 7. He seals up the hand of every man, that all men may know his work.]
There is a like expression before concerning Gods sealing up the stars, chap.
9.7. concerning which see the Note there. The meaning of this here is, that God
by covering the earth with snow, or by sending such tempestuous weather, as is
before mentioned, does wholly take men off from their labor; being driven home
for shelter, there he lodges them, and locketh or seals them up fast, so
that they cannot stir abroad to follow their employments: and this he does
that all men may know his work, that is, that all men may hereby see and know
what God is able to do, who can thus at his pleasure take men off from their
businesses, and make them wait upon him, till he is pleased to set them at
liberty again.

Verse. 10. By the breath of God frost is given, etc.] That is, By the cold
winds, which God does as it were breath upon the earth, he causes frosts; (and
this he says in reference to what he had said in the foregoing verse
concerning the winds, Out of the South comes the whirlwind, and cold out of
the North;) and the breadth of the waters is straightened, that is, the waters
are frozen, and so being congealed into ice, and as it were bound together in a
narrower compass, they seem to be dried up, and take not up so much room as
they did before.

Verse. 11. Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud, etc.] That is, the
black full clouds: and it may be said, that God wearieth the thick clouds,
whilst by them he waters the earth, either first, because they are carried
about to water the ground from one place to another, or secondly, because they
go laden with such abundance of rain within them, or thirdly, because by
watering they are spent and wasted, even as the strength of a man will wast and
consume, when he is wearied with much labor. As for the following clause, he
scatters his bright cloud, though some understand it thus, that by the wind,
or by the beams of the Sun, he scatters the clouds from whence flashes of
lightening did before break forth; yet I rather take the meaning to be this,
that by the wind or Sun he soon scatters the white, empty, lightsome cloud,
that it quickly vanishes and comes to nothing.

Verse. 12. And it is turned round about by his counsels, etc.] That is, By the
wise determinate counsels of God, and not by chance, is the cloud carried round
about the earth, or rather whirled about, sometimes one way and sometimes
another: that they may do whatsoever he commands them; that is, that these
clouds, and the hail, rain, snow, etc. therein, may do what God appoints them.

Verse. 13. He causes it to come, whether for correction, or for his land, or
for mercy.] To wit, the cloud, together with the showers and storms it brings
along with it. It is not easy to distinguish the two last clauses in this
verse, namely, where it is said that God causes these things to come, or for
his land, or for mercy. Some by his land understand that part of the earth
which is not inhabited, in which none therefore challenge an interest, but the
Lord only: and so they make the meaning to be this, that sometimes God causes
these showers to come for his land, those parts that are not inhabited; and
sometimes for mercy, that is, in mercy to man, when he sends them to make the
earth fruitful where men dwell. Others say, that God causes them to come for
his land, when he sends them to moisten and fatten the earth, which is the
Lords, as is all the fullness thereof, but more out of that common respect that
he has to all his creatures, then out of any respect to the wicked
inhabitants, that are no way worthy that God should mind them; and that he
causes them to come for mercy, when he sends them in pity and mercy to men,
upon their humbling of themselves before him. Again, others hold that then God
is said to send these showers for his land, when he sends them in an ordinary
way for the watering of the earth, and to make it fruitful; and that then God
is said to send them for mercy, either when he sends them in times of drought,
taking pity of men in their misery, to restore again to them the fruits of the
earth, or at least a little to refresh them, and allay their misery, or when he
sends them in some other way of mercy, as to cool and cleanse the air, or any
other such like favor.

Verse. 14. Hearken unto this, O Job; stand still, and consider the wondrous
works of God.] That is, consider seriously of these mighty works of God, and
think whether it be fit that such a poor Creature, as thou art, should murmr
against so great a God, and whether it be possible for thee to comprehend his
secret counsels, that can not comprehend his ordinary works.

Verse. 15. Do thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his
cloud to shine?] As if he should have said, Were thou of counsel with God from
all eternity, when he decreed and determined how these things should be?
(namely, the wondrous works mentioned in the foregoing verse, or the clouds and
meteors, rain, snow, hail, etc. formerly spoken of) or when in time he did
actually order and dispose of them, that so thou should understand in what
manner and to what end they are done? As for the particular instance that is
added in the next words, and caused the light of his cloud to shine? either it
must be understood of the lightening, to wit, that he did not know how out of
such a thick, watery, cold cloud so many flashes of lightening should break
forth; or of the light of the Sun, how that breaks forth through the clouds; or
of those transparent lightsome clouds, which are sometimes in the sky, how
they are gathered and ordered by the mighty power of God. For though some
learned Expositours understand this of the rainbow, yet that seems to me of
all the least probable.

Verse. 16. Do thou know the ballancings of the clouds? etc.] That is, How God
has caused the clouds, which are often very great and ponderous, to hang in the
liquid air round about under the heavens, as in an even and equal balance? As
for the following words, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in
knowledge, by the mention therein made of Gods perfect knowledge, he intimates,
that though God knows these things exactly, yet, alas, it is little or
nothing which man can know of them.

Verse. 17. How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the South
wind?] That is, whence it is that the South wind, that usually brings calm and
still weather with it for the refreshing of the earth, does make thy garments
warm about thee, rather then any other wind.

Verse. 18. Have thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a
molten looking-glass?] That is, like a looking-glass of molten, polished
brass: See Exodus 38.8. The sky is said to be strong, not because it is of a
hard, massy, elementall thickness, but because it is of a solid substance, not
subject in its own nature to wear and wast away, and especially because it
stands firm and fast by its own strength, not having any thing else to support
it: and it is said to be as a molten looking-glass, because it is transparent
and bright. Now the drift of Elihu in demanding of Job, whether he helped God
in spreading out the sky at its first Creation, is to imply, that unless it
were so, he could not exactly know the manner how it was done, and the causes
of its strength and brightness; and that therefore there was no more
likelihood, that he should know whence it is, that the sky, being of so thin
and transparent a substance, should yet withal be so firm and strong, then
that he had any hand with God in spreading it at first over our heads.

Verse. 19. Teach us what we shall say unto him; for we cannot order our speech
by reason of darkness.] As if he should say, Since you would seem so wise, and
to know so much above others, as that you dare complain of Gods government, and
the dispensations of his providence, and desire so earnestly that you may plead
your cause before God, teach us, I pray you, how we should plead in this kind
for our selves or others, or wherein we should object any thing against God;
or, teach us what we should in your stead say in your defense, (which I like
the best) of those many arguments, wherewith you say you could fill your mouth
(chap. 23.4;) let us hear but one of them, that we may allege it on your
behalf: for alas we profess, that through the ignorance and blindness of our
minds, we are no way able to comprehend his works, and therefore must needs say
that we know not how to allege any thing by way of pleading against any of his
proceedings; or, we cannot imagine any thing that can be said in the defense of
your murmurings against God.

Verse. 20. Shall it be told him that I speak? If a man speak, surely he shall
be swallowed up.] Some understand this as spoken in reference to what Elihu had
spoken concerning the meteors, Shall it be told him that I speak? etc. as if he
had said, Who can or dares undertake before God to give a reason of these
things, whereof I have spoken? He that should undertake it, would be swallowed
up in seeking to comprehend the unsearchable wisdom that is in these works.
And much more then is that man sure to be overwhelmed with Gods glory, that
shall search into his secret counsels. But the words in our Translation will
hardly bear this Exposition. Rather they are added in reference to that which
he said in the foregoing verse* Teach us what we shall say unto him? etc. And
so the first clause, Shall it be told him that I speak? may be understood,
either after the manner of judicial proceedings, Shall it be told him that at
such a time I will plead the cause I have undertaken? or else simply of some
man's reporting to God, that he pleaded against the proceedings of Gods
Providence: and accordingly the drift of Elihu in these words may be to imply,
either first, that none would dare to make report to God of what he should say,
if he should speak any thing by way of pleading against God, Shall it be told
him that I speak? No doubtless, no man would dare to do this for me, which I
dare not do my self; or secondly, that if he should speak, as Job had done, by
way of blaming any of Gods dealings, he might well be afraid, lest the Lord
should hear of it; or thirdly, that the complaints and murmurings of so base a
creature as man is, would not be found with God worth regarding; (and this I
like the best) Shall it be told him that I speak? as if he should say, Yes, it
were pity else: as if it should be thought worthy to be carried to a king, that
some base beggar, that were withal a very Idiot, had found fault with
something in the kings governing of his kingdom. But however the following
clause is clear, If a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up; for the
meaning of that is plainly this, that if any man should thus undertake to plead
against God, or but to report what another man has so pleaded, he would soon
be confounded and overwhelmed with Gods Majesty and glory. Now all this tends
to show Job his error in quarrelling against Gods proceedings with him, and
desiring in such a peremptory manner, that he might be admitted to plead his
cause before God.

Verse. 21. And now men see not the bright light that is in the clouds; but the
wind passes and cleanses them, etc.] It is very hard to determine what the
drift of the words is in this and the following verse, and how they depend upon
that which went before. First, some hold, that having said in the foregoing
verse, that the man must needs be swallowed up that dares to argue the case
with God, here Elihu shows, that the very cause why some men are so overbold to
contend with God is, because they do not consider the mighty works of God, as
he had advised Job to do, And now men see not the bright light, etc. as if he
should have said, And now the reason of men's overdaring in this kind is,
because they do not duly observe those wonderful works of God before
mentioned, as of the bright light that is in the clouds, namely, whence it is
that some clouds are so bright and lightsome, and of so transparent a
substance, that the light of the Sun does so easily shine through them; and so
likewise how the wind passes and cleanses them, that is, cleanses the sky of
them, or cleanses them of that black and watery mixture, that was formerly in
them; and how (verse. 22.) fair weather comes out of the North, to wit, by
means of the North Wind, that scatters the clouds and clears the air. And now
those that hold this to be the drift and dependence of these words, do
accordingly understand the last clause verse. 22. thus, with God is terrible
Majesty, as if he had said, Did men consider seriously of these great works of
God, they would conclude that God is so dreadful in Majesty, that it is not
fit that men should carry themselves so boldly toward him. Again secondly,
others will have these words to depend upon that which Elihu had said verse. 18:
for having spoken there of Gods stretching forth the sky, which is strong, and
as a molten looking-glass, and having then inserted that passage in the two
next verses, as it were to put Job in mind how impossible it was to contend
with a God that could do such mighty things; here again Elihu returns to add
somewhat more of these mighty works of God, to wit, that sometimes men can
hardly see the light of the Sun, by reason of the interposition of thick
clouds, And now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds, but that
on a sudden oftentimes the winds come and scatter them, but the wind passes
and cleanses them; fair weather comes out of the North. From all which at
last he lays down that conclusion, with God is terrible Majesty. But thirdly,
the most and best Expositours would have the words understood thus, to wit,
that Elihu here proves that there is no standing before God to contend against
him, by an argument from the less to the greater; namely, that men cannot
behold the light of the Sun, when the wind has scattered the clouds, and so it
shines clearly in the firmament, and much less can they stand before God, who
dwells in light inaccessible, and is of terrible Majesty. And this indeed is
very probable; yet the second Exposition seems best to agree with our
Translation.

Verse. 23. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out, etc.] As if he should
have said, And from all this that has been said we may concerning the Almighty
conclude, that we cannot find him out, he is altogether incomprehensible; of
which see the Note chap. 11.7. he is excellent in power and in judgment and in
plenty of justice; he will not afflict; that is, not willingly, till men by
their sins force him to it, and much less will he afflict them causelessly or
unjustly.

Verse. 24. Men do therefore fear him, etc.] To wit, because he is of such
infinite and incomprehensible power and justice, and especially of such
goodness and mercy, that he will not afflict; this makes men fear God, and
humble themselves under his hand, not daring to quarrel or contend with him:
he respects not any that are wise of heart; that is, he minds them not. The
drift of these words may be, either to show what reason there is that men
should so fear God, who is of such infinite power, etc. as not to dare to
contend with him, to wit, because God will not vouchsafe to mind such a worm as
man is, so infinitely beneath him, no not those that are wise of heart, as if
he had said, not those that out of an overweening conceit of their own wisdom
think they can maintain their cause against God; or, because God is able to
punish them, and will punish them, if they be too peremptory with him, be they
never so wise of heart, they shall not be able thereby to rescue themselves out
of his hands, he will neither fear nor regard their wisdom; or else, to show
why men ought to fear God for his goodness and mercy, and not to murmr
against his chastisements, to wit, because God does not show them mercy out of
any respect he has to any wisdom or goodness in them, but merely of his own
free grace.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse. 1. THen the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind.] Job had often
appealed to God, as desiring that he would decide the controversy betwixt him
and his friends, and now and then had as it were challenged God, that he might
plead his cause before God, and that God would answer him; and his friends had
likewise wished, that God would satisfy Jobs desire herein, as chap. 11.5. O
that God would speak, and open his lips against thee: Accordingly therefore the
Lord did now appear to them, and did at last chap. 42.7. give judgment in this
cause betwixt Job and his friends, by approving Job, and reproving them. Only
the Lord finding, that though Job was much convinced by that which Elihu had
spoken, (and therefore it was that he was all the while silent) yet he was not
sufficiently humbled, before he would give sentence for Job, he first checks
him for those things he had spoken foolishly and rashly, and not with that
reverence toward God, as became him. Yea and observable it is, that though,
after the manner of the visions and apparitions, whereby the Lord used to
reveal himself to his servants in those days, the Lord answered Job out of the
whirlwind, that is, out of the cloud, wherein there came a whirlwind, (it seems
that first there appeared a cloud, out of which when the whirlwind had broken
out with some terror, then after that the Lord spoke to Job out of that stormy
cloud; which was to humble him, and to make both him and the rest the more
attentive to what he should say: see the Note 1 Kings 19.11.) yet he spoke to
him with much gentleness; whereas his three friends condemned him for a wicked
hypocrite, and Elihu, though he acknowledged his sincerity, and only blamed him
for his inconsiderate speeches, yet he had therein used some very bitter
expressions, as in chap. 34.7, 8. What man is like Job, who drinks scorning
like water, which walks in company with the workers of iniquity? etc. in Gods
answer to him there is no such bitterness at all.

Verse. 2. Who is this that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge?] Many
Expositours hold, that these words are spoken to Elihu: for they say, that the
Lord undertaking to answer Job, as is said in the foregoing verse, does first
check Elihu, and take him off from proceeding any farther: and that he is
charged with darkning counsel by words without knowledge, either because he
did not sufficiently set forth the glory of Gods works; or because he did not
clearly enough express his own meaning in the arguments he brought to convince
Job; or because, though he spoke truth, yet he uttered it not in a manner
suitable to Jobs condition, but with such sharpness, as was likely to add to
his affliction, rather then to afford him any comfort. And indeed 2 Reasons
they give why this should be spoken to Elihu, rather then to Job, which have
much probability in them. First, because these words, who is this that darkneth
counsel? etc. seem rather to intend one that was then speaking, as Elihu was,
rather then Job that had not spoken of a long time together: and 2ly, because
God does no where reprove Elihu, as he does Job chapter 40.2. and his other three
friends, chapter 42.7; and seeing Elihu had dealt somewhat too tartly with Job
also, and had very much misinterpreted some things that Job had spoken, it were
strange that he only should pass unreproved. But methinks it is far more
probable, that these words are spoken to Job, first, Because it is said in the
foregoing verse, that Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and
said, and then immediately this is added as his answer to Job, Who is this that
darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? Gird up now thy loins like a man,
etc. secondly, Because chap. 42.3. Job does afterward repeat these words, as
acknowledging himself therewith justly checked, who is he that hides counsel
without knowledge? therefore have I uttered that I understood not, etc. and
thirdly, Because it is very hard to show, why Elihu should be charged with
darkning counsel by words without knowledge, seeing the Lord here pleads with
Job after the same manner, and urges the very same, or the like works of God,
as Elihu had done: whereas now we may easily conceive that Job might well be
charged with darkning counsel by words without knowledge, whether we
understand it of his own counsel or Gods. For first, he had darkened his own
counsel, in that he had not clearly enough expressed his meaning, but in his
passion had expressed himself so simply and foolishly, that his words seemed to
import worse then he thought, to wit, that there was no difference at all in
Gods dealing with his faithful servants and with wicked ungodly men, and that
God had not dealt justly with him: and secondly, he had darkened Gods counsels
by words without knowledge, in that he had seemed to imply, for want of
expressing himself fully and plainly, that God had dealt with him as an enemy,
and that there was no more love in the prosperity of the righteous then the
prosperity of the wicked, nor no more wrath in the judgments of the wicked
then in the afflictions of the righteous. So that the Lord does not here charge
Job with speaking that which was false, but with uttering the truth
unskilfully, Who is this that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? As
if he had said, What do I hear? Is this you, Job, that talk thus foolishly and
pettishly, as if you meant to charge me with injustice? whatever others might
have done, I expected better words from you.

Verse. 3. I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.] This seems to be spoken
with reference to that proud challenge of Jobs chap. 13.22. Call thou, and I
will answer; or let me speak, and answer thou me; wherein he gave God the
choice, either to object against Job, and then he would answer, or to answer
what Job should object against him: and accordingly therefore the Lord here
puts Job to answer to certain Questions that he propounds to him: the drift
whereof is, to give Job to understand, that if he could not give a full and
clear account of these ordinary works, much less was he like to know his
secret counsels; and therefore it must needs be a high degree of arrogance to
charge him with injustice, whose works he was not able to comprehend, and who
being of infinite wisdom and power, must needs be of infinite justice and
holiness too.

Verse. 4. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth, etc.] As if
he had said, Poor wretch, many ages after the earth was created thou had not
a being, and how then can thou know how it was done? declare, if thou have
understanding, that is, since you think your understanding so great, that you
can dispute with me, and blame the dispensations of my Providence, show me, I
pray, how this was done.

Verse. 6. Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? etc.] See the Note
chap. 26.7. or who laid the corner stone thereof? As the foundations, so also
the corner stones of a house, whereby the walls are firmly joined together, do
contribute much to the strength and stability of any building; in allusion
whereto the Lord here demands of Job, who laid the corner stone of the earth?
intimating, that surely he did not contribute either counsel or assistance
therein, but that the Lord alone did it, with whom therefore he might see that
he was no way fit to contend. Some conceive that it was of old a custom, that
when any glorious building was to be raised, some Prince or great man was wont
to lay the corner stone, and that thereto these words do allude; which may seem
the more probable, because of that which follows in the next verse.

Verse. 7. When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted
for joy.] To wit, as men are wont with shouting and singing to express their
joy, when the foundations are first laid of any great and magnificent building.
Some Expositours understand the first clause literally of the stars in the
firmament, and accordingly they hold, first, that it is said they sang
together, because being of different magnitudes, and having different motions
and influences, they did yet as it were harmoniously join together in sounding
forth the praises of God, as in a consort of different voices singing together,
in that they did show forth the infinite power and wisdom and goodness of
their Creator, according to that of David, Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the
glory of God, etc: and secondly, that they are called the morning stars, either
because those stars that shine in the morning are by a Synecdoche put for all
the stars in general, or because from the first morning of time in the
Creation of the world, they sang forth the praises of God; whence some would
have the similitude to be taken from the singing of Birds at the first break of
day. And whereas against this it might be objected, that the stars were not
created till the fourth day Genesis 1.14. and therefore could not praise God when
the foundations of the earth were laid: to this they answer; first, that no
more is here intended, but that they praised God even at the creation, and 2ly.
that the stars were created the first day together with the heavens and light,
only their light was not then such as it was afterward made to be on the fourth
day. But then again others hold, that both clauses do here express the same
thing, to wit, that the angels (who were therefore created the first day
together with the highest heavens, of which see the Note Genesis 1.1.) did sing
forth the praises of God, when they saw the foundations laid of this glorious
fabric of the world; for, say they, as they are the Angels that are called the
sons of God in the second clause (wherein all Interpreters agree, see the Note
chap. 1.6. to which some add, that the word (all) and all the sons of God
shouted for joy, is purposely inserted to imply, that even those angels, that
afterward fell away, did then at first praise God together with the rest,) so
they are the angels also that are called in the first clause the morning stars,
both because they were the first and best of all Gods creatures, and
particularly because of their exceeding glory and brightness, as in allusion
to the brightest of all the stars the morning star; for which cause also the
Apostle calls the holy angels 2 Cor. 11.14. angels of light. And indeed this I
conceive to be far most probable, because I conceive it is clear that the stars
were not created till the fourth day, whereas the Lord here speaks of the
shouting and singing that was on the first day, when the foundations of the
earth were laid: as is the more evident in the following verses, when he speaks
still of the works of God in the first and third day of the Creation; and of
the stars he speaks afterward verse. 31, 32.

Verse. 8. Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had
issued out of the womb?] Some understand this of the first creating of the
waters together with the earth; and then the womb out of which, as in a moment,
they suddenly brake forth, must be the womb of Gods almighty power or eternal
decree; and that which is said of Gods shutting up these waters, as with
doors, is meant of Gods holding in the waters in their circumference about the
earth, as they were in that first instant of their creation, when the earth
round about lay overwhelmed therein as in a deep, and the spirit of God moved
upon the face of the waters, Genesis 1.2. But others again understand it of the
breaking forth of the waters out of that Chaos or deep of earth and water,
wherein they were at first created, as if it had issued out of the womb, to
wit, when God said on the third day, Genesis 1.9. Let the waters under the heaven
be gathered together unto one place: and then the doors wherewith it was shut
up are the sea shores, wherein it is held. And indeed because it is this
gathering together of the waters, that can properly be called the sea, and
because in the following verse he speaks of binding up the waters with a cloud,
and the clouds were not created till the second day, I should think this last
Exposition the best, unless rather we understand it of both jointly together.

Verse. 9. When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a
swadling-band for it.] Following the Metaphor in the foregoing verse, where the
sea was compared to a newborn babe, here he speaks of swaddling of it with a
cloud and darkness; and that to intimate the mighty power of God, who can turn
and wind and bind up, at his pleasure, the huge Ocean sea, as easily as a nurse
does her sucking child. Now according to the different Exposition of the
foregoing verse, if we understand it of the first creation of the waters, then
the garment and swadling-band wherewith God bound up these waters must be that
darkness wherewith, as with a black cloud, that confused Chaos of earth and
water was overspread, the light not being then as yet created, as it is
expressed Genesis 1.2. and darkness was upon the face of the Deep: but if we
understand it of the gathering together of those waters into one place, to make
the sea, then the thick and black clouds wherewith God compassed the earth and
the sea round about, are the garment and swadling-band wherein God has bound
it.

Verse. 10. And brake up for it my decreed place, etc.] To wit, those hollow
places in the earth, wherein God laid the sea, as it were in a cradle,
concerning which see the Note Genesis 1.9. And for the following words, and set
bars and doors, etc. see the Note chap. 26.10.

Verse. 12. Have thou commanded the morning since thy days? and caused the
dayspring to know his place?] That is, Did thou ever in all thy time by thy
command cause the Sun to arise, at any other time or at any other place, then
according to its ordinary course? or rather, (because the Lord seems here to
proceed to speak of the works of creation on the fourth day, when the Sun and
other the lights of heaven were made,) Did thou at first establish the
vicissitude of day and night, and appoint at what several times and in what
several points of the heaven the Sun should arise, and the daylight break
forth, sometimes sooner and sometimes later, sometimes in one part of the
heaven and sometimes in another, according to the several seasons of summer
and winter.

Verse. 13. That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, etc.] That is,
That from the place where it rises it might in an instant, as in the
twinkling of an eye, pass to the uttermost parts of the earth: and indeed
because the morning light does so speedily spread it self from one end of the
heaven to the other, therefore does David ascribe wings to the morning, Psalm.
139.9. If, says he, I take the wings of the morning, etc. But how do the next
words come in? that the wicked might be shaken out of it? what can the
spreading of the morning light to the ends of the earth do to the shaking of
the wicked out of it, that is, to the destroying of the wicked? I answer, Some
Expositours hold that this is here inserted, not to imply that the rising of
the morning light is any cause of the destroying of wicked men; but only
because as the Sun rises daily, so the wicked are day by day destroyed and cut
off by the just judgments of God, as men not worthy to behold the light of the
Sun: and hence it is that though God cuts off wicked men by night as well as by
day, yet having spoken of the rising of the morning light, that he might follow
on the same Metaphor, he speaks only of cutting them off by day, as men
unworthy to enjoy the light of the day, That it might take hold of the ends of
the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it? as if he had said, Art
thou the cause that the morning light takes hold of the ends of the earth, and
that the wicked are then cut off, as men not worthy to see the light? And this
is the reason too, that though good men die daily, as well as wicked men, yet
he speaks not of them, but of the wicked only, because to the godly death is
only a passage to a better life; and they cannot properly be said to be shaken
out of the earth, as wicked men may be, who are as it were with violence turned
out of the world, and out of all the felicity they could hope to enjoy here,
and thrust out into utter darkness. But because the words in the following
verse seem to speak of the effects of the morning light, I cannot think it so
probable, that this should not also be understood so. Now there are two other
Expositions given of the words, that make the morning light the cause that the
wicked are shaken out of the earth. The first is, that by means of the morning
light they are cut off and destroyed from the earth, either because thereby
they are discovered and known, or because thereby they are apprehended, carried
before the judgment seat, and so are cut off as malefactors, and so are
shaken out of the earth, as a man would shake moths or dust from off a garment:
which may be judged the more probable, if it were the custom of those times,
as some say it was, early in the morning to sit upon the trial and judgment
of malefactors; whereon they say that of the prophet is grounded Jer. 21.12.
Oh house of David, thus says the Lord, Execute judgment in the morning, etc.
And the second is, That the morning light causes wicked men, that hate the
light, to hide themselves, and so they are as it were shaken from the face of
the earth, being driven into their dens of darkness.

Verse. 14. It is turned as clay to the seal, etc.] That is, The earth is turned
as clay to the seal: and two ways this may be understood: to wit, first, that
whereas the earth in the dark night seems as a lump of clay, that has neither
form nor figure, so soon as the morning light arises, it puts on a new face,
and appears like the potters clay, that is wrought into several fashions, and
adorned with several figures and colors: and accordingly the following words,
and they stand as a garment, must also be understood, to wit, that the plants,
trees, and other things upon the earth are as a curious, neat, glorious garment
of diverse colors, wherewith it is clothed. Or secondly, of the mutability of
the earth and all things therein, to wit, that as the clay, when it is soft,
may be turned into diverse shapes and figures; so it is with the earth, not only
in regard of other things, but also in regard of men the inhabitants thereof,
especially wicked men, one generation passes away, and another comes in the
room of them; and they stand as a garment in that regard, that is now on, then
off, ever and anon altered and changed, now fresh and within a while
thrid-bare, torn and worn out, as the Psalmist also expresses it, Psalm.
102.26. they shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shall thou change them,
and they shall be changed.

Verse. 15. And from the wicked their light is withholden, etc.] This may be
meant, either of wicked men's flying into dark places, their guilty consciences
driving them thereto, that they may not be discovered and punished; or else of
their being cut off and destroyed, whereby they are deprived, not only of
beholding the light of the Sun, but also of the light of life, and of all their
prosperity here, even of all that was pleasant and delightful to them. See the
Note chap. 18.5. As for the next clause, and the high arm shall be broken,
thereby is meant also, either that when they hid themselves in dark corners,
they should not then be able to do the mischief that formerly they did (for in
these words the high arm, he seems to allude to men's lifting up their arm on
high, when they mean to strike;) or else that being destroyed, there shall then
be an end of all their great power and tyranny over others. Now this may be
added, either first to show the instability of wicked men, as in relation to
that which was said in the foregoing verse; or secondly, to prevent that
objection, why God should give light to the wicked, as well as to the
righteous; or thirdly, in reference to that which went before verse 12. Have
thou commanded the morning since thy days? etc. and so the meaning of this and
the foregoing verses should be, as if God had said, When the wicked were to be
punished, were you able to hasten the morning light that this might be done?

Verse. 16. Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? or have thou walked
in the search of the depth?)] To wit, that thou should know the exact depth
of the sea, or how the waters spring up there, or what variety of fishes and
other creatures there are therein.

Verse. 17. Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or have thou seen the
doors of the shadow of death?] Concerning the shadow of death see the Note
chap. 3.5. Some understand this of the depth of the sea, and make this to be
only a different expression of what he had said before in the former verse:
Others understand it of the abyss of the earth; as if he had said, Were thou
ever in the bottom of the sea, or beneath in the bowels of the earth? for
this, they say, is termed death, and the shadow of death, because the dead are
buried there, and to intimate, that it is as impossible that a living man
should come thither, as that he should be at the same time both dead and alive.
But the words may be also understood of the different ways of men's dying, and
the condition men are in after death: Have the gates of death been opened unto
thee? etc. that is, Are all the ways to death known to the^, and in thy power?
Have thou been in hell? or do thou know in what estate all that are dead are?

Verse. 18. Have thou perceived the breadth of the earth? etc.] That is, Have
thou traveled all over the earth, and so have observed every country as thou
wentest along, and do exactly know the full breadth of the earth? Declare if
thou know it all, that is, all the earth; if thou have seen and know it
all, declare this which I now demand of thee: or, all that I have asked thee;
as if he should have said, You boasted that if I questioned, you would answer
me: now then answer all that I have asked thee, if thou know it all.

Verse. 19. Where is the way where light dwells? and as for darkness, where
is the place thereof?] This may be added, as in relation to the foregoing
verse, as if it had been expressed thus, If thou know all the earth, as
having traveled all over it from the Sunrising to the Sunsetting, tell me
then, I pray, where the place of residence is, where the light dwells, and so
likewise concerning darkness. And this some would have to be meant of those
places, where it is day and night a long time together, whether he knew those
places where the light and darkness stayed so long: as indeed there are some
places where it is day for six months together, and then night as long. But I
rather conceive, that the Lord here enquires of Job, whether he knew exactly at
what points of the heaven the Sun was to rise and set, at the several seasons
of the year; or rather, whether the light or darkness went, when they went
from their hemisphere: intimating, that he was never able to ascend up into the
heavens, that he should exactly know the manner how and the reason why God had
ordered the several seasons of light and darkness all the world over.

Verse. 20. That thou should take it to (or at) the bound thereof, and that
thou should know the paths to the house thereof.] That is, that thou
should find them (whether light or darkness) where they are; or, that thou
should appoint them their bounds or limits, whence they should rise, which
way they should spread, and whether they should go; or, that when thou see
them spread so far abroad in the air, and wander as it were so far from their
home, thou should take them and carry them back to their place, and so
direct them in their way.

Verse. 21. Know thou it, because thou wast then born? or because the number
of thy days is great?] That is, either because thou were born, when I first
created the world, and so did see how I then ordered all these things; or
else, because having lived so long, thou have by so long experience since found
it out?

Verse. 22. Have thou entered into the treasures of the snow? etc.] That is, Do
thou know from whence that abundance of snow and hail comes, which yearly I
pour down upon the earth? Have thou ever been in my storehouses, where these
things are laid up? or are these things at thy disposing?

Verse. 24. By what way is the light parted, which scatters the East wind upon
the earth?] By the light here some understand the light of the Sun, as it is
usually taken elsewhere: and the Question that is propounded concerning the way
whereby this light is parted, must then be meant, either first of the lights
dispersing it self through the air several ways, to wit, by what means it
comes to pass, that the beams of the Sun do so dart forth themselves several
ways, that the air may be enlightened in every place; or secondly, of its
shining successively upon several parts of the earth, to wit, how it is that
the Sun runs a several course in the heavens every day, and so it gives light
more or less to several parts of the earth, it is day in one place and night
in another, it is summer in one place and winter in another, and at several
seasons the days and nights are shorter and longer; or thirdly, of the Suns
different dispersing of its light, by reason of some black clouds in the sky,
to wit, how it comes to pass, that the Sun shines bright in one place, whilst
in another place it is dark and cloudy. But because this last Exposition seems
somewhat forced, and because concerning this dividing of the Suns light God had
spoken before verse. 12. and because he is now speaking of tempestuous meteors,
as in the foregoing verses of snow and hail, and in the following verses of
showers of rain, etc. therefore I rather think, that the light here spoken of
is lightening, concerning which the Lord enquires of Job, either how it comes
to pass, that the flashes of lightening do break forth several ways, or
else, whence it is that there is thunder and lightening sometimes in one
country, and sometimes in another. As for the last clause, which scatters the
East wind upon the earth, either it is meant of the light of the Sun, to wit,
because the Sun draws up those vapors from the earth, which cause winds in the
air; or, because together with the Sun when it rises, the East wind does
usually rise: or else it is meant of lightening, which may be said to scatter
the East wind upon the earth in a two fold sense; to wit, either because the
lightening does commonly bring tempestuous winds with it; (for the East wind is
mentioned figuratively in stead of all other violent winds) or on the contrary,
because the lightening breaks forth with such violence, that it many times
interrupts the course of the strongest winds, and scatters them abroad into the
several corners of the world.

Verse. 25. Who has divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters?]
Either this is meant of the several hollow places in the earth, which God has
provided, as so many several channels, for the current of the waters, some one
way, and some another, when abundance of rain has made great inundations here
below; or else rather of the several ways, whereby the overflowing of waters
that is in the clouds does pour down, as by so many several pipes and
waterspouts, sometimes in great Cataracts, whereby the earth is watered in
several places.

Verse. 26. To cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is, etc.] These last
words, where no man is, may be added both to imply, that man (and so Job in
particular) can no way be the cause of watering those places, that are not
inhabited by man; and likewise to intimate, that God takes care to provide
food, not only for man, but also for the beasts in the deserts, where no man
inhabits.

Verse. 31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades?] That is, Can
thou restrain the influences of the seven stars, and so keep back the spring,
either wholly or for a time, which those stars do bring along with them? and
indeed therefore he terms their influences sweet, because they bring in the
spring with them, which is a season so sweet and pleasant, and that yields such
delight and refreshing to all creatures, in that it opens the earth, that so
all trees and plants and herbs and flowers may then bud and sprout forth: Or
loose the bands of Orion? that is, or can thou hinder the influences of
Orion, which brings in the winter season? for these he calls the bands of
Orion, either because therewith he leads in storms and tempests, as with so
many cords and strings; or because therewith the earth is frozen and bound up,
as with cords and bands: as if he had said, Can thou cut or untie these
cords, that so this Constellation should not bring such cold and tempestuous
weather along with it? Concerning these Constellations mentioned here and in
the following verse, see the Note before chap. 9.9.

Verse. 32. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or can thou guide
Arcturus with his sons?] That is, Arcturus with the lesser stars about it, that
seem to stand about it as children about their parents: can thou direct this
Northern Asterisme to know his season, to wit, the Autumn, and to run the
course which God has appointed it? As for the first clause, Can thou bring
forth Mazzaroth in his season? though some hold that by Mazzaroth is meant the
planets, and others the twelve signs in the Zodiac, (as is expressed in the
margin of our Bibles;) yet I rather conceive, with others, that thereby is
meant those remote stars about the Southern Pole, called the chambers of the
South chap. 9.9. or else the dogstar, with others that rise here in the Summer;
Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? that is, can thou make the
dog star and other fiery summer stars, or those stars that are hidden in the
South, to show themselves in their season? which is the more probable, because
then we have here, as before chap. 9.9. four Constellations mentioned, which
arise in the four several Quarters of the year; and therefore may be the more
fitly named in stead of all the stars.

Verse. 33. Know thou the ordinances of heaven? etc.] That is, In what order
God has disposed the several orbs thereof, and what laws and decrees God has
established for their several motions and influences, which thereupon they do
constantly observe? Can thou set the dominion thereof in the earth? that is,
Can thou, that dwell here below, order and settle what dominion and rule
the heavens shall have by their influences over all things here on the earth?
Some indeed understand this last clause thus, Can thou order it so, that thy
self, or other men dwelling here in the earth, should have the command of the
heavens above? and this they judge the more probable, because the Lord speaks
in the following verses of man's commanding rain and lightening from above. But
that I conceive is no sufficient warrant for this Exposition.

Verse. 34. Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters
may cover thee?] That is, the land where thou dwell. And because showers of
rain do usually follow the thunder, and so may seem, as it were, to come, when
God by that mighty voice of his does call for them, it is not altogether
improbable which some conceive, to wit, that in allusion hereto the Lord might
ask, whether Job could lift up his voice, as he does when he thunders, thereby
to call for showers of rain to water the earth.

Verse. 37. Who can number the clouds in wisdom? etc.] That is, who is so
wise, as exactly to find out the number of the numberless clouds? or who can
stay the bottles of heaven? that is, who can restrain the rain in the clouds
from falling down upon the earth?

Verse. 38. When the dust grows into hardness, and the clods cleave fast
together.] Some take these words to be a description of the drought that will
be in the earth, if the bottles of heaven were stayed, as was said in the
foregoing verse, to wit, that the earth then grows hard, and the clods cleave
fast together, and become hard like stones. But others take them to be a
description of the earth, when it is already sufficiently watered with rain,
(and so it were well that the bottles of heaven were stayed,) when the dust
grows into hardness, etc. that is, when the light dust is turned into lumps
of earth, or (as some translate the words) when the dust is turned into mire,
and the clods, ready before to crumble into dust, being moistened with rain do
cleave fast together.

Verse. 39. Will thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill the appetite of the
young lions?] The drift of these three following verses is to show, first, how
impossible it were for man to provide food sufficient for all beasts and birds,
as God does; thereby to set forth the infinite greatness of God above man, and
so to imply how unfit man is therefore to contend with God, and withal perhaps
to intimate how unlikely it is, that God should deal cruelly with his own
children, that is thus careful to provide for these brute creatures: and
secondly, how unlikely it is that man should search into Gods secret counsels,
that cannot comprehend how God does these things that he sees ordinarily done.
He instanceth first in Gods providing food for the lion and his whelps, not so
much because he is the king of beasts, as because the lions are of all
creatures the most ravenous; the providence of God being most observable in
this, that God should provide so abundantly for them, that so they might keep
within their desert places, who otherwise would range about, and break into
towns and cities, so that there would be no living for man upon the earth.

Verse. 40. When they couch in their dens, etc.] To wit, as preparing themselves
to leap out on a sudden upon any beast that passes by. Some restrain this to
the young lions, this being more especially observable, that when being young
they dare not go far from their dens, even then God by his providence does
bring, as it were, their prey into their mouths: But I think it is better to
understand it of all lions, lurking in their covert places to watch for their
prey.

Verse. 41. Who provideth for the raven his food? etc.] Amongst all fowls he
instanceth likewise in the raven, because they are most greedy and ravenous,
and therefore it is the more strange how God provides for them and their young
ones. When his young ones cry unto God, they wander for lack of meat: This
which is said of their wandering for lack of meat, may be understood of the old
ravens, that wander up and down for meat, whilst their young ones do as it were
cry unto God: but most Expositours understand it of their young ones, who being
usually driven out of their nests by their dams, so soon as ever they are able
to fly, do then wander up and down for lack of meat: and indeed the Providence
of God is most observable, in that he directs these young things to find out
the meat he provides for them. Most Expositours mention many other things to
set forth the Providence of God in feeding the young ravens: as that the dams
keep from them for some days after they are hatched, either because they are
white, and so they own them not till their black feathers begin to grow out; or
because they are so greedy to feed themselves, and that God in that time does
wonderfully feed their young ones, with worms that breed in the dung, with
flies, or a dew that comes down from heaven. But because we cannot by
experience find these things made good, I insist not thereon.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse. 1. Know thou the time when the wild goats of the rocks bring forth?
or can thou mark when the hinds do calve?] Though it may be, and is known,
that these creatures go eight months after they conceive with young before
they bring forth, yet is it not strange that Job should be questioned
concerning this; first, Because not knowing the just time when they conceive,
they cannot so keep their account as to know the time, at least the just exact
time, when they will bring forth, that so they might afford them any help or
ease therein; which though it may be truly affirmed concerning any creatures,
yet it must needs be more evident in these, in regard they live in rocky,
inaccessible places, where no man lives to observe the time of their bringing
forth, which the last clause does more clearly express, or can thou mark
when the hinds do calve? and secondly, Because hereby is employed, that if man
cannot know the time when they bring forth, much less can it be thought that
man has appointed the season when, and the manner how they should bring forth;
but that as God alone has given them the instinct of nature, whereby they
choose to live in such rocky places, so it is he also alone that has ordered
the time of their bringing forth, and has taught them how to help themselves
therein. Now the reason why the Lord instanceth for this in the wild-goats and
hinds, is, because, as writers constantly affirm, of all creatures these do
bring forth their young with greatest difficulty; (whence it is mentioned as a
mighty work of God, that by the noise of the thunder he hastens their bringing
forth, Psalm. 29.9. The voice of the Lord makes the hinds to calve;) and that
therefore when their time draws nigh, they are wont to eat of an herb called
Seselis, which makes their birth the more easy; which, if true, is indeed a
wonderful work of God.

Verse. 3. They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, etc.] That
is, Knowing by the instinct of nature the time of their bringing forth, they
compose themselves to such a posture, as may be most for their own ease, and
least hurtful to their young ones; for bowing their bodies, they strain
themselves, and so by this natural midwifery, without any help, they bring
forth their young ones; whereas tame and house-bred cattle have sometimes help
in this case. As for the last clause, they cast out their sorrows, though some
understand it, of the mournful cries they utter by reason of their pains and
sorrows, yet I rather take it to be meant of their straining out their pains
together with their young ones.

Verse. 4. Their young ones are in good liking, etc.] That is, Though they come
so hardly into the world, and have none to take care of them, but those
unreasonable creatures their dams, yet presently, or within some short time
after, they are in good plight: they grow up with corn; that is, say some
Expositours, they grow up, as if they were fed with corn: but I rather think
the meaning of these words is, that after they have been suckled but a while,
they soon learn to feed on corn, and so grow up apace: and then their dams soon
cast them off, not being like the children of men, that must be many years
nursed up by their mothers; they go forth, and return not unto them, and yet
through Gods Providence they make a shift to live.

Verse. 5. Who has sent out the wild ass free? etc.] That is, Who but I have
made the wild ass of such a fierce and untameable nature, that he will by no
means be brought into subjection, but will range abroad freely in the
wilderness wherever he pleases? As for the expression here used, of sending
out the wild ass free, and loosing the bands of the wild ass, either it is
used only to imply, that God has given him such a nature, that he will be
free, there is no binding him with bands, as other creatures may be; or else,
that no man could bring them into subjection, that afterward he might let them
loose again; or else in reference to those homebred asses, that are so tame,
and so readily serviceable to man in all kind of drudgery; as if he had said,
Since these asses are in such bondage to men, how come those wild asses, that
are so like the other in all other regards, to be sent out free? Some conceive
the drift of this Question to be, that Job should take notice of this
wonderful work of Gods Providence, that these poor creatures should enjoy such
freedom and liberty, the choicest of outward privileges, whereas men for the
most part live in subjection and bondage: But I rather conceive, that the aim
thereof is, only to hint the observablenesse and unsearchablenesse of Gods
Providence, in that he has given to the wild ass a nature so different from
that of others, that seem to be of the same kind, whereby it is that he keeps
always in the wilderness, not needing the help of man to provide for him, as
the other have: whereby also an intimation may be given, that as it would be a
folly to enquire, why God has made some creatures free from man's subjection,
and others not; so likewise it would be, to seek a reason of other counsels of
God, as why God should make some rich and others poor, why some are bound in
the cords of affliction and others left free.

Verse. 7. He scorneth the multitude of the city, etc.] This is diversely
understood by Expositours: as first, that he scorns the tumult and confusion of
the city, preferring far before that a solitary and retired life in the
desert; secondly, that he regards not the company of men, as some beasts do,
nor the provision which is made for those tame beasts that live amongst them;
thirdly, that he scorneth to be in bondage and subjection, as men are; and
fourthly, that he scorneth to be brought into subjection, though never so great
a multitude of people should attempt to do it. And indeed this last Exposition
seems best to agree with those words, the multitude of the city; as likewise
with the following clause, neither regards he the crying of the driver, that
is, he will not be ruled, as some other beasts are, to go this way or that at
the command and voice of the driver.

Verse. 8. The range of the mountains is his pasture, etc.] As if he had said,
He will not be pent up within pales and hedges, nor be fed so scantly and
coursly as the tame asses many times are, but rangeth abroad where he lists,
and so feeds plentifully on whatever likes him best.

Verse. 9. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? or abide by thy crib?] To
wit, as the horse and ox will; for here the Unicorn is opposed to the horse or
ox, as before the wild ass was opposed to the tame: as if he should have
said, God having made the Unicorn of such a fierce and untameable nature, can
thou change their nature, to make them serve thee? No; even the horse and the
ox would be too strong for thee, if God had not fitted them with a nature that
makes them willing to serve man.

Verse. 10. Can thou bind the Unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he
harrow the valleys after thee?] That is, Can thou fasten him to the plough,
and make him draw the plough in the furrows before thee? or, when thou leadest
him fastened to the harrow, will he follow after thee to harrow the valleys?
Some understand the last clause thus, will he harrow the valleys after thee?
that is, after thou have ploughed them? But the first Exposition is best.

Verse. 11. Will thou trust him, because his strength is great? etc.] To wit,
with the work of thy husbandry? or will thou leave thy labor to him? that is,
will thou leave thy work in ploughing, carting, etc. to be done by him? or,
will thou leave thy hay and corn, the fruit of thy labor, to be brought in by
him?

Verse. 12. Will thou believe him that he will bring home thy seed? etc.] That
is, say some Expositours, that he will so plough and husband thy ground, that
at harvest there shall be a good return of thy seed brought home? But it may
far better be understood of inning his harvest, Will thou believe that he
will at harvest bring home thy corn? which the following words, and gather it
into thy barn, do plainly express.

Verse. 13. Gave thou the goodly wings unto the Peacocks? etc.] Under this
particular instance of the Peacock, as likewise of the stork and the ostrich,
(as some translate the following clause, the feathers of the stork and the
ostrich) all other birds are comprehended, whom God has clothed with such
beautiful and goodly feathers; a work far above the skill and power of man.
But if we read the last clause, as it is in our Bibles, or wings and feathers
unto the ostrich? that which I conceive is noted as observable in this creature
is, not only the goodlinesse of her feathers, but especially that she should
have wings and feathers, whereas she flies not in the air as birds do, and for
the huge vastness of her body may seem a beast rather then a bird.

Verse. 14. Which leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust.]
For, whether it be because the exceeding weightinesse of the ostriches body
might endanger the breaking of her eggs, or because through the scarcity of her
feathers she cannot afford them warmth enough to hatch them, by the instinct of
nature she leaves her eggs in the earth, covering them only with the sand,
which being heated by the Sun, does by the special Providence of God hatch her
eggs; and therefore these birds by the same Providence are never in any other
but hot countries. Some understand the last clause of the ostriches sitting a
while upon her eggs: but I rather think it is said she warmeth them in the
dust, because she leaves them there to be warmed.

Verse. 16. She is hardened against her young ones, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, she regards not her young ones after they are hatched. But that it
should rather be understood of her careless leaving her eggs in the dust seems
most probable, because the following clause seems also to have respect to that;
her labor is in vain, without fear, that is, her labor in breeding, laying,
and hiding her eggs, is in vain, because she leaves them at last so carelessly,
not fearing what will become of them. I know this last clause is otherwise
expounded by some, her labor is in vain, without fear, that is, by leaving her
eggs so, she loses her labor in laying them; which yet she does without
fear, not having any cause to fly from them for fear, (for what creature needs
she fear, being of so mighty a stature and strength?) but merely out of a
natural regardlesnesse of them.

Verse. 17. Because God has deprived her of wisdom, etc.] That is, he has
not given her that instinct of love and providence for her young ones, that he
has given to other creatures.

Verse. 18. What time she lifts up her self on high, etc.] This phrase seems
to imply the wonderful height of this Bird, being usually, as is said, higher
then a man on horseback. However the meaning of these words is, that when she
raises up her self to get away from those that seek to surprise her, she
scorneth the horse and his rider, that is, she easily outstrips them, and so
fears them not. For though she cannot fly in the air, her wings being little,
and the bulk of her body so exceeding great; yet therewith she hastens her
flight, running and flying both together, and so scorns that the speedyest
horseman should overtake her.

Verse. 19. Have thou given the horse strength? etc.] Upon the mention that was
made of the horse and his rider in the close of the foregoing verse, the Lord
takes occasion to speak next of the courage and strength of the horse; and that
to imply the infinite power of that God that made him, and how desperate a
thing it must needs be to contend with him, or to murmr against him. For the
following clause, Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? though some
understand it of the strength of his neck, wherewith (say they) rushing upon
the enemy, he gives him such a shock, that he apprehends himself, as it were,
to be thunder-stricken; yet I question not, but that it must be understood of
his mighty neighings: for first, the thundering noise thereof may well be
ascribed to his neck, not only because the force whereby he neighs comes
through his neck, but likewise because the horse when he neighs does usually
advance and shake his neck with a great deal of terror; and secondly, the word
clothed implies, that his neighing was an exceeding ornament to this goodly
creature, Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? as if he had said, Thou
may trim and adorn his neck with trappings and ribbands, and the glittering
bosses of a bridle, but can thou cloth his neck with the thunder of his
neighings, as I have done?

Verse. 20. Can thou make him afraid as a grassehopper? etc.] This is a manner
of speech, whereby far more is employed then is expressed; as if he had said,
He is another manner of creature then to be scared with every noise, as the
grassehopper will be: the least stirring that they hear will make them hushed
and fly away and hide themselves, whereas the terriblest noises of an army do
rather embolden the horse, then make him afraid. As for the next clause, the
glory of his nostrils is terrible, under those words the glory of his nostrils
may be comprehended, first, the broad, round and open glaring of his nostrils,
which is indeed one of the chief beauties of a goodly horse; secondly, the
blasts of breath, which, in his rage especially, he puffs out like smoke from
his nostrils; and thirdly, his disdainful snoring: for all these have some
terror in them.

Verse. 21. He paweth in the valley.] It is said in the valley, with respect to
that old custom of pitching their battles in valleys, especially when their
armies consisted chiefly in horse.

Verse. 22. He mocketh at fear.] By fear here may be meant every thing that is
dreadful, and apt to make a poor creature fear; and then the meaning must be,
that he slights those things that have most terror in them: or else the
passion of fear; He mocketh at fear, that is, he scorns to fear, he knows not
what belongs to it.

Verse. 23. The quiver ratleth against him, etc.] Most Expositours understand
this of the riders quiver hanging upon the horses shoulder, as our horsemens
pistols are wont to do. But these words ( against him) in our Translation seem
rather to intend the rattling of the arrows shot by the enemy against them,
which no whit daunts this courageous beast.

Verse. 24. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage, etc.] This may
be meant either of the swift galloping of the horse, to wit, that he posts away
over the ground with that speed, as if he swallowed it up; and indeed the
horses swiftness in running, though one of his chief excellencies, is no where
mentioned, if not here: or else of his furious carriage of himself, to wit,
that what with the pawing of his feet, and what with the gnashing of his teeth,
the champing of his bridle, and foaming at the mouth, he seems as if he were
mad to be fighting, as if he could tear the very ground he stands on with his
teeth, and swallow it up. And so likewise the next clause, neither believes he
that it is the sound of the trumpet, may be also understood two several ways:
to wit, either that he is so eagerly desirous to have the battle begin, that
when the trumpet does sound to the battle, he can scarce believe it is so; or,
that in point of fearing the warning that is thereby given of the dangers
approaching, he is no more moved thereby, then if it were not the sound of a
trumpet; it troubles him no more then if he heard one playing upon a pipe for
his pleasure.

Verse. 25. He says among the trumpets, Ha, ha, etc.] That is, He rejoices at
it; yea by his proud neighings he does as it were answer the trumpets again in
a kind of scorn and challenge.

Verse. 26. Does the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the
South? etc.] This that is here said of the hawks stretching her wings toward
the South, some understand thus, that when the South wind blows sweetly and
gently, she uses to stretch forth her wings thereto, either thereby to refresh
her self, or else that this may help forward the casting off her old feathers,
and the growing out of new ones in the room of them; which she does yearly (as
other birds also do, whence is that Psalm. 103.5. thy youth is renewed like the
eagles:) or else, that she stretches forth her wings toward the Sun in the
South, for the reasons before mentioned. But others understand it of her flying
Southward, to wit, that when winter comes, she is wont then to fly into some
hoter Southern country, or that having cast her feathers, she then returns to
some warmer climate.

Verse. 27. Does the eagle mount up at thy command? etc.] To wit, so far
higher then any other birds? Yet some understand this more particularly, of the
eagles flying plain upright into the air; which, they say, no other bird can
do but she.

Verse. 29. Her eyes behold afar off.] And hence in part it is, that the
invasion of an enemy from a far country is so often compared in the
Scriptures to the eagles falling upon her prey, as Deuteronomy. 28.49, and Hab. 1.8.
their horsemen shall come from far, they shall flee as the eagle that hastes
to eat.

Verse. 30. Her young ones also suck up blood, etc.] Some say that eagles never
drink water, but blood only: but whether it be so or no, in that their young
ones are trained up to feed on creatures they have newly slain, etc. they may
well be said to suck up blood.

CHAP. XL.
Verse. 1. MOreover, the Lord answered Job.] That is, Having for a while made a
stop and been silent, to see what Job would say, (as the following words which
he now adds do also clearly imply,) the Lord began again, and proceeded to
answer to what Job had formerly spoken.

Verse. 2. Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct him? etc.] As if
he should have said, Judge now by this which thou have heard, whether man be
able or fit to contend with the Almighty God, whether any such poor wretch, as
will undertake to contend with me, be able to instruct me how to do any thing
more wisely or justly, then I have done it. If in none of these my works,
whereof I have spoken, there is nothing you can blame, why should thou think
me blameworthy for my dealing with thee? If thou can not comprehend these my
ordinary works, how can thou think to judge of the secret counsels of my
providence? he that reproves God let him answer it, that is, let him answer to
this which I now say, whether he that contendeth with God can instruct him; or,
let him answer to that, or any one thing of that which I have before spoken;
or, let him answer it, that is, let him answer for his reproving of God. And
thus he covertly taxes Job for his foolish boldness in daring to expostulate
with God as he had done, and in desiring so earnestly that he might plead his
cause with him, whereas now when God had begun to argue with him, he had
nothing to say.

Verse. 3. Then Job answered the Lord.] Though hitherto he durst not reply a
word, as being appalled with Gods immediate parlee and the terror of the
whirlwind, and fully convinced of his folly, and that he had thereby provoked
God to be angry with him; yet because the Lord in his last words seemed to
upbraid him with his silence, he now addresseth himself to give an account
thereof, even by an humble acknowledgement, that his mouth was stopped, and
that he had nothing to say for himself.

Verse. 4. Behold, I am vile; what shall I answer thee? etc.] That is, I am
every way base and worthless, and no way fit to contend with a God of such
infinite power and wisdom and holiness, as all thy works declare thee to be:
yea a vile and wicked thing it was in me to speak of thee in so peremptory a
manner as I have done: neither have I any thing to answer for my self, but I
now renounce my challenge; I will lay mine hand upon my mouth: concerning which
expression see the Note chap. 21.5.

Verse. 5. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, etc.] That is,
several times. See the Note chap. 33.14.

Verse. 6. Then answered the Lord unto Job out of the whirlwind.] Though Job was
fully already convinced, and had humbled himself before God, and promised
amendment of that wherein he had been faulty; yet the Lord again in the
whirlwind replies upon Job, and that to the same purpose as before, thereby yet
farther to humble him, and to assure him of the infinite power, wisdom and
justice of God, that so if there were any scruple remaining in his mind, it
might be removed, and he might be brought wholly to resign himself to the good
will of God. For besides that the best of Gods servants, by reason of the
remainders of corruptions in them, have need to have these things often pressed
upon them, for Job in particular this might seem the more needful, because he
had not yet begged pardon of God, nor had yet, at least plainly and expressly,
acknowledged his fault, as afterward he did, chap. 42.3, etc. Concerning the
whirlwind see the Note chap. 38.1.

Verse. 7. Gird up thy loins now like a man, etc.] As if he should have said,
What? do thou flinch? That were a shame for thee, that did erewhile with so
much confidence desire thou might plead thy cause with me: Gird up thy loins
now like a man; I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me: concerning
which words see the Note before, chap. 38.3.

Verse. 8. Will thou also disannull my judgment? etc.] To wit, by condemning
that which I have done to thee, as unjust; for so the following clause seems to
explain this, will thou condemn me, that thou may be righteous? Yet this
question may imply somewhat more, namely, whether Job would undertake, as a
superior judge, to make void the sentence which God, had passed, or to order
an alteration in that which God had done; because when men condemn Gods
proceedings, they take upon them, as if they could rectify that which God had
done amiss. As for this word also, either it may be referred to the person of
Job, as if he had said, It were no wonder that wicked ungodly men should thus
exalt themselves against me; but will thou also disannull my judgment? or else
to the evil which he charge upon him, will thou also disannull my judgment?
as if he had said, Is it not enough for thee to defend thy self, but thou will
also condemn me?

Verse. 9. Have thou an arm like God? etc.] That is, Is thy strength equal to
mine? Now this is added to imply, that seeing it was not so, he was no way fit
therefore to contend with God, nor to blame what he did in the government of
the world, whose acts of government he could in no degree imitate, and who must
needs be infinite in justice, as he was in power, and can no way fail therein,
as being the great Judge of all the world.

Verse. 10. Deck thy self now with majesty and excellency, etc.] To wit, as
earthly Princes use to do, when they sit in the throne of judgment; or,
according to that majesty and glory wherewith I am adorned, as it is said Psalm.
104.1. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honor and
majesty, etc. So that the drift of these words is to imply, either that though
he could set out himself with all the majesty, wherewith any earthly prince is
arrayed, yet he could not do those great works mentioned in the following
verses, which God daily does in the government of the world; or else, that he
poor wretch was no way capable of that majesty and glory which was in God. And
indeed considering the poor condition wherein Job now lay covered over with
dust and scabs, there was much sharpness in this Ironicall expression, Deck
thy self now with majesty and excellency, and array thy self with glory and
beauty.

Verse. 11. Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath, etc.] The drift of these words is
to imply, how unable Job was in his wrath to destroy the wicked here and there
all the world over, as God did; and so the following words likewise, and behold
every one that is proud, and abase him, imply that, first, Job could not take
notice of all that proudly exalted themselves against God, whereas they were
all continually in Gods eye: or secondly, that he could not destroy them with a
look, as God did, according to that Hab. 3.6. He beheld and drove asunder the
nations, and Psalm. 104.32. He looks on the earth, and it trembles.

Verse. 12. And tread down the wicked in their place.] That is, every wicked man
in his place all the world over. Some would have the drift of the words to be
this, that Job could not destroy them in their place, that is, where their
power was greatest, as God could. But the first Exposition agrees best with
the foregoing words.

Verse. 13. Hide them in the dust together, and bind their faces in secret.]
That is, Cut them off, and throw them into the grave together, how many or of
what condition soever they be, where they may be laid low out of sight, and
their very memories may perish for ever. This, I conceive, is the true meaning
of these words; and that phrase of binding their faces, may allude to the
usual custom of tying some linen cloth about the faces of dead men. I know
the words may well bear diverse other Expositions; as first, the bringing down
of wicked men to a low and poor condition, where they may be as men cast out of
sight, and may not appear to do any hurt; or secondly, the casting them into
prison, and so the phrase of binding their faces may allude to the custom of
covering the faces of those that were condemned, concerning which see the Note
Esth. 7.8. or thirdly, the forcing of them to hide themselves in the caves of
the earth, according to that Isa. 2.10. Enter into the rock, and hide thee in
the dust, for fear of the Lord, etc. But the first Exposition may justly be
preferred before all the rest.

Verse. 14. Then will I also confess unto thee, that thine own right hand can
save thee.] That is, that thou art God as I am, almighty and independent, of
thy self able to do what thou please; and consequently, that thou being
equal to me, art strong enough to maintain thine own cause, and that therefore
it is no wonder that thou should dare to contend with me.

Verse. 15. Behold now Behemoth, which I made with thee, etc.] Almost all
Expositours agree, that it is the Elephant that is here called Behemoth: and
they say, that because the Hebrews had no peculiar name for this beast,
therefore they called it Behemoth, which is, by interpretation, Beasts, and
that with respect to the exceeding greatness of his body, as it were to imply
that he was the beast of beasts, or that in him there were many beasts met in
one, and that he was full as big as two or three other beasts. As for those
words, which I made with thee, either they are added to imply, that God made
the Elephant as well as he made man, and perhaps also that he made him on the
same day when he made man, to wit, on the sixth day of the creation, Behold now
Behemoth which I made with thee, that is, thy fellow creature, the work of my
hands as thou art; or else, to imply, that he was created to live on the earth,
(which may be added as in opposition to the Leviathan mentioned in the next
chapter, that lives in the sea) and that not amongst the wild beasts, but
amongst those that are tame and gentle, that love to live with man, and that
are for the use and service of man. And to the same purpose also may the next
clause be added, he eats grass as an ox, to wit, that he lives not by
preying upon other creatures, as wild beasts do, (which may seem strange in a
creature so terrible, as that seems to be) but feeds on pasture, as other
house-beasts do: though withal I conceive the singular Providence of God is
thereby likewise hinted to us, in that he has appointed grass to be the food
of this beast* which had they lived by preying upon flesh, as the wild beasts
do, in regard of the mighty bulk of their bodies, one might well think they
would devour all before them, and that the flesh of man and beasts would
scarcely suffice them. Now this concerning the Elephant is here mentioned, to
intimate the infinite wisdom and strength of God that made him, and who
orders him as he pleases, which man otherwise could not do; thereby to
discover the folly of Job in contending with God, and what cause he had
therefore to beg pardon for it.

Verse. 16. Lo now his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navell
of his belly.] As if he should have said, His strength is not in his horns or
claws, as it is with those beasts that live upon prey, but in those parts,
whereby he is enabled to bear huge burdens for the use of man, namely in his
loins, and in the navell of his belly; wherein the Elephant is of such
exceeding strength, that it is almost incredible to think what mighty burdens
they will carry, as may appear by that instance 1 Maccab. 6.37. where it is
said, that the Elephants which Antiochus had in his army, had each of them
towers of wood upon their backs, in every one whereof there were two and thirty
fighting men. The greatest difficulty in these words is, why the strength of
this beast is said partly to be in the navell of his belly: for which some say,
that hereby is employed, that even those parts are firm and strong in this
beast, which in others are tender and weak; and others say that the meaning of
the words is only this, that the body of this beast is every way of mighty
strength, both above and beneath; which they say is evident, in that he is able
to endure such mighty girding about his belly, as must needs be used for the
fastening of such exceeding burdens upon his back. But the ground of this
expression may also be, because by the arteries that are fastened to the navell
the vital parts within the body are as it were held and bound up together: to
which that speech of Solomon's may also have reference, It shall be health to
thy navell, Prove. 3.8.

Verse. 17. He moves his tail like a cedar, etc.] Or, as it is in the margin of
our Bibles, He sets up his tail like a cedar: And some understand thereby
his yard, others that which we properly call his tail; affirming that it is
compared to a cedar, both because of the greatness of it, and also because
when it is set up, it stands straight upright like a huge tall cedar, and is
likewise plain and smooth, the Elephants tail not being shaggy and hairy as
other creatures are. But because all writers affirm, and by experience it is
known, that neither the tail nor the yard of this creature is great, but very
little rather, considering the vast bulk of its body; I should rather think it
is meant of the strength or stiffnesse of his tail, which a man can stir or
bend no more then a cedar; or of his generative part, which may the rather be
thought, because of the following clause, the sinews of his stones are wrapped
together, to wit, within his body close up to his reins, as we shall see the
roots of trees folded together in the earth: for as the tail before was
compared to a cedar, so these are compared to the roots thereof; and the
testicles of this beast do not appear outwardly, as they do in other creatures.

Verse. 18. His bones are as strong pieces of brass; his bones are like bars of
iron.] That is, as strong: and some do herein also comprehend the Elephants
teeth.

Verse. 19. He is the chief of the ways of God, etc.) That is, the chief of all
the works of God amongst the beasts, to wit, for bigness, strength, and
strange sagacity to conceive and learn what is taught him: he that made him can
make his sword to approach unto him; that is, though in regard of his
matchless strength man could never have grappled with him nor subdued him, had
not God made him of such a gentle and tractable disposition, (as appears by his
unresistable violence when he is enraged) yet God can many ways easily destroy
him.

Verse. 20. Surely the mountains bring him forth food, etc.] That is, unless he
be tamed by men, he rangeth abroad on the mountains, and there feeds himself;
(and this may be mentioned to note the wonder of Gods providence, that such
huge creatures should there find food sufficient) where all the beasts of the
field play, to wit, as no way fearing the Elephant, though of so terrible an
aspect, in regard he preys not upon flesh, as other beasts do.

Verse. 21. He lies under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed and fens.]
That is, By reason of his natural heat, and being bred in hot countries, he
loves to abide and rest himself in shadowy and watery places: and no more can
be meant by these words he lies, if it be true, which is commonly said, that
having no joints in his legs, the Elephant never lies down on the ground.

Verse. 23. Behold, he drinks up a river and hastes not.] Because the
Elephant drinks so exceeding much, and fetches such long draughts, by reason
partly of their great heat and thirst, and partly of the huge capacity of their
bellies, hence is this expression, he drinks up a river and hastes not, that
is, he drinks as if he would drink up a whole river, and does not for fear of
any creature hasten his draught, as the dogs are said to drink by snatches in
Nilus for fear of the Crocodile, and as many other creatures are wont, through
the frightfulness of their disposition, to break their draught and stare about
them. He trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth; that is, in the
vast imagination of his fancy he thinks he can suck up all Jordan into his
mouth: and this river is particularly named, because it was famously known in
Idumea where Job lived, near to the borders whereof it ran, and perhaps because
there were many Elephants in those times in the countries through which this
river went.

Verse. 24. He takes it with his eyes; his nose pierces through snares.]
Another Translation of these words we have in the margin of our Bibles, Will
any take him in his sight? or bore his nose with a gin? and the meaning of the
words so translated is plain, to wit, that the Elephant, when he is wild,
cannot be taken openly by force, (there must be some wiles used to take him)
nor were it possible for men to put a hook into his nose, therewith to lead him
away, when they had taken him: which may well be spoken with reference to the
nature of Elephants, if that be true which is commonly said, that though they
may easily be tamed and made gentle, yet they will never endure to have a
halter or bridle put upon their heads, a bit into their mouths, or a ring into
their noses, as some other beasts will. But reading the words, as they are in
our Translation, He takes it with his eyes; his nose pierces through snares;
either the meaning is, that he sees the snare when men go about to ensnare
him, ( He takes it or discovers it with his eyes,) and thereupon with his
trunk he easily makes his way through the snares that are set for him; or else,
that he takes it with his eyes, that is, He no sooner sees the river, but
presently by reason of his thirst he thinks to drink it all up: his nose
pierces through snares, that is, he thrusts his snout so deep into the water,
(which is a sign of strength in beasts) that with his nose he makes way through
stubs and sharp stones, and other things, that lie as snares to hurt his snout
in the bottom of the river: which may be thought the more probable,
considering that it is commonly said of the Elephant, that he is wont with his
snout to stir the mud in the bottom of rivers before he will drink.

CHAP. XLI.
Verse. 1. Can thou draw out Leviathan with a hook? or his tongue with a cord
which thou let down?] That is, Can thou by angling take him, and so draw
him out of the sea with a line and a hook? because the fish is wont to swallow
down the anglers hook and line together, which the angler perceiving jerks up
the line, and so the hook is struck into the fish, sometimes into the root or
palate of his tongue; hence is the second clause in this verse, or his tongue
with a cord which thou let down? The drift of that which is said here
concerning the Leviathan, is the same as before in that which was said
concerning Behemoth, concerning which see the Note chap. 40.15. The great
question is what this Leviathan is, whether the Crocodile, as some say, or the
sea-dragon, as others, or the Whale, which is noted Genesis 1.21. as the greatest
of all living Creatures. The most Expositours understand it of the whale or
whirl-pool; not those whales which are usual in the Baltic or Mediterranean
sea, (with which the description here given us of the Leviathan does not agree
in every particular;) but those monsters which have been sometimes seen in the
great Ocean. And indeed that it must be meant of some sea monster is evident;
for as before he spoke of the greatest of the Creatures that live on the earth,
so now he speaks of the greatest that live in the sea: and wherever the
Scripture mentions the Leviathan, it speaks of him, as of a sea monster; as
Psalm. 104.26. There go the ships, there is that Leviathan, whom thou have made
to play therein; and where the king of Egypt is compared to this Leviathan, as
Psalm.74.13, 14. Ezekiel. 29.3, 4. and in other places.

Verse. 2. Can thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a
thorn?] Some hold that here the same question, with that in the foregoing verse
is again propounded in other terms, namely, whether he could in angling strike
his nose or his jaw through with a fish-hook; for that, they say, is called a
thorn in the second clause, either because they used thorns sometimes in stead
of fish-hooks, or because their fish-hooks were sharp as a thorn. Others will
have the question here propounded to be, whether he could with an awle or thorn
bore through his nose or jaws, and so ring him, as men ring hogs or bears, or
lead him up and down by the nose, as bears will be led, or at least bring him
into subjection. But I make no question but that, as in the foregoing verse he
spoke ironically of his angling for the Leviathan, as if he were some little
fish, so here he speaks of carrying him home when he had caught him, Can thou
put an hook into his nose? etc. that is, when thou have taken him, can thou
hang him upon a fishers hook, a rush or thorn-twig, struck through his nose, or
jaws, or gils, and so carry him home?

Verse. 3. Will he make many supplications unto thee? etc.] That is, Will he
with humble and flattering words entreat thee to give over pursuing him, or to
spare his life? either there is an allusion to men overmaster'd by their mighty
oppressors, who are thereupon forced to fawn upon them and beg their favor;
or to men overcome in battle, who are then wont with all the art and humility
they can, to beg for their lives; or else to spanniels, that will lie down
before a man, and fawn upon him, as if they would beg for favor.

Verse. 4. Will thou make a covenant with him? etc.] To wit, as men are wont to
covenant with those they have taken in war, that they shall pay them such a
ransom or tribute, or that they shall be their vassals and servants; or as men
are wont to covenant with those they hire to be their servants: for to either
of these the following words may also have reference, will thou take him for a
servant for ever? The drift of both is to imply, that there was no taming or
subduing the Leviathan, or that he could never be brought to serve men for hay
and corn, as other creatures did.

Verse. 5. Will thou play with him, as with a bird? will thou bind him for thy
maidens?] That is, will thou tie him in a string for thy little girls to make
sport with, or for thy maidens, that they may have them for thy children to
play with? The drift of the words is to imply, how impossible it was to use the
whale thus in regard of his vastness and terror.

Verse. 6. Shall the companions make a banquet of him? etc.] Will thou (as
fishermen are wont to do, when they have taken some extraordinary fish) make a
feast with him, by way of rejoicing or vaunting at the greatness of thy
draught? and so eat him, thou and thy companions together? that is, thy
friends, whom thou invitest, or thy fellow-fishermen, joined in company with
thee? for fishermen are wont to join in partnership together, especially for
the taking of greater fishes. And so likewise the following clause, shall they
part him among the merchants? may also be understood of their distributing him
at their eating him amongst the merchants, whom out of respect they invite to
so rare a feast; or else, of their selling him in parcels to those that use to
buy their fishes of them; or of the several commodities, which such a fish
would yield for the merchants, as whalebone, oil, etc. But however the scope of
all this is to imply, that the Leviathan was not by the strength of man to be
taken.

Verse. 7. Can thou fill his skin with barbed irons, or his head with
fish-spears?] Because these words seem plainly to allude to the ordinary manner
of taking whales in these days, we may well hence conclude, that the Leviathan
here spoken of is some more stupendous sea monster, or at least some other
kind of whale that is in the great Ocean, of far greater bulk and strength
and terror then ours are, and therefore (as these words import) not to be
taken with barbed irons and fish-spears, as ours may be.

Verse. 8. Lay thine hand upon him, etc.] That is, say some Expositours, since
there is no possibility to subdue him by force, lay your hand gently upon him,
and stroke him, and see if by that means thou can take him or tame him:
remember the battle, do no more; that is, remember how dreadful it would be
to contend with him, and therefore see only what you can do by handling him
gently. Again others take it thus, Lay thine hand upon him, etc. that is, offer
him any violence, and he will soon so use thee, that remembering the battle, you
will have no mind to meddle farther with him. But I rather understand the words
thus, Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more, Do no more
but put forth your hand to touch him a little, and think what would become of
you, if he should seize upon you, and the very thought of the danger would in a
manner strike you dead, at least you would soon be afraid to meddle any farther
with him.

Verse. 9. Behold, the hope of him is in vain.] That is, the hope of taking him.

Verse. 11. Who has prevented me that I should repay him? whatsoever is under
the whole heaven is mine.] Having said in the foregoing verse, that if no man
were able to grapple with the Leviathan, much less would they be able to
contend with God, (which is indeed the general drift of all that is here
spoken concerning this sea monster,) None is so fierce that dare stir him up;
who then is able to stand before me? hereupon he adds this, Who has prevented
me? etc. The drift whereof is, either first, to prove that it must needs be
more impossible to contend with God, then with any creature, because all the
creatures are the work of his hands, and the strength that is in any of the
creatures must needs be but a very little portion of that infinite power that
is in God, even as a drop of water. This we see is expressed in the last clause
of this verse, whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine; and the first
clause prefixed before this is to show how unquestionable clear this is, and
what a gross folly it were to ascribe the work of creation to any but him, Who
has prevented me that I should repay him? It is spoken either first, as in a
way of disdain, as if he had said, Who has made any of the creatures for me,
or been helpful to me in the making of them, that I may acknowledge his
kindness, and requite him for it, as I am abundantly able to do, having all
under heaven at my disposing? or else rather secondly, to prove that there was
no contending with God, because he was almighty, and that all the creatures,
and so all men whatsoever, were under his absolute power, that he might do
with them whatever he pleased; Who has prevented me that I should repay him?
etc. as if he should have said, There is no man so beforehand with me, by
doing any thing for me, that I should thereby be engaged to him, and become so
obnoxious to him, that I must do nothing, but what he will have me do, or
that I must be charged with injustice in that I do; and that because all the
creatures are mine, the work of mine own hands, and therefore I cannot be bound
unto any man, nor can any man justly complain of me, since I may surely do
what I will with mine own. The Apostle Paul seems to allude to this place, Romans
11.35.

Verse. 12. I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely
proportion.] Some refer this to the man spoken of in the foregoing verse, who
has prevented me that I should repay him? etc. as if the Lord had said
ironically, If there be such a man, that has thus prevented me, and so is able
to contend with me, I would not conceal his praise, etc. But methinks it is
clear, that the Lord does here return to speak of the Leviathan again.

Verse. 13. Who can discover the face of his garment? etc.] By discovering the
face of his garment may be meant, first, the plucking off his skin; as if it
had been said, who dares take him into his hands, and flea him, as men are wont
to flea an eele? or secondly, the taking away the sea from him, or at least the
leading him out of the sea, which covers him as a garment; and it does very
emphatically set forth the hugeness of this Creature, that the whole Ocean is
said to be as a garment to cover him. In this expression there seems to be an
allusion to the handling of a horse, as if it had been expressed thus, Can
thou go to him, as to a horse in a stable, take off his cloth, bridle him, and
then lead him out of the sea, as out of a stable, that there he might be viewed
or ridden? And to this agree the following words, Or who can come to him with
his double bridle? to wit, to bridle him, and lead him out of the sea. Some
read this last clause thus, Or who can come to him within his double bridle?
that is, within his lips or jaws, which being drawn open, by reason they are so
exceeding great, have huge folds and wrinkles in them, which seem like a double
bridle; and then the meaning must be, that when he gapes, no man will dare to
come within his mouth, to wit, to view the inward parts of his mouth, to take
away the prey he has gotten from thence, or to see if there he can wound him.

Verse. 14. Who can open the doors of his face? etc.] This also is meant of his
upper and nether lips or jaws, which for their greatness are like the double
doors of some city gate, and so terrible therefore, that being shut, no man
dares lay his hand upon them to force them open: which is farther set forth by
the terror of his teeth, his teeth are terrible round about. And because it is
commonly said, that the whales in our seas have no teeth, nor no scales, of
which mention is made, verse. 15, 16, 17, it may hence be concluded, that the
Leviathan here spoken of is some other sea monster, at least some other kind of
whale, then those that are usually taken in our Northern seas.

Verse. 18. By his neesings a light does shine, etc.] That is, when with his
nostrils he snores, and with great violence spouts out water aloft in the air,
this water, by reason of its whiteness and frothinesse and thinness, being
spread into several drops, appears afar off, especially in the night, like
so many flashes of lightening, or like the light of some sparkling fire, or the
breaking out of the Sun-light in the morning. To which also agrees the
following clause, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning, that is,
they are red and fiery, and yield a bright shining light, like that of the
morning. It is evident by the glittering and shining of cats eyes, when we see
them in the dark, what a sparkling light there may be in the eyes of some
creatures; and because the Leviathans eyes are also of a huge compass,
therefore they are said to appear like the breaking forth of the Sunbeams at
the first dawning of the morning.

Verse. 19. Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.]
This may be meant, first, as the words in the foregoing verse, of the
glittering of the water he spouts out of his mouth, appearing afar off like
sparkling fire; or secondly, of his breath, which being like thick and hot
smoke, appears to the beholders, as if there were some great fire from whence
it proceeded, as is expressed in the following verse, Out of his nostrils goes
smoke, as out of a seething pot or caldron; or thirdly, of the exceeding heat
of his breath, which by reason of the fiery constitution of his body may be
sulphurous, and so appear as fire, or at least exceeding hot, as if there were
sparkles or flames of fire went along in it, or as if it were hot enough to set
any thing on fire, (for all these are hyperbolicall expressions) according to
that which follows verse. 21. his breath kindles coals. And indeed that
inward heat, which must concoct meat for such a mountainous body, had need to
be like that of those huge fires in kitchins, where meat is dressed for great
families.

Verse. 22. In his neck remains strength, etc.] That is, In that part of his
body which is next his head, which is the neck in other creatures, he is
exceeding strong, and able to bear down all before him: and sorrow is turned
into joy before him; that is, that which is very terrible in it self* and would
exceedingly fright others, and cause sorrow and mourning in others, as when he
meets with other huge sea monsters, or ships armed for fight, or any other
enemy, it is a joy to him, as hoping then to get some good prey, or delighting
in his pride to try his strength upon them.

Verse. 24. His heart is as firm as a stone, yea as hard as a piece of the
nether millstone.] That is, He is as fearlesse and mercylesse, as if his heart
were of stone, yea the hardest of stones: for the nether millstone is named, not
so much because that still stands firm and is never moved, as because the
millstone is made of a very hard stone, and the nether millstone, because it must
bear the other, is usually the harder of the two. Some understand it as an
hyperbolicall expression of the hardness of the flesh of his heart, to wit,
that it is firm and hard, more like a stone then flesh. But the former
Exposition I like much better.

Verse. 25. When he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid, etc.] That is,
When he lifts up himself, and so is seen above the waters, as a mountain in
the sea, the stoutest that are, whether you understand it of fishes, beasts or
men, will be afraid: and it may more especially be meant of mariners and
soldiers in ships, men that are of all the most bold and fearlesse; and to men
I am sure the following clause must be restrained, by reason of breakings they
purify themselves, that is, by reason of the Leviathans violent breaking of the
sea, as he turns this way or that, which makes it perilously rough and
boisterous; or by reason of the mighty waves dashing and breaking one upon
another, or upon any thing that is in their way, occasioned by the rouling of
his vast body in the sea; or by reason of his usual breaking and dashing of
ships in pieces, they apprehend themselves in present danger of death, and so
thereupon do what they can to expiate their sins, that, if it may be, they may
be delivered from that danger, as by confessing their sins, by praying to God
for mercy and favor, by offering sacrifices, or at least binding their souls
in a vow for sacrifices or other things. Some understand it of their vomiting,
by reason of the seas tumbling their ship, as if it had been translated, they
purge themselves, or of a worse purging through fear; but our translation, they
purify themselves, will hardly bear such an Exposition.

Verse. 26. The sword of him that lays at him cannot hold, the spear, the
dart, nor the habergeon.] Or, the breast plate. This last is mentioned amongst
the rest, to imply, that as no weapon can hurt him, so no arms can defend the
man that shall dare to contend with him; that his teeth will pierce through an
iron breast plate, as easily as through a man's skin; or that, be a man never so
well armed, he will soon for all that devour and swallow him up.

Verse. 30. Sharp stones are under him, etc.] That is, Usually he lies upon the
sharpest-pointed stones and rocks, and yet they never hurt him. As for the next
clause, he spreads sharp-pointed things upon the mire, though some take them
to be a high hyperbole, to wit, that by his weight he grinds the stones into
dust, and so spreads it upon the mire; yet I rather conceive that by
spreading sharp-pointed things upon the mire is only meant, that by his weight
he often breaks the craggy and sharp ends and pieces of the rocks he lies upon,
which by that means are scattered here and there upon the mire in the bottom
of the sea: or else the scattering of stones slung at him, and the pieces of
swords and spears and darts, which being broken upon his scales do fall and
sink down to the bottom of the sea.

Verse. 31. He makes the deep to boil like a pot, etc.] The meaning is, that
partly by the moving of his huge body, and partly by his blowing out the waters
from his mouth, he causes the sea to swell, and tumble and bubble and foam, as
a pot of seething water will do, when it boyls on the fire. And in the
following clause he compares it particularly to the boiling of a pot of
ointment, he makes the sea like a pot of ointment; either because that uses
to be done with a violent fire, and by reason of its thickness does rise and
swell the more; or else rather to express how muddy the sea is made thereby,
and what a froth and scum there will be on the top of the waters,

Verse. 32. He makes a path to shine after him: one would think the deep to be
hoary.] That is, As he swims along he leaves a kind of furrow behind him, which
appears as the path where he went, where the water is shining and frothy, as if
there were a hoary frost upon the waters.

Verse. 33. Upon the earth there is not his like, etc.] No, not the Behemoth
before spoken of.

Verse. 34. He beholds all high things, etc.] Some understand this of the
height of his body, to wit, that when he raises up himself, he can behold the
very tops of the masts of ships, and the highest hills and mountains on the
lands. But there are two other Expositions of the words, that seem far more
probable: first, that that they were intended to set forth his fearlesnesse, to
wit, that he is not afraid to behold the mightiest and most terrible of all
Gods creatures, but rather beholds them with fierceness and fury, according to
that expression chap. 40.11. behold every one that is proud, and abase him: and
secondly, that they imply with what scorn and contempt he looks upon the
mightiest of the creatures, either by sea or land; he beholds all high
things, that is, he despises them, he looks downward upon them, slighting them
as far inferior to him, according to that Cant. 1.6. Look not upon me, that
is, despise me not, because I am black; he is a king over all the children of
pride, that is, the greatest, the mightiest, the proudest of all the creatures
by sea or land, that pride themselves in their great strength.

CHAP. XLII.
Verse. 2. I Know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought can be
withholden from thee.] That is, that it is not possible to withhold thee from
doing any thing thou have thought or purposed to do: which is more fully
expressed in the Translation set in the margin of our Bibles, and that no
thought of thine can be hindered: yet we must know withal, that Jobs aim in
these words, I know thou can do every thing, etc. was not only to profess
that he knew God was able to do whatever he pleased, but also that he had
authority and power to do what he would, that being the sovereign Lord over
all, and infinitely wise and good and just, he might do whatever he pleased;
and so withal to imply, that it was no way fit that any man should murmr
against that which God does, and that it was mere madness for any man to think
to contend with him. Though therefore Job had spoken as much before concerning
the omnipotency of God, yet there was more intended in these words then that:
for whereas before by his reiterated complaints of Gods dealing so severely
with him, and by his eager desiring that he might plead his cause with God for
the clearing of himself, he had seemed to question Gods justice, (and happily
transported with the bitterness of his sufferings, his mind inclined to think,
that God had laid his hand too heavily upon him, though withal he durst not
but think that God was most just;) now he recants all this, by acknowledging
that God in regard of his Sovereignty could do with his creatures whatever he
pleased. Some understand the second clause of Gods omniscience, to wit, that no
thought of man's heart can be concealed from God; and some restrain it to Gods
knowing Jobs heart concerning that which he had now spoken, as if Job had said,
I know thou can do all things, and thou know that I speak what I think,
when I say so. But I rather think that both clauses are meant of Gods power and
right to do in all things whatever he would; wherein Jobs aim might be to
imply, that God knew how, and was many ways able, to bring glory to his name
and good to his children, even out of their afflictions; at least that however
it was both foolish and sinful for any man to contend with God about any thing
he did.

Verse. 3. Who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? etc.] Some
understand this also as spoken with reference to Gods omniscience, as if Job
had said, Who can be so brutish, as to think to hide any thought or counsel of
his heart from God? But they are plainly a repetition of the words which God
had spoken to Job chap. 38.2. (concerning which see the Note there) Job
applying them to himself with a holy kind of Indignation, thereby the more
sharply to tax his own folly in questioning Gods dealings, Who is he that
hides counsel without knowledge? as if he had said, Just cause had thou to
upbraid me with those words, as thou did erewhile, who is he that hides
counsel without knowledge? or, what a wretch was I to hide counsel without
knowledge! or, I am that very man, who have darkened counsel without knowledge.
Therefore have I uttered that I understood not, things too wonderful for me,
which I knew not: He says that he had uttered that he understood not, because
through rashness, unadvisednesse and ignorance, he had talked foolishly, he
wist not what; and that he had uttered things too wonderful for him, which he
knew not, because they were the secret counsels of God, concerning which he had
discoursed so weakly, which are indeed too high and wonderful for man to
comprehend. Some would refer this particularly to that which follows in the
next verse, as if he had said, Therefore have I uttered that I understood not,
etc. to wit, when I said (as it follows verse. 4.) Hear, and I will speak, etc.
But doubtless it is meant of all that he had spoken foolishly concerning Gods
dealing with him, that not understanding Gods ends in correcting him, yet he
had murmured, as if God had dealt too severely with him, considering how holily
he had lived, and had so boldly challenged liberty that he might plead his
cause with God, not understanding sufficiently either Gods infinite Majesty, or
his own weakness, or how unsearchable Gods ways and counsels are. So that his
drift in these words is to condemn himself in that for which God had blamed
him: though withal there is an intimation too, that he had offended not
wittingly, but through ignorance and infirmity. As for that illative particle,
(Therefore) either it implies that because he was the man that had darkened
counsel without knowledge, therefore he now confessed that he had uttered that
he understood not; or, that because he had uttered he wist not what, for this
God had justly taxed him for darkning counsel by words without knowledge.

Verse. 4. Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak, etc.] Some, as is already
noted upon the foregoing verse, think that Job here mentions the words wherein
he had spoken so foolishly. But I rather conceive that Job here professes,
that he would not hereafter speak as he had done, but as he should be taught by
God. First therefore, he desires leave to speak in an humble manner, Hear, I
beseech thee, and I will speak; reject not one that is conscious to himself of
his own weakness and folly: and then he adds, I will demand of thee, and
declare thou unto me; as if he should have said, I desire thou would hear me
speak; but it shall not be in a way of contending with thee, as I die before,
or as I desired before, but only by way of seeking to be taught by thee. So
that the last clause, I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me, may be
spoken, either as in reference to the same words spoken twice by the Lord chap.
38.3. and 40.7. as if he had said, Lord, thou were pleased to say to me, I will
demand of thee, and declare thou unto me, but with shame enough I may
acknowledge my folly in giving thee occasion to upbraid me so, and must now
desire that of thee, namely, that I may seek information of thee, and so thou
would instruct me: or else as in reference to his own words chap. 13.22.
wherein he had challenged God, as it were, that God should answer what he could
object; for now, as recanting that, he professes that when at any time he
should desire to speak to God, it should not be by way of contending with God,
but only by way of desiring instruction from God, I will demand of thee, and
declare thou unto me.

Verse. 5. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye
sees thee.] The knowledge he had now gotten of the power and sovereignty of
God he preferres before that he had before, which he had gotten by the
instruction of his forefathers and teachers; and that, as the words seem to
imply, upon these grounds: either first, because now he had been taught
immediately by God, even as if God had presented himself before him to be seen
by him; or secondly, because he had now with his eyes seen the signs of Gods
presence; or thirdly, because the enlightening of his knowledge by Gods
immediate speaking to him, was as far beyond that he had before, as the seeing
of a thing with the eye is beyond the hearing of it with the ear, it was more
clear and certain and convincing; or fourthly, because now he had been humbled
by Gods afflicting hand, which had opened his eyes, and made him see that of
God which he saw not before. All these may be comprehended in this expression,
but now mine eye sees thee; though I conceive it is primarily meant of his
beholding the visible signs of Gods presence, and the effectual working
thereof upon him.

Verse. 6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.] Either
this last clause has reference to his present sitting in the ashes, of which
mention was made chap. 2.8. (and thereof see the Note there) as if he had said,
Sitting here in dust and ashes, I do humbly repent of all I have spoken so
foolishly; or it may imply a promise that he would repent in dust and ashes,
according to the custom of those times* or else it may be meant of the low
dejection of his spirit, to wit, that he did repent with as much self-confusion
and sense of his own vileness, as if he were covered over with dust and ashes.
From chapter 3.3. to the end of this verse all has been expressed in meeter in the
original, the rest is again in prose.

Verse. 7. After the Lord had spoken these words unto Job, the Lord said to
Eliphaz, etc.] Having brought Job to humble himself, and to repent, and beg
mercy for his offense, the Lord addresseth himself next to give sentence out of
the whirlwind against his three friends, (who happily began to be exalted in
their spirits, as apprehending by the Lords checking Job for his folly, that he
took their part against him) and directing his speech to Eliphaz by name, as
being happily the ancientest and most honorable of the three, but especially
because he brake out first against Job, and had handled him most bitterly, My
wrath, says he, is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends; for ye
have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has. Wherein
is observable, first, That though Job had spoken much amiss, as is before
noted, yet he is said here to have spoken right, to wit, comparatively, he had
spoken far more rightly then his friends had done; and that because they had
condemned Job for a wicked man and an hypocrite, merely because of his heavy
afflictions; and though they spoke the truth concerning Gods punishing wicked
men, and blessing the righteous, yet it was out of an opinion, that God did
constantly deal thus with the wicked and righteous here in this world, which
was a gross error: and Job on the other side had rightly maintained his own
innocence against them, and that God did usually both prosper the wicked and
afflict the righteous; and had striven against his impatience, though he were
sometimes overborn by the bitterness of his sufferings, and the violence of
Satan's temptations: secondly, That God vouchsafed not to talk long with these
men, as he had with Job, but to show his anger, takes them up very short, and
so fends them away: and thirdly, That he never mentions Job without an
expression of his favor to him, to show what a high esteem he had of the man
whom they despised; for four several times he calls him his servant Job. As
for Elihu, because he had not so condemned Job, but only reproved him for his
rash impatient expressions, therefore God reproved not him at all.

Verse. 8. Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams, etc.] That
is, each of you seven bullocks and seven rams* and so many, and that of the
greatest sort of sacrifices were required, (whereas by Moses Law there was but
one bullock appointed for the sin-offering of a Priest) to make them know
thereby how great their sin was, and how highly God was offended with them. For
though it is probable that they aimed sincerely at Gods glory in all their
pleadings with Job, yet God would have them see how much he detested all such
rash judging of godly men; and there being so many prudent and pious men that
offend herein, he would have this left as a memorial, to testify how much he
mislikes this in any men whatsoever. As for the following words, and go to my
servant Job* and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, the meaning thereof
is this, that when they had gone and provided these cattle here enjoined them,
they should then go and carry them to Job, that so he might offer them as
sacrifices to God on their behalf. Whether Job were a Priest, as Melchisedech
was, or only the firstborn and chief of his family, (who in those times were
wont as Priests to offer sacrifices,) or whether God did now only in an
extraordinary way appoint him to do this service, we cannot certainly
conclude: but however, herein was Job a type of Christ our Mediator; and
hereby God notably does both honor Job, and try the faith, obedience, humility
and sincerity of his three friends, in making them employ Job, as Gods special
favorite, to offer up their sacrifices, to pray for them, and so to make
reconciliation between God and them, whom they had condemned as a wicked
hypocrite, hated of God, and therefore so severely punished. So that to this,
and that which God here added, my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will
(...) accept, that place seems to have reference Ezekiel. 14.14. Though these
three men, (...), Daniel and Job were in it, they should deliver but their own
souls.

Verse. 10. And the Lord tu^ned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his
friends, etc.] By this, the Lord turned the captivity of Job, is meant either
(as some say) that God ^^stored to him all that had been taken from him, as
when men carried away into captivity are brought back again^ or (...) that God
delivered him out of all the miseries, wherein before he had been as it were
held captive; or thirdly, that God did now free him from being any longer under
the power of Satan, into whose hands God had delivered him, chap. 2.6. And it
is said that this God did, when he prayed for his friends, to intimate, how
well it pleased God, that he could so heartily intercede for those that had
used him so ill: wherein he was also a type of Christ, who prayed for them that
crucified him, Luke 23.34. As for that which follows, Also the Lord gave Job
twice as much as he had before, to wit, as is afterward expressed, verse. 12.
fourteen thousand sheep, where^s he had but seven thousand before, six thousand
camels, whereas he had but three thousand before, and so in the rest chap. 1.3.
it cannot be thought that this was done in an instant, but in process of time;
though withal it is probable, that the extraordinary blessing of God upon him
was much manifested in the speedy increase of his estate.

Verse. 11. Then came there unto him all his brethren, etc.] That is, his
kindred, neighbors, and acquaintance. These had before estranged themselves
from him; either because of his poverty, or because they looked upon him as an
hypocrite, hated of God, as his three friends did, as Job often complained,
chap. 6.15. and 19.13, 14, etc. but now they came again flocking to him from
all parts. Some conceive that this was not till God had doubled, or at least
greatly increased his estate: for which I see no just ground. Rather it may be
most probably thought, that when the fame was spread abroad, how God had
appeared in a vision to Job and his friends, and had taken his part against
them, and had miraculously recovered him of all his bodily distempers, and some
way perhaps blessed him in his estate, then they came thus to visit him; and
so did eat bread with him in his house, that is, feasted with him in his own
house: which may be added also to imply Jobs meekness, who would not now
reject them, because they in his adversity had despised and forsaken him. And
then for the following words, and they bemoaned him, and comforted him, etc. to
wit, in regard of his late heavy sufferings; we may well conceive, that hereby
or herewith they did as it were excuse their former neglect of him, or perhaps
blame themselves for it. As for their presents; every man also gave him a piece
of money, and every one an ear-ring of gold, this is not mentioned, as if they
were given to relieve his poverty, and as a new stock to begin on; but only to
show, that by way of congratulating Gods mercy to him, and by way of honor and
reverence afforded him, they came with their presents to him, as to great men
in those times they were wont to do. For though Jobs loss was very great in
his cattle, yet there being no mention made of the loss of any other part of
his estate, I see no reason why we should take it for granted, that he was
brought to such a beggarly condition, as it is commonly thought.

Verse. 13. And he had seven sons, and three daughters.] Just as many as he had
before chap. 1.2. But yet some say, that because his other children were not
lost, but were alive with God in heaven, therefore even in his children his
number was doubled too; and that there was no need that his new stock of
children should be twice as many as before, as his cattle were. And to this
others add also, that he would not have had twice as great an estate to leave
to his children, as he had before, if his children had been twice as many as
they were before. But however hereby is employed, both the perfect recovery of
his health, and likewise that his wife was, together with his other friends,
reconciled to him: unless we should say with some, that these children he had
by another wife; which is not so probable, both because there is no mention of
the death of his former wife, and also because it is most probable that
presently upon his recovery God comforted him in this particular, as well as in
other things; thereby also giving him hope of children.

Verse. 14. And he called the name of the first, Iemima, etc.] Their names are
thus punctually expressed, to manifest the truth of the history.

Verse. 15. And their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.] Which
shows that they were married, not to strangers of another nation, but, for Jobs
greater comfort, to some of his own country.

Verse. 16. After this lived Job an hundred and forty years.] This also implies
the perfect recovery of his health, and makes it most probable, that he lived
before the age of Moses, of which see the Note chap. 1.1. yet how old he was
before he was afflicted is no where expressed: for that which some say, that he
was seventy years old before he was afflicted, building upon this, that his
years after his calamities, as well as his cattle, were twice as many as they
were before, which is an hundred and forty, is a mere conceit.

Verse. 17. So Job died being old and full of days.] See the Note Genesis 25.8.
Thus God made good to Job, what Eliphaz promised him if he would repent, chap.
5.26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn
comes in in his season.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the book of PSALMS.
PSALM I.
Verse. 1. BLessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,
etc.] This book is often cited by Christ, and his Apostles, by the name of the
Psalms, Luke 24.44. All things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law
of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms; and the book of Psalms, as
Luke 20.42. David himself says in the book of Psalms, The Lord said to my
Lord, etc. yea and in express terms, as written by the inspiration of the
holy Ghost, as Matthew. 22.43. How then does David in spirit call him Lord? and
Acts 1.16. The holy Ghost by the mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas,
etc. Many Expositours hold that all the Psalms were made by David; but I cannot
see that they make good what they say: for though it is very probable, that the
most of them were composed by him, and provided purposely to be sung in the
Tabernacle and the Temple, and that because it is evident that some, even of
those Psalms before which David's name is not prefixed, were yet made by David,
as we see in the second Psalm, which is expressly said to be David's, Act. 4.25.
and in the 105 Psalm, of which it is said, 1 Chronicles. 16.7. that David delivered
it into the hand of Asaph and his brethren, and yet neither of these have any
title prefixed before them (and the like may be said of others) and therefore I
conceive it is that he terms himself, the sweet Psalmist of Israel, 2 Samuel
23.1. and the Apostle Peter says that he was a Prophet, Act. 2.30; yet I
conceive it is unquestionable, that some of the Psalms were composed by other
holy men of God, that wrote also by the inspiration of Gods spirit; first,
because the prefixing this title A Psalm of David to some, implies clearly that
all are not his; secondly, because the 90. Psalm is in the title expressly
termed A Prayer of Moses; thirdly, because some of the Psalms sung in the
Temple were made by Asaph, as is plain 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Hezekiah the king and
the Princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord with the words
of David, and of Asaph the Seer; and fourthly, because it is manifest by that
which we find in diverse Psalms, that some of them were made after the Jews were
returned from the Babylonian captivity, as the 126, and the 137. yea some of
them, as is very probable, in the days of the Maccabees, when Antiochus did so
much mischief to the Jews, as Psalm. 44. As for this first Psalm, it seems
purposely set in the first place, as a Preface to all the rest, because it
commends unto men the diligent study of Gods word, and consequently, amongst
the rest, of this book of Psalms, and a holy life answerable thereunto. For
the drift of it is, to show the bliss of the godly and the unhappy condition
of the wicked, and that chiefly, I conceive, to remove the scandal of the
frequent afflictions of the godly, and the great prosperity of wicked men. The
first words of the Psalm are expressed in such a manner, as if the Psalmist had
been seriously considering of the condition of Gods righteous servants, and did
thereupon at last break forth into this Resolution, Blessed is the man that
walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, etc. The sum whereof is this,
that they are truly blessed and happy, not that seek after the riches and
honors and pleasures of the world, but that keep themselves so, that they have
not any commerce or communion in any thing with any of the wicked, that is,
that withdraw themselves from all society with such men, and partake not with
them in their evil ways. For to express this are these three several Phrases
used, that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way
of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful: wherein by these three
terms, the ungodly, sinners and the scornful, is not meant, that some are
ungodly* some sinners and some scornful; but only thereby he seeks to express
the whole impiety of wicked men; (and therefore afterward verse. 4. they are all
three comprehended under that one word ungodly; The ungodly are not so, etc.)
and by not walking in the counsel, nor standing in the way, nor sitting in the
seat of such men, is meant, not having any fellowship with such men in their
evil courses. Yet almost all Expositours observe a gradation in these words.
For first, by not walking in the counsel of the ungodly, they say is meant,
either not joining with them in their wicked consultations; or not taking or
following their advice, according to that which is said of Ahaziah 2 Chronicles.
22.4, 5. that the house of Ahab were his counselors, and that he walked also
after their counsel; or not doing as they do, according to that Job 21.16.
the counsel of the wicked is far from me. Secondly, by not standing in the way
of sinners is meant, not continuing in their evil practices, which is more then
the other. And thirdly, by not sitting in the seat of the scornful is meant,
not setting up a man's rest securely and presumptuously in the society and
practices of those that do scorn God and good men, and all ways of goodness,
but especially those good men that shall undertake to reclaim them from their
evil ways. And thus there is herein an intimation given, by what degrees men
become extremely wicked, and that the good man, though he may fall and sin, yet
he will not at least run into these extremities.

Verse. 2. But his delight is in the law of the Lord.] That is, in the word of
God: for the Scripture in general may be called the law of the Lord; so Christ
speaks of the Psalms, Joh. 10.34. Is it not written in your law, I said ye are
Gods? and indeed the drift of this Psalm may seem to be more particularly to
stir up men to the reading of the Psalms.

Verse. 3. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, etc.]
That is, by the several streams of a river; for so husband men are wont
sometimes to cut out several channels for the water of rivers to run in, the
better to water the ground where they have fruit trees growing. And because the
Psalmist speaks here of a tree whose leaf shall not wither, it must be
understood of such trees as are green all the year long; such as is the palm
tree, according to that Psalm. 92.12. the righteous shall flourish like the
palm tree, and the olive tree, Psalm. 52.8. I am like a green olive tree in the
house of God, and diverse other trees besides. Now whereas the Psalmist says
here of the godly man, that he shall be like a tree* planted by the rivers of
water, etc. the meaning is, that in general he shall constantly continue in a
flourishing and prosperous condition: and yet withal I conceive it is
principally meant of the prosperity of such a man in regard of his spiritual
estate. For though the same phrase of speech is sometimes used to set forth the
glory of a man's outward condition, as we see Ezekiel. 31.3, etc. The Assyrian was
a Cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, -- the waters made him great, etc. yet
here I say it seems principally meant of his spiritual bliss. He is compared
first, to a tree planted, to imply that his goodness is not by nature, but by
grace. Secondly, to a tree planted by the rivers of water, with respect to his
ingrafting into Christ, who is the fountain of the gardens, that is, his
Churches, Cant. 4.16; to his regeneration, and the continual supply of grace
and comfort from the spirit of Christ, wherewith his soul is continually
refreshed and quickened; and likewise to his daily meditation on Gods word,
(whereof he had spoken in the foregoing verse) which is to him the means of his
spiritual good. Thirdly, to a tree which brings forth his fruit in due
season, with respect to the holiness of his life, the fruits of Gods spirit,
and that especially manifested in the duties of his particular calling and
condition: which is also said to be in season, either because he lays hold
upon every opportunity to do good, or because his works are such as God
requires, and not like the works of hypocrites, which are like untimely fruit,
that never come to their full ripeness. Fourthly, it is said that his leaf
shall not wither, with reference to his constant perseverance in grace, and the
unchangeable constancy of his happiness; that it is not like the flourishing
of the wicked, which is only for a season, but constant and permanent, even in
the winter of adversity, and after this life is continued to eternity. As for
the last clause, And whatsoever he does shall prosper, the meaning is, either
that whatsoever he does, to wit, by the assistance of Gods spirit, shall be
accepted of God, and tend to his own salvation; or that all that he does, and
consequently all that shall befall him, shall tend to his advantage, Romans 8.28.

Verse. 4. The ungodly are not so; but are like the chafe, which the wind
drives away.] He compares them not to a tree in a barren soil, as by way of
opposition to that which is before said of the godly, one would have expected;
but the more emphatically to set forth the wretchedness of their condition, he
compares them to chaff etc. concerning which see the Note, Job 21.18.

Verse. 5. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, etc.] That
is, Because they are so unlike the righteous, or because they are like the
chaff, therefore they shall not be able to look God in the face, as being
confounded in themselves through the guilt of their own consciences; or, they
shall not be able to justify themselves, but shall be soon cast and condemned;
or, they shall not be able to endure the wrath of the Almighty, but shall sink
under it, and shall be cast out of his presence, namely in the judgment* that
is, at the day of the last judgment. For that all this may be comprehended
under these words, shall not stand in the judgment, is evident by other places
where the same expression is used: as Psalm. 5.5. The foolish shall not stand in
thy sight; and Luke 21.36. pray always, that ye maybe counted worthy to escape
all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the son of man;
and Romans 14.4. who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own
master he stands or falls; and Rev. 6.17. where we read that at the day of
judgment the wicked shall say, The great day of his wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand? I know the words here may also be understood of the
times when God judges the wicked here in this life, to wit, that when God
begins to call wicked men to an account here, they are not able to stand before
him: but doubtless it is at least principally meant of the last judgment,
which is therefore called here by way of emphasis the judgment; as appears
more clearly in the following clause, the ungodly shall not stand in judgment,
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous: for the meaning of this is,
that at the day of judgment God shall separate the goats from the sheep; the
wicked from the righteous; and To when the righteous shall be owned by Christ,
and taken into glory, (though they be scattered here, they shall be gathered
into one congregation hereafter) the wicked shall not be suffered to be amongst
them, but shall hear that fearful sentence, Depart from me, ye cursed, etc.
Matthew. 25.32, etc.

Verse. 6. For the Lord knows the way of the righteous, etc.] That is, He
approves, takes special notice of, and delights in their ways, and
consequently he takes care of them, to direct, bless and prosper them. For
that all these the Scripture does usually comprehend under this term of
knowing, is evident in many places: as in Job 9.21. I would not know mine own
soul, (concerning which see the Note there;) and so also Psalm. 31.7. thou have
known my soul in adversity, that is, thou have been tender and watchful over
me; and Amos 3.2. you only have I known of all the families of the earth: and
on the other side by not knowing is meant, not approving nor regarding, etc. as
Psalm. 101.4. I will not know a wicked person; and Matthew. 7.23. then will I
profess unto them, I never knew you. So that the meaning of these words, the
Lord knows the way of the righteous, is, that the Lord knowing the ways of
the righteous to be according to his will, does accordingly approve of their
ways and courses, and does direct and bless and prosper their ways, even
till he has brought them to heaven; whence it is that the way of the righteous
is called the way everlasting, Psalm. 139.24: and then on the contrary he adds,
but the way of the ungodly shall perish, that is, The Lord approves not the
ways they take; and therefore all their practices and endeavors shall perish
and come to nothing, yea they and their ways shall perish together.

PSALM II.
Verse. 1. WHy do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?] That
this Psalm was composed by David we have a clear testimony in that passage of
the Churches prayer Act. 4.24, 25. Thou, Lord, by the mouth of thy servant
David have said, Why did the heathen rage? etc. and that it was in the Apostles
times accounted the second Psalm (which yet some have denied, making the first
Psalm only a preface to the Psalms, or this and that to be but one Psalm) is
evident Act. 13.33. it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my son*
this day have I begotten thee. Now if concerning the subject matter of this
Psalm that question should be propounded, which the Ethiopian Eunuch propounded
to Philip in a like case, Act. 8.34. Of whom speaks the prophet this? of
himself or of some other man? the answer I conceive must be, that he speaks
here jointly both of himself and of his seed, the Lord Christ, who is often
called the son of David, and in relation to whom that promise was made to David
concerning the everlastingnesse of his kingdom 2 Samuel 7.12.13. I will set up
thy seed after thee -- and I will establish the throne of his kingdom for
ever: yet withal I doubt not, but that his primary intention was, to write
this as a prophecy concerning Christ, and that what he speaks in relation to
himself and his government was only, as there was in them a type and shadow of
Christ and his kingdom; and that hence it comes to pass, that many passages
in the Psalm can very hardly be understood of any other but of Christ; though
others may be easily and fully applied both to the one and to the other, as
having respect to that everlasting kingdom promised to him and to his seed,
which began to be made good to him in his own person, but was especially to be
accomplished in Christ. And accordingly we must understand this first clause of
the Psalm. So soon as David was anointed king, not only the greatest part of
the Jews rose up against him, siding with the house of Saul and Abner, who
sought to make Ishbosheth king, 2 Samuel 2.12, 13, 14. but even foreign nations
also bandied against him, as the Jebusites 2 Samuel 5.6. the Philistines also
verse. 17. the Moabites, Ammonites, Amalekites, and Syrians, chap. 8.1, etc. Now
David looking upon this as a shadow of the great opposition that should be made
both by Jews and Gentiles against Christ, first in his own person, to which the
Apostles apply this Act. 4.25, 26, 27. and afterward to all succeeding ages,
in the Gospel, kingdom and Church of Christ; and being assured that as all
their rage against him would be in vain, so much more all their furious
bandying against that everlasting kingdom, which God had promised his seed,
would be to no purpose; to express this he breaks out thus, Why do the heathen
rage (or tumultuously assemble together) and the people imagine a vain thing?
the propounding of it by way of an Interrogation strongly implying, first, the
undoubted certainty of the thing, in that the thing it self is not questioned,
but only the cause of it; secondly, the exceeding wickedness of their rage,
which made him thus abruptly break forth in the very beginning of this Psalm,
as by way of admiration and indignation, Why do the heathen rage? etc. thirdly,
the causlesnesse of their rage; and fourthly, the folly of it, because they
were so violent in that which they would never be able to effect: and indeed
this manner of speech, Why do the heathen rage? etc. seems to be used, as
bewailing the silliness of their making such a busle to no purpose at all.

Verse. 2. The kings of the earth set themselves, etc.] That is, to take
counsel, and to employ all their wit and power against the Lord and his
anointed, as it follows in the next clause, and the rulers take counsel
together against the Lord and against his anointed. He calls them the kings of
the earth by way of contempt, to intimate what a vain thing it was for them to
fight against the God of heaven, as they did, in that they opposed him, whom
God had anointed to be king over his people: which as it must be chiefly
understood of Christ, as we see the disciples did, against whom all the
endeavors of his enemies must needs be in vain, because God had anointed him
to be the king of his Church; so also it may be meant of David, this being that
whereby David assured himself, that all the opposition that was made against
his kingdom should be in vain, to wit, because he had not out of an ambitious
spirit sought the kingdom, but God of his own good pleasure had chosen him
when he thought nothing of it, and appointed him to be anointed king of Israel.
What is farther to be known concerning the anointing both of David and Christ,
see in the Note upon 1 Samuel 16.1.

Verse. 3. Let us break their bands asunder, etc.] That is, Let us cast off
their government, and disclaim all subjection and obedience to their laws: and
by their bands and their cords is meant the laws and government of the Lord God
and his Anointed, to wit, David and his seed, and that is principally Christ,
yea and consequently of all those that shall by authority from Christ seek to
bring men into subjection to Christ, and to keep them to the obedience of his
laws and government; so that these words do imply, first, that they that
rebelled and rose up against the kingdom of David, and much more they that
withstood the kingdom of Christ, did thereby oppose and fight against the Lord
God, who had appointed David to be king of Israel, and Christ to be king of his
Church, though they might happily pretend no such thing: secondly, that they who
opposed the doctrine and discipline, the Ministers and governors in the Church
of Christ, did thereby (whatever they may pretend to the contrary) oppose the
Lord and his Christ: and thirdly, that because the Gospel and discipline of
Christ will not give men liberty to live licentiously in ways of sin,
therefore they count no bondage greater then to be subject hereunto, and
consequently in their pride they storm against it; great men especially, that
think it a diminution of their greatness to be subject to any power
whatsoever, and pretending falsely that the servants of Christ seek to bring
them into bondage, they do all they can to cast off the yoke of Christ's
government, according to that Luke 19.14. we will not have this man to reign
over us.

Verse. 4. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them
in derisi^^*] This which is said of the Lords laughing and having them in
derision may ^ply, first, that the Lord shall discover their subtlest and
best-managed designs to have been foolish and ridiculous; secondly, that he
shall make them to be derided and scorned by others, according to that 2 King.
19.21. The virgin, the daughter of Zion has despised thee, and laughed thee to
scorn; thirdly, how securely God may slight all their endeavors against him
and his people, and that because God can so easily frustrate all their most
cunning and violent attempts; fourthly, that when God forbears them for a time,
and lets them go on, it is not because he wants power to cross and crus^
them, but because he scorns their rage, as being able man instant to bring all
their endeavors to nothing, which we find again thus expressed Psalm. 37.1^.
The wicked plotteth against the just, etc. The Lord shall laugh at him; for he
sees that his day is coming; and fifthly, that God rejoices in their ruin,
according to that of Solomon, Prove. 1.26. I will laugh at your calamity, I will
mock when your fear comes. And then the ground of all these is employed in that
title which is here given to God, He that sits in the heavens, (where the
Lord of heaven is opposed to the kings of the earth, and his sitting quietly in
the heavens to their tumultuous assembling and consulting together,) for hereby
is clearly intimated, first, that the Lord is far above the reach of their
malice and power; secondly, that he sees all their plots and conspiracies
against him and his anointed, which likewise is inferred from the Lords
dwelling in the heavens Psalm. 11.4. the Lords throne is in heaven, his eyes
behold, his eyelids try the children of men; and thirdly, that he is of
omnipotent power, and sitting in his throne above has all things below under
his power and command, and so can do with his enemies what he lists, as the
Psalmist expresses it Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in the heavens; he has done
whatsoever he pleased.

Verse. 5. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, etc.] Some refer this
word ( Then) to the time, when by the coming of Christ into the world, and by
the preaching of the Gospel, his kingdom should be manifested; others to that
which was said before, concerning the enemies bandying against the Lord and
against his anointed, and concerning the Lords laughing them to scorn. And
indeed I conceive that the words must be understood generally thus, (and that
with relation both to David and Christ) that when the enemy had used their
utmost endeavors against the Lords anointed, and the Lord had suffered them a
while to run on, as deriding the vanity of all their endeavors, at last, when
they were ripe for destruction, and God should find it to be a convenient and
fit time to take vengeance on them, then he should call them to an account,
Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, etc. Nor can I conceive, that this
which is said of Gods speaking to them in his wrath, was meant of that fearful
sentence, Depart from me, ye cursed, which God should pronounce against them at
the day of judgment: rather I conceive this expression implies, first, that
the vengeance that should be poured forth upon them should be by the command of
God; which also shows how easily God could destroy them, it was but a word of
his mouth, and it would be presently done: and secondly, that by the
punishments he would inflict upon them, his wrath against them should be
plainly manifested; he would not always speak to them in a way of mercy by the
preaching of the Gospel, but at last he would speak to them in a way of wrath,
and make them see their former madness. Because David was but of mean
parentage, his enemies hoped they should easily crush him; but when they were
vanquished, and David was settled in the throne of Israel, then their folly was
manifested to all men. And so because of the obscurity of Christ's outward
condition, his enemies thought they should soon ruin him; but by the ruin of
his enemies God soon declared how vain their attempts were, to the overwhelming
of them with horror and confusion, which is expressed in the next clause, and
vex (or, trouble) them in his sore displeasure; which implies, not only the
outward troubles, which God should bring upon them, that had been the great
troublers of his Church, out of which they should not know how to extricate
themselves, but also the inward fears and terrors that should also surprise
them.

Verse. 6. Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Sion.] This may be meant
of David; of whom it might be said that God had set him as his king, upon his
holy hill of Sion, because God had chosen him in a peculiar manner as his king,
to rule over his people, (concerning which see the Notes 1 Samuel 16.1.) and Sion
David chose to be the Metropolis or chief seat of his kingdom, whence it is
often called the city of David, as here it is called Gods holy hill, because
the Temple was built there, where God was pleased as it were to dwell amongst
his people, of which also see the Note 1 King. 8.1. But principally it is meant
of Christ, to wit, that God the father does here affirm, that immediately by
himself he had appointed and established Christ to be for ever the king of his
Church, of which see also the Note before cited 1 Samuel 16.1. For because that
city of David was a type of the Church, in relation thereto the Church of
Christ is often called Jerusalem, and Sion; as Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem, which is
above, is free, which is the mother of us all; and Heb. 12.22. you are come
unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem:
and it may well indeed be called Gods holy hill of Sion, not so much because
Christ there performed the work of our Redemption, and from thence the Gospel
first went forth, as in regard of its spiritual resemblance thereto, to wit,
first in regard of its stability, being built upon a rock, against which the
gates of hell shall not prevail, Matthew. 16.18. and sure therefore to be Psalm.
125.5. as mount Sion, which cannot be removed; secondly, in regard of its
eminency, Esa. 2.2, 3. which makes the members thereof to be as a city that is
set upon a hill which cannot be hid; thirdly, because the inhabitants thereof
are nearer to heaven then others are, they see those things which others cannot
see, they mind heavenly things, and look down with contempt upon whatever is
great in the world; fourthly, because it is hard and difficult to be such as
the members of the Church ought to be, it will make us toil and breath to
attain hereto, as men do that climb up some high hill; and fifthly, in regard
that God in Christ dwells in the Church, which is as a holy temple unto the
Lord, and there only is God truly worshipped. However doubtless God the father
is here brought in, as affirming this concerning his Son, yet have I set my
king upon my holy hill of Sion, to show first, why the heathen and others were
charged before with setting themselves, and taking counsel against the Lord,
to wit, because they did it against him, whom the Lord had established to be
his king in Sion; secondly, how deservedly God should pour forth his wrath and
indignation upon them, that stuck not to bandy so against his king; thirdly,
how vain all their attempts must be, that are against him of whom the Lord had
said, that he should reign in Sion. For the emphasis of this expression is in
the word (I) yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Sion; as if he had
said, and who can cross what I the Lord will have done?

Verse. 7, I will declare the decree: the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my
son, etc.] This is one of those places from whence some Expositours conclude,
that this Psalm can be understood of none but Christ, and that because though
angels and men are sometimes called the sons of God, yet it were very harsh to
say of any man that he was begotten of God, as here it is said, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. But first, because I do not see, but that
a man may be said figuratively to be begotten of God, as well as to be born of
God, as it is said of all the regenerate, 1 John 3.9. whosoever is born of God,
does not commit sin; secondly, because the very same expression in effect is
used concerning the regenerate, Jam. 1.18. of his own will begat he us with the
word of truth; and thirdly, because many of those that restrain it to Christ,
yet understand it in a figurative sense of the Resurrection of Christ, I see no
cogent Reason, why we may not in some respect understand it of David, as a type
of Christ, in the first place; but then principally, and more clearly and
perfectly of Christ. They that apply these words first to David, they conceive
that in the first words, I will declare the decree, David professes, that to
take away all pretense of ignorance from those that would not submit to his
government, he would make known Gods decree concerning him, to wit, that he had
appointed and anointed him to be the king of Israel, and had decreed that the
kingdom should be settled upon him and his seed for ever. And to this some
add, that David might the more properly say this of himself, because he was a
prophet, and did declare and make known the will of God unto men, Psalm. 40.9,
10. I have preached righteousness in the great Congregation, etc. and
particularly that decree of God concerning his kingdom, Psalm. 78.70, 71. He
chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds, etc. And then
for the next clause, The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee, they refer that to the day of his being anointed king, in
regard he was then declared to be the Son of God in a peculiar manner; not only
because of the regal dignity in general, according to that which is said of
Magistrates Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods, and all of you are children
of the most high, and in regard he became then, as it were, a new man, being of
a shepherd made a king, and by the effusion of an extraordinary measure of the
gifts and graces of Gods spirit upon him, as is noted 1 Samuel 16.13. he was
thenceforth another manner of man then he had been before; but also because God
had in a special manner covenanted with him, that he would be his father, as
in reference to his being a type of Christ, and the stock out of which the
Messiah was to spring. But then understanding it of Christ, the seed of David,
(as doubtless the terms were purposely such as could very hardly be applied
to David, that we might principally understand it of Christ,) then in the first
words, I will declare the decree, we must know that Christ is brought in,
resolving to make known to the world, that God had conferred the kingdom upon
him, and that he did not of himself usurp this power. So that hereby is
signified both that Christ partly in his own person, and partly by his Apostles
and Ministers, (Ephesians. 2.17. Christ came and preached peace unto you, etc.)
should proclaim in the Gospel what God had determined concerning him, so to
render all his enemies inexcusable; and also that by preaching the Gospel his
subjects were to be gathered, and his kingdom to be established. And as for
the following clause, The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee, that may be understood either first, of the eternal
generation of Christ, as he was the only-begotten son of God; and so by those
words (this day) must be meant the day of eternity, where there is no time past
nor to come, no beginning nor ending, (as neither is there of the fathers
begetting his son) but always one present this day. And indeed that this
eternal generation of the Son must be at least employed and included is
evident, first, because if this be spoken to Christ, it implies that he had a
being before he was man, whence it is also said Phil. 2.7. that he took upon
him the form of a servant: and secondly, because the Apostle Heb. 1.5. seems to
prove Christ to be the son of God in a far more peculiar manner then the
Angels are, by warrant of this place, Unto which of the Angels said he at any
time, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee? Or secondly, of the day
of the Son of Gods Incarnation and coming into the world; which to make good
they say that this place is cited by the Apostle Act. 13.33. partly to prove
what he had said before verse. 23. Of this man's seed has God, according to his
promise, raised unto Israel a Savior Jesus. Or thirdly, of the whole time of
his manifestation in the world, when he was sent forth as a prophet to teach
them, and was declared evidently to be the son of God, ( We beheld his glory,
says Saint John chap. 1.14. the glory as of the only-begotten son of God)
partly by his miracles Joh. 5.36. and partly by that voice that was heard from
heaven, Matthew. 3.17. and 17.5. This is my beloved son, in whom I am well
pleased. Or fourthly, of the day of Christ's Resurrection: and indeed this seems
to me to be at least chiefly intended, both because it seems to be spoken of
some solemn time of Christ's manifestation to be the son of God, and he was
declared to be the son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead,
Romans 1.4. and especially because the Apostle does clearly affirm, that this was
accomplished in Christ's Resurrection, Act. 13.33. he has raised up Jesus
again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee. Nor needs it seem strange, that it should be said that on
that day Christ was begotten, in regard that though he began not then to be,
yet then he began most clearly to appear to be the son of God; whereas from the
beginning he had been hid in the bosom of the father, and in the law he had
been only darkly shadowed forth, then he was clearly manifested: and therefore
some understand that desire of Christ's, that he might be glorified, John 17.1,
5. of his desire that he might he raised from the dead. However we see that
Christ is called in regard of his resurrection the first-begotten of the dead,
Rev. 1.5. and the day of our Resurrection is called the Regeneration, Matthew.
19.28.

Verse. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.] This also can very
hardly be applied to David; no otherwise, then by holding that by the uttermost
parts of the earth is meant the uttermost parts of the land, to wit, the land
of Canaan: and so that place also must necessarily be understood, Psalm. 72.8.
He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends
of the earth, if we understand it of Solomon, as the title of the Psalm, A
Psalm for Solomon, seems to direct. But now in Christ we may look for the full
accomplishment of this, as being a promise made to him, that so far his
enemies should be from ruining his kingdom, that all the inhabitants of the
earth should be his, and in subjection to him; partly in that some of all
nations should by the Gospel be brought in voluntarily to submit to his
government, partly that all the rest shall be under his power and disposing:
and how the Church may be said to be the Lords or Christ's inheritance, see in
the Note Deuteronomy. 40.20. As for those words prefixed before the promise, Ask of
me, etc. the drift of them is, either first, to imply his fathers singular love
to him, in regard whereof he might have whatever he would ask of him; or
secondly, to intimate his just right to what was promised, in regard he was the
son of God; as if he had said, Being my son, thou may of right demand the
heathen to be thine inheritance: and indeed, however the kingdom was given to
Christ as he was man, yet as he was the only-begotten son of God, it was his by
right of inheritance, and therefore Christ is called the heir of all things,
Heb. 1.2. or thirdly, to imply the priesthood of Christ, to wit, that upon his
mediation, merits and intercession (wherein may be included that prayer of his
for his elect people* Joh. 17.5, etc.) all nations should be put in subjection
under him. And indeed Christ's kingdom is ascribed to his mediation, Phil. 2.8,
9. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death; wherefore God also has
highly exalted him, etc. Yea, and whereas Christ alleges this place to prove,
that he did not take upon him the priestly office of himself, Heb. 5.5. Christ
glorified not himself to be made an high priest, but he that said unto him,
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee; it may seem that it is alleged
in reference to these following words, Ask of me, and I shall give thee, etc.
for there is nothing else in the place, that has any relation to the
priesthood of Christ.

Verse. 9. Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, etc.] That is, if they will
not obey thee, but shall bandy together against thee, thou shall not only break
all their plots and combinations, but shall also easily and irrecoverably
destroy them for ever by thine almighty, eternal and unresistable power, even
as when men dash in pieces a potters vessel. The like expression is frequently
used in other places, to signify the irrecoverable destruction of a people, as
Jer, 19.11. I will break this people and this city, as one breaks a potters
vessel, that cannot be made whole again; and so also Isa. 30.14. Some conceive
that by the rod of iron here mentioned is meant, the word of Christ, which is
the scepter of his kingdom, according to those expressions elsewhere; He shall
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
shall he slay the wicked, Esa. 11.4. and Rev. 19.15. Out of his mouth goes a
sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations; and he shall rule them
with a rod of iron. And indeed the wicked may well be said to be destroyed by
the word of God, because the destruction that falls upon them is the sure
effect of those threatenings, wherein this destruction was denounced against
them. But yet here I conceive it is meant of the unresistable power of Christ;
namely, that Christ shall destroy his obstinate enemies, not only at the day of
judgment, but also often here in this world: a notable instance whereof we
have in the Jews, who are so dashed in pieces, that they are scattered abroad
all the world over. Yet some shadow there was also of this in the great
victories of David over the nations that rose up against him, 2 Samuel 8. and 1 Chronicles. 18 and 19.

Verse. 10. Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: etc.] He expressly addresseth his
speech to kings and judges, because first Gods advancing them was an engagement
to them above others to serve the Lord; secondly, such have usually great power
to draw men in to Christ, or to keep men off from submitting to him; thirdly,
one end why God has given them their authority is, that they may improve it
for the drawing in of men unto Christ; and fourthly, being puffed up with their
greatness, and the high conceit they have of their own wisdom, and being
withal still jealous, that their subjects by embracing the Gospel will prove
seditious, they above others are hardliest wone to stoop to the government of
Christ. Yet withal under these the people also are comprehended, as appears by
that general clause verse. 12. Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him: if kings be bound to submit, much more those of inferior rank. As for the
expressions here used, Be wise, and be instructed, they imply, that however
they might count the Gospel foolishness, and pride themselves in their
wisdom, yet it would be their wisdom to embrace and believe the instruction
of the Gospel, and most gross folly it would be to oppose the Lords anointed.
And then this word ( now) is added, Be wise now therefore, O ye kings, as in
reference to the word then, verse. 5. Then shall he speak to them in his wrath,
etc. as if he should have said, Now submit, whilst you may be accepted, before
that time comes, when he will surely destroy all that have opposed him. How
both this and that which follows may in some sense be applied to David, we
may easily conceive.

Verse. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.] Rejoicing and
trembling are here joined together, as are fear and joy Matthew. 28.8. And they
departed quickly from the sepulcher with fear and great joy: and it may be
meant, either of their carnal rejoicing in their greatness and prosperity, as
if he had said, Whilst you rejoice in your eminency above others, forget not to
fear and tremble before the Lord your God; or else rather of their spiritual
rejoicing in Christ, and the wonderful grace of God tendered to them in him,
namely, that they should take heed that they did not turn the grace of God into
wantonness, or Christian joy into carnal licentiousness, but that their joy
should be still tempered with a holy fear of doing any thing that should
provoke the Lord to displeasure against them.

Verse. 12. Kiss the Son, etc.] To wit, both by way of acknowledgement of his
sovereignty, if you refer it to David, and by way of submission to his regal
power; and likewise also by way of divine adoration, if we understand it of
Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, coequall with the father. For that
kissing signified both these, we may see in the Notes upon 1 Samuel 10.1. 1 Kings
19.18. and Job 31.27. As for the following words, lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way, etc. they must be referred to the Lord, mentioned in the
foregoing verse; if ye understand the former words of David: but those being
understood of Christ these may far more probably be referred to him, Kiss
the Son, lest he (that is, the Son) be angry, etc. and by perishing from the
way is meant, either their being cut off by the judgments of God here in this
world, suddenly and unexpectedly, whilst they promised themselves nothing but
safety, or their being cut off whilst they were pursuing their projects, and
disabled from bringing them to effect.

Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.] That is, in the Lord
Jehovah, or rather in his Son Christ. And this clause is added, both to set
forth the grievousnesse of the miseries that would befall them against whom his
wrath should break forth, by affirming how happy they were that by trusting in
Christ were secured from that danger; and also to imply, that though there was
nothing spoken yet but of Christ's severe wrath against his enemies, yet to his
people he should be the author of all perfect happiness.

PSALM III.
The Title. A Psalm of David when he fled from Absalom.] It is not improbable
that this Psalm was composed by David in the very time of his withdrawing
himself from the rage of Absalom, if we consider first, that the time was long,
secondly, how careful David was to redeem all times of any freedom for any
spiritual services, and thirdly, that he was thereto enabled by the special
inspiration of Gods spirit. Yet the words may well bear it, that it was
composed afterward, to express how he was affected in that time of his
distress, thereby to sound forth the praises of God.

Verse. 1. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me! etc.] It is said 2 Samuel
15.12. that this conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually
with Absalom: and chap. 17.24. that Absalom passed over Jordan, he and all the
men of Israel with him; which was according to Hushai's counsel verse. 11. I
counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto thee, from Dan even to
Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude. And hence it is that
David here complaining to God, upon whom he casts his grief and care, mentions
this three several times, that his enemies were so many; expressing himself by
way of admiration, to show how strange it was, that so many should so suddenly
without any cause fall off from him, whom God had anointed to be their king, to
set up an ambitious youngster, as his son Absalom was, to reign over them.

Verse. 2. Many there be which say of my soul, etc.] That is, of me: See the
Note Genesis 27.4. There is no help for him in God; that is, no hope or
possibility of help. And thus they animated one another against him, and did
thereby exceedingly wound his soul: either first, out of an Atheistical
contempt of God, boasting that now they had such a strong party, that God
should not be able to help him; and indeed we see with what confidence
Ahithophel spoke, 2 Samuel 17.2. I will come upon him while he is weary, etc. and
all the people that are with him shall flee, and I will smite the king only: or
secondly, because they judged thus from that sore calamity that God had brought
upon him, in the insurrection of his own son against him: or thirdly, because
they judged that God had forsaken him for his sin in the matter of Uriah (which
probably might be the reason that moved Ahithophel, though so great a
Politician, to join with Absalom) for so we see Shimei concluded, 2 Samuel 16.8.

Selah.] Diverse opinions Expositours have concerning the meaning of this word,
which is three several times inserted in this, and often in other Psalms; but
very little clear evidence of reason there is in any thing they allege as the
ground of their opinions. That which has most show of likelihood is, either
first, that it is set as a musical pause, to show that in that place the
singers were for some time to make a stop in their singing: which may seem the
more probable, because we find this word no where in Scripture, but in this
book of the Psalms, and in the song of Habakkuk; and in both always at the end
of a verse, unless it be in these few places, to wit, Psalm. 55.19. and 57.3.
and Habak. 3.3, 9. or secondly, that it was a Note to mind the singers, that in
that place they were to lift up their voices; which is grounded upon this, that
the word seems to be derived from an Hebrew word that signifies to elevate or
lift up. These two, I say, are the most probable opinions. Only withal we must
know, that the end of either of these was to signify the observablenesse of
the foregoing passage, as here how considerable this sad condition of David
was, that his enemies should say, there was no help for him in God. They that
hold it was a musical pause, say it was to give a hint, that men should
seriously ponder of that which was then said: and they that hold it was for the
lifting up of the voice, or (as some think) to show that the foregoing passage
was to be sung twice, do likewise conceive, that hereby was signified how
admirable and observable that was for all that heard it.

Verse. 3. But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of
my head.] He terms God his glory, first, because God had given him, and he
knew would still give him, cause of glorying in his favor and help: secondly,
because he had honored him, and so would still, by giving him victory over his
enemies; and this he opposes to the shame that lay now upon him, when he was
glad to fly for the saving of his life: and thirdly, because it was the Lord
that had advanced him to that glorious condition of being king over his people,
and therefore he doubted not but that he would maintain and protect him
therein. And then again he terms him the lifter up of his head, first, because
God did comfort and support his dejected spirit, and keep him from sinking
under his afflictions: secondly, because through Gods grace to him, he was
enabled to bear up his head with confidence and comfort, according to that Luke
21.28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh: thirdly, because God had often,
and he knew still would, deliver him out of troubles, and raise him from any
dishonor and reproach that should be cast upon him; as it is said that the
king of Babylon did lift up the head of Jehoiachin, when he freed him out of
prison, 2 King. 25.27: and fourthly, because he had exalted him to be king, and
therein he doubted not but he would continue him, according to that Psalm.
110.7. He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up the
head.

Verse. 4. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, etc.] Why was it not enough to
say, I cried unto the Lord, but that these words must be added, with my voice?
I answer, first, because he would covertly imply, that in stead of spending his
breath, as in their afflictions many do, in vain and useless complaints, and
murmurings against God, he rather chose to call upon God for help: secondly,
because he would hereby oppose the lifting up of his voice in prayer to their
clamours and insultations, as if he had said, Their outcryes shall not put me
to silence; whilst they lifted up their voice in such outcryes against me, God
has forsaken him, there is no help for him in God, this stopped not my mouth,
but I cried to the Lord with my voice: and thirdly, to show, that by reason of
the strength of his affections, he not only prayed within himself, but also out
of the fervency of his spirit, poured forth his desires in vocal prayer. As
for the following words, and he heard me out of his holy hill, it may be meant
both of Gods hearing him out of heaven, which is sometimes in the Scripture
called Gods holy hill, as Psalm. 15.1. who shall dwell in thy holy hill? and
also of the hill of Sion, and that because the Ark was there, the sign of Gods
spiritual presence amongst them; and probable it is that David by this
expression intended to intimate, that though he was now driven from Gods holy
hill, and had sent back the Ark thither, as is related 2 Samuel 15.25. yet he
doubted not but thence God would hear his prayer.

Verse. 7. Arise, O Lord; save me, O my God, etc.] Though David had the
Cherethites and Pelethites and Gittites with him, 2 Samuel 15.18. and many
others, that fell not off to Absalom, yet his trust was in God, and not in
them. As for the following words, for thou have smitten all mine enemies upon
the cheek bone, they may imply the shame and dishonor that God had cast upon
them: (concerning which see the Note Job 16.10.) But I rather think the meaning
to be, that Gods hand had been heavy upon them, as when a man strikes one so on
the cheek that he beats out his teeth; which is added in the next clause, thou
have broken the teeth of the ungodly: Yet some conceive that ungodly men are
compared here to wild beasts, whose teeth being broken, they are disabled to
do hurt as formerly.

Verse. 8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord, etc.] That is, It is only in his
power to save, and it appertains to him to save those that by Covenant are
his people: which is more fully expressed in the next clause, thy blessing is
upon thy people.

PSALM IV.
The Title. TO the chief Musician on Neginoth.] That is, on stringed
instruments: for so the word Neginoth is translated, Habak. 3.19, It seems the
Psalms which David composed he distributed amongst the several companies of
the Levites, that were the holy singers in the Tabernacle and Temple, some to
one company, some to another; and accordingly this was delivered to the Master
of that Quire that played on stringed instruments.

Verse. 1. Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness, etc.] That is, Thou
that art the witness, judge, maintainer and revenger of mine innocence, and
the righteousness of my cause. And doubtless this is meant of the cause of
his Regal dignity, whereto God had anointed him. So that though the time and
occasion of composing this Psalm be not expressed, yet we may well think it was
composed when some opposition was made against him concerning the kingdom, to
wit, either by Absalom, or rather (because the words verse. 2. How long will ye
turn my glory into shame? seem to imply a longer opposition) by Saul, or his
family and their abettors after Saul's death.

Thou have enlarged me when I was in distress, etc.] The meaning is, that God
had often enlarged his heart with joy and comfort, when he was as a man
imprisoned through grief and sorrow; or rather, that God had often freed him
out of great streights and troubles. As for the following words, have mercy
upon me, and hear my prayer, see the Notes upon 1 Kings 8.30.

Verse. 2. O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? etc.]
This is added, as the fruit of his foregoing prayer, to wit, that he doubted
not of Gods protection; to which end he turns his speech here to his enemies, O
ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? By the common
consent of almost all Expositours, the Hebrew words, here translated sons of
men, do signify men of eminency and renown above others, at least such as
thought so of themselves, (and therefore are these words translated men of high
degree, Psalm. 62.10. and so also Psalm. 49.2.) and by his glory here is meant
either his innocence, which his enemies sought to traduce, or rather the honor
that God had put upon him in making him his anointed king, which he says they
sought to turn into shame; first, because they charged him, that he ambitiously
and treasonably sought to wrest the Crown from his lawful Sovereign, and from
his seed, and so by their slanders sought to make the people to look upon him
as a rebel, rather then the Lords anointed; and secondly, because they
despised and derided him, and in his low estate insulted over him, Ye shall see
what his Anointing will come to: Is it likely that Gods Anointed should hide
himself in rocks and dens, or fly to the Philistines for shelter? etc. as
Shimei triumphed over him, when he fled from Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.8. and thirdly,
because they sought with shame to cast him down from that dignity, whereto God
had advanced him, and so utterly to ruin him. Why this is expressed by way of
Interrogation, we may see in the reasons given for the like expression Psalm.
2.1. It is as if he had said, O ye that exalt your selves so much in your
greatness, how is it that after so many manifestations of Gods favor to me,
and of his choosing of me to be your king, you are still so bold or foolish, as
to seek to turn my glory into shame? And accordingly also we must understand
the following clause, how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? to
wit, that therein he charge them first, with taking great delight and
pleasing themselves in those plots against him, which would prove vain devices
and lying imaginations, and such as they would never be able to bring to
effect; see the Note Job 15.35. secondly, that though they pleased themselves
with many colorable pretenses for their opposing of him, yet they would all
prove vanity and lies; see the Note Job 15.31. and thirdly, that it was merely
for preferment and reward, for honors and riches, that they opposed him the
Lords anointed; wherein they exposed themselves to Gods displeasure, for
worthless transitory things that were mere vanity, and wherein they should
never find that happiness they expected.

Verse. 3. But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself.]
Doubtless this David speaks concerning himself; as if he should have said,
Whereas the Lord rejected Saul for his impiety, he has chosen me, whom he has
endued with true piety, that I might advance godliness and religion in the
land: and indeed this expression, of Gods setting him apart for himself, seems
to have relation to that of Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 13.14. The Lord has sought
him a man after his own heart, and that which God said to Samuel 1 Samuel 16.1. I
will send thee to Iesse the Bethlehemite; for I have provided me a king among
his sons. Yet withal we see it is expressed indefinitely, that the Lord has
set apart him that is godly for himself, that is, that the Lord will own every
truly pious man, as one of those whom he has chosen and set apart from the
world, that they might be his peculiar people; and that purposely to imply,
that if the Lord did thus own all his holy Saints and servants, much more would
he own him who endeavored after true piety and godliness in his whole
conversation, and whom he had set apart to that peculiar service of ruling over
his people. So that the drift of the words is clearly, to put his enemies in
mind, that he did not ambitiously seek to advance himself, but that the Lord
had chosen him to be king; so that they opposed the Lord in opposing him; and
however low he might be brought for a time, yet the Lord would raise him up
again, and would not fail to protect his own servant.

Verse. 4. Stand in awe, and sin not, etc.] This clause in the Septuagint is, Be
angry and sin not: and because the Apostle has the very same words Ephesians. 4.26.
it is thought that he alleges them as from this Psalm. Nor yet need we be
troubled that the Apostle should not cite them according to the Hebrew
Original, which is well translated in our Bibles, Stand in awe, and sin not;
for first, because the Septuagint translation was best known to Gods people in
those times, he might cite it, as a passage taken out of that translation,
holding forth a necessary duty, though not rendering the genuine sense of the
words in the Psalm, and so not as a testimony of the Prophet David: secondly,
the word in the Original, here translated Stand in awe, does generally
signify any moving of the heart; and though it were therefore here principally
intended concerning their being moved inwardly with the fear of God, yet it
might well be applied by the Apostle to men's being moved with anger: and
thirdly, when men stand in awe of God, this must needs be accompanied with a
holy anger against themselves for the offenses they have committed against God;
and in that regard, that which the Prophet David says here, might be, without
wresting the place, cited to the purpose for which the Apostle there alleges
it. As for the drift of David in these words, some conceive that here he turns
his speech to those that sided with him, Stand in awe and sin not; as if he had
said, Though you be grieved and troubled to see me, the Lords anointed, to be
so persecuted and troubled as I am, and that I should be in so low a condition,
whilst mine enemies prosper and triumph over me; yet as standing in awe of the
Majesty of God, take heed that you sin not either by (...) that signifies
to p^ssesse, (and so both the Septuagint and the Vulgar Latin render it;) and
accordingly they say that hereby is shown, that this Psalm treats of the
troubles of Gods people, who are the Lords inheritance, or that it concerns the
enemies of Gods people, who sought to drive them out of the land of Canaan, the
inheritance of the Lord; concerning which see the Notes 1 Samuel 26.19. And
diverse other interpretations are given of it. But the most probable, I
conceive, is that first named, that hereby is meant wind Instruments, the word
Nehiloth being derived from an Hebrew word that signifies to pierce through or
to wound, because they are hollow, or because of the holes that are in pipes,
which have the appearance of so many wounds.

Verse. 3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, etc.] That is,
speedily and out of hand: for so this expression is elsewhere used, as Psalm.
143.8. Cause me to hear thy loving-kindnesse in the morning. I doubt not but
David speaks here as in reference to his constant course of praying early in
the morning, so giving to God the first fruits of each day: but yet that which
is here chiefly intended is, that God would hear him betimes and without delay;
that as his earnest desires carried him carefully to pour out his requests
before God betimes in the morning, so God would betimes also come in to his
help: In the morning (says he) will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will
look up, to wit, as waiting for a gracious answer of my prayers, according to
that Mich. 7.7. I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
salvation; and Psalm. 145.15. The eyes of all wait upon thee, or, look unto
thee. Whence it was that Peter and John Act. 3.4, bad the criple, as in
expectation of what they would do for him, to look on them.

Verse. 4. For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness; neither
shall evil dwell with thee.] That is, Thou will not own wicked men to be of the
number of thy people here, nor will thou suffer them to live with thee in thy
kingdom of glory hereafter. Yea this phrase may farther comprehend, that God
will not protect wicked men, that he will not endure them, nor have any thing
to do with them. However doubtless David alleges this as a sure argument,
that God would hear his prayers, and destroy his enemies, namely because God
was always an enemy to such wicked wretches.

Verse. 6. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing, etc.] He means this of
his enemies, that did slander him, such as he complained of to Saul 1 Samuel
24.9. Wherefore hear thou men's words, saying, Behold, David seeks thy
hurt? as likewise of those that flattered him with their lips, being bitter and
implacable enemies in their hearts; as when Saul proffered him his daughter in
marriage, etc. And so also that in the next clause, the Lord will abhor the
bloody and deceitful man, may be spoken in reference to Saul's slaying the
Priests, and all other bloody and deceitful practices of his enemies against
him.

Verse. 7. But as for me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy
mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.] By Gods house
and Temple here is meant the Tabernacle, whereon the Ark of God dwelt between
the Cherubims, (see the Notes on 1 Samuel 1.9.) in the Courts whereof the people
used to worship toward Gods holy place; and by his coming into Gods house in
the multitude of his mercy may be meant, either first, that he would go
thither trusting in Gods infinite mercies; or secondly, that his work there
should be, with a thankful heart to extol Gods many mercies; or thirdly, that
through the riches of Gods mercy to him in defending him, and delivering him
out of his troubles, he should come to Gods house to worship him there. It
seems therefore that David's aim in these words was, to imply first, that though
for the present he was driven from the house of God, yet he doubted not but God
would bring him thither again; and secondly, that his purpose then was to
praise him there for all his mercies, and to worship him there daily with all
reverence and godly fear: for this the second clause does import, and in thy
fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple; to wit, not only that he would
behave himself in worshipping him with all possible reverence, but also that he
would do it with a truly pious heart; his joy when God had delivered him
should not make him the less, but the more careful not to offend God. And
thus also by opposing this promised piety to the wickedness of his enemies,
whereof he had spoken in the foregoing verses, he does hereby encourage
himself, that God would surely hear his prayer.

Verse. 8. Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, etc.] Some by thy
righteousness here understand that way of righteousness which God has
prescribed in his word, wherein David being conscious to himself of his own
weakness, desires to be guided by the spirit of God, that he might not turn
aside out of that way: and that, says he, because of mine enemies, that is,
lest they should draw me into any way of wickedness; or that they may not find
any thing in me, for which to upbraid me, or to insult and triumph over me, and
for which they might seem justly to persecute me. But then others understand
hereby the righteousness of God, Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, that
is, for, or according to thy righteousness, thy faithfulness and justice; as
if he had said, As thou art a righteous God, faithful in making good thy
promises, and so art wont to prosper the righteous and destroy the wicked,
conduct me safely, and prosper me in all my ways, because of mine enemies,
that continually lie in wait for my life. And thus accordingly we must
understand the next clause also, make thy way straight before my face; that is,
cause me to walk right on in the ways of thy commandments without turning
aside; or, carry me safely through those many perplexities and difficulties
that lie in my way, and bring me to the end which thou have promised.

Verse. 9. Their throat is an open sepulcher.] This David says of his enemies,
either only generally, to imply how insatiably bloody they were after the
destruction of himself and other the faithful servants of God, even like an
open sepulcher, that still is ready to devour all the dead that are laid into
it; or else more particularly, to imply first, that with their speech they
sought to destroy him, as by their lies and slanders, by tempting him to sin
against God, by flattering him, and so endeavoring to draw him into a snare;
or secondly, with relation to their cruel threatenings, that they breathed
forth nothing but slaughter and destruction against him, according to that
Prove. 1.12. Let us swallow them up alive as the grave, and whole as those that
go down into the pit; or thirdly, to imply the loathsomenesse of their
blasphemies against God, his truth and people, and other the wicked language
they uttered, which coming from the rottenness and corruption of their hearts,
might the rather be compared to the stench of an open sepulcher. And then
besides, in regard of their seeking to entrap him unawares, he might compare
them to an open grave, whereinto a man in the dark may suddenly fall, not
seeing any danger. The Apostle Romans 3.13. alleges these words, though spoken
of David's enemies in particular, to prove the common corruption of all mankind,
not Gentiles only, but Jews also, and that because naturally there is the same
fountain of corruption in all mankind: and as under the person of David both
Christ and all his members are described, even all the regenerate; so under the
persons of David's enemies all the wicked of the world are described. However
clear it is, that what David here says concerning his enemies, is, to imply
his danger thereby, and so to move God to protect him, and destroy his enemies.

Verse. 10. Destroy thou them, O God, etc.] Or, make them guilty, that is, by
punishing them make known their guilt: let them fall by their own counsels, or,
from their counsels; that is, let their counsels come to naught. As for the
following clause, Expositours judge diversely of the casting out there
mentioned, cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions; to wit, that
David prays, that they might be cast either out of the Church, or out of the
kingdom, or out of the world, according to that Job 18.18. He shall be driven
from light into darkness, and chased out of the world, or that being shut out
of heaven, they might be cast into hell. But I should rather think that the
meaning is more general, to wit, that David prays that God would not prosper
them in their attempts, but cast them away, and utterly destroy them.

Verse. 11. But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice, etc.] Either
David desires that they might rejoice upon Gods manifestation of his love to
them in their own persons; or else rather, that the Lords dealing with him
might be to them an occasion of great joy, to wit, when thereby they should see
how careful God is to defend and bless his righteous servants, and to destroy
their enemies. And the same is intended in the last clause of this verse, let
them also that love thy name, be joyful in thee, that is, those that love
thee: yet withal by the Name of God may be meant his word, or whatever else it
be whereby God is made known. Yea, as the Name of those men hate is hateful to
them, and the Name of those they love is delightful to them; so they that love
God, they love his very Name.

PSALM VI.
The Title. TO the chief Musician on N^ginoth upon Sheminith.] For the first
part of the Title, see the Note upon the Title Psalm. 4. and concerning
Sheminith, see the Note 1 Chronicles. 15.21. This is the first of those that are
commonly called the seven Penitential Psalms; the other six are the 32, 38,
51, 102, 130, and the 143.

Verse. 1. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, etc.] That is, Correct me not
in thine anger; for so this word rebuke is often taken in the Scripture, as
Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: and by this which he
desires, that God would not correct him in his anger, nor in his sore
displeasure, is meant, either that God would correct him gently and moderately,
and so that which he prays against may be, that severity which God uses
sometimes in correcting his own children; or else that God would not lay his
hand upon him in wrath, by way of satisfying his justice, but in fatherly mercy
to correct him as his child, and not utterly to destroy him as an enemy,
according to that Jer. 10.24. Correct me, but with judgment, not in thine
anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

Verse. 2. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord, heal me, for my
bones are vexed.] That is, my most inward parts: see the Note, Job 30.17. Very
probable it is which some gather from these words, to wit, that David's aim in
this Psalm was to set forth how he was affected in some sore fit of sickness,
or to teach Gods servants how they ought to be affected in that condition. Yet
these words, I am weak, may be meant of his being brought low by any deadly
distress or danger; and deliverance from any such distress may be termed
healing, as Deuter. 32.39. I wound, and I heal; and so also the healing of the
sick foul with comfort or grace, as Psalm. 41.4. Heal my soul, for I have sinned
against thee.

Verse. 3. My soul is also sore vexed, etc.] To wit, with fear of thine
indignation, with grief for my sins and thy displeasure, and the insultation of
mine enemies over me: but thou, O Lord, how long? that is, how long will thou
afflict me? or how long will thou defer to help me? but, as one whose words
were swallowed up with grief, he only says, How long?

Verse. 4. Return, O Lord, etc.] That is, Whereas thou have withdrawn thy self
for a time from me, return, and be with me again, to help and comfort me, as
formerly: deliver my soul, that is, deliver me, or save my life. Nor needs it
seem strange that David should so earnestly beg for life; first, because death
is naturally dreadful to all men: secondly, because the bliss of the Saints
departed was not so clearly revealed under the Old Testament, as it is now:
thirdly, because the bliss of this life was by Gods appointment to them a
pledge of their future life and happiness: and fourthly, because he might fear
that the cause of Religion, which he sought to establish aright, might suffer
much after his departure.

Verse. 5. For in death there is no remembrance of thee, etc.] That is, When men
are dead, they cannot record and praise thy name before men, as I desire to do.

Verse. 6. All the night make I my bed to swim, etc.] He mentions the night,
either because sick men are usually worst in the night; or because he had then
most freedom to think of his sins, or his enemies that longed for his death,
and might with most privacy pour forth his tears before God.

Verse. 7. Mine eye is consumed because of grief, etc.] For weeping, yea grief
alone, may darken and mar the eyes. See Job 17.7.

Verse. 8. Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.] Being delivered from his
sickness, or the deadly danger he was in, or at least being assured of
deliverance, in these words either David resolves to cast off those his
enemies, that had been formerly familiar with him, and in the mean season
desired his death; or else he engages himself, as by way of thankfulness for
this mercy, that he would not henceforth have any communion with any wicked
men; or else rather by these words he insults over his enemies, telling them
they might be gone with shame, that had stood gaping after his death, or sought
it, and that because the Lord had now heard his prayer and tears.

Verse. 10. Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed, etc.] To wit, as
being disappointed of what they hoped for: let them return and be ashamed
suddenly; that is, let them turn their backs and be gone with shame (according
to that Psalm. 56.9. When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back)
and that suddenly, that is, God on a sudden delivering me out of their hands.

PSALM VII.
The Title. SHiggaion of David, etc.] There are diverse conjectures in
Expositours, but they are mere conjectures, concerning this word Shiggaion: as
that it was the name of some Musical Instrument, to which this Psalm was to be
sung; or the name of some kind of Verse wherein it was composed; or of some
tune, or some known song, to the tune whereof it was to be sung. That which
seems most probably said is, that Shiggaion is derived of an Hebrew word that
signifies to err, and so may be translated an aberration, or, a song of
wandering: to wit, either because it was sung in parts, or by several voices,
some singing one clause, and then others another; or because upon the
Instrument whereon they played when this Psalm was sung, they ran with their
fingers from one string to another; or because it was made of sundry variable
or wandering verses; or because therein are expressed those cares of David,
which made him in danger to err or go astray. Yea because the Hebrew word
Prove. 5.19. does signify to be delighted or to wander in love, therefore some
translate Shiggaion of David, David's variable or delightful song, or the
solace of David. As for the following words, which he sang unto the Lord
concerning the words of Cush the Benjamite, it is most probable that this Cush
was some great Courtier of Saul, and of his tribe and family, who had accused
David to Saul, upon occasion whereof David composed this Psalm. I know that the
most Expositours hold, that it is Shimei or Saul himself that is here called
Cush, by interpretation the Ethiopian or blackmore; and that, say they, to note
his black, malicious and hellish disposition, or that there was no more hope of
changing his nature and qualities, then of washing a blackmore white. But
besides that the reasons alleged for giving either of them this name Cush,
have no great solidity in them, and that there could be no cause at all why he
might not have expressed them by name, in the Psalm David seems plainly to
speak of some slander that endangered his life, which could not be meant of
Saul, nor of the revilings of Shimei.

Verse. 2. Lest he tear my soul like a lion, etc.] In the foregoing verse he had
said, Save me from all them that persecute me; this therefore which he adds
here in the singular number, Lest he tear my soul like a lion, must either be
understood indefinitely of every one of those that did persecute him, Lest he
tear my soul, etc. that is, lest he that persecutes me do tear me in pieces, or
destroy my life (for soul is often taken for the person or the life of a man,
see the Notes Psalm. 3.2. and 1 Samuel 25.29.) or else of Saul in particular his
great enemy, whom others served in their persecuting of David. And by comparing
him to a lion, he implies his power and cruelty, thereby the rather to move God
to deliver him: and if this were done after Saul had made such a slaughter of
the Priests 2 Samuel 22.18. David had the juster ground to compare him to a lion
tearing his prey.

Verse. 3. If I have done this, etc.] That is, this which Cush has laid to my
charge, and which is thereupon commonly spread abroad concerning me, to wit,
that he adds in the following verse, that when things were all at peace in the
kingdom, and that Saul had given his daughter in marriage to David, and
preferred him as his favorite in all things, then David sought to take away
Saul's life, that he might step into the throne; If, says he, I have rewarded
evil to him that was at peace with me, that is, to Saul; which the following
clause does also confirm, wherein he seems to have particular reference to his
saving of Saul, when he had him at an advantage, and he restrained his captains
from offering him any violence, 1 Samuel chap. 24. and 26. Yea, says he, I have
delivered him that without cause is mine enemy.

Verse. 5. Let him tread down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the
dust.] By this honor may be meant his soul, as in Genesis 49.6. (concerning which
see the Note there) which may be said to be laid in the dust, when his life,
that proceeded from the union of his soul and body, was taken away, and he laid
in the dust; and so both clauses, let him tread down my life upon the earth,
and lay mine honor in the dust, may both intend the same thing: or, secondly,
by his honor may be meant that honorable condition whereto God had advanced
him, or which God had promised him, to wit, of being king over his people;
which might be said to be laid in the dust, either by his death, or by his
being brought to a low and poor condition: or, thirdly, by his honor may be
meant that honorable fame and repute and credit wherein he had lived, and
which might remain of him after his death; which in case of his guilt he
desires might be laid in the dust, to wit, by the perishing of his memory, or
being buried under obloquy and reproach.

Verse. 6. Lift up thy self because of the rage of mine enemies, etc.] That is,
Because of their rage arise to my help; and so it is the same in effect with
the foregoing clause, Arise, O Lord, in thine anger: or, Lift up thy self, that
is, exalt and glorify thy self as a conqueror, by saving me from their rage.
As for the following clause, and awake for me to the judgment that thou have
commanded, there are two several Expositions, neither of them improbable,
which are given of it. The first is, that David does therein desire the Lord to
awake for him; to settle him in the kingdom which he had promised him: for
because his office was therein to do justice and judgment, and to settle all
things in the kingdom, which had been out of frame under Saul's reign, and
because God had commanded Samuel for this purpose to anoint David, and because
God had decreed and said that David should be king, and had at the same time
pronounced this judgment against Saul, that he had rejected him, 1 Samuel 16.1.
and what God has decreed shall be, in regard of its certainty, is frequently
in the Scriptures said to be commanded of God, as Psalm. 33.9. He spoke and it
was done, he commanded and it stood fast, and Psalm. 147.15. He sends forth
his commandment upon the earth, his word runs very swiftly; therefore does
he express this in these terms, awake for me to the judgment that thou have
commanded. And then the second is, which I best approve, that David does herein
desire that God would raise up himself to punish his enemies, and to deliver
him that was injured and oppressed: which he terms the judgment which God had
commanded, either because God had commanded the sons of men thus to execute
judgment, and therefore he doubted not that God would himself do what he had
enjoined others to do; or because it was that which he knew God had ordered
and decreed.

Verse. 7. So shall the congregation of the people compass thee about, etc.]
Two things may also probably be intended herein. The first is, that if God
would make good his promise, and settle him in the throne, so far as in him
lay, the people that were now grown to a kind of profane neglect of Gods
worship under the government of Saul, as appeared by the neglect of the Ark all
the time of his reign, should be brought to assemble themselves duly together,
to perform the duties of his worship and service: and hereby he makes it
manifest, that he desired not the kingdom for his own interests, but for the
advancement of Gods glory. And the second is, that if God would appear in his
defense against his enemies, the experience of Gods justice and faithfulness
herein would bring in the people by multitudes to compass him about, (and it
may be meant of the Israelites alone, or of other nations jointly with them, to
whom the fame of what God had done for David herein should come) to wit, to
praise God, to pray to God for judgment in the like case, yea and in general
to worship God with fear and reverence: for indeed the judgments of God
manifested in the world do notably stir up devotion in men. And to this purpose
also is that which follows, for their sakes therefore return thou on high, that
is, exalt thy self, and show thy self gloriously in this cause of mine; or
rather, ascend again into thy throne of judgment, and judge the cause between
me and mine enemies: for in these words there seems to be an allusion to the
thrones and seats of judgment amongst men, which used to be on high above the
people, as we see in Solomon's throne, 1 Kings 10.19. or else to the height of
the heaven, of which it is said, The Lords throne is in heaven, Psalm. 11.4, and
because whilst God had forborne punishing his persecutours, it had been as if
God had given over judging the world, therefore he desires that God would
return to his throne of judgment.

Verse. 8. The Lord shall judge the people, etc.] As if he should have said, And
therefore from the slanders of men I appeal to God, and know that he will judge
righteously: whereupon he adds, Judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, etc. concerning which see the Note, 2 Samuel 22.21.

Verse. 9. Oh, let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, etc.] As one
that had been long under this affliction, he desires the Lord that at last,
some way or other, there might be an end put to the malicious practices of his
enemies against him and others, and so thereby that he would establish the
just: for (says he) the righteous God tries the hearts and reins; that is,
the Lord exactly knows the secretest thoughts and desires of men's hearts, and
consequently he knows the integrity of mine heart, and that there never came
any such thing into my thought, as they lay to my charge. Because in the
entrails of a man the reins lie of all the rest the most retired and hidden,
therefore they are added to the heart.

Verse. 11. God is angry with the wicked every day.] Hereby is meant, not so
much that there is no day wherein God does not manifest his anger against some
wicked men, by pouring forth his wrath upon them; as that he is every day angry
with the wicked, even when he forbears them; whence it is that even then they
are said to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5.

Verse. 12. If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he has bent his bow, etc.]
That is, If the wicked man repents not, and gives not over his persecuting the
righteous, God will whet his sword, etc. and by whetting his sword, and having
his bow bent, and his arrows prepared in a readiness, called the instruments
of death verse. 13. he implies how sore and sudden Gods judgments upon him
should be; he was ready to shoot, and the wounds given by his sword should be
deep and deadly: he ordains his arrows against the persecutours; he makes and
intends them, and decrees them purposely to be shot against the persecutours.
And this, being prophetically spoken, some say was accomplished when Saul was
sore wounded by the Philistine archers, and afterward thrust himself through
with his own sword, 1 Samuel 31.3, 4.

Verse. 14. Behold, he travelleth with iniquity, etc.] That is, He strives to
effect his wicked and mischievous purposes against the righteous, being even
pained as a woman in travel to accomplish his intentions, but all in vain. See
the Note Job 15.35.

Verse. 16. His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing
shall come down upon his own pate.] These expressions, His mischief shall
return and shall come down, seem to imply, that what mischief the wicked seek
to do to the righteous, God takes it as intended against himself, according to
that Zach. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple of his eye; and
accordingly that it is of God that their mischief, like so many arrows shot
against heaven, is turned back upon their own heads: as it was with Saul, who
having often plotted how to bring David to fall by the hands of the
Philistines, was at last himself overcome by them, by means whereof he slew
himself, and they finding his body, cut off his head, and carried it up and
down their country in a way of triumph.

PSALM VIII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician upon Gittith.] See the Note upon the Title
Psalm. 4. For these words, upon Gittith, which are also the Title of the 81 and
the 84 Psalm, the conjectures of Expositours are various. First, some conceive
that this Psalm was to be sung with those musical Instruments, which were used
by the Levites of Gathrimmon, who were called Gittites, as Obed-Edom is called
2 Samuel 6.10; or because David composed this Psalm to be sung when the Ark was
removed to or from the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite. Secondly, others think,
because Gath in Hebrew signifies a wine press, that the musical Instrument
wherewith this Psalm was to be sung, had the form of a wine press; or that it
was composed to be sung at the vintage amongst the wine-presses, perhaps at the
feast of Tabernacles, which was about that time; or that it was to be sung in
the tune of those lightsome songs, which they usually sung at their vintages.
And thirdly, others say that it was composed upon occasion of some great
deliverance or mercy afforded to David, that had some relation to Gath a city
of the Philistines; or that Gittith was the name of some musical Instrument,
as the Gittern is with us; or the name of some song or tune, used or invented
at Gath of the Philistines. And indeed of all these conjectures this last seems
to me the most probable.

Verse. 1. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth! etc.]
That is, thy same and glory! what excellent things are by thy works manifested
and known of thee throughout the world! For by the Name of God in the Scripture
is often meant the same of all his glorious attributes, his power and mercy,
etc. as in Mal. 1.11. From the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same
my Name shall be great among the Gentiles. And because David in the following
part of the Psalm speaks of the great goodness of God to man, and that, as
some think, in relation to Christ, it is likely that even here he has
principally respect unto that: and he expresses it by way of admiration, how
excellent is thy Name! to imply, that he was not able to set it forth in words,
as it ought to be. As for the following words, who have set thy glory above the
heavens, therein a reason is given why Gods Name must needs be exceedingly
excellent in all the earth, to wit, because he had set his glory above the
heavens: whereby is meant, either that God had manifested so much of his
glorious excellencies above in the heavens, which he had taken as the royal
seat and throne of his Majesty, by the influences and power whereof the things
below are preserved, cherished and governed, that the whole earth stirred up
thereby must needs sound forth his praises; or else that Gods glory is so
great, that the whole world is not able to contain it: to which purpose the
like phrase is often used, as Psalm. 108.4. Thy mercy is great above the
heavens; and Psalm. 113.4. The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory
above the heavens; and in many other places. Others do also understand this
glory of God above the heavens of the Angels praising God, and of the glory of
Christ sitting at the right hand of his father; but David speaks here, as I
conceive, of the glory of God, which is manifested to all the inhabitants of
the earth.

Verse. 2. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength,
etc.] This I conceive is to be understood, as the words do plainly hold forth,
of little children and sucking infants, namely, that they do wonderfully set
forth the glory of God. For David intending now in the sequel of the Psalm to
show more particularly, how God has manifested his glorious excellencies,
especially his goodness and mercy, in man above all his other creatures, he
begins here with this, that even in their tenderest years, whilst they are but
babes and sucklings, God is exceedingly glorified in them. And whereas this is
said to be done out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, either no more is
intended thereby but this, that by the testimony of babes God does declare his
many glorious excellencies, (even as for the same cause, Psalm. 19.1. the
heavens are said to declare the glory of God, to wit, because in them there is
so much to be observed, that does show forth the glory of God,) as that they
should so strangely make their way out of their mothers wombs; that such poor
helpless things should be so wonderfully sustained and preserved, being in
themselves exposed to all kind of miseries; and that especially by the instinct
of nature, which God has planted in the hearts of parents, whereby even those
that are most graceless, are yet tender over them, and willing for their good
to undergo any trouble in their noysomnesse and continual rawling; and many
other wonderful providence besides that may be observed in children; or else
this expression may have particular relation to those things that concern the
mouths of babes and sucklings; as that they should so presently, by a secret
instinct of nature, hunt and wind about for the breasts, those bottles wherein
God has wonderfully provided milk out of blood for their nourishment, and
which he has made soft, thereby fitting them for their tender mouths; as
likewise that they should know how to draw and suck forth the milk there
prepared for them, the passages through which the milk issues forth being so
ordered, that neither the straightness thereof should make it too hard for
them to draw it forth, nor the too great wideness thereof should endanger the
stifling of them by its coming forth too fast; and likewise that being grown up
a little, they should so soon frame their tongues and mouths to speak the words
they hear others speak: for indeed in regard of these many wonders the tongues
of stammering children, yea the mouths of sucking infants, do most rhetorically
speak forth the praises of God before they can speak. As for that phrase of
ordaining strength, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have ordained
(or founded) strength, either the meaning is, that God had firmly determined
and ordered it to be inviolably and unalterably so, that the glory and praise
of Gods strength should be manifested out of the mouth of babes and sucklings;
and indeed, because whatever discovers the strength of God, tends to his glory
and praise, therefore Gods glory and strength are often joined together in the
Psalms, as Psalm. 29.1. give unto the Lord glory and strength, and so often
elsewhere; and these very words are rendered by the Septuagint, as they are
also cited by our Savior, Matthew. 21.16. Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings thou have perfected praise: Or else, God is said to have ordained
strength by the praise that redounds to God out of the mouths of young infants,
in relation to those following words, because of thine enemies, that thou
might still the enemy and the avenger; namely, to imply that there is
strength enough in the mouths of poor feeble infants, to stop the mouths, or to
confound all the proud Atheists in the world, that deny the power of Gods
all-ruling providence: for these are they that are here called Gods enemies, to
wit, because their wisdom, yea their whole lives are nothing else but a
continual enmity against God; and the avenger, either because not believing
the providence of God, they mind only the revenging of themselves upon their
enemies; or because such Atheistical wretches do hate God, and seek as it were
to dethrone God, and being fighters against God, are usually also bloody
persecutours of his servants, and are ever thirsting to be revenged on them;
for any deadly and much incensed enemy is usually called an avenger in the
Scripture, as we may see Psalm. 44.16. This I take is the proper meaning of this
place. Yet there is another Exposition that has much probability in it; to
wit, that God does usually choose to glorify himself by weak and simple and
despised people, (whom he terms here babes and sucklings, as Christ also
terms them, Matthew. 11.25. thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes) rather then by the great learned
and wise men of the world: and that the Lord does this, that he might still the
enemy and the avenger; that is, that he might confound all the wicked enemies
of God and his people; as when he caused the Gospel to prevail in the world by
such simple and such mean men: and when he reveals the wisdom of God to such
rather then others, this is sufficient to confound the great and wise men of
the world, according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.27. God has chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, etc. And this, they say,
David might allege, to answer why he should undertake to set forth the praise
of God, which in the foregoing verse he had employed was inexpressible, to wit,
because God is wont to glorify himself by babes and sucklings: Which makes some
also incline to think, that David composed this Psalm in his younger years,
when he kept his fathers sheep, and so admires that God should employ such a
babe as he was in setting forth his praise: and to make this the more probable,
they observe that verse. 3. he sets forth the glory of the heavens, as they
glitter in the night season, (when he used to watch his flocks) making mention
of the moon and stars, not of the Sun, and verse. 7. speaking how all the
creatures are put under man's subjection, he reckons the sheep first. But
however, for our Saviors applying of these words, Matthew. 21.16. to the
Acclamation that was made to Christ, by children and others of the common sort
of people, that cried Hosanna to him as he rode into Jerusalem; I conceive the
drift thereof was to imply, that if Gods all-ruling Providence was magnified,
as David said, by the mouths of babes and sucklings, it need not then seem
strange, that God should by his Providence stir up those children and despised
people to give that Testimony to him, the promised Messiah, even to the
confusion of the Scribes and Pharisees, that were the enemies and persecutours
of Christ, his Gospel and disciples. Yet there are some, I know, that hold that
David did prophetically in these words foretell, how by the acclamation and
Testimony of such despised ones Christ's glory and kingdom should be promoted;
to which purpose they show that in those words, thou have ordained strength, by
strength may be meant a strong and firm kingdom, as elsewhere it is, namely
Psalm. 86.16. give thy strength unto thy servant; and again, Psalm. 110.2. The
Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion.

Verse. 3. When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers; the moon and
the stars, which thou have ordained.] That is, which received their being at
thy command, and were by thy appointment disposed of and ordered according to
their several places and motions and influences. As for the first clause, by
the work of thy fingers there is meant, I conceive, the work of thy hands, as
the heavens are called Psalm. 102.25: yet the most Expositours incline to think,
that by tearming the heavens the work of Gods fingers or his finger-work may be
employed, both with what facility, and with what curiosity God made the heavens;
that which is made with the fingers requiring art rather then strength, as we
see in arras, tapestry, and all embroidered works, whereto the heavens are here
compared.

Verse. 4. What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that
thou visitest him?] As if he had said, Because the heavens, the moon and stars
are such glorious creatures above that which is in man, or rather, because by
the glory of these heavenly bodies we may clearly see how infinitely glorious
the Lord is that made them, and that has taken them to be his dewlling place,
therefore when I consider thy heavens, etc. then think I, What is man? that
thou art mindful of him? etc. that is, what is mortal man, dust and ashes,
or, what are the poor sinful children of men, that thou should so highly
regard him, and be so tenderly careful of him? And this is meant especially of
man, as considered in the state of redemption through Christ, by whom God
visited man in great mercy, (according to that Luke 1.98. Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people) and recovered for him
all those privileges of his first Creation, which he had lost by the fall of
Adam. And hence it is that the Apostle, Heb. 2.6. applies these words to
Christ particularly, (though all the faithful, as members of Christ, must
needs be comprehended) because it is by Christ that man recovers what the first
Adam had lost. Nor need we stumble at it that these words should be applied to
Christ, wherein the Prophet does so vilify man; for indeed in regard of
Christ's humane nature he was as other men, and it was an act of wondrous free
grace, that in him man should be exalted to such a high degree of honor. See
the Notes Job 7.17. and 10.12.

Verse. 5. For thou have made him a little lower then the angels, thou have
crowned him with glory and honor.] This David speaks as in relation to that
glorious estate, wherein man was at first created; when in regard of his
earthly body, and that in case of sin subject to dissolution, he was indeed
made in a condition lower then the angels; and yet withal, because his soul
was of a spiritual substance, and endued with reason and understanding like
unto the angels, and that he was made after Gods own image for wisdom,
holiness and righteousness, fitted for the hope of a blessed and eternal
life, and that all things were made to be serviceable to him, and all earthly
things were put under his Dominion, it might well be said, that though he was
created in a condition lower then the angels, yet it was but a little lower
then the angels, and that he was crowned with glory and honor, as being made
so like unto God, and all things put in subjection unto him as their Lord and
King. Indeed man soon fell from this glorious condition; but yet David speaks
of it, as of the present bliss which through Gods goodness man did enjoy, for
thou have made him a little lower then the angels, etc. partly because there
are some remainders of this glorious condition still left in man; but
especially because in Christ man has recovered that dignity, which our first
parents lost; and that not only in regard of the exaltation of man's nature in
the person of Christ, but also in regard of the renovation of Gods image by
Christ in all his members (which is begun here in all believers, who are made
by him partakers of the divine nature, and at last perfected in the glory of
heaven) and the right which they have in all things through Christ, who is the
heir of the world, Romans 4.13. And this is thought to be the reason why the
Apostle does particularly apply this to Christ. Yet some do rather hold, that
the Apostle does only there elegantly show, how that which David spoke of man
in general, might in another sense be most fitly applied to Christ: Thou
made him a little lower then the angels, or a little while inferior to the
angels; to wit, all the time of his humiliation, but especially in the time of
his agony and his dying upon the Cross; the bitterness whereof that he might
be enabled to undergo, there appeared an angel unto him from heaven
strengthening him, Lu. 22.43: and then thou crownedst him with glory and
honor; which was, when he rose again from the dead, ascended into heaven, and
sat down there at the right hand of the Majesty of God, far above all
principality and power, etc. Ephesians. 1.21.

Verse. 6. Thou have put all things under his feet.] This must be understood, as
that which went before, partly with relation to that glorious condition wherein
man was at first created, and partly with relation to what remainders thereof
man still enjoys, and partly to that which man has recovered and does enjoy
in and by Christ. And withal it seems principally meant of those sublunary
things, which are as it were wholly at man's disposing: for though all the
creatures, even the sun, moon and stars, were made for man's use, and so he may
be said to be created Lord over all things; yet this phrase of being put under
his feet seems to imply a subjection of those things, over which man has power
of life and death, and to do with them for his use what he pleases. But yet,
because Christ has absolute power over all the creatures, therefore the
Apostle, applying these words to Christ, Heb. 2.8, takes them in their utmost
extent, proving from thence the subjection even of the Angels to Christ, as
also 1 Cor. 15.27. where he proves from thence that all his enemies, yea even
death it self, must be at last vanquished by Christ.

Verse. 7. All sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field.] That is, wild
beasts that live abroad in the fields; which is added, because this advances
much the dominion of man, that they also should be subject to him, and Gods
goodness to man in giving him so large a dominion. See also the Note verse. 1.

Verse. 8. The fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the
seas.] To wit, those sea monsters, and other creatures that live in the waters,
that cannot so properly be called fish.

Verse. 9. O Lord, our Lord, etc.] See the Note verse. 1.

PSALM IX.
The Title. TO the chief Musician upon Muth-labben.] It is here again very
uncertain what is meant by this word Muth-labben: namely, whether it were the
name of some Instrument, or some Tune, or some song, or some part in music; as
some indeed think that hereby was meant that which we call the Counter-tenor.
Some translate the words, upon the death of his son, and so conceive the Psalm
was composed upon the death of Absalom, which David's extreme heaviness then
makes improbable. Others render it upon the death of Laben, and so hold that
Laben was the name of some great Commander, that was slain when David got some
glorious victory over his enemies; or that it was Nabal, or Nebal, that is here
by a transposition of the letters called Laben. And then again others translate
it, Upon him that was between, that is, that stood between the two camps, when
he came forth and defied the whole army of Israel, meaning Goliath. But it is
evident that this Psalm was composed after the Ark was placed in Sion, verse.
11, and 14. and whether therefore it were composed in remembrance of a victory
obtained so long before, is altogether uncertain.

Verse. 1. I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, etc.] That is,
first, sincerely, wholly ascribing the glory of our deliverances to thee,
without the least self-respect: and 2ly, with as much affection as possibly I
can, not praising thee with my lips, when my heart is far from thee; I will
show forth all thy mavelous works. But how could he do this, the wonderful
works of God being infinite in number? I answer: Either this must be restrained
to the miraculous deliverances which God had wrought for him and his people; or
the meaning must be, that he would speak of the several sorts of his
mavelous works; or else, he shows hereby, not what he should be able to do,
but what he did desire, and would endeavor to do.

Verse. 2. I will be glad and rejoice in thee, etc.] To wit, as acknowledging
thee the only author of all my joy: I will sing praise to thy name, O thou
most high! that is, who do every way transcendently excel those that are
highest and greatest here in this world. And this title David gives God in this
place, because in his mavelous works for him and his people he had shown
himself such.

Verse. 5. Thou have rebuked the heathen, etc.] See the Note upon Psalm. 6.1.
This implies that his enemies were many, and as it were from several nations
combined together against him: thou have put out their name for ever and ever;
to wit, either by destroying them utterly, that so they may be no more named
amongst the living, and by degrees their very memory perish together with them;
or by bringing them to such a reproachful ruin, that they lose thereby all
that glory and renown they had formerly gotten.

Verse. 6. O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end, etc.] If we
read this, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, The destructions of the enemy
are come to a perpetual end; and their cities have thou destroyed etc. the
meaning seems then to be clearly this: O Lord, thou have put an end to the
destructions, which the enemy began to make amongst thy people; and thou have
destroyed their cities, whereas they thought to have destroyed ours. But
reading it as it is in our Bibles, it may be understood, either to be spoken
ironically, O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end; and thou
have destroyed cities, etc. as if he had said, O thou enemy, thou have f^nished
the ruin thou did intend to bring upon us, by destroying our cities; to
which then that must be opposed which follows in the next verse, But the Lord
shall endure for ever, etc. Or else it must be understood as spoken by way of
insultation over the proud enemy, as it he had said, Whereas thou, O proud
enemy, did resolve never to give over destroying, till thou had brought all
to ruin; destructions thou see are come to a perpetual end, thou shall no
more for ever destroy as thou beganst to do: thou have indeed destroyed
cities, etc. but (verse. 8.) the Lord shall endure for ever; he has prepared
his throne for judgment, that is, it belongs to him to judge the world as a
righteous judge, and though therefore he does it not at all times, he will
certainly do it.

Verse. 9. The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed.] That is, Such they
shall esteem him, and such he will be unto them.

Verse. 10. Thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek thee.] That is, those
that endeavor to approve themselves to thee, that they may enjoy thy favor;
or those that by faith do pray unto thee: and indeed this last is chiefly here
meant.

Verse. 11. Declare among the people his doings.] That is, Not only amongst the
Israelites, but also amongst the nations far and near.

Verse. 12. When he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers them, etc.] That
is, the people mentioned in the foregoing verse; or the humble, mentioned in
the following clause, he forgets not the cry of the humble. And this phrase,
when he makes inquisition for blood, implies, first, that though shedders of
blood may escape for a time, yet they shall sooner or later be called to an
account; secondly, that no excuses or pretenses shall clear or secure those
that are indeed guilty of blood; and thirdly, that God makes precious account
of the blood of those, of whom the world makes no reckoning at all.

Verse. 13. Consider my trouble, O thou that liftest me up from the gates of
death.] That is, say some Expositours, from the counsels and plots of mine
enemies; making the ground of this expression to be, the custom of all
nations, in making the gates of their cities the place where they sat in
counsel concerning the affairs of the Commonwealth. See the Note Genesis 22.17.
But rather I conceive that by being lifted up from the gates of death is meant,
his being delivered from desperate dangers, wherein he seemed to be nigh unto
death, from the jaws of death, from the mouth and brink of the grave; which
indeed those words thou that liftest me up seem much to favor. See the Note
Job 38.17. Yet by the gates of death may be meant the power and dominion of
death, which agrees with that expression of the Apostles of deaths reigning,
Romans 5.14.

Verse. 14. That I may show forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of
Sion, etc.] That is, in the solemn assemblies of the inhabitants of Sion; for
they used to be in the gates of Jerusalem. And why the inhabitants are called
the daughter of Sion, see in the Note upon 2 Kings 19.21: and the elegancy is
observable of opposing here the gates of Sion to the gates of death mentioned
in the foregoing verse; God lifted up David from the gates of death, that he
might praise him in the gates of Sion.

Verse. 16. The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes, etc.] This
may be meant generally of all the judgments which God executes on wicked men,
because they do all show forth the power and holiness and justice of God; but
rather here that judgment seems to be particularly intended, which is
expressed in the following words, the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands; because nothing does more notably discover the wisdom, power, justice
and providence of God, then when he causes wicked men to be entangled by their
own cursed practices. In the close of this verse these words, Higgaion, Selah,
are added. Concerning Selah, see the Note Psalm. 3.2. As for that word Higgaion,
it signifies meditation; and therefore it may seem added to imply, that the
foregoing clause was worthy men's most serious thoughts: yet some take it to be
some term of music.

Verse. 17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, etc.] By hell in the Scripture
is sometimes meant the grave, as Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in
hell: but if nothing else were intended here, there were nothing then threatened
to these wicked wretches, but what is common to the godly together with them.
It must therefore be understood here, I conceive, of the place of the damned,
or of the grave and that jointly together: The wicked shall be turned into
hell; as if he had said, There is no cause why men should be so afraid as they
are of these proud wicked wretches; at length God will cut them down, and lay
them in the grave, and throw their souls into hell, and then there will be an
end of their oppressions. As for this word (turned,) The wicked shall be turned
into hell, some conceive it is used in reference to their returning to the
earth, from whence they were taken; others conceive that because of their
hell-bred qualities, because they are of their father the devil, Joh. 8.44. and
when they are cast into hell they go to their place, as it is said of Judas
Act. 1.26. thence is this expression of their being turned into hell. But I
rather think that this word ( turned) does imply either first, that whereas
they had set themselves as it were to fight against God, he should foil them,
and put them to flight, and turn them back into hell: or secondly, that their
end should be far different from what they expected; for whereas they carried
themselves, as if they had made a covenant with death and with hell, and as if
they meant to exalt themselves above the clouds, in the conclusion they should
be brought down to the grave, and their souls thrown into hell.

Verse. 19. Let the heathen be judged in thy sight.] That is, by thee; as men
arraigned before thy tribunal.

PSALM X.
Verse. 1. WHy stand thou afar off, O Lord? etc.] See the Note upon Exodus
32.11. The Greek and Vulgar Latin Translation make this a part of the
foregoing Psalm; and so they do likewise with the 104 and 105 Psalms: but then
to make up the number of 150 Psalms, they divide other Psalms into two.

Verse. 2. The wicked in his pride does persecute the poor, etc.] This David
might intend concerning himself, as being brought very low by the continual
persecution of Saul and his faction; yet he expresses it generally, because it
is usually so with others likewise: but however, that they are poor and
afflicted whom the wicked man persecutes, is mentioned as a great aggravation
of his cruelty. Let them be taken in the devices that they have imagined; that
is, let them be ensnared by their own plots. Yet some understand it of their
being discovered and apprehended, and punished by the Magistrate for their
plots against the righteous.

Verse. 3. For the wicked boasts of his hearts desire, etc.] That is, he
glories in the sinful desires of his heart, as justifying them, and
applauding and encouraging himself therein: or, he glories of his success in
his wicked deeds, wherein he has accomplished the desires of his heart. As for
the following words, and blesses the covetous, whom the Lord abborreth, either
they may be meant of the wicked man's blessing himself in his covetous
practices, to wit, that he justifyeth, applaudeth and encourages himself
therein, as assuring himself that they shall bring no evil upon him; and so
some read this clause, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, the covetous
blesses himself, etc. or they may be meant of his justifying and applauding
other covetous wretches like himself.

Verse. 4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after
God.] That is, Through his pride, which he discovers in his countenance, he
never minds whether his ways be pleasing to God or no; he never seeks Gods
favor, but resolves to do what he lists himself.

Verse. 5. His ways are always grievous, etc.] That is, a matter of grief,
troublesome or mischievous to others. Thy judgments are far above out of his
sight. Some by the judgments of God do understand the laws of God, as if he
had said, He never minds thy commandments; but doubtless the meaning is, that
he never regards nor thinks of the judgments which God is wont to execute upon
wicked men: as for all his enemies he puffs at them, that is, he slights
them, as if he were able to blow them away with a puff.

Verse. 7. His mouth is full of cursing, etc.] By cursing here some understand
all kind of evil speaking, to wit, when wicked men curse and revile and falsely
accuse the godly. But others understand it of the false oaths whereby wicked
men are wont to deceive the innocent; his mouth is full of cursing, that is, he
is frequently wont with curses and imprecations annexed to swear this and that,
when yet his heart and tongue agree not together: which may seem the more
probable, because with cursing here deceit and fraud are joined: as likewise
because of the following clause, under his tongue are mischief and vanity, or
iniquity; for this expression implies, that under smooth and plausible
language he hides mischief and vanity.

Verse. 8. He sits in the lurking places of the villages, etc.] Some
understand this literally of thieves and robbers; but it is rather spoken by
way of similitude, to wit, that wicked men do lie in wait for any advantages to
oppress and slay the godly, and do use all cunning and dissembling courses to
accomplish their desires, even as robbers are wont to lie lurking in thickets
and caves about villages to watch for passengers that go by, and then unawares
break out upon them, and rob and murder them: and such likewise is that last
expression of this verse, his eyes are privily set against the poor; that is,
he closely watches to mischief the poor, even as such robbers that stand
peeping out of their lurking places to watch for those that go by, or as those
that aim to shoot a man, do it with fixing their eyes half-shut upon him.

Verse. 9. He does catch the poor when he draws him into his net.] That is,
When he has ensnared him by his fraudulent and dissembling dealings, then,
poor wretch, with all violence he seiseth upon him.

Verse. 10. He croucheth and humbles himself, etc.] To wit, as a lion, that
lies close to the ground, that he may the better hide himself, and with the
more speed and strength may suddenly leap out upon his prey: that the poor may
fall by his strong ones; that is, that he may tear the poor in pieces by the
strength of his teeth or paws. Now we must know, that it is the show which the
wicked man often makes of an humble, lowly mind, and his craft in concealing
and dissembling his mischievous purposes, that is here compared to the
crouching of a lion: and by his strong ones may be meant those strong and
mighty men, that are subservient to the wicked man in his oppressions.

Verse. 15. Break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil man, etc.] That is,
Break in pieces their power: see the Notes upon Deuteronomy. 33.20. 1 Samuel 2.31. As
for the following clause, Seek out his wickedness till thou find none, that
which he desires of God therein, I conceive, is this; that whereas the wicked
man was ready to flatter himself, that God would never require his wickedness
of him, as he had said before verse. 13. the Lord would make him see the
contrary, and would to that end seek out his wickedness, that is, call him to
an account, lay all his sins to his charge, and judge and punish him for them,
till he found none, that is, till there be no wickedness of his left
unpunished, or till by destroying such wretches there be no more footsteps to
be seen of any such wickedness, according to that Ezekiel. 23.48. where the Lord
having shown how he would destroy his rebellious people, he adds, Thus will I
cause lewdness to cease out of the land. Others, I know, understand this last
clause of wicked men, thus; seek out his wickedness till thou find none, that
is, Destroy thou the wicked man till there be none left, or that others may be
warned by his example, and so there may be no more any such Atheistical
wretches to be found upon the earth. Others take it thus; Discover thou, Lord,
the evil purposes of the wicked man, and then they shall not be able to effect
what they have mischievously intended. But the first Exposition is far the
best.

Verse. 16. The Lord is King for ever and ever, etc.] This is here alleged, as
that whereon he grounded his hope and desire that God would destroy the wicked,
namely, because being the great King of the world, to him it belonged to
execute judgment; and being King for ever, though he did defer to help his
oppressed people for a time, yet there was no peril in that, since it would be
always in his power to do it. Now for the following clause, the heathen are
perished out of his land, either it is meant of the wicked Israelites, who are
here called the heathen, to show that they were no better then heathens in Gods
account, whence it is that the prophet uses that expression, Amos 9.7. Are ye
not as children of the Ethiopians to me, O children of Israel, says the Lord?
and then it must be taken as a commination that God would certainly destroy
them out of his land, though it be expressed as if it were done already, to
show the certainty of it, and by way of triumphing in their approaching ruin:
Or else rather it is meant of the Canaanites, whom God cast out before the
Israelites; and then it is added, that thence he might imply, that as God had
cast out and destroyed those nations for their wickedness, so he would
likewise do with those wicked Israelites, that now defiled the land by their
wickedness no less then the other had done.

Verse. 17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble; thou will prepare
their heart.] Some read this last clause, Thou will confirm their heart; and
then the meaning is, that God would support and bear up the spirits of his
servants in hope that he would not for ever forsake and cast off his people,
and so would enable them still to call upon him.

PSALM XI.
Verse. 1. IN the Lord put I my trust, how say you to my soul, Flee as a bird to
your mountain?] It is most probable that this Psalm was composed by David
either when he was in great streights, or in remembrance of the great streights
he had been in, by reason of Saul's persecution. So that these words may be
taken as spoken to his friends, whose hearts fainting because of the long
continuance of their troubles, they might advise him to lay aside all hope and
expectation of the kingdom, and to provide for the saving of his life, and the
lives of his followers, by fleeing speedily out of the land to some place of
safe refuge. In the Lord, says David, put I my trust, who has promised me the
crown and kingdom of Israel; how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your
mountain? that is, how is it then that ye will persuade me, that like a
timorous coward I should flee away out of the kingdom to some place of safety,
as the poor fearful bird is wont to fly up to the mountains to escape away
from the fowler? Or secondly, they may be taken as spoken to the people of the
land, either because they also might advise him for the kingdoms peace to fly
out of the land, and so to get him out of Saul's reach; or because they would
afford him no place of refuge, but were still ready to betray him into the
hands of Saul, by means whereof he was forced to fly as a bird from one place
to another, and must needs be dangerously tempted to flee from the people of
God to secure himself. Or, thirdly, which seems to me most probable, they may
be taken as spoken to his enemies: and that either with respect to their
deriding him, because he hid himself in the caves and rocks of the mountains,
and fled still from one hold to another, not daring to appear against Saul in
the open field; and indeed it is noted that twelve several times he fled from
one place to another to secure himself: or because their continual persecuting
of him, not suffering him to be quiet in any place, but pursuing him up and
down, as when one does hunt a partridge in the mountains, as David said to Saul
1 Samuel 26.20, was all one in effect, as if they had said, that he should fly
out of the land to save his life, according to that which he said of his
enemies in the same place, verse. 19. They have driven me out this day from
abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go, serve other gods;
concerning which see the Note there. But however this expression, How say ye to
my soul, etc. may imply, what a sore temptation he found this in his mind, or
what a wounding it was to his soul, that he should be thus insulted over or
driven to these extremities by his enemies, or thus solicited by his friends
or others to abandon his country, and the hope that he had in the promise of
God: yet the meaning may be only, How say ye to me, flee as a bird, etc. of
which see the Note Psalm. 3.2.

Verse. 2. For lo, the wicked bend their bow, -- that they may privily shoot at
the upright in heart.] That is, at me and my followers, that never meant Saul
any hurt, but rather have deserved well both of him and the kingdom. Now this
is added as a reason, according to that which is said of the foregoing verse,
either first, why his friends or the people advised him to flee away for his
life, to wit, because Saul and his followers would no where suffer him to live
in safety; and so these words must be taken as the words of those that did thus
advise him: or secondly, why he charged the people with saying that he should
flee as a bird to the mountains, namely, because they would not afford him any
succor or shelter, though they saw his enemies so eager and violent causlesly
to take away his life: or thirdly, why it was no wonder though his enemies did
so insult over him, because they were continually using all possible means,
either by force or fraud, to take away his life: or rather fourthly, why David
had charged his enemies with saying, Flee as a bird to your mountain, namely,
because they were continually seeking to take away his life; when they stood
always as it were with their bows bent, ready to shoot at him and kill him,
this was a fair warning, that as a bird he should flee to the mountains.

Verse. 3. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?] Many
several ways these words are expounded by those that have commented thereon:
but there are three that have most probability in them. First, by the
foundations that were destroyed may be meant, the means that had been used by
him and others, and as it were laid as the foundations, either of settling the
peace of the kingdom, or of bringing the affairs of Religion and state of the
kingdom to a better condition; and so the meaning must be, that if these were
crossed and ruined, neither he nor any other the faithful servants of God
could help that: secondly, by the foundations destroyed may be meant, either
the breaking of covenants, wherein there ought to be stability, and which are
as it were the foundations of all civil peace between men and men; or else
generally the perverting and overturning of all truth and piety and justice,
because these are indeed the foundations and supporters of all kingdoms and
commonwealths; whence are those expressions Psalm. 75.2, 3. I will judge
uprightly: the earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved; I bear up
the pillars of it; and that Psalm. 82.5. where speaking of the corruptions of
judges, the Lord complains, that all the foundations of the earth are out of
course; and again Prove. 29.14. The king that faithfully judges the poor, his
throne shall be established in righteousness: and then the meaning of these
words is this, that if there were no justice nor truth nor piety in the land,
nothing but violence and oppression, and so hereby the kingdom was ruined, the
righteous were blameless herein. And thirdly, it may be spoken as in reference
to his own ruin, If the foundations be destroyed, that is, If they leave me
without any refuge, if all my forts and places of shelter be overthrown or
taken from me, if there be no place left me where I may safely set my foot, or
if I be utterly ruined, as a house whose foundations are overthrown, what can
the righteous do? that is, I cannot help it, I have no way deserved it: and so
this may be spoken by David by way of comforting himself in his own innocence,
or by way of moving the Lord thereby to take his part against his enemies.

Verse. 4. The Lord is in his holy Temple, etc.] That is, in heaven, which is
often called Gods Temple; the reasons whereof see in the Note upon 2 Samuel 22.7.
Some indeed understand it of the Tabernacle, where God dwelt amongst his
people. And indeed the Tabernacle is also often called the Temple: see 1 Samuel
1.9. but here the following clause explains this, the Lords throne is in
heaven. However this doubtless David opposes against all the enmity,
threatenings and discouragements of men, The Lord is in his holy Temple; as if
he should have said, Though there be no comfort nor hope to be found on earth,
yet there is always comfort and hope to be had from heaven; there the glorious
and almighty God of heaven and earth dwells, who is the righteous judge of
all men, who will always be a refuge to the oppressed. And to the same purpose
tend the following words, His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men:
where the same thing is meant by his eyes beholding, and his eyelids trying the
children of men, namely, that he knows all men exactly: see Psalm. 7.9. Yet
some would have it, that there is an allusion in those words, his eyelids try
the children of men, to those that do look with their eyes half shut, when they
are intent to fix their eyes to discern any thing: and others hold the meaning
thereof to be, that God, by winking as it were, and seeming not to take notice
of the ways of men, does thereby try them. But these Expositions are somewhat
forced.

Verse. 5. The lord tries the righteous; etc.] That is, He exactly knows who
they are that are truly righteous: or, rather, the Lord tries the righteous by
afflictions; for because afflictions do purge away the corruptions of the
righteous and discover their graces, therefore they are said to be tried
thereby, as Psalm. 66.10, 11. For thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried
us, as silver is tried; thou broughtest us into the net, thou laydest
affliction upon our loins: see also Job 7.18. And indeed that this is meant
here of trying them by affliction, is the more probable by that which is
opposed hereto in the following clause, but the wicked and him that loves
violence his soul hates, that is, he hates him from his very soul.

Verse. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, etc.] That is, He shall pour down upon them many sudden,
terrible, unresistable and inextricable judgments. For by tearming them snares
is meant, that they should be surprised thereby when they thought themselves
secure, and should not be able to free themselves from them: and by those
terms, fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest, either he alludes to storms
of wind and thunder and lightening, which also do often send forth a
sulphurous savor; or else particularly to the punishment of Sodom and
Gomorrha; it being usual in the Scripture to set forth extraordinary vengeance
by the example of that which befell them, as we see Zeph. 2.9. Surely Moab
shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrha, and so in many other
places: and why it is said that he should rain these things upon them, see in
the Note Job 20.2.3. And then for the next clause, this shall be the portion of
their cup, the meaning of it is, This shall be that vengeance which God will
measure out unto them. It is a metaphorical expression taken from that ancient
custom, either of householders that used to set out to each of their family or
of the governor of feasts that used to allot to every one that sat at the
table, their several portion of meat and drink.

Verse. 7. His countenance does behold the upright.] To wit, as a loving father
that delights to behold his child, and is watchful over him for his good and
preservation.

PSALM XII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician upon Sheminith.] See the Note upon 1 Chronicles.
15.21.

Verse. 1. Help, Lord, etc.] This may be desired for himself, or for the godly
in general, that lived in those times of Saul's persecution, (for it is most
probable that this Psalm was then composed;) only his or their distress is the
more passionately expressed, in that, as one ready to perish, he cries out for
help, without naming the parties for whom he desires it: and as a reason of
this his desire he alleges the general corruption of the times, that there
was scarce a godly or faithful man to be found; because this sets forth their
danger to be great, in regard there were so few from whom any help could be
expected, and there were so many in every place that would be ready to wrong
and betray them; and it might well be feared, lest in such an universal
depravation of manners, even they also might be corrupted.

Verse. 2. With flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak.] That is,
a heart that suggests one thing to be spoken with the tongue, and in the mean
season intends the contrary. For the first clause, They speak vanity every one
with his neighbor, see the Note Job 31.5.

Verse. 3. The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that
speaks proud things.] By the tongue that speaks proud things may be meant,
such as without fear of God or man cared not whom they slandered, or what
falsehoods they reported of them; or such as when they had entangled men with
their flatteries, did then imperiously threaten them or insult over them; or
such as boasted of themselves, or of their deceits and subtle practices,
whereby they doubted not to ruin David, and others that feared God, as seems
to be expressed in the following verse, Who have said, With our tongue we will
prevail, etc. and in all probability this was meant of Saul's courtiers and
others, that sided with him to seek David's ruin. See 1 Samuel 20.31. and 23.23.

Verse. 5. I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him.] See the Note
Psalm. 10.5.

Verse. 6. The words of the Lord are pure words, etc.] That is, wholly free from
all vanity and falsehood, and so not like the words of sinful men, full of
lying and flattery and deceit; yea the words of the Lord are so pure in
themselves, that they are the means of purifying the children of men. And this
is added here, to show how safely the poor might rely on that promise of God
mentioned in the foregoing verse. As for the following words, how the words of
the Lord are tried words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purifyed seven
times, see in the Note 2 Samuel 22.31; and why it is said seven times, see Genesis
33.3.

Verse. 7. Thou shall preserve them from this generation for ever.] That is,
Thou will always preserve them from the men of this generation, though they
all in multitudes combine against them. Yet some would have the meaning to be,
that God would for ever preserve his servants from all such wicked wretches, as
were those of that generation.

Verse. 8. The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.] This
expression of walking on every side implies, first, that they then swarmed in
every place wherever a man could come: secondly, that they did not hide
themselves, but boldly and arrogantly strutted about, vaunting themselves in
their wickedness: and thirdly, that they went about seeking to lay wait, to
ensnare and to mischief the righteous.

PSALM XIII.
Verse. 1. HOw long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever?] That is, How long
will thou continually seem not to mind me? or, how long will thou proceed to
disregard me, as if thou meantest never more to mind me?

Verse. 2. How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart
daily?] This David complains of, because men in trouble will be eagerly busy
to devise in their minds how to free themselves, and through sollicitous fears
and cares their minds will run from one thing to another, not knowing what to
pitch upon, even as sick men are wont to toss up and down in their beds, not
knowing how to lie at ease; but, alas, get nothing hereby, but the wearying and
vexing of their minds with anxious and distracting thoughts, all proving vain,
and their sorrow rather increasing daily upon them then otherwise, till God is
pleased to send them relief. I know there are some understand this word daily
as implying the greatness of David's sorrow, in that it lay heavy upon his
heart even in the day time, when businesses are wont to free men from such
carking cares: but our Translation will hardly bear such an Exposition.

Verse. 3. Lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death.] Some understand
this thus, Keep me waking and watchful, lest if I grow secure and fall asleep,
my sleep prove like that of those that die in their sleep. But by desiring that
God would lighten his eyes, he rather desires either first, that God would
inform him by the counsel of his spirit what course he should take, lest
otherwise he should perish, being left to himself; and so these words may have
reference to that he had said in the foregoing verse, How long shall I take
counsel in my soul, etc. or secondly, that God would cheer up his fainting
spirit, and comfort his soul, by delivering him out of his troubles, and
causing the light of his countenance again to shine upon him, lest he should
die in his sorrow and misery: for indeed as sorrow and fainting do usually
darken the eyes, whence is that Lam. 5.17. For this our heart is faint, for
these things our eyes are dim; so when the spirits are cheared and the heart
comforted, it may well be termed an enlightening of the eyes. See 1 Samuel
14.27. and the Note 2 Samuel 22.29: or thirdly, (which I like the best, though
all three may be comprehended) that God would protect his life, and that by
preserving him out of the hands of his enemies, Saul and others. For the Lords
giving and preserving of life is often expressed in the Scripture by the
enlightening of the eyes, as Prove. 29.13. The poor and the deceitful meet
together; the lord lighteneth both their eyes; and Joh. 1.4. In him was life,
and the life was the light of men.

Verse. 4. Lest mine enemies say, I have prevailed against him, etc.] To wit,
notwithstanding my confidence in thee; which must needs, Lord, tend to thy
dishonor: and those that trouble me rejoice when I am moved, that is, when I
am overthrown, and moved from that condition wherein at present I am, or
trusted to have been.

Verse. 5. But I have trusted in thy mercy, etc.] As if he had said, Let them
do what they will, be things never so bad with me, I will never be moved from
this hold.

Verse. 6. I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with
me.] That is, when God shall have dealt bountifully with me, I will for that
sing praise unto his name.

PSALM XIV.
Verse. 1. THe fool has said in his heart, There is no God, etc.] David here
bewails the horrible profaneness that had overspread the face of the Church,
the Israel of God, in Saul's time: and so in the first place he mentions the
secret Atheism that was in their hearts, as the root of all their wickedness,
The fool, that is, the wicked man, (see 2 Samuel 13.13.) has said in his heart,
There is no God, that is, he does what he can to persuade himself that there is
no God, and to extinguish the light of knowledge and conscience that is in him
concerning God; and that secret contempt of God, that is in his heart, is in
effect a plain denial of God and a clear sign that he does not indeed believe
there is a God: which appears by the impiety of such men's lives, they are
corrupt, they have done abominable works, etc.

Verse. 2. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men; to see if
there were any that did understand, and seek God.] That is, any that did truly
know God, and seek after him in the right manner, to wit, to know and serve
him, to approve themselves to him, and make him and his glory the end of all
their actions. Some conceive that this is expressly spoken of the old world; as
if David had said, And thus it was in the days of Noah, The Lord looked down
from heaven upon the children of men, etc. as it is said Genesis 6.12. God looked
upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way.
But I rather conceive that David speaks still of the profaneness of his own
time, (though happily in the expression he uses he may allude to that which is
there said,) and that it is all one in effect, as if he had said, The
all-knowing God sees it is thus: The Lord looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, that is, those that are in their unregenerate estate, to see
if there were any that did understand, and seek God; and he saw there was not
any. For that this last is employed is evident, because the Apostle cites the
words thus Romans 3.11. There is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God.

Verse. 3. They are all gone aside, etc.] or gone back, as it is expressed Psalm.
53.3. (which is the same in a manner with this) to wit, from God, or from the
ways of holiness and righteousness, wherein God has prescribed them to
walk: they are all together become filthy, as being corrupt, and doing
abominable things, and consequently good for nothing; whence it is that the
Apostle renders this clause thus, Rom.3.12. they are together become
unprofitable. And because this David, or the Lord rather having looked down
from heaven, pronounces concerning the wicked in those days of Saul, that
were not regenerated by the spirit of God, therefore the Apostle applies it to
show, that thus all mankind are corrupted before they be regenerated, Romans
3.12. See the Note Psalm. 5.9.

Verse. 4. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people
as they eat bread.] That is, who daily devour the poor, who are my special
care, yea the poor of my peculiar people, the Israelites, and that without any
fear, yea with delight, making no more conscience of it, then a man would of
eating a piece of bread, and so feed and fat themselves thereby, as if they
were appointed to be meat for them. See the Note also Job 19.22. As for the
Interrogation in the beginning of the verse, Have all the workers of iniquity
no knowledge? who eat up my people, etc. some conceive it has the force of a
commination; as if the Lord had said, Do they not know that there is a just
God, that must needs one day punish them for this their horrible wickedness
and profaneness? Well, they shall know it. Again, some think it has the force
of an affirmation, Have they no knowledge? yea doubtless, so it is, they are
become very brutes, they have no knowledge; else they would not do as they
do. Again, some conceive, on the contrary, that it has the force of a
vehement negation; Can they be ignorant that they sin in these things, and that
there is a God that will be avenged on them for it? Doubtless they are not,
nor cannot be ignorant of it: and that is manifest by the terrors that ever
and anon they feel in their consciences; which is added in the next verse. But
others (which I judge the rightest) do understand it as spoken by way of
admiring, and bewailing that they should be so stupid and brutish.

Verse. 5. There were they in great fear, etc.] Psalm. 53.5. these words, where
no fear was, are added. All the difficulty here is to know what is intended by
this word ( There.) Some conceive of it thus, There, that is, before God and
his judgment were they in great fear; which is opposed, say they, to the
judgment of the world: and they allege that as a parallel place, Eccles.
3.17. God shall judge the righteous and the wicked; for there is a time there,
that is, before God there is a time of judging men for every purpose and for
every work. But there are three other Expositions of this word, which seem to
me more probable: to wit, First, that this word there has relation to Gods
punishing these Atheistical wretches: the former Question, Have all the
workers of iniquity no knowledge? etc. implying that God would make them know,
that there was a God that would punish such profaneness and impiety, hereupon
he adds There, that is, when God begins to punish them, were they in great
fear, etc. and so also this expression may imply the certainty of their
punishment, whilst he points at it, as it were, with his finger. Secondly, that
by there were they in great fear is meant, that they were terrified in their
hearts and consciences: The foregoing Interrogation, Have all the workers of
iniquity no knowledge? might imply, that they could not but know in their
consciences, that there was a God that would judge them; and so with relation
thereto it follows, There, that is, in their hearts and consciences were they
in great fear. And thirdly, (which seems the clearest) that this has relation
to that which is said before concerning their devouring Gods people, and not
minding to call upon the Lord, namely, that there, that is, as they were
running on securely and in the midst of this their profaneness, horrid
terrors from God should seize upon them: and so this expression may imply how
suddenly this should come upon them, as in Psalm. 36.12. there are the workers
of iniquity fallen; and that these inward terrors did evince, that they could
not be ignorant that there was a God that would call men to account for their
sins. For God is in the generation of the righteous, namely to protect them,
and take their part against those that injure them: and this may be added to
imply, either that by the discovery of this the wicked are terrified, or that
therefore for the righteous sake God strikes them with terrors. In Psalm. 53.5.
in stead of this clause, there are these words, For God has scattered the
bones of him that encampeth against thee; that is, God has destroyed the
strong enemies that had beset thee, and so has delivered thee, O thou
righteous servant of God, thou have put them to shame, because God has
despised them: which is the same in effect with that we have here.

Verse. 6. You have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his
refuge.] Here David turns his speech to those wicked men he had spoken of. The
words may be taken as spoken ironically, You have shamed the counsel of the
poor, etc. as if he had said, You thought to have made frustrate the hope of
the poor, but in your own terrors you feel what it is come to: and thus he
derides them for scorning and deriding the poor. But rather David does therein
expressly charge them with shaming, that is, with endeavoring to shame the
counsel of the poor, either by opposing them in their hopes and endeavors, or
rather by deriding them for hoping in God, when the Lord seemed not to regard
them; as if he had said, You will not call upon the Lord your selves, and you
deride them that do it: and this he charge upon them, as that which would
farther provoke the Lord to destroy them.

Verse. 7. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion, etc.] This
might be meant, both first of a temporal deliverance, as if he had said, O
that the Lord who dwells in Sion would deliver his Israel; or that from
heaven, whereof the Tabernacle in Sion was a type, he would save his people
from the tyranny of Saul, and all other their proud oppressors! O that he
would settle me in the kingdom that he has promised me, that I might then
purge out this profaneness out of the land! and if we take it thus, then the
following words must be thus understood, When the Lord brings back the
captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad; that
is, when the Lord shall thus free his people from the slavery under which they
are now held, then shall all true Israelites exceedingly rejoice. And if it be
objected, that this Psalm cannot be intended of the profaneness of Saul's
days, because of the mention that is here made of Sion, the Ark not being in
his days removed thither; to this it may be answered, either that David might
speak this by a prophetical spirit, or that happily he composed this Psalm after
the Ark was placed in Sion, though he writes therein of former times. And
secondly, it may he meant of the spiritual Redemption of his people: Being
grieved at the horrible impiety of the children of men, O, says he, that the
salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! that is, O that God would send his
Son our Redeemer, to save man from the bondage of sin and death! and those
words out of Sion are added, because thence the Messiah was to come, Romans
11.26. There shall come out of Sion the deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob; and thence also the Gospel was expected, Esa. 2.3. Out
of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: and
so then we must also understand the following words, when the Lord brings
back the captivity of his people, etc. to wit, of Christ's delivering his people
from the bondage of sin and death, the great joy of all true Israelites.

PSALM XV.
Verse. 1. LOrd, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy
hill?] This Question David propounds to the Lord, that the answer afterward
added might be received as a divine Oracle of unquestionable certainty. Some
understand it of the qualification of those that present themselves to serve
God in the Tabernacle or Temple: Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? etc.
as if he had said, Many flock thither, but who are they that have a just right
to come? or who are they that may expect to have this privilege continued to
them, of resorting to thy house? But more generally it is understood of the
qualification of those that are true members of the Church here, and shall live
for ever in heaven hereafter. Some conceive that it is the kingdom of heaven,
that is here called both Gods Tabernacle and holy hill* and so make the sum
of the whole Question to be this, Who shall dwell with thee for ever in heaven?
But because the Tabernacle was more peculiarly a type of the Church militant,
and the Temple on the holy hill of Sion a type of the Church triumphant,
therefore more commonly Expositours understand this Question thus, Who shall be
acknowledged true members of thy Church on earth, and who shall dwell for ever
in thy Church triumphant in heaven?

Verse. 3. Nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.] To wit, by raising
false reports, or any other way of reproaching them, or by hearkening to
others, or enduring them that do it. See the Note upon Exodus 2^.1.

Verse. 5. He that puts not out his money to usury, etc.] See the Notes Exodus
22.25, and Deuteronomy. 23.19, and under this all other unjust ways of gain are
comprehended.

He that does these things shall not be moved.] That is, He shall never be
cast out as an hypocrite: he shall certainly continue a true member of the
Church, and shall for ever live in Gods kingdom of glory.

PSALM XVI.
The Title. MIchtam of David.] The same Title is in the 56, and the four
following Psalms: and the same that is said before often of others, is by many
said of this, as that it was the name of some Musical Instrument, Song or
Tune. Besides some make it a word compounded of ( match) which signifies poor
or afflicted, and ( tam) which signifies simple or sincere: and so they render
the Title, A Psalm of David that was afflicted and sincere. But it is best
rendered, as in the margin of our Bibles, A golden Psalm of David; intimating
that David made precious account of it, that it was to him as a chain or
jewel, or crown of gold.

Verse. 1. Preserve me, O God, for in thee do I put my trust.] Because some
passages in this Psalm verse. 8. and 10 are by the Apostles cited as spoken by
Christ, Act. 2.25.31, and 13.35, therefore some of our best Expositours do
understand every clause of this Psalm as uttered by Christ; and accordingly
they say that in these words, Preserve me, O God, Christ prays to his father,
that he might be sustained and preserved in the time of his agony and death,
that he might not sink under them, but might at last triumph over all his
enemies and sufferings. But in regard there are some passages in the Psalm that
cannot so conveniently or properly be applied to Christ, as that verse. 4. that
he should profess that he would not partake with Idolaters in their
superstitions, who was far above the danger of any such contagion, (and others
of the like nature) I rather conceive that David does here pray and give
thanks, sometimes in the name of Christ, of whom he was a type, and sometimes
in the name of all the faithful members of the Church, of whom he was one, and
sometimes also of both together.

Verse. 2. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord, etc.]
David does often in the Psalms thus speak to his own soul; as in Psalm. 42.11.
and in other places. This here is all one in effect as if he had said,
Therefore do I hope in thee, and seek to thee, because from my soul I have
taken thee, the great Lord, governor and preserver of all things, to be my
Lord, and have given up my self to be thy servant, and therefore I know thou will preserve me, according to that Psalm. 123.2. Behold, as the eyes of
servants look unto the hand of their masters, etc. so our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God until that he have mercy upon us.

My goodness extends not to thee; but (verse. 3.) to the Saints that are in
the earth, etc.] They that understand the whole Psalm of Christ, make this
place parallel with that Joh. 17.19. For their sakes I sanctify my self, that
they also might be sanctified through the truth. But I rather conceive it is
added, either as a necessary explanation of what he had said before, to wit, by
showing that though he pleaded to be preserved, because of his relation to the
Lord as his servant, yet it was not out of an opinion that he could bring any
advantage to the Lord by any thing he could do, only to his Saints he desired
to do what good he could: or else rather as a farther argument to move God to
preserve him, because he relied merely upon his mercy, and not upon any
meritoriousnesse in his service, and that withal his delight was in the Saints
that were precious in Gods eyes.

Verse. 4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God,
etc.] or, that give gifts unto another God: that is, Whilst they afflict
themselves that are carried with a blind and mad zeal after other Gods, as
being still anxious to know what to do to please them, or whilst they
impoverish themselves in expenses upon them, alas, they do but increase their
own sorrows, since at length to their grief all their hopes will fail them,
their cost will be all as cast away, their Idols shall not profit them; but in
stead thereof, they will draw miseries and troubles upon themselves, the just
effect of Gods indignation against them. But this is only prefixed to make way
to that which follows, wherein he professes that for this he abhorred to join
with Idolaters in their Idol-worship: Their drink offerings of blood will I not
offer. As the Israelites by the direction of Gods law, so the heathens also
had, as appendences to their sacrifices, both meat offerings and
drink offerings, and these were usually of wine, as is evident Numb. 15.5, and
Deuteronomy. 32.37, 38. Where are their Gods? etc. which did eat the fat of their
sacrifices, and drink the wine of their drink offerings? and the offerers used
first to drink some part of them, and the rest they used to pour upon their
sacrifices; to which the Apostle seems to allude in that 1 Cor. 10, 21. Ye
cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils. But what then is
meant here by their drink offerings of blood? I answer; some think that thereby
is meant sacrifices gotten by rapine and blood, and others think that it is the
blood of their slain sacrifices that is here called drink offerings of blood.
But because many writers testify, that the heathens used to pour out
drink offerings of the blood of men, or because they used to pour the blood of
the beasts they slew upon their sacrifices, which must needs be an abomination
to the Jews, who might not eat any blood, it seems most probable, that these
were the drink offerings of blood of which David here speaks. Only we must
remember, that under this one particular he protests against having communion
with them in any of their idol-services; and that this he alleges too as an
argument to move God to preserve him: to which purpose also the next clause is
added, nor take up their names into my lips. For though some restrain this to
not swearing by their names; yet that it comprehends more of detestation then
so, see in the Note upon Exodus 23.13. As for those that understand the whole
Psalm of Christ, they conceive that both clauses may be most probably
understood thus; their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up
their names into my lips: that is, I will not present their offerings to my
Father, nor so much as mention their names, when I make intercession for the
Saints.

Verse. 5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup, etc.] In
the word cup there is an allusion to the custom of allotting every one that
fat at meat their several portion; of which see the Note Psalm. 11.6. And David
might call the Lord the portion of his inheritance, both objectively, because
he accounted the very enjoying of God and his favor that which was all in all
to him, and wherein he solely placed his solace and happiness; and likewise
efficiently, because he depended upon him alone, as the author of all the
blessings he did or could hope to enjoy: as if he had said, whilst others run
after other Gods, I have chosen the Lord Jehovah to be my God; or, whilst some
place their bliss in riches, and some in honors, the Lord is the
all^sufficient portion which I take for mine inheritance. And besides, it might
be spoken as in reference to his enemies endeavoring to drive him out of the
land of Israel; affirming, that though they sought thus to expel him out of
the inheritance of Gods people, as if he had no part in God, yet he knew well
that the Lord was his inheritance, which he was sure they could never take from
him; for, says he, thou maintainest my lot, that is, mine inheritance, (there
is an allusion in the word to the custom of dividing inheritances by lot:) and
he ascribes to God the maintaining of his lot, not only because it was of God,
that any outward blessings conferred upon him were continued to him; but also
especially, because the unchangeablenesse of his condition, in keeping the Lord
as his portion, and having heaven reserved for his inheritance, was merely of
God, and not of himself.

Verse. 6. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, etc.] To wit, in
that the Lord was his God, and so he had a sure interest in all spiritual and
heavenly blessings; and then besides over and above, the kingdom of Israel was
settled upon him and his seed after him* and this he seems to add, as in
opposition to what he had said before verse. 4. concerning the multiplied
sorrows of those that hastened after other Gods. But still we see he speaks of
his inheritance, My lines are fallen to me, etc. as alluding to earthly
inheritances which fall to men by lot, after they have been divided by lines:
and of this last see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.9. As for them that understand the whole
Psalm of Christ, they take this verse to be an expression of the precious
account that Christ makes of his Church, his inheritance given him of his
father.

Verse. 7. I will bless the Lord, who has given me counsel, etc.] That is,
who has by his spirit persuaded and inclined my heart thus to choose thee for
my part and portion; and so in other things also to do what may be pleasing
unto thee: my reins also instruct me in the night-seasons; that is, by the
inward and secret instinct of Gods spirit* I find my thoughts, affections and
desires moved, as to other things agreeable to Gods will, so especially to this
of choosing God to be my portion: (see the Note Psalm. 7.9.) and this he mentions
to have been done in the night, when he had no body else to counsel him but
God, yea and constantly night after night, in the night-seasons; because indeed
when men are free from worldly employments, and the distraction of the senses,
the spirit of God finds the minds of men fittest for serious and holy
meditations: and withal happily thereby to advance the praise of God, in that by
the inspirations of his holy spirit he was moved to those holy thoughts and
desires at those times, when men are usually surprised and overborn with
drowsinesse, and if awake, subject rather to distracting affrightments, yea
often overborn by temptations to sin. Indeed they that understand each passage
of this Psalm of Christ, do otherwise expound these words: to wit, that God did
inwardly counsel and strengthen Christ in that time of black darkness that
was upon his spirit, when the Lord in a great measure withdrawing the light of
his countenance, and pouring forth his wrath upon him, he was thereby inwardly
both in soul and body filled with most exquisite tortures, through pain and
grief and fear, which made him cry out, Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me, and afterward, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But
the former Exposition is to me far the better.

Verse. 8. I have set the Lord always before me, etc.] The Apostle Peter
expressly says that David spoke this concerning Christ, Act. 2.25. For David
speaks concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, etc. and he
proves it, by showing that the words following verse. 10 could not be properly
and literally understood of David. But yet, because the Apostle there yields
that these words were spoken by David, and it is evident that he that speaks
here speaks of himself, I have set the Lord always before me, etc. therefore
for the resolving of this doubt we must say, that though David spoke these
words of himself, yet it was chiefly in reference to Christ; and that not only
because being a type of Christ, he did as it were represent Christ's person, but
also especially because Christ was now in his loins according to the flesh: and
indeed the Apostle in that place seems to render this as the reason why he
applied these words of David to Christ, Act. 2.30, 31. Being a prophet, (says
Peter) and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of
his loins according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his
throne; He seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, etc. So
that these words were spoken by David both concerning himself, and concerning
Christ: I have set the Lord always before me, etc. that is, I have set my
thoughts continually upon God, as being ever present with me; and that both as
having respect in all things to do his will, (as indeed it is said of Christ
Phil. 2.8, that he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross) and also as ^esting solely upon him for help and support
in all my troubles and sufferings. Because he is at my right hand, I shall not
be moved; that is, because he is ever present with me, and still ready to
assist and protect me, I shall not be moved from that happy condition wherein I
stand, I shall not lose the favor of God, nor fall from my integrity, nor from
my hope and confidence in God. And as these words are intended of Christ, they
imply also, that he should not be swallowed up of his sorrows, nor removed from
his constant obedience to the will of his father. Gods readiness to assist is
expressed by this phrase of his being at our right hand, because the right hand
is the chief strength of a man, and thereby he assails his enemies; and
therefore this had need to be chiefly secured and protected.

Verse. 9. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, etc.] That is, my
tongue: see the Note Genesis 49.6. My flesh also shall rest in hope. That is, When
my body shall be laid at rest in the earth, it shall not be without hope of a
joyful resurrection. For hope is here ascribed to the dead body figuratively,
as an earnest expectation and waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God
is ascribed to the senseless and unreasonable creature, Romans 8.19.

Verse. 10. For thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer
thine holy one to see corruption.] This the Apostle Peter says could not be
spoken of David, but of Christ only, that is, properly and literally; and that
because David's body was left in the grave unto that day, and was corrupted,
Act. 2.29, etc. Let me freely speak unto you of the Patriarch David, that he is
both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is with us unto this day, etc. but he
spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell,
neither his flesh did see corruption: and the like the Apostle Paul affirms
concerning this place, Act. 13.36* 37. David, after he had served his own
generation, by the will of God fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers,
and saw corruption; but he whom God raised again saw no corruption. But yet,
because David knew well that Christ should rise again, as the head of that
mystical body, which should all partake of the same benefit together with him,
and that by virtue of Christ's resurrection even he also should one day be
raised from the grave, (whence it is that Christ is called 1 Cor. 15.20. the
first fruits of them that slept) therefore David had doubtless respect also to
himself in this which was principally and prophetically intended concerning
Christ, namely, that God would not leave him for ever in the grave, nor suffer
him to perish in the pit of corruption. The Papists would from this place
conclude, that the soul of Christ immediately upon his death did locally
descend into hell, the place of the damned; but without any just ground. For in
the Scripture frequently by the soul is meant the life of man, (see the Note
Psalm. 7.2, 3.) which when a man is dead may be said to be overwhelmed or
detained in the grave: or else the whole person of man, as Act. 7.14. Then sent
Joseph and called his father Jacob to him, and all his kindred, threescore and
fifteen souls; and 1 Pet. 3.20. where speaking of the Ark he says, wherein
few, that is, eight souls were saved by water; see also the Note Psalm. 5.2. And
so likewise by hell is meant the whole state and dominion of death, yea usually
the grave; so Genesis 42.37. Ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave, and Psalm. 141.7. Our bones are scattered at the graves mouths: the word
translated grave is the very same that is here translated hell. So that the
meaning of these words, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, etc. is no more
but this, Thou will not leave me in the grave, or, Thou will not leave me or my
life under the power and dominion of death: and because death chiefly seizes
upon the body, therefore the body is here chiefly intended. And indeed even
amongst Pagan writers we find the like phrase, as in Virgils Animamque
sepulchro Condimus. But however, that it cannot be meant of Christ's soul being
locally in the hell of the damned, is clear, because first, his soul, was
during the time of his burial in Paradise, Luke 23.43. To day shall thou ^e
with me in Paradise, that is, in heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. secondly, the words
speak evidently of a deliverance from a penal condition, whereas the Papists
themselves hold that Christ's soul was triumphant in hell: thirdly, the
Apostles, in the places before cited, expressly say, that David was left in that
hell from whence Christ was raised; so that it is clear they understood the
words of Christ's rising from the grave, as the second clause does more plainly
express, thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption, that is,
Christ, the holy one of God, as the devils themselves called him, Mark 1.24.

Verse. 11. Thou will show me the path of life, etc.] In Act. 2.28. it is
rendered thus, Thou have made known to me the ways of life. However, the
meaning of the words is this, that God would raise Christ from the grave, and
bring him to live for ever in heaven: and because by virtue of Christ's
resurrection all the members of Christ shall also rise again unto life
eternal, there is no doubt but that David spoke this with reference to
himself. Yet the phrase that is here used, Thou will show me the path of life,
seems plainly to imply, that the way of life was unknown and impossible to men,
till it was revealed to Christ, and by him to the children of men, and till by
his resurrection he became the first fruits of them that rise; and
consequently, that from God through Christ these three great benefits are
conveyed to all the faithful, to wit, 1. the enlightening of their minds with
the knowledge of the way of life; 2. the translating of them in their
conversion from a state of death to a state of life; and 3. the resurrection of
their dead bodies to life eternal: concerning which he adds, In thy presence
is fullness of joy, or, as it is rendered Act. 2.28. Thou shall make me full of
joy with thy countenance; which is meant of the beatificall vision. Whereas
earthly joys can never satisfy, and are always mixed with sorrows, there
shall be fullness of joy; and that by reason of Gods favorable presence, which
as it is here in part, so shall it be there in perfection, the bliss of the
glorified Saints: and therefore it is said of the wicked, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. that
they shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord: at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore: which is spoken
either in relation to Christ, because he was to sit in heaven at the right hand
of his Father, or in relation to the Saints; and that either because they shall
be set at Christ's right hand, and shall be in a state of favor and honor with
God, (which sitting at Gods right hand imports) or because they shall be
brought to the enjoying of those pleasures by the mighty power and great bounty
of God, whence it is that he speaks of them here as the gifts of his right hand.

PSALM XVII.
Verse. 1. HEar the right, O Lord, etc.] That is, Hear him that pleads for
nothing, but that which is just and right or; out of respect to the
righteousness of my cause, hear me, O Lord: give ear unto my prayer, that
goes not out of feigned lips; that is, lips that plead not innocence where
there is no such thing, or that speak that which my heart thinks not. Now this
mention of the righteousness of his cause makes it most probable, that this
Psalm was composed upon occasion of Saul's persecution, and the unjust clamours
which his followers made against him.

Verse. 2. Let my sentence come forth from thy presence.] As if he had said, I
appeal to thee from the unjust accusations of men: deal with us according to
that which thou, that art the searcher of the heart, find; and then I know
mine innocence shall be made known in the destruction of mine enemies.

Verse. 3. Thou have proved mine heart, thou have visited me in the night; thou
have tried me, and shall find nothing, etc.] That is, nothing wherein I have
injured these that are mine enemies. Concerning Gods proving and trying men's
hearts, see the Notes Psalm. 7.9, and 11.14. Amongst other expressions, whereby
he sets forth how exactly God knows all that is in man, this is one, thou
have visited me in the night: and that because 1. when men are then free from
employment, God does usually by his spirit instruct and persuade them to do
well; 2. then they are wont to sin the more boldly, by reason of the nights
secrecy; and 3. then many and various thoughts are wont to come into their
minds. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress; that is, that I will
not wrong mine enemies, no not in a word, or that I will not murmr against
thee, however mine enemies prosper; etc. or, that my tongue shall not utter
anything my heart thinks not.

Verse. 4. Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept me
from the paths of the destroyer.] Some would have the meaning of the first
clause, Concerning the works of men, to be in effect as if he had said, As far
as man may, as far as it was possible for poor man to do, I have kept me from
the paths of the destroyer. Others think, that having said in the foregoing
verse, how he had restrained himself from speaking evil, I am purposed that my
mouth shall not transgress, here he adds also what his deeds had been;
Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept me, etc. But,
I rather conceive the sense of those first words to be this: Concerning the
works of men, that is, As concerning those evil works whereto men are naturally
carried (according to that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not carnal, and
walk as men?) by the word of thy lips, that is, by the help of thy written law,
which I esteem no otherwise then if it had been delivered by an audible voice
from heaven, I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer: whereby is also
meant, that he had kept himself from those ways of outrage, violence and
destruction, wherein others walked; so intimating, that he had not suffered
himself to be carried away by the ill example of others; or that whereas they
accused him that he wasted and destroyed the kingdom, and sought the ruin of
Saul and his family, yet it was nothing so, he had kept himself, and his
soldiers too, from offering any violence to Saul, or to the kingdom in
general, according to that testimony which Nabals servants gave of David's men,
1 Samuel 25.15. the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt, neither
missed we any thing; or (which I think is chiefly intended) that however his
enemies had provoked him, by seeking his ruin, and doing him all the mischief
they were able, yet he had not repai'd evil with evil. Yet some do otherwise
understand these words: by the word of thy mouth I have kept me from the path
of the destroyer; that is, by the direction of thy word I have kept me from
falling into the hands of those that would have destroyed me.

Verse. 5. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.] That is,
Cause me to persevere in those ways of godliness wherein I have hitherto
walked, that I may not seek to revenge my self upon Saul and his followers, nor
may by any other temptations be made to go astray from the ways of thy
commandments: and thus he implies, that what he said before of his avoiding
the evil that others ran into, was not spoken by way of boasting of himself,
and that he ascribed what he had done hitherto wholly to the grace of God. Yet
some take this to be rather a Petition for preservation from his enemies, Hold
up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not; that is, Uphold and
preserve me, that I fall not into any evil which mine enemies have plotted
against me.

Verse. 7. Show thy mavelous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right
hand, etc.] Or, O thou that savest them which trust in thee from those that
rise up against thy right hand, to wit, in that they rise up against thy
people, and oppose thy will, as they do that seek to keep me from the throne
of Israel, wherein thou have undertaken to settle me. Now the kindness which
David here desires the Lord to show him, he calls mavelous loving kindness,
because his dangers were so desperate, that it would be a work of wonder if he
were delivered, and because it was indeed mavelous kindness, that the great
God of heaven should mind the prayers of sinful dust and ashes, and should put
such a difference betwixt his elect: and others, they being in themselves as
unworthy of any kindness as others are.

Verse. 8. Keep me as the apple of the eye; hide me under the shadow of thy
wings.] See the Note Ruth 2.12. Both these similitudes do imply, as Gods tender
care and watchfulness over him, so likewise his own tenderness, and how
easily they might ruin him, if God should not carefully preserve him.

Verse. 10. They are enclosed in their own fat, etc.] See the Note Job 15.27.
with their mouth they speak proudly; they are not afraid openly to publish
their pride. See the Note Psalm. 12.3.

Verse. 11. They have now compassed us in our steps, etc.] This word ( now) has
reference to that particular distress of David's, which occasioned the penning
of this Psalm: happily that, when Saul's forces had in a manner compassed him on
every side, 1 Samuel 23.26. However, the meaning of the words is this; They watch
me and my followers wherever we go, so that we cannot stir a foot, but they
are presently upon us, and are ready to beset us: they have set their eyes
bowing down to the earth; that is, they do most intentively watch me, and
incessantly seek my ruin; they mind in a manner nothing else. This phrase, of
setting their eyes bowing down to the earth, may be meant either of their
watching his steps, or of their eagerness in laying snares for him. Both
expressions are metaphorical, taken from huntsmen, who are wont to trace the
beasts they would take by the prints of their feet, and when they find where
they are lodged, do then hemme them in with nets or otherwise: and that last,
of setting their eyes bowing to the earth, may be taken from those that with
fixed eyes do level at such beasts with their guns or darts, when espying
where they lie they seek to kill them. Yet some think that this expression is
used, to imply how cunningly and closely they sought his ruin; as hunters that
stand silent watching for their sport, or as lions that lie couching and bowing
to the earth, as it were to hide themselves, when they watch for a prey: which
indeed the words in the following verse seem to favor.

Verse. 12. Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young
lion lurking, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 7.2, and 10.8, 9, 10.

Verse. 13. Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, etc.] This seems to be desired, as in
reference to that he had said before verse. 11. concerning his enemies
compassing him about: as if he had said, Though mine enemy thinks now to make
sure of me; yet, Lord, prevent him: deliver my soul from the wicked, which is
thy sword; that is, do not thou punish me by the ministry of thine enemies;
they can do nothing without thou art pleased to make use of them, and
therefore deliver my soul, that is, me or my life, from them: for the wicked is
here called Gods sword, as the Assyrian is called his rod, Isa. 10.5. O
Assyrian, the rod of mine anger. Yet some read this clause thus, deliver my
soul from the wicked by thy sword, that is, by thy power, or by thy judgments:
as if he should have said, In this extremity of danger there is none else that
can deliver; or thus, Let thy sword free me from his fury against me; for mine
hand shall not be upon him: according to that which David said of Saul, 1 Samuel
26.10, 11.

Verse. 14. From men of the world which have their portion in this life, etc.]
That is, from those worldlings, that were never called out of the world into
the number of thy children, and that only mind the things of this world,
placing all their felicity therein: which have their portion in this life; that
is, that choose the things of this life for their portion, and accordingly have
indeed therein all the bliss they are like to have: and whose belly thou
fillest with thy hid treasure; that is, to whom thou give, according to their
desire, plenty and abundance, and that of the choicest delicacies, and
desirable things that are in the world. For these I conceive are here called
the hid treasure, wherewith God does in a manner glut them; and that because
they are not afforded in common to all men, (few can find the way to such
wealth, and such rare and extraordinary dainties) but are locked up closely in
Gods treasures, and reserved for these men. I know some hold, that by Gods hid
treasure here is meant gold and silver and precious gemms, which are hid in the
earth; others say that hereby is meant meat and drink, wherewith God fills the
bellies of worldlings, and that they are called a hid treasure, because they
are, as it were, hid in the earth and in the air, in regard they spring out of
the earth, being moistened with the rain that distills from the earth, and yet
we cannot comprehend how they are produced. And then again others understand it
of earthly blessings in general, affirming that they are called Gods hid
treasure, either because the judgment of God, in allotting such plenty of
these things to wicked men rather then others, is secret and hidden; or because
God dispenses them where he pleases, nor can any man find out the way to
attain them, unless God gives them out of his treasures; or, because wicked
men take no notice that they come from God. But the first Exposition seems far
the best.

They are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their
babes.] It may also be read, Their children are full, and leave etc. However
the meaning is the same, to wit, that though they live in great plenty, yet
they have store enough to leave also to their children and childrens children:
and so all is according to their hearts desire. All which David mentions, as
bewailing that it should be thus, and desiring that God would pull down the
pride of these wicked men.

Verse. 15. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be
satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness.] Some hold that in both clauses of
this verse David speaks of what he expected in this life; as if he had said,
Let worldlings rejoice in their portion; there is somewhat that I expect better
then that, to wit, that though at present thou seem to hide thy face from
me, yet, in regard of the righteousness of my cause, and my endeavoring to
walk in all righteousness before thee, I shall behold thee again looking
favorably upon me: and then, when I awake, that is, when I shall be raised out
of this afflicted condition, (for he compares his estate in his afflictions to
that of a man that is asleep, because of the lumpishnesse and faintness and
weariness and terrors, which will creep upon men when they are in such a
condition) whereas worldlings have never enough of the world, the beholding of
the light of thy countenance shining favorably upon me will abundantly
satisfy me. Again, others understand both clauses of the beatificall vision,
when, as Saint John says 1 John 3.2, we shall be like him, for we shall see
him as he is. And indeed, considering that David opposes this to that which
was said before of worldlings having their portion in this life, I conceive
that necessarily, either both clauses must be understood of the bliss he
expected in heaven, or at least (which I like the best) the first clause may be
referred to this life; I will behold thy face in righteousness, that is, being
assured of the righteousness of my cause, and endeavoring in all things to
do that only which is just and righteous, I will behold thy face, not doubting
of thy favor: and then the second clause must be understood of his bliss in
heaven; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, that is, when I arise from the
dead, with thine image, that is, with beholding thee, as thou shall manifest
thy self to thy Saints in glory; or by beholding thee in the Lord Christ (who
is indeed said to be in the form of God, Phil. 2.6. the brightness of his
glory, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1.3.) when he shall appear in
glory; or with being made like unto thee, or thy Christ in glory, according to
that 1 John 3.2. and that of the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 15.49. As we have born the
image of the earthy, so must we also bear the image of the heavenly.

PSALM XVIII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician, etc.] See the Notes upon this Psalm in the
22 Chapter of the 2 of Samuel.

PSALM XIX.
Verse. 1. THe heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handiwork.] That is, it makes known whose handiwork it is, even the work of
an all-wise and almighty God; to wit, in that it shows how accurately and
admirably in every regard it is made; and consequently it shows what God can
do, and how admirable he is in all his works. The same may be said concerning
all the creatures: but because the heavens are the chief of the creatures, and
most glorious, but especially because they are seen by all men in the world, as
is afterward expressed verse. 3, 4. which other creatures are not, therefore he
mentions these above others.

Verse. 2. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge.] Some learned Expositours understand it thus; that day after day,
and night after night, or as one day and one night succeeds another, they do
proclaim the power and goodness and wisdom of God; there is not a day nor
night that do not thus glorify God: and the chief thing intended hereby they
hold to be, that the orderly and constant succession of day and night in their
several times, caused by the set course and revolution of the heavenly orbs,
does clearly make known the power and providence of God. But because in the
following words he still speaks of the heavens, and especially because of this
expression, Day unto day, and night unto night, the full drift of the words I
conceive to be this; that day and night, or the heavens, by the discovery that
is made of them both by day and night, do uncessantly without intermission
instructus concerning the wisdom, and other the glorious attributes of God;
for those words ( shows knowledge) may comprehend both 1. that they discover
Gods wisdom and knowledge, and 2. that they teach us to know God. And because
the day and night do glide away, and there is a constant succession of each of
them, therefore David expresses himself in a kind of poetical elegancy; as if
when one day had sounded forth the glory of God, it did then deliver over to
the following day the following on of the some work, and when one night had as
it were sung a hymn in the praise of God, it should speak to the following
night to take its turn likewise in doing the same.

Verse. 3. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.] As
if he had said, Whereas men cannot speak their minds to those that are of
another nation and language, that cannot understand the language they speak; at
least though they be men that can speak several languages, yet they cannot
speak at one time to several men in their several languages: it is otherwise
with the heavens; for they make known the glory of God at one and the same time
to all nations, and they all do hear and understand their language. For the
word here translated heard, there is no speech nor language where their voice
is not heard, does also signify understood; and so it is rendered 2 Kings
18.26.

Verse. 4. Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the
end of the world, etc.] By their line may be meant, 1. their delineation or
fabric, framed exactly as it were by line or by rule, according to that which
is spoken concerning the earth, Job 38.5. Who has laid the measures thereof,
if thou know? or who has stretched the line upon it? and this is said to be
gone out through all the earth, because it may be beheld all the earth over,
and is that whereby all the earth may be instructed concerning the glory of
God: or 2. their writing, or direction, or precept, according as the word is
again used Es^. 28.10. for precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept,
line upon line, line upon line, etc. and so the heavens are compared to an open
book written fairly with lines of great capital letters; and because all the
inhabitants of the earth may be directed and taught thereby what to think of
God, therefore it is said that their line or writing is gone out through all
the earth. The Septuagint, having more respect to the sense of the place, then
to the word in the Hebrew, have rendered it, Their sound went into all the
earth; and so the Apostle has cited it, Romans 10.18. The great question
concerning these words is, how the Apostle cites them in that place where he is
speaking of the preaching of the Gospel, seeing it is evident that David speaks
here of Gods discovering his glory to all nations by the heavens? Now to this
it is answered by some, that under the historical narration of the heavens and
their sound, is a hid prophecy of the Apostles preaching of the Gospel: and
this they hold the more probable, because in the later part of the Psalm David
speaks so much in the commendation of the written word. But there are two other
answers given that are more satisfactory. The first is, that the Apostle
alleges the words in the sense that David intended them, to wit, as spoken
concerning the language of the heavens, and that as drawing an argument from
thence to prove the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles; But I say, have
they not heard? yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their
words unto the end of the world: as if he should have said, Have not the Jews
heard? or, have not the Gentiles heard? or, why should it seem so strange, that
the Gospel should be preached to the Gentiles? we see that God has from the
beginning of the world made known himself to all the world by the book or voice
of the Creatures, sufficiently to render them inexcusable; and why may we not
as well think that he will also reveal the Gospel to all nations? yea why may
we not look upon that as an intimation, that he would in process of time
reveal himself savingly unto all the world? Or it may be taken as an argument
from the less to the greater, thus; If God has revealed himself unto all the
world by the teaching of the Creatures, much more may we think he will do it
by the Gospel, wherein the glory of God is far more abundantly revealed. And
indeed this Exposition agrees well with the drift of David in this Psalm, which
is to show how much more fully God has revealed himself by his word, then by
his works. The second answer is, that Paul alleges these words of the Psalm
only by way of allusion; as if he had said, Have they not heard? yes verily:
what was said by David concerning the preaching of the heavens, may well be
said concerning the preaching of the Apostles, their sound went into all the
earth, and their words into all the world. And if it be objected, that the
Apostles had not then preached the Gospel in all parts of the world, since in
many places it has not yet been preached: to this it may be answered, 1. that
these words import no more then what is expressly said elsewhere, as Col. 1.5,
6. Ye heard before in the word of the truth of the Gospel, which is come unto
you, as it is in all the world; and verse. 23. the Gospel was preached to every
creature which is under heaven: and 2. it was sufficient to make good these
words, 1. that the Apostles had preached to some in a manner of all nations, as
it is said Act. 2.5. that there were dwelling at Jerusalem (when the Apostles
preached there) Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven; 2. that
they had preached the Gospel in the remotest parts of the world, that were then
known, according to that which is said Luke 2.1. that there went out a decree
from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed; and as for those
countries that now know nothing of Christ, it may be that they were not then
inhabited, or that the ancient inhabitants had the Gospel preached amongst
them, though now their posterity have it not; and 3. that however the sound of
their doctrine shall go out even into those parts, where as yet it has not
been preached.

In them has he set a tabernacle for the Sun.] He says a tabernacle, not a
house, because the Sun is ever in a flitting condition, and never stays in
one place.

Verse. 5. Which as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, etc.] The Sun is
here compared 1. to a bridegroom coming out of his chamber; because when it
has been hid all night in the lower hemisphere, as in a chamber, it then
arises early in the morning gloriously adorned with golden and beautiful
rays, as with gorgeous attire, even as a bridegroom decketh himself with
ornaments, Esa. 61.10. and that to make the earth his spouse fruitful with his
embraces: and 2. to a strong man which rejoices to run a race, that is, which
comes forth with a cheerful and courageous mind to run a race; and that
because the Sun seems as it were to leap and sparkle when it rises, and does
with admirable swiftness run its course about that vast compass of the
heavens, and yet is not wearied. And indeed by the account of the best
Mathematicians, within the compass of a day and night it passes over one and
twenty thousand and six hundred miles of the earth.

Verse. 6. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto
the ends of it, etc.] That is, from the East it goes to the West, and so round
about under the earth to the East again. Yet some conceive that under these
words ( his circuit) the Suns moving Northward and Southward, according to the
several seasons of the year, is also comprehended; and that by the ends of the
earth may be meant the several places of the Suns rising and setting. As for
the following clause, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof, either
the meaning is, that there is nothing, neither man nor beast, tree nor plant,
that can be hid from the scorching heat thereof; or that there is nothing so
deeply hid in the bowels of the earth, which does not feel the enlivening heat
of the Sun, or the effectual operation thereof.

Verse. 7. The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, etc.] By the law
here is meant the whole word of God, see the Note Psalm. 1.2: or the whole
doctrine of salvation; for any doctrine in Scripture is called law, as the law
of works and the law of faith, Philip. 3.27. And it is said to be perfect,
because it is faultlesse, and does perfectly reveal the will of God in all
things necessary unto salvation. And thus David passes to that which was his
chief drift in this Psalm, namely, to show how far the instruction of the word,
which God has afforded his people, does surpass that of the creatures: by the
creatures much may be learnt concerning God; but in his word he has perfectly
revealed all things necessary unto salvation: and it is said to convert or
restore the soul, because it does restore men to life, that were dead in sin;
or generally, because it does restore men to a good condition, that are fallen
from the bliss of their first estate, according to that of the Apostle Act.
26.18. As for the 2 clause, the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the
simple, why the word is called the testimony of the Lord, see in the Note Exodus
25 ^ 16. And it is said to be sure, because it is so unquestionably certain and
true; and to make wise the simple, because those that are of meanest capacities
may hereby be made wise unto salvation, if they be humble, and not highly
conceited of their own wisdom; neither is there any true wisdom in men,
till hereby they are made wise.

Verse. 8. The statutes of the Lord are right, etc.] That is, They do clearly
and plainly teach men that which is right, and direct them in the right way:
the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes, that is,
enlightening men with knowledge, or comforting them in their sorrows.

Verse. 9. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever, etc.] If we
understand this, as some do, of that filial fear of the Lord, which is in all
the godly, that is said to be clean, because it purifies men's hearts and ways;
and to endure for ever, because even in heaven the Saints shall fear and
reverence the Lord, or because this fear must always be in the people of God,
and will bring them unto life eternal. And if we understand it of the worship
of God, that may be called clean, because of the inward and outward purity that
God requires in those that serve him, and we know it must be for ever in the
Church of God. But here evidently it is the Word that is called the fear of the
Lord. For as God is sometimes called fear, because he is the object of our
fear, as Genesis 31.53. Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac, and Psalm.
76.11. bring presents to him that ought to be feared, or to fear, as it is in
the Original; so the word or law of God is here called the fear of the Lord,
because the law was given with fearful majesty, and the Word it is that
works in men a due fear and reverence of God, and that teaches men how to
worship him. And why this may be said to be clean, see also Psalm. 12.6. As for
those words, enduring for ever, they intend, either that the Word is an
eternal and unchangeable law, which shall always be continued in the Church;
or that the truths contained therein shall for ever be found sure and certain,
and likewise that it is the means to bring men to live for ever in heaven. In
the last clause, the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether,
the commandments of God are called his judgments, either because they are the
commandments of him who is the judge of the world, or because according to them
he will judge men, or because of the threatenings of judgments thereto annexed,
or because God has therein declared what he has judged or determined that men
should do: and they are said to be true and righteous altogether, both to
signify that they are all such, and that they are perfectly and exactly such.

Verse. 10. Sweeter also then the honey and the honey comb.] That is, the honey
that of its own accord drops from the comb, which is accounted the sweetest.

Verse. 11. Moreover by them is thy servant warned, etc.] To wit, to avoid the
sins he was subject to, both in regard of his general and particular calling,
as he was Gods anointed king: and in expressing this he terms himself Gods
servant, as rejoicing in his walking in Gods ways, which he had said were so
delightful to him. As for the following clause, and in keeping of them there
is great reward, it may imply 1. that God is wont abundantly to reward all
those that sincerely endeavor to keep his laws; and 2. that the very keeping
of them is in it self a reward sufficient, there being so much sweetness and
so much of the first fruits of life eternal enjoyed therein.

Verse. 12. Who can understand his errors? etc.] This may be inserted here in
reference to several foregoing passages: as that verse. 7. The law of the Lord
is perfect; but, alas, we are so far from observing it perfectly, that no man
can tell how many ways he breaks it: or the words of the foregoing verse, By
thy law I am preserved from much evil; but, alas, in many things we offend all:
They that keep thy law shall be richly rewarded; but who can tell how many
ways they transgress it? so that it is thy grace in pardoning my sins, that I
must rest upon, and not mine own righteousness; and therefore, says he,
cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Verse. 13. Then shall I be innocent, etc.] To wit, if the Lord would preserve
him from sinning; as he had desired him to do in the foregoing words, keep
back thy servant also from presumptuous sins.

Verse. 14. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be
acceptable in thy sight, etc.] Some understand this of his prayers, as if he
had said, Let my requests, which after due meditation in my heart I pour forth
in my prayers, find gracious acceptance with thee. But rather David proceeds
still to desire, that God would preserve him from sin, namely, that God would
not suffer his words or thoughts (and consequently his deeds also) to be any
other then such as might please him. To which purpose also it is that he gives
the Lord in the close of his request those titles, O Lord, my strength and my
Redeemer; that is, the God by whom I hope to be strengthened against my
corruptions, and to be rescued from the power of my spiritual enemies. Yet in
these words, my Redeemer, he might also have respect to Gods redemption of his
people by Christ.

PSALM XX.
Verse. 1. THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, etc.] That is, thee, O
king; whom verse. 6. he terms the Lords Anointed. It seems therefore that this
Psalm was composed by David as a Prophet for the use of Gods people, as a
prayer for their king, when he was to make war, especially when he was to go
out in battle against his enemies in his own person; and that because at those
times immediately before their going forth they used to offer up prayers and
sacrifices to God by way of seeking his assistance, as is evident by that of
Saul 1 Samuel 13.12. The Philistines will come down upon me, and I have not made
supplication to the Lord; I forced my self therefore and offered a
burnt-offering: and therefore it is that the people are taught here to pray for
the acceptance of their kings prayers, as also his sacrifices verse. 3. Yea some
conceive that the particular occasion upon which this prayer was first composed
for the peoples use, was the war which David made against the Ammonites and
Syrians, and that because they had such a multitude of horsemen and chariots,
as we may see 2 Samuel 10.18. whereto David seems to allude verse. 7. Some trust
in chariots, and some in horses, etc. But however clear it is, that they are
taught to pray both for the success of his enterprise, and the safety of his
person, The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob
defend thee: which is all one as if he had said, the God of Jacob defend thee,
or the majesty and power of God defend thee: see the Note Psalm. 5.11. Or else,
by the name of God may be meant the invocation of God; as if he had said, May
the calling upon the name of God be thy defense: or else, the interest which he
had in God, or the cause of God; as if it had been expressed thus, May thou
be defended, because the name of God is called upon thee, as being the Lords
servant, yea the Lords anointed, or because thou maintainest Gods cause, and
fightest his battles. As for his tearming God in expressing this the God of
Jacob, either it is meant personally of Jacob the Patriarch, and then the
reasons why he gives God this title in this place may be, either because God
had more expressly revealed himself to Jacob concerning the kingdom of the
tribe of Judah; or because Jacob, being a man of great troubles, had yet by
prayer obtained deliverance from God, as it is now desired that David might
do, and almost with the same words that Jacob used Genesis 35.3. I will make
there an altar unto the Lord, who answered me in the day of my distress: Or
else by Jacob may be meant the people of Israel, the seed of Jacob, as in Isa.
44.1. Hear, O Jacob, my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen; and so in many
other places: and then this title the God of Jacob may be here given him,
either by way of distinguishing him from the false Gods of the heathens, and so
intimating the ground of their hope, in that they trusted in the true God; or
by way of pleading the covenant which he had made with Jacob and his seed for
ever. Many Expositours do also understand this whole Psalm as a prophesy of
Christ. And indeed because God had promised by the kingdom of David and his
seed to save his people, and so David's kingdom was a type of Christ's, I see
not but the whole Psalm may in a spiritual sense be applied to Christ: as
this,. The Lord hear thee, etc. to the Lords hearing him, and supporting him in
his passion.

Verse. 2. Send thee help from the sanctuary, etc.] That is, from heaven,
according to that which follows verse. 6. the Lord saves his anointed; he
will hear him from his holy heaven; for which see the Note 2 Samuel 22.7: or from
the tent or tabernacle, where the Ark was placed by David in Sion; so that it
is all one in effect as if he had said, The true God, the God of Israel hear
thee; for the Sanctuary was a sign that God owned them for his people, and
would hear their prayers: see Psalm 3.4.

Verse. 3. Remember all thy offerings.] This expression seems to allude to the
law that appointed part of the offering to be burnt as a memorial, Levit. 2.2.
It may also be understood of the sacrifice of Christ's death: see the Note also
verse. 1.

Verse. 4. Grant thee according to thine own heart, etc.] To wit, all thou
desire now in the cause in hand; yet with reference to their assurance, that
holy David would ask nothing but according to Gods will, this might be thus
expressed. It may also be understood of Christ's prayers on earth, and his
Intercession in heaven.

Verse. 5. We will rejoice in thy salvation, etc.] That is, in thy preservation,
O king, who art the breath of our nostrils, and in the victory which God has
given thee; or in the saving of the people by thy means under God, and the
great deliverance which by thy victory thou have effected for the people for
whom thou did fight: and in the name of our God we will set up our banners;
to wit, in a way of triumph, as tokens of victory, and to the honor of God.
Yet some understand this of their going forth in the confidence of Gods help
with their banners displayed against their enemies.

Verse. 6. Now know I that the Lord saves his anointed, etc.] That is, Even now
beforehand through faith, or now upon these our prayers, we know that God
saves his own anointed king: for it is the people speak here as one man,
unanimously agreeing in that which is said. Or these words may be added, as the
words wherewith they should triumph; as if it had been said, And then shall
every one say, Now know I that the Lord saves his anointed. Or it may be
understood thus, Now know I, that is, by this victory I see by proof and
experience, that the Lord saves his anointed. For this Psalm might be composed
after the victory was obtained.

Verse. 7. Some trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will remember the
name of the Lord our God.] That is, Our enemies, or rather, more generally, the
men of the world, trust altogether in outward things, some in chariots, and
some in horses, and so never mind God; but we will think on God, and the great
things that he has formerly done, and will trust in God, and pray to God, as
our only help.

Verse. 8. They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand
upright.] That is, Our enemies, or those that trusted in their chariots and
horses, that were before exalted in their pride, and in a lofty condition, for
all their bragging, are now laid low enough, being vanquished and slain; and we
that trusted merely in the name of the Lord, though we were before oppressed
and in a low condition, yet are now raised to a better, and through Gods help
are safe and sure. The first clause, They are brought down and fallen, some
understand thus; whereas they were carried aloft on their chariots and horses,
now they are from thence cast down. But then by way of opposition the following
clause, but we are risen, etc. must be understood of being raised up on
chariots and horses; which seems no way probable.

Verse. 9. Save, Lord, let the king hear us when we call.] That is, as some
expound it, Let God the great king of the whole world hear our prayers. But
rather I conceive it must be understood thus, Save, Lord, let the king hear,
etc. that is, Preserve the king, O Lord, that when we call to him for help,
through thine assistance he may deliver us: Or, Preserve us, Lord, and that by
making our king isntrumental for our preservation, when we seek to him for
help. And this must be understood principally of Christ, as our king and
Mediator.

PSALM XXI.
Verse. 1. THe king shall joy in thy strength, O Lord; etc.] To wit, as
thankfully acknowledging that by thine assistance he has prevailed over his
enemies. In this Psalm the people are brought in blessing God for conferring
upon their king those mercies which they had prayed for in the foregoing Psalm.
And this must be understood both of David, and Christ, of whom David was a type.

Verse. 2. Thou have given him his hearts desire, etc.] As was desired in the
foregoing Psalm verse. 4. Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill
all thy counsel. How this was verified eminently in Christ see Psalm. 2.8. Luke
22.15. Joh. 11.42. and 17.1, etc.

Verse. 3. For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness, etc.] That
is, Thou have bestowed many good blessings of thine own free grace and
goodness, which he neither did desire nor could deserve: thou set a crown
of pure gold on his head; that is, thou made him king over Israel, when he
dreamt not of any such thing; for this is mentioned as one of those blessings
which God bestowed upon him undesired. Because it is by some conceived that the
foregoing Psalm was composed upon occasion of David's making war against the
Ammonites, therefore they understand this as spoken with reference to their
kings crown, 2 Samuel 12.30. He took their kings crown from off his head (the
weight whereof was a talent of gold, with the precious stones) and it was set
on David's head: but this seems not so probable. Taking this as spoken of
Christ, either it may be meant of his kingly office, the kingdom of David
being restored in him the son of David, which had been quite lost as it were
for a time; or of that incorruptible crown of glory, whereto, after his
sufferings and being crowned with thorns, he was exalted in heaven. See Heb.
2.7.

Verse* 4. He asked life of thee, and thou gave it him, etc.] That is, Being
often in desperate dangers, he desired that thou would save his life, and
not suffer him to fall into the hands of his enemies; and thou did grant his
request, and gave him his life for a prey, even length of days for ever and
ever, which was more then he desired. And hereby may be meant, either 1. that
God granted him a long, yea a very long life, to the great benefit of his
people (for this only the Hebrew phrase may imply;) or 2. that the Lord did not
only cause him to live to a good old age, but also gave him assurance of life
eternal hereafter; or 3. that God granted him that his kingdom should be
continued in his posterity till the coming of Christ, in whom it should become
an eternal kingdom. And indeed if the words be understood of Christ, they
must be referred to his desire, that he might not be swallowed up of death, and
to his resurrection, and his obtaining of eternity of days in heaven, both
for himself and for his members: concerning which see Heb. 5.7. Romans 6.9.
Revel. 1.18. Heb. 7.25.

Verse. 5. His glory is great in thy salvation, etc.] That is, His fame and
renown is great by reason of his many glorious victories; and that especially
because it is so evident, that thou, O Lord, have taken his part, and made him
so victorious. Understanding it of Christ, it must be meant of the exceeding
glory he attained by the work of man's salvation, however he was scorned and
despised at first: concerning which see Joh. 13.31. and 17.1. and Philip. 2.9,
10.

Verse. 6. For thou have made him most blessed for ever, etc.] As if he should
have said, Why should I go about to number the particular blessings conferred
upon him, which are innumerable? Thou have made him most blessed in every
regard: thou have made him exceeding glad with thy countenance. See the Notes
Psalm. 4.6, 7. and 16.11. and 17.15.

Verse. 7. For the king trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most
High he shall not be moved.] That is, He rests upon the promises thou have
made to him (meaning that 2 Samuel 7.16. concerning the perpetuity of his
throne, and others of the like nature) and therefore his kingdom shall be
established for ever.

Verse. 8. Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, etc.] That is, Thine
hand, O God, shall destroy all those that, being enemies to thine Anointed, are
also enemies to thee: see the Note Psalm. 2.2. Or, thine hand, O king, (meaning
David, or Christ) shall destroy all thine and thy peoples enemies; they shall
not be able to hide themselves, or escape from thee.

Verse. 9. Thou shall make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger,
etc.] That is, Through thy wrath they shall be still burning like an oven,
implying judgments without intermission; or, they shall be as those things
which the fire devours and consumes when they are cast into an oven, that is,
they shall be utterly and suddenly consumed: the Lord shall swallow them up in
his wrath, and the fire shall consume them; which may be meant of their being
swallowed up in hell fire. See also the Notes Deuteronomy. 32.22. and Psalm. 11.6.

Verse. 11. For they intended evil against thee, etc.] To wit, in that they
intended evil against thy people, yea against thine anointed, in seeking to
destroy him, or to oppose his kingdom; but all in vain, as is expressed in the
following clause, they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able
to effect.

Verse. 12. Therefore shall thou make them turn their back, etc.] Or, thou shall
set them as a butt, when thou shall make ready thine arrows upon thy strings
against the face of them: and so he compares them to men tied to a stake, that
they may be shot to death; or the bodies of wicked men are compared to a butt,
and their faces to the white mark that is fastened on the butt. See also the
Notes Deuteronomy. 7.10, and Job 7.20.

Verse. 13. Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength.] To wit, by defending
and advancing the kingdom of thine anointed; which may be meant both of David,
and Christ.

PSALM XXII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician upon Aijeleth Shahar, A Psalm of David.]
Though David wrote this Psalm concerning himself, (as the whole frame of the
Psalm, compared with the Title, does methinks evidently show) yet doubtless
his chief aim was thereby to represent the passion and resurrection of Christ,
and the propagation of his kingdom, of whom he both in his sufferings and
kingdom was a type. And hence it was, that foreseeing by the spirit of
prophecy what Christ should suffer, some passages are inserted according as
they were literally to be accomplished in Christ, which can only figuratively
be applied to David; as that verse. 16. concerning the piercing of his hands and
feet; and that verse. 18. concerning their parting his garments, and casting
lots upon his vesture: and of the last of these both Matthew and John have
punctually noted, that when the soldiers did this to Christ's garments, that
was therein fulfilled which is here spoken by the prophet David, as we may see
Matthew. 27.35. and Joh. 19.24. And so likewise the Apostle Heb. 2.11, 12. cites
the words of the 22 verse of this Psalm, as spoken by Christ, He is not ashamed
to call them brethren, Saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren; in the
midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee. As for those words in the
Title of this Psalm, which are in no Title of the foregoing Psalms, upon
Aijeleth Shahar, or, the hind of the morning, (as it is rendered in the margin
of our Bibles) either it was the name of some musical Instrument, wherewith
this Psalm was to be sung; or rather these words were the first words of some
song, to the Tune whereof it was to be sung. Many Expositours, I know, hold
that David terms himself here the hind of the morning, because he was hunted
up and down by Saul and other his enemies from one place to another, even as a
hind is usually hunted by men, when she comes forth in a morning from the
place where she had lodged all night: and others, that it is Christ that is
meant thereby; (to show that the Psalm was written of him) and that he is
called the hind of the morning, either 1. because as when a hind comes forth
in a moring to seek out for pasture, she is usually hunted and killed for
dainty meat, so was Christ hunted and worried and killed by the Jews and
Gentiles, those dogs mentioned here verse. 16. and that early in the morning
Joh. 18.28. or in the first dawning of the daylight of the Gospel, when he was
seeking to do the will of his Father, which was meat unto him, Joh. 4.34. and
so became meat for us, though the Jews intended no such thing, no more then the
hounds do intend, when they hunt any beast, to provide meat for their masters;
or 2. because he arose from the grave early in the morning, Ioh. 20.1, as a
hind that comes rushing forth cheerfully from the place of her repose; and
indeed Christ is in the Canticles often compared to a hind, as chap. 2.9, 17.
and again chap. 8.14. or 3. because Christ is the true morning star, see Numb.
24.17. and it is the morning star that is here called the hind of the morning,
because it comes forth with the first dawning of the day, leaping as it were
over the mountains, as the hind does. But these things have more wit then
solidity in them. It has more probability, which some other Expositours say,
that these words were to signify that this Psalm was appointed to be sung in
the morning, if not every morning.

Verse. 1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? etc.] In the Hebrew this
is, Eli, Eli, Lamah hazabthani; but our Savior using these words, expressed
them in the Vulgar Syriack, Matthew. 27.46. Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthani. This
interrogation may be the same in effect, as if he had desired that God would
not forsake him; as we may see is noted concerning a like expression, Exodus
32.11. Yet withal I conceive it implies a profession and complaint of his
extreme sufferings. For though the person of the Son of God was never separated
from his humanity, neither did God the Father cease to love Christ, or wholly
withdraw his help from him; (for even upon the Cross God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. Behold my servant whom I
uphold, etc. says the Father of Christ, Isa. 42.1. Ye shall leave me alone;
and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me, says Christ to his
disciples Ioh. 16.32.) yet because 1. Christ was to bear the wrath and curse of
God due to his people for their sins, and 2. hereupon God did not only withdraw
from him all manifestation of his love and favor, but also made an impression
of wrath upon his spirit, in regard of our sins imputed to him, and 3. the
Godhead did so far for a time suspend its influence, as to suffer him to be
surprised with the fear of death, and to endure incomprehensible anguish and
horror of spirit because of the wrath of the Almighty; therefore did Christ
apprehend himself for the time as forsaken of God, and brake out into this
bitter complaint, yet without sin, because he underwent this only in our stead,
that he might save us, and did still in the midst of this agony cleave fast
unto God, as those words, My God, my God, etc. do clearly imply.

Verse. 2. I cry in the day time, but thou hear not; and in the night season,
and am not silent.] That is, as some expound it, without ceasing, never holding
my peace. But the meaning of that last clause, and am not silent, is rather
this; that for all his crying to God in the night, yet he found no ease nor
comfort, and consequently there was no end of his groanings and complaints.
Some think also, that the mention that is here made of crying day and night is
with reference to Christ's praying by night in the garden, and by day on the
Cross: whereas doubtless the meaning is only, that he cried unto God
incessantly, both by day and by night. Nor must this be restrained to verbal
and vocal praying, but must also comprehend the inward desires and groanings of
his soul and spirit. Nor does this complaint of Gods not hearing the Lord
Christ contradict what Christ himself said, Ioh. 11.42. I knew that thou
hear me always. For there were two sorts of desires and cries in Christ:
the one of his deliberate and absolute will, which were always consonant with
the will of God; and these God always heard; whence it is said, Heb. 5.7. that
when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears,
unto him that was able to save him from death, he was heard in that he feared,
and verse. 24 of this Psalm, when he cried unto him, he heard: but then the
other were the desires of nature in him, the cries, as I may say, of his
sensitive will, as that he might not taste of the cup of death, etc; which it is
no wonder though his Father heard not, since himself never gave any full
consent thereto.

Verse. 3. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.]
That is, Thou art pure, and so infinitely gracious, just and faithful, never
failing to do good, and to make good thy promises, O thou that constantly and
without any intermission do dwell and rule as a king amongst thy people
Israel, giving them thereby continual cause to praise thy name. And this may
be here added, either as a farther aggravation of his misery, that his prayers
should be disregarded by a God so holy, that does so constantly give his people
cause to magnify his name; or else rather by way of checking himself for
complaining, and to imply, that if God heard not, it was his fault, not Gods,
and that he might encourage himself to wait upon God in hope of a gracious
answer, who was so holy, and that did so constantly fill the mouths of his
people with his praises. For indeed God is here said to inhabit the praises of
Israel, either 1. because the Sanctuary, the place of Gods special presence,
was the chief praise and glory of Israel, or rather the place where the
Israelites did meet together to praise God; our holy and our beautiful house,
where our fathers praised thee, is burnt up with fire, says the Church of the
Temple, Esa. 64.11: or 2. because the Lord dwelt amongst a people that were
constantly employed in this work of praising his name, by reason that he gave
them daily occasion so to do, as is more fully set forth in the two following
verses: or 3. because God was continually in the mouths of his people, when
they were employed in advancing his praise.

Verse. 6. But I am a worm, and no man, etc.] That is, I am scorned and
despised, and by every base wretch trampled under foot, without any respect or
pity, and so am esteemed and used more like a worm then a man. This was
verified in Christ, when they preferred Barabbas a robber and a murderer
before Christ; in regard whereof he became not only lower then the Angels, Heb.
2.7. but also lower then man. And this also may be alleged, as tending to his
encouragement, as well as the setting forth of his low condition, implying,
that surely that God, who was so compassionate to all that are in misery, would
pity him that was in such extremity of misery. See the Note Job 25.6.

Verse. 7. All they that see me laugh me to scorn, etc.] Besides that these
words all that see me do set forth how generally he was derided, they do also
covertly strike at the inhumanity of his enemies, that were so far from
condoling him, when they saw his misery, that on the contrary they did then
insult over him, and laugh him to scorn; whereas men are wont to compassionate
the worst of malefactors, when they see them suffer: they shoot out the lip,
that is, they make mouths at me, they shake the head, to wit, by way of
derision; see Matthew. 27.39. see also the Note Job 16.4.

Verse. 8. He trusted in the Lord that he would deliver him; let him deliver
him, seeing he delighted in him.] Neither did David's nor Christ's enemies intend
by these taunting words, that God was not able to deliver him, but that God
would not do it; and that hereby his hypocrisy and folly would be discovered
in his former boasting of his peculiar interest and confidence in God.

Verse. 9. Thou did make me hope when I was upon my mothers breasts.] The
meaning of these words may be only this, that from his childhood he had hoped
in God: see the Note upon a like expression Job 31.18. Or if they be limited
strictly to the time when he first hung upon his mothers breasts, it must be
taken as a figurative expression of the common dependence of all the creatures
upon God, which may be termed a hoping in God, as all creatures are said to
wait upon God, Psalm. 145.15. and the young ravens to cry to God, Psalm. 147.9.
Or else the drift thereof may be to imply, that Gods providence over him in his
tender infancy was such, as might have made him even then to hope in God had he
been then capable of it; or at least that by that which was then done for him
he might be taught in aftertimes to hope in God. And it may well be, that
understanding these words as spoken by Christ, they might have special
reference to his deliverance in his infancy from Herod.

Verse. 10. I was cast upon thee from the womb.] To wit, because all that can be
done for a poor infant would avail nothing, if God did not by his special
Providence preserve it and provide for it.

Verse. 11. Be not far from me, for trouble is near, etc.] He pleads the
nearness of his trouble, because in such extremities God is wont to come in to
the help of his servants. And understanding this of Christ, it may be meant
either of the nearness of his trouble when he was to be delivered up to his
enemies, of which he spoke Matthew. 26.45, behold, the hour is at hand, and the
Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners; or rather of the near
approach of his death, because indeed it is evidently his Passion on the Cross
that is described throughout the Psalm, as we may see verse. 1.7, 8, 16, 17, 18.

Verse. 12. Strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round.] Because in Bashan there
were very rich and fat pastures, and so the breed of cattle there was fat and
big, and their bulls in particular strong and furious; yea perhaps the
inhabitants of that country were many of them men of a gigantine stature, as
appears by Og king of Bashan, Deuteronomy. 3.11. therefore he terms his mighty and
furious enemies bulls of Bashan. It may be meant both of Saul's courtiers, and
of the chief priests and Scribes that crucified Christ.

Verse. 13. They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring
lion.] See the Note Job 16.10. As it is spoken in reference to Christ, it is
meant of the Jews, when with such fury they pressed his death, and roared out
to have him crucified; even as a lion that roareth, either out of hunger when
he seeks his prey, or out of fierceness and fury when he has gotten his
prey, according to that Amos 3.4. will a lion roar in the forest, when he has
no prey? will a young lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing? Yet
withal Satan's violent assaulting of Christ at his death must be included too,
of which our Savior spoke beforehand, Ioh. 14.30. the prince of this world
comes, and has nothing in me; and with reference whereto it is said at his
first temptation Luke 4.13. that the devil departed from him for a season.

Verse. 14. I am poured out like water, etc.] That is, My life is in a manner
gone, past hope of recovery, and so I am, as it is said in the same or a like
case 2 Samuel 14.14. like water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered
up again: or rather thus, My spirits and strength do wast and flow away, even
as water that runs out of a leaking vessel; see the Note Genesis 49.3. and all my
bones are out of joint, that is, By reason of my sufferings, both inward and
outward, my limbs have lost their strength and power to move themselves, no
otherwise then as if my bones were all out of joint: yea in Christ this was
literally accomplished, by the stretching and racking of his limbs upon the
Cross. My heart is like wax, it is melted, etc. that is, by reason of the fire
of Gods displeasure, (as indeed Christ, for the sins that were imputed to him,
did bear the fiery indignation of the almighty) my heart through faintness and
fear does as it were melt within me: see Josh. 7.5.

Verse. 15. My strength is dried up like a potsheard, etc.] That is, By my
sufferings outwardly, and in particular through the loss of so much blood that
has been shed, and through that grief and fear that lay upon my spirit, my
radical moisture, the spring of life and strength, is so dried up, that I am
more like a dry pot-sheard then a living man: and indeed Solomon says Prove.
17.22. that a broken spirit dries the bones. And hereto agrees that which
follows, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws: for though this phrase does
sometimes imply forced silence or inability to speak, (see the Note upon Job
19.28.) and therefore some would have it referred to Christ's silence when he
was arraigned and falsely accused, of which the prophet speaking says Esa.
53.7. that he opened not his mouth; yet sometimes also it implies extremity of
thirst, as Lam. 4.4. the tongue of the sucking child cleaves to his mouth for
thirst, and the context makes it evident that it must be so taken here; and so
it referres to Christ's thirsting when he hung upon the Cross, John 19.28. And
thou have brought me (for it was not done without the providence of God) into
the dust of death; that is, I am even ready to drop into the grave.

Verse. 16. For dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed
me, etc.] That is, a company of base, wicked, malicious wretches have, like a
pack of hounds, beset me, and with all possible rage set upon me. For though
some would have it, that the rascal crew of David's and Christ's enemies are
here called dogs, to wit, the soldiers and others, as the rich and mighty ones
were before termed bulls; yet I rather think it is meant of all his enemies in
general. For I am sure those words, the assembly of wicked men, seem clearly
to have reference to that which is said so often, that the chief priests and
the Scribes and the elders of the people assembled themselves together; as we
may see Matthew. ^6.3. and 27.1. and in many other places. As for the following
clause, they pierced my hands and my feet, it is one of those passages which
can hardly be understood of David. But though it was literally accomplished
only in the nailing of Christ's hands and feet to the Cross, for which see Luke
24.40. and Ioh. 20.25. yet figuratively David might speak this of himself,
meaning thereby, that his enemies had so bound him up, as it were, as a man
that is fettered hand and foot, that he could neither move his hands to defend
himself, nor his feet to flee away from them.

Verse. 17. I may tell all my bones, etc.] To wit, by reason of his leanness,
caused by the grief of his heart and grievous sufferings, which had brought him
to be nothing but skin and bones; or (as it is spoken in reference to Christ)
by reason of the extreme stretching of his body on the Cross; especially
considering that before by their cruel scourging of him they had made such
gashes in his skin and flesh: they look and stare upon me, to wit, as
delighting to behold me in so much misery, Luke 23.35. which agrees with that
triumphing of David's enemies, Psalm. 35.21, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it.

Verse. 18. They part my garments among them, etc.] This was also literally
accomplished in Christ, when the soldiers divided his garments amongst them,
and as by way of sport cast lots upon his vesture: see the Note before upon the
Title of this Psalm. Yet David might also figuratively thus complain of his
enemies, in regard that when he was forced to flee from the Court, they seized
upon all that was his, (not sparing his wife) every one catching at what they
could get, even literally perhaps his very garments.

Verse. 19. But be not thou far from me, O Lord, etc.] That is, Though others
stand aloof, and there be none to help; yet do not thou stand afar off. How
Christ was heard herein, see the Note verse. 2.

Verse. 20. Deliver my soul from the sword, etc.] That is, me or my life from
death; see Job 5.15. my darling from the power of the dog; that is, from wicked
men, called before dogs, see the Note verse. 16. Some conceive, that this is
meant of the devil; and others, that it is expressed in the singular number,
because his enemies were so united together as one man: but I rather think that
dog is put for dogs. However, it is doubtless his soul or life, which he
prays may be delivered from the power of the dog: which he terms his darling,
because the soul is the most precious part of man; or because naturally every
man makes such precious account of his life; or his only one, as it is in the
Original, because it was left desolate, as he had said before verse. 11. there
is none to help.

Verse. 21. Save me from the lions mouth, etc.] See the Note before verse. 13.
For thou have heard me from the horns of the Unicorns; that is, thou have upon
my prayers delivered me, when I was in the midst of many cruel enemies, or
from the power of those enemies.

Verse. 22. I will declare thy name unto my brethren, etc.] That is, I will show
forth thy praise amongst them: and as it is meant of Christ, it was
accomplished, partly when he appeared to his disciples after his resurrection
for forty days together, informing them in the great things that God had
done, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, Act. 1.3.
(for these he termed his brethren, Act. 20.17. Go unto my brethren, and say
unto them, I ascend unto my father and your father, etc.) and partly in that by
their doctrine the knowledge of these things is spread abroad throughout the
world; for all believers are the brethren of Christ, as is noted Heb. 2.11, 12,
and that because by Christ they receive the adoption of sons, who is therefore
called the firstborn amongst many brethren, Romans 8.29.

Verse. 24. For he has not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the
afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, etc.] Gods regarding of him
is here opposed to the contempt of the world, of which he had said before verse.
6. that he was a reproach of men, and despised of the people, abhorred as a
worm, and no man; and concerning which the prophet Esaias speaks Isa. 53.3. we
hid as it were our faces from him. As for the last clause, but when he cried
unto him, he heard, see the Note before verse. 2.

Verse. 25. My praise shall be of thee in the great Congregation, etc.] That is,
Thou will give me occasion to praise, or, I will praise thee in the solemn
assemblies of thy people. Yet, as this is spoken in reference to Christ, by the
great Congregation may be meant, the solemn assemblies that the Jews had on
their three great feasts; or particularly that assembly, where after his
resurrection Christ was seen of above five hundred brethren at once, 1 Cor
15.6; or rather, the great Church of the Gentiles, of whom it was promised,
that they should be as the stars in heaven for multitude, namely, that amongst
them Christ would by his servants preach the Gospel of salvation, and thereby
publish Gods praise. I will pay my vows before them that fear him; that is, the
sacrifices or the praises which I have vowed to give thee: and observable it
is, that he does not only promise this, but he does it also with a kind of
rejoicing, as being glad to think of his doing this which he does promise.

Verse. 26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied, etc.] By the meek here are
meant those poor mortified souls, that being pressed in conscience with the
burden of their sins, and the apprehension of Gods indignation against them
for their sins, either feared or felt, are humbled thereby, and have their
fierce nature tamed and subdued. Yea and because a poor low and an afflicted
condition does often thus meeken the spirits of men, therefore some conceive
that this is principally meant of such, who being distressed and oppressed, and
being destitute of all outward help, do therefore humbly seek to God for
deliverance; and therefore on the other side he affirms the same afterward
verse. 29. of those that be ^at upon the earth. However that which is said of
these, that they shall eat and be satisfied, is spoken with reference to those
sacrifices and peace offerings of praise, which David had termed vows in the
foregoing verse, it being the constant course of those times to feast many, the
poor especially, with their peace offerings; yet that which is said, that
eating they should be satisfied, is not meant so much of satisfying their
bodily hunger, as that their souls should be satisfied, to wit, either with
consolation in those spiritual benefits, which were signified by their
sacrifices, or by being raised up fully to trust in God by experience of that
readiness in God to help, which had caused David to pay those his vows unto
the Lord; as is more fully expressed in the following words^ But now as this is
spoken in relation to Christ, the meaning must be, that the meek should be fed
with the word of the Gospel, or with Christ, the true nourishing food of our
souls, both in the Word, and in the Sacrament of his body and blood, and so
should be cheared and revived thereby, whereas before they were as dead men
through the terrors of Gods wrath, etc. And accordingly we must also
understand the two following clauses, they shall praise the Lord that seek him,
that is, they that seek to know God and to obtain his favor, shall praise him,
see the Note 1 Chro. 16.11; your heart shall live for ever, that is your hearts
shall be cheared and revived for ever, or your souls through faith in the
redemption of Christ shall be comforted and live for ever.

Verse. 27. All the ends of the world shall remember, and turn unto the Lord,
etc.] This is meant of the conversion of the Gentiles upon the preaching of the
Gospel; and the word remember may comprehend these three particulars: 1. that
hereupon they should bethink themselves of their sins, and the curse thereby
due unto them; 2. that they should be put in mind of the sufferings and glory
of Christ, his Resurrection and Ascension, etc. (and that partly by the
preaching of the Gospel, and partly by the Sacrament of his body and blood, of
which Christ said, Luke 22.19. Do this in remembrance of me;) and 3. that they
should be often speaking of and extolling the Grace of God in Christ, 1 Pet.
2.9. Yea some conceive also that this word remember is used in speaking of the
Gentiles conversion, because those nations had formerly the knowledge of the
true God, and professed the true religion, and should be then turned again from
their vanities to serve the living God, Act. 14.15.

Verse. 28. For the kingdom is the Lords, and he is the governor among the
nations.] That is, God in Christ is the king of the Church; and therefore being
also by nature the supreme Lord over all, it is fit they should serve him, or
he will surely bring them to submit to his scepter.

Verse. 29. All they that be fat upon the earth shall eat and worship; all they
that go down to the dust shall bow before him, etc.] That is, Both rich and
poor shall believe and serve the Lord Christ; see the former Note verse. 26. For
by those that be fat upon the earth are meant the rich and the great men of the
nations, see the Note Job 15.27. Though it be as hard a thing to win these,
as to make a camel go through the eye of a needle; yet through the mighty
efficacy of the Gospel, even these shall be won, Psalm. 45.12. the rich among
the people shall entreat thy favor. And by those that go down to the dust are
meant the poorer and baser sort of people, to wit, such as lie in the dust,
that live in a poor and low condition (the expression used may have reference
to the custom of those that, being in distress, used in those times to sit or
throw themselves down upon the ground, to cast dust upon their heads, yea to
roll themselves in the dust; see the Note Job 16.15.) or such poor lean starved
souls, as are in a manner half dead, even ready to drop into the grave: see the
former Note verse. 15. and that Job 30.19. I know some by those that go down
into the dust understand all mortal men, and those that are actually dead; and
so take the meaning to be, that even those that are laid in their graves shall
one day be raised up from thence, and shall then acknowledge and worship
Christ. As for the last words, and none can keep alive his own soul, either
they are added as a farther description of the persons mentioned in the
foregoing clause, they that go down to the dust, namely, that they are such as
(poor souls!) are not able to sustain themselves, men in a manner dead without
hope of recovery; or else as an intimation of the reason why they of whom he
had spoken, should eat and worship Christ; namely, because none of them could
nourish themselves, or cheer and revive themselves, or save themselves from
wrath, and therefore they must be nourished and revived and saved by faith in
Christ, and so him thereupon they shall worship and adore.

Verse. 30. A seed shall serve him, etc.] That is, say some Expositours, Christ
shall have a seed that shall serve him, according to that Isa. 53.10. when thou
shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed. But rather it
is meant of the seed of those mentioned in the foregoing verse, that being
converted to the true faith should submit to Christ's scepter, to wit, that
their seed should also serve him: or else it must be understood in general,
that in all ages there should be a seed that should serve him. And though some
would refer this to the Jews, that even of them there should be a remnant, as
the Apostle speaks Romans 11.5, that should believe in Christ; yet I rather
refer it to the seed of the Gentiles converted, of whom he had spoken in the
foregoing verses, or of all in general: it shall be accounted to the Lord for
a generation; that is, they shall be reckoned and accounted a race or
generation of Gods children, according to that Psalm. 73.15. If I say, I will
speak thus, behold, I should offend against the generation of thy children.

Verse. 31. They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people
that shall be born, that he has done this.] This may be understood either of
those that were first converted, or of their seed mentioned in the foregoing
verse, to wit, that they shall successively to their posterity declare his
righteousness; that is, the righteousness of God in Christ made ours by
faith, yea that he of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness and
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. even that he has done this, that
is, all things that belong to our salvation: or, the righteousness and
faithfulness of God in making good his promises, to wit, principally in the
work of our Redemption by Christ, and so likewise in the conferring of any
other blessing promised; and because David's deliverances were a notable proof
of Gods faithfulness herein, thereto those last words may have reference, that
he has done this.

PSALM XXIII.
Verse. 1. THe Lord is my shepherd, etc.] This is a Pastoral Song; wherein
David, that had been well acquainted with the employment of a shepherd in his
younger years, compares the tender care of God in Christ over him to the care
of a shepherd over his own flock. And indeed men may well be compared to
sheep, in regard they are so prone to wander, and through silliness to run
without fear into any danger, and altogether unable to help or defend
themselves, unless God should do it for them: in the confidence whereof he
adds those words, I shall not want, that is, he will give what shall fully
content me, neither will he withold any thing that he knows to be good, either
for my body or soul.

Verse. 2. He makes me to lie down in green pastures: he leads me beside the
still waters.] These words imply a plenteous supply of meat and drink, yea of
all things necessary both for body and soul: for lying down in green pastures
does not only imply rest and refreshing thereby, according to those expressions
Ezekiel. 34.15. I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, and Cant.
1.7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou make thy flocks to rest
at noon; but also plenty of feeding, wherewith when the sheep have filled their
bellies, they use to lie down; and this to Christ's sheep is principally the
doctrine of life and salvation in the Gospel. And in the second clause, by
still waters are meant calm waters, perhaps those in watering-troughs, or in
gutters and furrows dug for the letting in of water to their grounds; at
least they are opposed to swift and violent streams, which may be dangerous and
harmfull to sheep: wherein also is employed that God provided not only for the
thirst of his body, but also for the refreshing of his soul with his word and
spirit, the waters of life. For though some think that he only intends the
plenteousnesse of his pasture, by saying in the second clause he leads me
beside the still waters, to wit, because watered grounds yield the best
pastures: yet because in those hot countries they used to water their sheep,
Genesis 30.38. I question not but that in those words he has reference also to
the shepherds providing for his sheep therein; and that by leading him he
alludes to the shepherds driving his sheep softly and gently, and would imply
thereby the tender respect that the Lord had to his many infirmites.

Verse. 3. He restores my soul, etc.] That is, He comforts and revives my
fainting soul, see the Note Psalm. 19.7; or, he brings me back into the right
way, and fetches me home to himself, when I have strayed aside: so that he
alludes to the shepherds care, either in cherishing his sheep when they are
sick or feeble or faint, or in fetching them in when they are gone astray: he
leads me in the paths of righteousness for his names sake; that is, not for
any righteousness of mine, or any thing else in me, but merely for the glory
of his own name: see the Note 1 Samuel 12.22. And herein he alludes too to the
shepherds care in leading his sheep gently in fair and plain ways, not
through deep mire, brambles and briars, or over craggy, or any other ways,
that must needs be hard and troublesome for them to go in.

Verse. 4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, etc.] As
if he had said, through the deepest shadow of death, see the Note Job 3.5. I
will fear no evil. His meaning is, that though he should fall into the most
desperate and deadly dangers, as a sheep that wandering falls into the paws of a
lion, yet he would not cast off his confidence in God. For he does not intend
by these words, that he should be void of all fear; but that his faith in Gods
providence should overmaster his fear. For thou art with me, to wit, as a
shepherd that stands watching over his sheep; thy rod and thy staff, they
comfort me. Some distinguish here betwixt the rod, and the staff: by the
staff they say is meant the shepherds hook; and by the rod a little wand,
which they say shepherds also used, to beat in the sheep when they went astray
from the flock, to keep them up close together, and to hasten them forward when
they lagge behind: and some, that it is the shepherds hook that is here called
both a rod and a staff. However doubtless the meaning of these words is, that
considering that God as a careful shepherd did watch over him, he was thereby
comforted in his greatest perils; yet withal by his rod and staff may be
meant, 1. his Providence in guiding and preserving him, 2. his word and spirit
directing him in all his ways, and his rod of correction, which may also
properly enough be said to comfort him, as being an evidence of Gods fatherly
care over him.

Verse. 5. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies,
etc.] As if he should have said, to their grief and vexation, they being no way
able to hinder it, as it is expressed Psalm* 112.10. The wicked shall see it,
and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away. Some think that
this expression is used also in allusion to the custom of Princes, that used
to have those they had taken captives stand by when they were feasting, as by
way of insulting over them, as we see in Adonibezek and Samson; but David's
meekness and piety make it improbable that he ever used to do this. As for
those words, Thou preparest a table before me, he alludes therein to the royal
plenty he daily enjoyed, comparing the liberal provision that God afforded him
to a plenteous feast, for which great preparations are made beforehand, and
which is spread on a table, and set out in the most curious manner: and to the
same purpose is that which follows, thou anointest my head with oil, my cup
runs over; for though some understand this anointing his head of his
anointing to be king of Israel, yet it is far more probable, that this
expression is used in reference to the custom of feasting in those times, when
they used to welcome their guests with pouring forth sweet precious oils upon
their heads; whence Amos speaking of feasting says, Amos 6.6, that they did
drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, and Christ
said to the Pharisee that had feasted him, mine head with oil thou did not
anoint: and so likewise that, my cup runs over, is in reference to the
custom at feasts, of assigning to every guest his several portion, see the
Note Psalm. 11.6. So that the sum of the words is an acknowledgement that God
had afforded him plenty of all things, not only for necessity, but also for
delight. Nor can it be denied, but that it may be extended also to Gods
feasting his soul with those spiritual dainties of the Word and Sacraments,
and to Gods chearing of his soul with the comforts of his spirit, called the
oil of gladness Psalm. 45.7.

Verse. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life,
etc.] By goodness and mercy may be meant, not only the grace and favor of
God, but also the effects thereof in a gracious supply of what was truly good
for him; for of this he might be sure that God would never fail him: and the
expression is very emphaticall when he says, goodness and mercy shall follow
me; for it does not only imply the continuance of Gods goodness to him, but
also Gods readiness to show him favor: whilst other men pursue and follow
after happiness, happiness does pursue and follow the servants of God; they
do not with so much earnestness seek a blessing from God, as God seeks to
bless them. As for the following words, and I will dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever; either it is a resolution that he would to his lives end worship
and praise him in his Sanctuary, implying that in this he rejoiced more, then
in the abundance of earthly blessings that God had given him: or else it is a
profession of his assured hope, that he should constantly abide in the Church
here, and for ever in heaven.

PSALM XXIV.
Verse. 1. THe Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, etc.] By the
fullness thereof is meant all the creatures that are on the earth, but
principally the nations that dwell therein; as is expressed in the following
clause, the world and they that dwell therein. Now this is prefixed, that
hereupon he might add, (and that by way of admiring the goodness of God to
his Israel) that though the whole world and all the inhabitants thereof were
the Lords, yet all the world was not his as Israel was; though the whole
Universe was his, yet he had chosen Jerusalem to be in a special manner his
dewlling place, and his Church to be above others his peculiar people: The
earth is the Lords, etc. but says he verse. 3. who shall ascend into the hill
of the Lord? etc. I know that some Expositours give another reason why this is
here prefixed, namely, that from the Lords dominion over all the world, he
might afterward infer how necessary it was that the Princes of the world,
that dwelt in the Lords holy hill, should receive and obey Christ his anointed;
which they conceive is that which is intended in those words verse. 7. Lift up
your heads, O ye gates, etc. But the reason before given is much the clearer.
However very observable it is, that the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.25, 26. proves by
these words, that Christians might without scruple buy and eat any meats that
were sold in the market, because all was the Lords, and made for man's use, and
so they as Gods children (especially also if we add the right they had to them
through Christ) might lawfully take them from the hand of their father;
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience
sake: for the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof: and yet immediately
verse. 28. by the same words he urges them not to eat of any meat, concerning
which notice was given them that it had been offered to idols, to wit, because
all the creatures being the Lords, they were to use them to his glory, and
therefore might not eat them to the scandal of their brethren; or because the
whole world being the Lords, they need not fear they should not have to eat,
seeing out of his rich store he was able to provide otherwise for them, But if
any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his
sake that showed it, and for conscience sake: The earth is the Lords and the
fullness thereof.

Verse. 2. For he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the
floods.] That is, say some Expositours, by the seas and by the floods; as we
use to say in that sense that London stands upon the river of Thames. But
rather it is said that God has founded it upon the seas, etc. because whereas
the natural place of the earth is to be under the waters, God has ordered it
so, that it is above the seas and above the floods, so that in outward
appearance it seems as it were to stand upon the waters, and hereby it was made
fit for the habitation of his creatures. See the Note Genesis 1.9.

Verse. 3. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in
his holy place?] As if he should have said, Though all the inhabitants of the
world be the Lords, yet to dwell in Gods holy hill, as members of his Church,
his peculiar people, that is a privilege which few to speak of do enjoy, yea
even amongst those that are his people in outward profession. But for the more
clear understanding of these words, see the Notes Psalm. 2.6. and 15.1.

Verse. 4. He that has clean hands, etc.] That is, He whose works are
blameless; and a pure heart, that is, a heart purified by faith from all
sinful pollutions, all erroneous opinions and carnal affections, he that is
careful to approve his heart unto God* as well as to avoid sin outwardly. As
for the following clause, who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, that is
diversely expounded: Some understand it of the man that has not worshipped
idols, which are often termed vanities in the Scripture, see the Note 1 Kings
16.13. Others of him that does not give his mind to vain and foolish sinful
practices, or that does not heed or trust in the vain and foolish designs of
the world, nor the allurements of Satan's temptations; see the Notes Job 31.5.
and Psalm. 4.2. But there are two Expositions which most follow. The one is,
that by lifting up his soul unto vanity is meant vain and false swearing: for
because they that swear do engage their souls thereby, and as it were offer
them up as a pledge unto God, 2 Cor. 1.23. I call God, says the Apostle, as a
record upon my soul; therefore the man that swears vainly and falsely may be
said to lift up his soul unto vanity: and so they make this to be much the same
with that which follows, nor sworn deceitfully. The other is, that by the man
who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, is meant the man that does not set
his heart upon vanity: because men are wont with much eagerness to look and
gape after those things which they earnestly desire, Psalm. 123.1, 2, therefore
by a borrowed speech, they that earnestly look after and greedily desire the
vain things of this world, riches and honors and pleasures, or that prosecute
eagerly any vain or sinful desire, they are said to lift up their souls unto
vanity. The same expression is used in the Hebrew much to the same purpose,
Deuter. 24.15. and Jer. 22.27.

Verse. 5. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, etc.] That is, He, and
he alone, shall receive the blessing which the Lord has promised his people,
to wit, all blessings temporal, spiritual and eternal; for thus are all
these comprehended under this word the blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9. knowing that ye
are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing: though indeed both
here and there the blessing of eternal life may be principally intended,
concerning which Christ shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you, etc. Matthew. 25.34. And so in the following clause,
and righteousness from the God of his salvation, it is this blessing promised
that is there termed righteousness, to wit, either because it shall be the
reward of their righteousness, or because God out of his righteousness or
faithfulness will bestow it upon them; in both which regards the glory of
heaven is accordingly called a crown of righteousness 2 Timothy 4.8. See the Note
Psalm. 5.8. Some, I know, understand this of the righteousness of God in
Christ: but in regard he speaks of rewarding the righteous, the first
Exposition must needs be intended.

Verse. 6. This is the generation of them that seek him, etc.] By a generation
of men in the Scripture is usually meant some sort or kind of men; as Matthew.
12.39. An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and Luke 16.8.
The men of this world are in their generation wiser then the children of light:
and so it is taken here; This is the generation of them that seek him, that is,
These that I have before described, are that sort or kind of men that do truly
seek God, and are the true people of God. Yet withal I doubt not but that the
title of the generation of them that seek him is here limited to these,
purposely to show how vainly those Israelites boasted of being the seed and
generation of Abraham, and the peculiar people of God, who in the mean time
lived not as became Gods people; and that though they went up amongst others to
worship God in his holy place, (for this is spoken in reference to that before
verse. 3. who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, etc.) yet they did not
indeed seek God: and therefore in the second clause, by turning his speech to
God (for so some read it, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, that seek thy
face, O God of Jacob) he does as it were call God to witness that it was so;
and so does withal covertly imply, that however men might esteem them Gods
people, yet before Gods tribunal it would not be so. But if we read it as it is
in our Text, the meaning is this, that seek thy face, O Jacob, that is, seek to
join themselves to the true Church and people of God, according to that of the
prophet Isa. 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords; and another shall call
himself by the name of Jacob, etc.

Verse. 7. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, and the king of glory shall come in.] In these words first David
expresses his earnest desire that the Temple might be built, and the Ark
settled therein; and therefore in a poetical manner he speaks to the gates of
the Temple, calling them everlasting doors, because the Ark, that had been
often removed from one place to another, was now in the Temple to continue for
ever, according to that Psalm. 132.14. This is my rest for ever, etc. see also
the Note 1 Kings 9.3. And by speaking to the gates to lift up themselves,
either first he may mean the building of them up; Lift up your heads, O ye
gates, that is, Be ye built up, that the Lord of glory in his Ark may enter
into you: or secondly, the lifting up of the upper posts of the gates; as if he
had said, Raise up and enlarge yourselves, and become greater then you are,
because the great King of Glory is to enter in by you; alluding to the custom
of opening the gates of a house or city to the widest, when some great Prince
is to come in: or thirdly, the lifting up of their heads in a way of glorying
and rejoicing; as if he had said, Triumph, and rejoice, O ye gates; thereby the
better to set forth the solemnity and joy of the Arks removal into the Temple.
But secondly, Doubtless under this type, 1. he speaks to the Church, the true
spiritual Temple, desiring that this Temple may be built up, and that at her
doors (which are called everlasting, because the Church shall continue for
ever) the Lord Christ, the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8, may be entertained with
joy as their Lord and King, and so he may enter and rule as king amongst them:
2. to Christians, the particular members of the Church, or to all men in
general, who being converted become the true Temples of the ever-living God, 1
Cor. 3.16; at the doors of whose hearts (called everlasting doors, because they
shall live for ever) he knocks to have entrance, Rev. 3.20, exhorting them to
lift up their heads, that is, to raise up their hearts from all earthly things,
and to prepare them by faith, that God in Christ, the Lord of glory, and by
whose merits all his members are glorified, may enter in and dwell and rule in
their hearts by faith: 3. as some conceive, to Princes and Magistrates,
exhorting them to let in the Lord Christ, and the Gospel and kingdom of
Christ, into their kingdoms and commonwealths, expressing this in these
terms, Lift up your heads, O ye gates, etc. either as alluding to the custom
of Magistrates sitting in the gates in those times when they judged the people;
or because of the great power that such men usually have, either to let in or
to keep out the profession of the Christian religion amongst the people: and 4.
to the gates of Gods holy Temple in heaven, calling upon them with all joy to
entertain the Lord Christ, when he should after the accomplishment of the work
of man's Redemption triumphantly ascend into heaven; and so in these words, Lift
up your heads, O ye gates, etc. there may be an allusion to those triumphall
Arches which used to be set up for the entertainment of great Conquerours.

Verse. 8. Who is this king of glory? etc.] These words must be taken as a
question propounded by David, either in his own name, as if he should have
said, But who now is this king of glory that I speak of? that so he might take
occasion to extol this king of glory, and show what reason there was why they
should gladly receive him; or in the name of some other that might move this
question, as if he should have said, But now if any one shall demand of me, Who
is this king of glory? I answer, the Lord strong and mighty, etc. I know, many
Expositours take them to be the supposed reply of those that were spoken to in
that foregoing figurative expression, Lift up your heads, O ye gates, etc. and
accordingly they conceive that this reply is made, either by way of scorning
and despising Christ, as if they should have said, What is this your glorious
king, that we should submit to him? or else by way of desiring to be informed
and satisfied concerning Christ: yea they that understand the former verse of
Christ's ascension into heaven, take these words as the reply of the Angels,
admiring that one clothed with a humane body should ascend above the heavens,
and enter in as the Lord of that Jerusalem. But that which is first said of
this seems most probable. And however that which is answered, The Lord strong
and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle, plainly imports, that it was he, who
being of infinite power, was able to destroy those that would not submit to
him, and to protect his people against all their enemies, both temporal and
spiritual, and to make them victorious over them all; and it may have special
reference to Christ's conquest over Hell and death, when after his Resurrection
he ascended triumphantly into heaven.

Verse. 10. The Lord of hosts, etc.] See the Note Genesis 2.1.

PSALM XXV.
Verse. 1. UNto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.] That is, In thee only do I
trust and hope; and my hearts desire for help and comfort is only toward thee,
and with much eagerness does expect good from thee. In the Hebrew this Psalm
is so composed, that we have all the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet one after
another in the first letter of every verse (except only in two or three verses)
and that, as we may probably conceive, that being a Psalm of singular
excellency and special use, it might by this help be the better remembered. The
like elegancy there is in the 34, 37, 111, 112, 119, and 145 Psalms.

Verse. 2. I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed.] To wit, as they use to be,
that when they have hoped for any thing with great confidence, and have boasted
of their hope, yet at last have been disappointed.

Verse. 3. Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed, etc.] To wit, neither by
their own disappointments, nor mine. For this last some add, because if he
should fail of his hopes, he knew this would be a great discouragement to
others, that waited to see what the issue of Gods dealings with him would be.
Let them be ashamed which transgress without cause, that is, that causlesly
afflict and trouble me, and oppose me in the business of the kingdom promised
me: see the Note Psalm. 7.3. Yet some conceive that by them which transgress
without cause is meant, those that out of distrust do causlesly fall away from
God: and others understand it of all wicked men whatsoever; all sin against God
being in true judgment altogether unreasonable and causlesse. But the first
Exposition is the best.

Verse. 4. Show me thy ways, O Lord, etc.] That is, the ways wherein thou have
appointed thy people to walk: Or, Show me thy ways, that is, the ways thou
usest to take with thy children; as namely, how gracious thou art unto them,
though thou do usually afflict them, how faithful in performing all thy
promises to them, that so I may quietly rest upon thee, and may not through
impatience or desire of revenge do any thing to displease thee. And indeed if
we understand these words in the first sense, of Gods teaching him to walk in
the ways of his commandments, it is probable that in desiring that, he had
respect chiefly to the distress he was in, that he might not thereby be drawn
to do any thing that was evil, as men in adversity are prone to do.

Verse. 5. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me, etc.] Many several Expositions
are given of these words: as, Lead me in thy truth, etc. that is, carry me with
constant assurance and trust to rest on thy promises, thy truth and
faithfulness; or, Cause me to be true and faithful as thou art, etc. But I
conceive this is the same in effect with that Psalm. 5.8. Lead me, O Lord, in
thy righteousness: concerning which see the Note there.

Verse. 6. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy loving kindnesses; for
they have been ever of old.] To wit, to me even from my first conception, and
toward all thine from the beginning of the world; yea from all eternity, in
that God set his love upon his 2 Timothy 1.9. before the world began. And thus
does David secretly comfort himself by pressing this, as knowing that the Lord
was unchangeable, even the same still that he had ever been.

Verse. 7. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions, etc.] To
wit, such as I have run into in my riper years. For by mentioning the sins of
his youth in the first branch David intended not to imply, that he had not
sinned since that time, or that he had no cause to be troubled for any sins but
those of his youth; but rather hereby he sought to humble himself before God,
that from his youth he had provoked God many ways, and that if he should deal
with him according to the rigor of his justice, he might charge upon him not
only the sins he had more lately committed, but all his evil deeds even from
his youth unto that time: and therefore he adds, according to thy mercy
remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord; that is, moved thereto by
thine own goodness, or to declare and make known thy goodness.

Verse. 8. Good and upright is the Lord, etc.] That is, gracious and faithful,
really intending and faithfully performing whatever he has promised: therefore
will he teach sinners in the way; for which see the Note before verse. 4.

Verse. 9. The meek will he guide in judgment.] Who are meant by the meek, see
in the Note Psalm. 22.26. And for that which is said, that God will guide them
in judgment, the meaning may be, either that God will so direct them, that
they shall walk judiciously, or in a right manner, ordering all their affairs
with wisdom and mature judgment; or that God in judgment, that is in great
wisdom and provident care, will guide them, having in all things a fatherly
respect to their weakness and profit.

Verse. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth to them that keep his
covenant and his Testimonies.] That is, his Commandments, (see the Note Exodus
25.16.) which by Covenant the people of God are bound evangelically to keep.
Now to such it is said, that all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth,
that is, all that God does to them is done in mercy and faithfulness, yea such
see and acknowledge that there is mercy and truth in all the dispensations of
Gods providence toward them. Yet some here also by the paths of the Lord
understand those that he has appointed us to walk in, and so make the meaning
to be, that all that God has appointed his people to do is for their good,
and out of mercy and faithfulness to them it is enjoined them.

Verse. 11. For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great.]
This last clause, for it is great, is not added as a reason to move God to
pardon his iniquity; (for properly and in it self the greatness of sin is an
argument why God should punish, rather then why God should pardon) but rather
it is added as a reason why he did so earnestly beg pardon of God, namely
because his iniquity was great, and therefore was the liker to endanger him,
and lay the more heavy upon his conscience; as if a sick man should say to his
Physician, Help me, I beseech you, for I am very sick: or as a reason why he
pleaded that God would pardon him for his names sake, that is, of his own
goodness and for his own glory, (see the Note 1 Samuel 12.12.) namely, because
his sin was so great, that nothing but Gods free grace and infinite mercy could
give him hope of pardon. Yet withal it is true, that where the party begging
pardon does truly repent and believe, even the alleging of the greatness of a
man's sin may have some force of an argument to move God to pardon, because the
glory of Gods mercy and grace is hereby the more magnified, according to that
of the Apostle Romans 5.20. where sin abounded, grace did much more abound.
However, by the iniquity which he says was great may be meant some particular
greater sin, which lay sore upon his conscience, or his sins in general
collectively considered.

Verse. 12. What man is he that fears the Lord? etc.] This question may imply
the paucity of those that truly fear God, and withal their wonderful
happiness; What man is he that fears the Lord? as if he had said, There are
not many such; but oh, great is the happiness of that man that does thus fear
God! At least this question implies how universally true that which he says is
concerning those that fear the Lord, What man is he that fears the Lord? as
if he should say: Whoever he be that does this, him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose; that is, he shall be taught of God in the way that God
himself does prescribe or approve: or rather, God shall direct him what way to
choose in all his businesses and streights whatsoever, he shall not be left to
his own choice, but God shall direct him what way to choose.

Verse. 13. His soul shall dwell at ease.] The man that lives in a prosperous
condition is said to live at ease, see the Note Job 12.5. and accordingly the
meaning of these words is, that he that fears the Lord shall long enjoy
plenty of all blessings, temporal and spiritual, even to the full content and
ease of his mind, and after that eternal rest and joy in heaven. And indeed
though the righteous be often much afflicted, (which their not fearing God, as
they ought to do, may bring upon them) and have not all things as they would
themselves; yet, in regard of the inward sweet content of their minds, they may
be well said to dwell at ease; and it may be that to imply this the word soul
is here expressed, His soul shall dwell at ease. Some, I know, restrain this to
the rest of heaven. But the first Exposition is every way the best.

Verse. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, etc.] This may be
meant of the secret of Gods Providence, and of the secret counsel of his
spirit, see the Note Job 29.4. But yet most commonly, and upon best grounds, it
is understood of Gods revealing unto such men his will concerning man's
salvation expressed in his word, as is more clearly set forth in the following
clause, and he will show them his Covenant: and that this is called the secret
of the Lord, because it contains many things which are not to be known by
natural reason, but only by the enlightening of Gods spirit; as concerning the
remission of sins, the sanctifying of our nature, and life eternal, with other
secrets of heaven, which God only imparts to his friends, as Christ says, Joh.
15.15.

Verse. 15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, etc.] This must be taken in the
same sense, as when before he said that he lifted up his heart unto the Lord:
see the Note verse. 1. and Psalm. 5.3. and then the following clause, for he
shall pluck my feet out of the net, may be meant of all the streights he was
in, and more especially of the plots whereby his enemies sought to ensnare him.

Verse. 17. The troubles of my heart are enlarged.] To wit, both for my sins,
and the miseries I endure.

Verse. 20. Let me not be ashamed.] See the Note before verse. 2.

Verse. 21. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me.] That is, Preserve me,
because of mine integrity and uprightness; as I have no way injured others,
even those that are now mine enemies, so let not others hurt and injure me. Yet
withal he might also in these words desire of God, that he might be still kept
upright for his security, that nothing his enemies did might drive him to seek
revenge, or any other way to do that which was evil in his sight. Some, I
know, limit the words to the integrity of his faith, and so make them a
request, that God would preserve him, because he did sincerely rest upon God
alone: but we had better understand them of his integrity in regard of his
enemies.

Verse. 22. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.] The rather did David
add this, because God, by anointing him king, had committed his people to his
care; and it most grieved him, that they, the godly especially, were involved
in his troubles.

PSALM XXVI.
Verse. 1. JVdge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity, etc.] That is,
in that integrity wherewith I carried my self from the beginning, both toward
Saul, and the rest of mine enemies; as I was guiltless at first, so I have
still continued, though never so much provoked by them. See also the Notes
Deuteronomy. 32.36. Psalm. 7.8, and 17.2, and 4.1, and 2 Samuel 22.21. I have trusted
also in the Lord, therefore I shall not slide; that is, I shall not fall from
mine integrity, and from mine endeavor to do only that which is just in thine
eyes, or from my steadfast hope that thou will defend me and my just cause.

Verse. 2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.] As if
he had said, I appeal to thee; take exact notice whether I be not inwardly such
as I profess my self to be. See the Note upon a like expression Job 31.6. And
for the word reins, see the Notes Psalm. 7.9, and 16.7.

Verse. 3. For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, etc.] In two several
respects David might set Gods goodness before his eyes, by meditating
frequently and seriously thereon: namely, 1. that he might be rendered thereby
the more careful to obey God in all things, and the more fearful to offend
him, even because he is so good and gracious, according to that Hos. 3.5. they
shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the later days; and 2. that being
hereby confirmed in his faith, that God would be good to him, as he uses to be
to all his, especially to the afflicted and oppressed, and that he would help
and protect him, this might keep him from recompencing evil for evil, and
taking any unlawful course to help himself. And in both these respects
therefore David might here allege his continual setting of Gods goodness
before his eyes, both as a proof of his integrity, and that he was far from
those sinful practices which his enemies charged him with; and to show with
what confidence he might therefore well appeal to God to be judged by him. And
accordingly we must also understand the following clause, and I have walked in
thy truth; to wit, either that he had lived according to the direction of Gods
word, which is truth, Joh. 17.17; or else, that he had continually walked in
the confidence of Gods faithfulness, and lived by faith in his promises,
continually meditating on the promises which God had made both to the righteous
in general, and to him in particular concerning the kingdom, and so waiting
upon God in the way of righteousness, whom he knew to be a God of truth to
make good his promises, and not seeking by any unlawful courses to help
himself. I know there are some that understand both clauses of imitating Gods
goodness and truth: thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, to wit, as a
pattern which I desire to imitate; and I have walked in thy truth, that is, I
have endeavored to imitate thy truth and faithfulness: and others understand
it of the goodness and truth which God requires in his people; For thy loving
kindness is before mine eyes, etc. that is, the loving kindness which thou
requirest, I have endeavored to practice, and to walk in the truth which thou
have prescribed. But the former Exposition is clearly the best.

Verse. 4. I have not sat with vain persons, etc.] Some by vain persons
understand lying, false, deceitful men, and so hold that the next clause does
explain this, neither will I go in with dissemblers; others, such as are not
what they pretend themselves to be, as magistrates and counselors of State,
that pretend to be for the public good, but do indeed mind no such thing,
being as clouds without rain, and fountains without water. But doubtless David
meant it more generally of all wicked men, who are called vain persons, because
they were void of all true piety, and gave themselves wholly to vanity, that
is, to seek after earthly things, which are vain and transitory, and to follow
sinful courses, which would never yield them any solid comfort or benefit,
Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed?
see also the Notes Judge. 9.4, and Job 11.11. However this is here added as a
farther proof of his integrity; the intention of these words being to signify,
either that he had not sat plotting with wicked men, and taking crafty counsel
against his enemies, as they had against him; or more generally, that he had
not conversed with such kind of men, which indeed is a clear sign of a good
heart: see the Note Psalm. 1.1. Yea and by joining this with that which went
before, concerning his setting Gods goodness before his eyes, and walking in
his truth, he implies, that his trusting in Gods goodness and truth had kept
him from joining and conversing with such kind of persons.

Verse. 6. I will wash mine hands in innocence; so will I compass thine altar,
O Lord.] Having professed, in the two foregoing verses, that he had carefully
shunned the society of all wicked men, he adds here, that yet he would not
because of them avoid the place of Gods public worship; only he would not come
thither, as many did, in their sins, but would be careful to purge himself
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and so he would come with his
sacrifices to Gods altar. And thus these words may also include, first, a
farther profession of his integrity, propounded before ver. 1, and secondly, an
engagement of offering gratulatory sacrifices to the Lord, if the Lord would
plead his cause against his enemies, as he had there also desired. However, in
this expression of washing his hands in innocence, which probably he spoke in
reference to the lifting up of his hands in prayer unto God, either he alluded
to the custom of men's washing their hands, thereby to profess their innocence
in any thing, as Pilate did to clear himself of the guilt of our Saviors death
Matthew. 27.24. whence it is usual with men still to say, I will wash mine hands
of such or such a thing, meaning that they have had or will have nothing to do
in it: or else to those legal washings that were used before men approached to
Gods altar to offer sacrifices; not only by the priests, of whom it is said
Exodus 40.32. when they came near unto the altar, they washed, but also by the
people, especially if they had contracted any legal pollution; whence it is
that the Apostle, amongst other their legal rites, mentions their diverse
washings, Heb. 9.10. and that to signify what spiritual purity God required in
those that would worship him; see also the Note Job 9.30. And then for the next
clause, so will I compass thine altar, this expression, I conceive, is used
either in reference to the multitude of sacrifices he would bring, or else to
his going together with many others to offer their sacrifices on Gods altar.
Yet some hold, that because the people might not approach to the altar, but
were to stand some distance off, they that were zealous in Gods service, that
they might the more affect themselves with seeing what was done when their
sacrifices were offered, used not to stand still in one place, but to move from
one place to another round about, as occasion was, that they might see what was
done; and that hence David, to set forth his diligence and alacrity in that
service, uses this expression, so will I compass thine altar, O Lord.

Verse. 8. I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place where thine
honor dwells.] That is, where thy Majesty dwells, or where thine Ark is:
see the Note 1 Samuel 4.21. This is also added as an evidence of his integrity.

Verse. 9. Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men.] That
is, Keep me still, as thou have done, from the society of such persons, that I
may not be won to partake with them in their wicked ways: or rather thus,
Let me not fall into the hands of such persons; or, Involve me not in their
curse and ruin. We have the contrary to this expressed in a contrary phrase, 1 Samuel, 25.29. the soul of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life.

Verse. 12. My foot stands in an even place.] That is, I am in a sure and safe
condition, to wit, because I walk in my integrity, and do not turn aside from
the way of thy commandments, and so am sure that thou do and wilt preserve
me. The ground of this expression is, because in even ground there is sure
footing.

PSALM XXVII.
Verse. 1. THe Lord is my light, etc.] That is, He it is that does teach me and
guide me, and preserve my life, and deliver me out of troubles; he is my
comforter, and the author of all my happiness. See the Notes 2 Samuel 22.29.
and Job 29.3. And to the same purpose is that which he adds, the Lord is the
strength of my life; that is, the supporter and preserver of my life.

Verse. 2. When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat
up my flesh, etc.] That is, as it were to devour me. See the Notes Job 19.22,
and 31.31, and Psalm. 14.4.

Verse. 3. Though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.] That
is, that the Lord is my light and my salvation, as he had said before verse. 1.
Yet some refer it to the word war; in this, that is, in this war, will I be
confident.

Verse. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, etc] Either this is added as a
reason why he was so confident of Gods protection, to wit, because his only
desire was to enjoy communion with God in the place of his worship; or else as
a reason why he desired that God would still plead his cause against his
enemies, namely, because his great aim was, that he might be settled in such a
peaceable condition, that he might freely and constantly resort to the house of
God: One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, etc. as if
he should have said, Though I be spoiled of my estate, bereaved of the society
of friends, and driven from house and home, yet it is not the recovery of these
things, no nor the obtaining of the kingdom which God has promised me, that I
desire, so much as that I may dwell for ever in the house of the Lord;
concerning which see the Note Psalm. 23.6. As for the following words, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, thereby may be meant, 1. the attaining of the
knowledge, or the meditation of all the glorious excellencies and perfections
of God in his attributes, his holiness, justice, goodness and truth, etc.
which by his word he manifests to his Church: 2. the consideration of Gods
wonderful works, and his bounteous gifts to the sons of men, which make him
glorious in their eyes: 3. the mysteries of our redemption by Christ, and the
benefits that redound to us thereby, which were shadowed forth in the
sacrifices and other ceremonial rites of the Tabernacle: and 4. the glory of
heaven. And doubtless in this expression he alludes to the external beauty
and magnificence of the Tabernacle, or rather the glory of the Temple he
intended and foresaw, which were typical representations of these things. But
in the last clause, and to enquire in his Temple, it is the Tabernacle which he
intends by the Temple: of which see the Note 1 Samuel 1.9.

Verse. 5. For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the
secret of his Tabernacle, etc.] That is, God will be graciously present with
me, to shroud me and protect me from mine enemies: even as a shepherd should
shelter his sheep in a tent or tabernacle from the heat of the Sun; or as if a
king should undertake to protect one in his pavilion, whence none dare venture
to take him; or as men use to hide some precious thing in some secret place of
their dwelling; or as when men are hid in Gods Tabernacle or Temple, whether
they used to fly for shelter to the horns of the altar; yea as if a man were
hid in the most holy place, whether none might enter, but only the High priest
once a year, which is therefore called Gods secret place Ezekiel. 7.22. they shall
pollute my secret place; for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it. To
all these there may be an allusion: yet because of the dependence of this upon
that said in the foregoing verse, concerning his longing after Gods Tabernacle,
many think the last is rather intended, and so conceive the drift of the words
to be this; that seeing he so earnestly desired to be present with God, God
would be always present with him to defend him.

Verse. 6. And now also shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round
about, etc.] That is, I shall be out of the reach of mine enemies; it shall not
be in their power to hurt me: it is the same with that in the foregoing verse,
he shall set me up upon a rock. See farther also in the Note Psalm. 3.3.
Therefore will I offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy; that is, sacrifices
of praise, which were offered with great joy, with sounding of trumpets, Numb.
10.10. and other musical instruments, 1 Chronicles. 16.41, 42. And thus we see he
trusted to come to Gods Tabernacle, and that he meant to express his joy in a
holy manner, and not in that profane jollity wherewith carnal men are wont to
triumph.

Verse. 8. When thou saidest, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy
face, Lord, will I seek.] As if he had said, Against all temptations concerning
mine own unworthiness, the weakness of my faith, and the delay of help, I
oppose this, that thou have commanded us to seek thy face, which imports thy
readiness to help, and gives me encouragement to seek and pray unto thee. For
this phrase of seeking Gods face, see the Note 1 Chronicles. 16.11.

Verse. 10. When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me
up.] That David's father and mother did never forsake him, is evident, 1 Samuel
22.1. The meaning therefore is, that though those on whom he might most justly
rely, even his father and mother, should forsake him, yet he knew God would
never forsake him.

Verse. 11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 25.4, and 5.8.

Verse. 12. For false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breath out
cruelty.] That is, such as in all their talk discover the bloody intentions
they have against me: yet this phrase of breathing out cruelty may have
reference to that vehement blowing and breathing, which may be observed in men
when they are furiously enraged.

Verse. 13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living.] That is, to enjoy the good things that God
has promised me here in this world: see the Notes Job 7.7, and 28.13. For
though heaven may be termed in a special manner the land of the living, (the
grave is the land of the dead, the earth the land of the dying, and heaven is
only properly the land of the living) and though, as many learned men hold, the
land of Canaan, which was a type of heaven, is sometimes peculiarly called the
land of the living, as in Ezekiel. 26.20. I shall set glory in the land of the
living; yet usually in the Scriptures by the land of the living is meant this
present world, as Esa. 38.11. I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord
in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of
the world; and so also Esa. 53.8, Psalm. 52.5, and in many other places.

Verse. 14. Wait on the Lord, etc.] David, as being conscious to himself of his
own weakness, and expecting farther trials, speaks this to himself: yet it
may be also taken as spoken to others, out of a desire that others by his
example would learn to wait upon God.

PSALM XXVIII.
Verse. 1. UNto thee will I cry, O Lord, my rock, etc.] See the Note Deuteronomy. 32.4.
be not silent to me, that is, refuse not to answer my prayer; or, forbear not
to help me, see the Note Exodus 14.14: lest if thou be silent to me, I become
like them that go down into the pit, that is, the grave: as if he should have
said, for if thou help not (there is none else that can do it) I am utterly
undone; so great is my danger, that without help from heaven I am but a dead
man, even as one that is ready to be carried to the grave. Yet some conceive
that in this phrase he alludes rather to those, that going down or falling
casually into some deep pit, from whence they cannot get out again, must needs
there perish, if there be no body to hear their cry, and to help them up.

Verse. 2. I lift up my hands toward thy holy Oracle.] That is, toward heaven,
of which the Oracle was a type; see the Note 2 Samuel 22.7: or toward the most
holy place, where the Ark was, the sign of Gods presence. See the Note 1 Kings
8.30.

Verse. 3. Draw me not away with the wicked, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 26.9. The
phrase that is here used seems covertly to imply, that when wicked men are cut
off, there is a hand of justice, dragging them as it were away as malefactors
to their deserved punishment; and withal, that when such men die, they are
violently and forcibly haled away, their affections being wholly fixed upon the
world and worldly things.

Verse. 4. Give them according to their deeds, etc.] The great question
concerning this and such like places is, how it could stand with David's piety
thus to pray, that Gods wrath might be poured forth upon his enemies, it being
the express precept of Christ Matthew. 5.9. Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you. But to this it may be answered, 1. that David did not desire this
out of a private thirst after revenge, but merely out of a zeal for Gods glory,
and the good of his people, as having after long experience found that they
were implacable enemies of all godliness, and were become by degrees
intolerably insolent; and therefore being grieved that they should proceed so
far and so long without being called to an account, desired that justice might
be executed on them: 2. that David penned this Psalm for the use of others, and
not only for himself: and 3. that these expressions were in David rather
prophesies, then imprecations; he did rather by the instinct of Gods Spirit
foretell that it should be so, then pray that it might be so.

Verse. 5. Because they regard not the works, of the Lord, nor the operation of
his hands, etc.] This may be meant generally of all the works of Gods
providence, wherein the hand of God was apparently seen, the good he did for
the righteous, and his judgments on the wicked; (for so the very same words
are used by the prophet Isa. 5.12.) but withal it may be more particularly
meant of Gods choosing and anointing David to be king, the many victories he
obtained, whereby much good had been done for Gods people, and the Lords
delivering him from so many desperate dangers, which were clear proofs of Gods
tender care over him, and the precious account he made of him, and that he had
determined he should be king; which his enemies not regarding, did as it were
obstinately fight against God; for which cause, says David, he shall destroy
them, and not build them up, that is, he shall destroy them without all hope of
recovery: for this phrase of building up men see the Note Job 22.23.

Verse. 8. The Lord is their strength, etc.] Having spoken in the foregoing
verse how he had been helped, he adds, The Lord is their strength, that is, the
strength of my soldiers; and so, though they were but few in comparison of
mine enemies, by their help I have been preserved: or it may be meant of Gods
people, as being spoken in reference to the following verse, The Lord is their
strength, that is, the strength of his people: (see the Note Exodus 15.1.) and
he is the saving strength of his anointed, that is, of me his anointed; and so
he terms himself, because that was the ground both of his enemies rage against
him, and of his confidence in God.

Verse. 9. Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance, etc.] See the Note
Psalm. 25.22. Feed them also, or rule them, to wit, as a shepherd does his
flock: (see the Notes Psalm. 23.1, 2, etc.) and lift them up for ever, that is,
exalt them, and make them every way great and glorious, even above other
nations; or set them in a safe condition above the reach of their enemies, and
that successively in all generations. Some understand it also of Gods carrying
them on, and raising them still up to farther degrees of grace, till they were
brought at last to live for ever with God in heaven.

PSALM XXIX.
Verse. 1. GIve unto the Lord, (O ye mighty) give unto the Lord glory and
strength.] That is, Confess how glorious and strong the Lord is, and that both
by word and deed, to the praise of his name; (and strength is here the rather
mentioned, because those works of God, of which he speaks afterward, do
singularly manifest his mighty power and strength) or, acknowledge that all the
glory and strength you have, yea all glory and strength whatsoever, is of God.
His intention in these words is, that the great ones of the world, that in
their pride are wont above others to exalt themselves against God, should
humble themselves under the hand of God, who is of such infinite power, and
has all things subject to him, as he shows in the following verses: see also
the Note Psalm. 8.2.

Verse. 2. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, etc.] That is, due to
him, or such glory as is due to a God of such Majesty, the acknowledgement of
his infinite excellencies, or the worship which he has prescribed in his Word:
worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, that is, in his beautiful holy
place, in his glorious Sanctuary, as it is in the margin. See the Notes Psalm.
27.4, and 1 Chro. 16.29.

Verse. 3. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, etc.] The thunder is called
the voice of the Lord, because it comes out of heaven, and is an effect of Gods
mighty power: and some think that it is said to be upon the waters, that is,
upon the sea, because it makes a noise, and runs as it were upon the sea a
long time together. But I rather understand these words thus, The voice of the
Lord is upon the waters, that is, in the watery clouds: for so also Psalm. 18.11.
the clouds are called dark waters. And because in such storms of thunder there
uses to be abundance of rain, therefore in the last clause it is said, the
Lord is upon many waters. Having in the beginning of the Psalm called upon the
mighty men of the world not to exalt themselves against God, but to humble
themselves before him, here he puts them in mind of this mighty work of God;
because nothing does more terrify the most atheistical men, convincing them
that there is a God that is higher then the highest, then the thunder does. And
some conceive that it was some extraordinary tempest, perhaps some tempest that
helped to the foyling of David's enemies, that was the occasion of composing
this Psalm.

Verse. 4. The voice of the Lord is powerful, etc.] That is, of mighty force:
the voice of the Lord is full of majesty, to wit, both in regard of the
dreadful noise it makes, and of the bright flashes of lightening that go
along with it. Yet some conceive that it is said to be powerful and full of
majesty, because Gods mighty power and glorious majesty is thereby so clearly
discovered.

Verse. 5. The voice of the Lord breaks the cedars, etc.] To wit, by the
thunderbolts, which are cast down upon the earth in the thunder claps; or by
the tempestuous winds which do many times accompany the thunder. However herein
and that which follows is covertly employed, how strange it would be, if men
that have reason and understanding should not be deeply affected with this
terrible voice, which works so mightily upon the very unreasonable and
senseless creatures.

Verse. 6. He makes them also to skip like a calf, etc.] Either it is in regard
of the bowing and tumbling of the cedars this way and that by the force of the
winds in such tempests, that they are said here to skip like a calf; or else in
regard of the violent rending and hurling of these trees up by the roots; or
else in regard of the leaping and flying of the splinters and broken pieces of
the trees several ways, when they are thunder-strucken, and violently torn in
pieces thereby. As for the following words, Lebanon and Sirion (of which see
the Note Deuteronomy. 3.9.) like a young unicorn, either they are meant of the trees
that grow on those mountains, (and indeed that seems to me the most probable;)
or if they be meant of the mountains themselves, they must be taken as an
hyperbolicall expression of the violence of such tempests, that it is such,
that they make the very foundations of mountains to tremble; like that Psalm
114.4. The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs. Some,
I know, understand it of earthquakes: but why they should be mentioned in this
description of thunder-storms, I cannot conceive.

Verse. 7. The voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire.] The thunder is
said to divide the flames of fire, either because by breaking the clouds it
causes the lightening to break forth in several flashes one after another; or
because the lightening does disperse it self several ways throughout the
air; or because the claps of thunder do still come between the flashes of
lightening; and then too the doing of this in the midst of pouring showers,
where the fire and water is in a manner mingled together, makes it the more
wonderful.

Verse. 8. The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness, etc.] That is, It
makes the trees in the deserts to shake, yea the very earth there to tremble:
see the former Note verse. 6. Or it may be very probably referred to the wild
beasts in those wast wildernesses, to wit, that it makes them to quake and
tremble; which may seem the more probable, because of that which immediately
follows in the next verse, that it makes the hindes to calve: and so hereby
may be intimated, for the greater advancement of Gods glory, that his terrors
strike even those desert places, whether the power and dread of man does not
reach. Yet some would have this referred to the trembling of men as they
travel through those deserts, who indeed in such vast wildernesses, that are
dreadful in themselves, are apt to be the more terrified with such horrid
tempests.

Verse. 9. The voice of the Lord makes the hindes to calve, etc.] That is, the
thunder helps forward their calving, (see the Note Job 39.1.) or rather, it
causes them through fear to cast their calves: and discovers the forests,
that is, it pierces the thickest forests, and by the light of the flashes of
lightening that strike through the trees, it makes those places to be seen
therein, which were before hidden in darkness: or by beating off the leaves of
the trees, and by casting down the trees in several places, it lays the
ground bare, and exposes both it and the wild beasts therein to open view,
which before could not be seen. As for the last clause, and in his temple does
everyone speak of his glory, it may be rendered, as it is in our Bibles, and in
his temple every whit of it utters his glory; and then the meaning must be,
that in the assemblies of Gods people in his Sanctuary every whit of that,
which is before spoken of, is alleged for the setting forth of Gods glory. But
if we read it, as most Interpreters do indeed render it, and in his Temple does
every one speak of his glory, then either these words are added to show, that
when God sent such storms of thunder, the people of God were wont to meet
together in the Tabernacle, there to praise God by the acknowledgement of his
mighty power, and to pray to God that herein he would be merciful unto them;
(And indeed the rather might they be said therein to praise God, because this
voice of God, though only terrible to others, might well yield to them matter
of comfort, as discovering what a mighty God they had to protect them, and
confound their enemies) Or else they are added to show, that though God do thus
manifest himself by these works of his to the whole world, yet none do truly
advance his glory, but only his people: the world is often little moved with
these glorious discoveries of Gods power; or if they be, they are rather driven
from God, then drawn to God thereby; but now to his people God has revealed
himself by his word in a far more eminent manner then he has unto the world,
and so when they are affected with these dreadful works of Gods providence,
yet they can then draw nigh to God as to a father, and can speak much more
abundantly of the glory of God. And so also the drift of these words may be,
both to bewail as it were that the world will not praise God as the Church
does; and likewise to stir them up to join with the Church herein, since it is
indeed the work of salvation that must encourage us to draw nigh unto God, and
open our mouths in a right manner to praise his name.

Verse. 10. The Lord sits upon the flood, etc.] That is, God has the command
of those inundations of water that are caused by these mighty tempests: though
they may seem to threaten ruin to all where they come, yet God rules and
orders them by his providence, both for the punishment of the wicked, and the
preservation and good of the righteous: yea, the Lord sits king for ever;
that is, He is and shall for ever be the Lord and governor of the whole world.
The most Expositours, I know, refer this to Noah's flood, thus: that as the Lord
did by his sovereign all-ruling power bring the flood upon the old world, for
the punishment of their sins, so he still as King rules all things, and always
shall do. But the first Exposition is best.

Verse. 11. The Lord will give strength unto his people, the Lord will bless
his people with peace.] This also may be referred to those thunder-storms of
which he has spoken, to wit, that God will preserve and hearten his people
against the danger and terror thereof: or it may be understood more generally
of the Lords strengthening his people every way, and of his affording them all
kind of peace and prosperity: and yet it may be added too as in relation to
that which went before, to wit, as being inferred thus, that his people may
take comfort in those works of his providence which are so terrible to others,
the mighty power of God discovered therein being to them a ground of full
assurance, that he was able to strengthen them and confer upon them all
prosperity and peace.

PSALM XXX.
The Title. A Psalm and Song, etc.] That is, A Psalm provided to be sung, But
seeing all the Psalms were composed for that use, why this is expressed in some
Psalms and not in others, I find no sufficient reason given by Expositours. At
the dedication of the house of David. Some understand this of the dedication of
his house, when the Ark of the Lord was brought into it. Again others think,
that because Absalom had defiled David's house with his incest and other
wickedness, therefore when David returned again to Jerusalem in peace, the
conspiracy of Absalom being brought to naught, before he would dwell in his
house again, as he removed his concubines, and put them in ward, 2 Samuel, 20.3.
so he also caused his house to be dedicated anew, and so upon that occasion
this Psalm was composed. And the chief reason why they hold this, is because
that which is said verse. 6, 7. concerning his growing secure by reason of his
settled prosperous condition, and Gods hiding his face from him thereupon, and
the troubles he then fell into, In my prosperity I said, I shall never be
moved, etc. does better agree with that time, when, after some years spent in
his exalted estate, he fell into that sin with the wife of Uriah, and so fell
into great troubles, especially by the rebellion of Absalom, then with that
time when he first built his cedar house, 2 Samuel 5.11: for then, say they, he
was but newly settled in the throne, etc. But because we find expressly, that
their new built houses they were wont to dedicate at their first coming to
dwell in them, see the Note Deuteronomy. 20.5, and Nehem. 12.27. and that 1. to bless
God for the finishing of them; 2. thereby to testify, as it were, that they
acknowledged God to be the chief Lord of whom they hold their houses, and that
upon the condition of doing him homage by a holy conversation, and making their
houses as so many Sanctuaries for the worship of God all the time they dwelt
therein; and 3. to pray to God to bless them therein; but now of dedicating
their houses anew, when they had been polluted with any gross sin, we find not
the least mention: therefore I rather conceive it is meant of the dedication of
his new-built palace, 2 Samuel 5.11. for there it is said verse. 12. that David
perceived that the Lord had established him king over Israel, and that he had
exalted his kingdom, etc. because he had taken the strong fort of Zion, and
had vanquished his enemies round about, all the tribes had submitted themselves
to him, and having built a fair palace, he was quietly settled in his throne;
so that it is no wonder that he should then begin to be puffed up with some
thoughts of carnal confidence: and for those troubles, which God hiding his
face, did thereupon befall him, it might be some sickness he fell into whilst
his house was building, or that violent invasion of the Philistines, which is
related 2 Samuel 5.17: and so at the dedication of his house he blessed God for
delivering him from this desperate danger.

Verse. 1. I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, etc.] As if
he had said, Because thou have lifted me up, I also will endeavor to lift up
or exalt thy name. What he means by Gods lifting him up, see in the Notes Psalm.
3.3, and 28.9.

Verse. 2. I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me.] See the Note Psalm. 6.3.

Verse. 3. O Lord, thou have brought up my soul from the grave, etc.] That is,
thou have delivered me from the very jaws of death; which may be meant of
sickness, or any other desperate dangers. See the Note 2 Samuel 22.6.

Verse. 4, Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, etc.] That is, ye that are
sanctified of God, and whom alone God acknowledges for his peculiar people:
and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness, or, to the memorial of
his holiness; that is, when by his works, such as this of his delivering me
from this danger, you are put in remembrance of his holiness; or that the
memorial of his holiness may be for ever continued in his Church. Yet some
make this to be the meaning of this last clause, give thanks at the remembrance
of his holiness, that is, at the remembrance of our most holy God; or to the
name of Jehovah; which is the memorial whereby he will be mentioned or
remembered amongst his people, as it was said to Moses Exodus 3.15. and likewise
Hos. 12.5. Yea and some by the memorial of his holiness understand the
Tabernacle, because therein the holiness of God was shadowed forth, into whose
presence no unclean thing might enter.

Verse. 5. For his anger endures but a moment; in his favor is life, etc.]
This some Expositours understand thus; Gods anger lasts but a little while, but
it is of his favor that we live; or, of his favor he desires we should live,
and not perish for ever. Others render the meaning of these words thus; Gods
fatherly anger with his children is but for a very little while, he soon gives
them a taste of his favor again, and this then is life to them, that is, this
chears and revives their hearts again. But because it seems clear, that life is
here opposed to a moment, others do better, I conceive, give this sense of the
words; Gods anger with his continues but a moment, but his favor to his
continues all their life long: yea and life eternal may be herein also
comprehended, in comparison whereof the longest afflictions are but momentary,
as the Apostle says 2 Cor. 4.17. our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And
indeed we may well think that David had respect to this, that was so long in an
afflicted condition, and yet could judge it but a moment of anger. Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning: as if he had said, As the
darkness of the night stays not long, but in the morning it grows light
again; so the afflictions and sorrows of Gods children continue not long, but
there soon comes a morning of joy again: which is according to that of the
prophet Isa. 17.14. behold at evening tide trouble, and before the morning he
is not.

Verse. 6. And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.] That is, When I
was prosperously settled in the kingdom, I began to conclude within my self,
that now there was an end of all my troubles, I should now live all my days in
a prosperous estate. See the Note upon the Title of this Psalm.

Verse. 7. Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong, etc.]
That is, say some Expositours, Thou have strengthened me so, that my condition
is as firm and unmovable as a mountain, or that I am as safe, as if I were in
some fort built upon a mountain: and indeed they were wont to build their
castles and forts upon hills and mountains, not only because they were the more
hardly to be assaulted, but also because their standing so aloft added the more
majesty and splendor to them. But because kingdoms, in regard of their
eminency of power, are usually termed mountains in the Scripture, as Isa. 2.2.
the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, that is, Christ's kingdom
shall be exalted above all kingdoms, and Dan. 2.35. the stone that smote the
image became a great mountain, that is, a great kingdom, and so in other
places; therefore I rather conceive that by his mountain here David meant his
kingdom; Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong, that
is, thou have by thy favor most firmly established and strengthened my
kingdom, above danger of any opposition: and it is likely too that in this
expression he alluded to mount Sion, where he had built himself a palace, and
had made it the chief seat of his kingdom. And this is here alleged as the
occasion of his growing so secure, namely, because his kingdom was so settled,
and become so strong every way, that there seemed to be no fear of a change.
Yet withal there seems to be likewise an intimation in these words, that
seeing it was of Gods favor that his kingdom was so settled, it was a folly
in him to grow so carnally secure, merely because he saw himself so strongly
settled, since he might well think, that it was easy for him that had so
settled him, to unsettle him again; as he acknowledges in the following words
that God did. Thou did hide thy face; that is, thou were offended with me for
this my carnal confidence and security, and did withdraw thy wonted help and
protection: and I was troubled; that is, I fell into great distress, and
thereby was oppressed with much sorrow and anguish of mind.

Verse. 9. What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? etc.]
Because the life of every living creature is said to be in the blood, Genesis 9.4.
therefore some Expositours understand this clause thus, What profit is there in
my blood? etc. that is, What profit is there in my life? as if he should have
said, Of what avail will it be that I have lived hitherto, if I be now cut off,
when being settled in my kingdom I have more power to promote the cause of
religion, and to do good to thy people, then formerly? But doubtless, by his
blood here is meant his death; and that which he intends in these words is,
that if he should be cut off either by his enemies, or by Gods immediate hand,
he should not then be able to praise his name, as he should if his life were
prolonged; see the Note Psalm. 6.5. which is evident in the following clause,
shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth? that is, the truth of
thy promises, or thy faithfulness in performing thy promises? And it is like
he mentions this purposely to intimate his hope, that God would perform his
promise made to him concerning settling the kingdom upon him and his seed.

Verse. 11. Thou have put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.] That
is, Upon my prayer to thee, thou have turned my sorrow into joy. Thou have put
off my sackcloth, which they used to wear in times of great sorrow, especially
when with penitent hearts they humbled themselves before God to beg mercy at
his hands: and girded me with gladness, that is, with garments of joy; or
rather thou did compass me with gladness, giving me abundance of joy: as
Psalm. 18.32. thou have girded me with strength, that is, thou have made me very
strong.

Verse. 12. To the end my glory may sing praise to thee, etc.] See the Note Genesis
49.6.

PSALM XXXI.
Verse. 1. IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let me never be ashamed.] See the
Note Psalm. 25.2. Many Expositours are of opinion, that the occasion of
composing this Psalm was, David's distress when the men of Keilah were likely
to have delivered him up to Saul, and when immediately after that Saul had in a
manner hemmed him in, in the wilderness of Maon, 1 Samuel 23.12, 26: and indeed
many passages in the Psalm seem to favor this conjecture, as shall be noted in
the several places where it is so. But yet it is but a conjecture. Deliver me
in thy righteousness: See the Note Psalm. 5.8.

Verse. 2. Deliver me speedily.] This he adds because help would else come too
late. In 1 Samuel 23.26. it is said, David made haste to get away for fear of
Saul.

Verse. 3. For thy names sake lead me, and guide me.] That is, direct me in the
way wherein I should go, show me what I should do, and carry me on therein
with a supporting hand. Yea some think that he uses these two words, lead me
and guide me, (both in a manner of the same signification) to imply that he
desired Gods help, not only in his present streights, but likewise after that
still in all the difficulties he should fall into. See the Notes also 1 Samuel
12.22, and Psalm. 25.11.

Verse. 4. Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me, etc.] Such
as was that when the Ziphites observed the place where David hid himself, and
discovered it to Saul, 1 Samuel 23.19, etc. See the Note Psalm. 25.15.

Verse. 5. Into thine hand I commit my spirit, etc.] To wit, for the
preservation of my life; and however for the saving of my soul even in death it
self: as if he had said, Having no power to secure my self, I commit my soul,
and consequently my whole man, into thine hands, as confidently relying both on
thine almighty power, and wisdom, and fatherly care over me, and withal as
willingly resigning my self to be disposed of by thee, as thou art pleased.
Thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth; that is, thou have at other times
delivered me out of great dangers, which makes me with confidence now to rely
upon thee the God of truth, who art still the same thou have always been, and
never failest to perform thy promises: and in this David might have respect to
the promise made to him concerning the kingdom. But yet some understand this
clause of our Redemption by Christ; as if he had said, Thou have redeemed me to
thy self from eternal death, and therefore being thine, and purchased to thy
self by so great a price, I am resolved living or dying to rely upon thee.

Verse. 6. I have hated them that regard lying vanities,] That is, that do so
mind and esteem vain hopes, or any outward things whereon it is in vain for men
to hope, (as indeed they that hope in any thing but God, hope in lying
vanities, that will deceive them) that either they rely thereon themselves, or
would draw others to do so. Some, I know, would limit this to idols, (see the
Note 1 Kings 16.13.) others to soothsayers, to which in those East countries
they were much addicted. But it is better understood more generally.

Verse. 7. Thou have known my soul in adversities.] See the Note Psalm. 1.6.

Verse. 8. And have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy, etc.] As indeed
he was like to have been by the men of Keilah, 1 Samuel 23.7. Saul said, God has
delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, etc; and afterward by Saul in
the wilderness of Maon, verse. 26. Saul and his men compassed David and his men
round about to take them. For the next words, thou have set my feet in a large
room, see the Notes 2 Samuel 22.20, and Psalm. 4.2.

Verse. 9. Mine eye is consumed with grief, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 6.7: yea my
soul and my belly; that is, I am extremely weakened and decayed both in mind and
body; o^ by his soul may be meant his vital parts, and by his belly his inward
parts, or his whol^ body. Yet many by the word soul understand that power of
life which desires food; and by the belly, that part of the body which
concocteth the meat we eat; and so will have the meaning of the words to be,
that he had neither any appetite to eat, nor strength to concoct what he did
eat.

Verse. 10. For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing, etc.]
That is, my life is wasted, and my years hasten away to an end: my strength
fails because of mine iniquity; that is, because of my sin, or because of my
miseries and afflictions; for so the word iniquity is sometimes used in the
Scripture, as Genesis 19.15. which may seem here the more probable, because he
speaks here only of his sufferings: and my bones are consumed, see the Note Job
30.17.

Verse. 11. I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my
neighbors, etc.] That is, they despised and reproached me; or rather, they
counted it a reproach to them to own me, or to have any thing to do with me:
and a fear to mine acquaintance; that is, mine acquaintance were afraid to show
me any favor, or any countenance, as being scared by that which befell
Ahimelech and the other Priests that were slain with him, 1 Samuel 22.18. or at
least fearing that it would be a discredit and a disparagement to them: which
is more fully expressed in the next clause, they that did see me without fled
from me; that is, as fearing to be seen openly in my company; or as detesting
me for those foul crimes, which they here charged upon me, looking upon me as
one accursed of God. And thus too David implies his misery to have been the
greater, in that he was thus openly and in public despised.

Verse. 12. I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind, etc.] That is, in regard
of the love they have formerly shown to me, notwithstanding all the good that I
have done for the kingdom, I am in a manner now quite forgotten; because they
esteem me to be a lost man, of whom there is no hope, they now regard me not, I
am now to them as a dead man out of mind. And indeed of the dead Solomon says,
Eccles. 9.5. that the memory of them is forgotten; whence it is that the grave
is called Psalm. 88.12. the land of forgetfulness: and therefore too he adds, I
am like a broken vessel, that is, I am forgotten and quite disregarded, like an
earthen vessel, which being broken men cast away, and never mind it more,
because it cannot be mended again.

Verse. 13. For I have heard the slander of many, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 4.2.
Fear was on every side; that is, I was beset with fear, as being beset with
enemies on every side: yet it may be meant also of the fear of those that were
about him. It is in the Hebrew Magor missabib, an expression which from this
place Jeremy often uses in his prophecy, as Jer. 6.25, and 49.29, and in
diverse other places; and chap. 20.3, 4. he gave this for a Name to Pashur the
Priest, signifying that he should be a terror to himself, and to his friends
round about him.

Verse. 14. I said, Thou art my God.] To wit, though thou have sorely afflicted
me. See the Note Psalm. 16.2.

Verse. 15. My times are in thy hand, etc.] That is, The years of my life are in
thy power, and not in the power of mine enemies: Or rather it may be meant more
generally, of all the changes that could befall him (for to every thing there
is a season and a time, Eccles. 3.1.) to wit, that nothing could befall him,
whether good or evil, but by Gods providence; and thereupon he inferres, as
with reference to that he had said of his times being in Gods hand, deliver me
from the hand of mine enemies.

Verse. 16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, etc.] That is, Manifest thy
love and favor to me, who am indeed persecuted because I serve thee, by
delivering me from mine enemies. See the Note Numb. 6.25, 26.

Verse. 17. Let me not be ashamed, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 25.2. Let the wicked
be ashamed; see the Note Psalm. 6.10: and let them be silent in the grave; that
is, not able to say or do any thing against the righteous; see the Note 1 Samuel
2.9.

Verse. 18. Let the lying lips be put to silence, etc.] This may be meant not
only of his enemies slanders and flatteries (see the Note Psalm. 5.6.) but also
of their vain boastings and threatenings; as may appear by the following words,
which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous,
that is, against me and mine, whom they persecute causlesly: for the grievous
things spoken by them may be, not only their slanders, (which may be so
called, both because they prove often the cause of much mischief, and likewise
because it is so grievous to Gods righteous servants to have such foul crimes
charged upon them, see the Note 1 Kings 2.8.) but also their threatening of
grievous things they will do to them. And for those words, proudly and
contemptuously, see the Note Psalm. 12.3. Out of the high conceit that wicked
men have of their wisdom, etc. it proceeds that they contemn the righteous.

Verse. 19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee, etc.] Because of the following clause, which thou have wrought for
them that trust in thee, before the sons of men, many learned Expositours hold
that David speaks here only of Gods goodness to his people here in this world:
and that of this first it is said here, that it is laid up for them that fear
him, either 1. because Gods goodness to them is hidden under many afflictions,
and of the Lords withdrawing his help from them for a time, perhaps a long time
together, so that not only the men of the world discern no such thing, but even
the faithful themselves have often much ado to be assured of it; or 2.
because many outward blessings God keeps in store for them, laid up as a
treasure, which they do not at all times enjoy, though others be then openly
conferred upon them; or 3. because Gods goodness is chiefly manifested to them
in inward spiritual blessings, which cannot be outwardly discerned, as in the
graces of Gods spirit, and of that inward comfort they enjoy; of which that is
spoken Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden
manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written,
which no man knows, saving he that receives it; or rather 4. because it is
the peculiar treasure of the righteous that truly fear him: for though God
affords many outward mercies to all men whatsoever, yet there is this that is
peculiar to the righteous in the good he does for them, that he does it out of
a fatherly love to them, and that he causes all things to farther their
eternal salvation. And secondly, it is said that it is wrought for them that
trust in God, before the sons of men, because even when God hides himself from
his servants for a time, yet at last he is wont to manifest his love to them
so, by taking their part, and by delivering them out of troubles, and
otherwise, that their innocence and Gods precious esteem of them is manifest
hereby as it were to all the world. But I see no reason why it may not be
understood more generally, of all the good which God has allotted to be the
peculiar portion of his elect, and so may comprehend even that eternal bliss,
of which it is said that it is reserved in heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. and with
reference whereto Saint John says, 1 John 3.2. that it does not yet appear
what we shall be, and Saint Paul 1 Cor. 2.9. that eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, etc. the things which God has prepared for them that love him. For even
of the goodness of God thus largely taken it may be said, that it is laid up
for the righteous, and withal wrought for them before the sons of men, either
because it is first laid up in Gods eternal decree, and then in time
accomplished for them; or because it is kept in store for them, and in due time
conferred upon them; or because it is in part conferred, and in part reserved
for aftertimes.

Verse. 20. Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of
man, etc.] See the Notes Job 29.4, Psalm. 25.14, and 27.5. The presence of Gods
favor and grace, whereby he protects his servants, may be called the secret of
his presence, either because they are thereby hidden (as it were) in secret
from the rage of their enemies; or because this presence of Gods favor with
the righteous, especially in their sore afflictions, is not discerned by the
men of the world; whence it is that they are called Gods hidden ones, Psalm.
83.3. Thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues;
that is, from the contention of slaundering and reviling tongues, or from
tongues that cause contention, according to that of Solomon Prove. 15.1.
grievous words stir up anger.

Verse. 21. Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous kindness,
etc.] See the Note Psalm. 17.7. and for the following words, in a strong (or
fenced) city, the meaning is, that when he had no place to hide his head in,
but lay naked and open to the malice of his enemies, having no place of
shelter; yet through Gods protection he was kept as safe, as if he had been in
a fortified city. I know, some conceive that it was Keilah he speaks of, (which
indeed Saul called a town that has gates and bars, 1 Samuel 23.7.) namely, that
God had shown him mavelous kindness there, in that he revealed to him that
the inhabitants of that town would deliver him up to Saul: and others
understand it of Jerusalem, that God had shown him great kindness by settling
him after all his dangers in that strong city: yea some conceive, that it is
the Church that is here, in reference to Gods protection, termed a strong
city. But the first Exposition seems to me the best.

Verse. 22. For I said in mine have, I am cut off, etc.] It is said 1 Samuel
23.26. that when Saul with his army had in a manner compassed in David in the
wilderness of Maon, David made have to get away; and accordingly of this have
some understand this place: but I conceive it is rather meant of the rashness
and hastiness of his spirit, that apprehending his danger to be unavoidable,
on a sudden transported with fear, he said in his mind, what upon more
deliberation he could not think, namely, that God had cast him out of his sight.

PSALM XXXII.
The Title. A Psalm of David, Maschil.] Some say that Maschil was the name of
some musical Instrument, or some Song to the tune whereof this Psalm was to be
sung: But rather I conceive it is added to signify the matter of this Psalm,
and that it was composed to give instruction, according to the signification of
the word set in the margin, A Psalm of David giving instruction.

Verse. 1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.]
To wit, from the sight of God, by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, so
that the Lord looks upon him no more as lying under the guilt of his sin. And
the word covered seems to be used as in relation to the filthiness of sin,
making men loathsome in Gods sight. David having been long sorely oppressed
with the burden of his sins, and the fear of Gods wrath, breaks forth into this
patheticall expression concerning the blessedness of the man whose sins are
forgiven.

Verse. 2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in
whose spirit there is no guile.] By guile here may be meant all hypocrisy in
general; and then this last clause is added, that he is blessed also in whose
spirit there is no guile, because sincerity and unfeigned purity of heart is
the necessary effect of justification and remission of sins, and so they that
have truly obtained pardon do always manifest their justification by their
sanctification, even by their sincere endeavors to walk in all holiness and
righteousness before God. Or else it may be meant of that hypocrisy in
particular, whereby men are kept from turning unfeignedly to God, that they may
obtain remission of sins and reconciliation; as namely when men do vainly
embolden themselves against all fear of Gods wrath, though they be never so
profane, or when men beguile themselves with false flatteries, as by excusing
or extenuating their sins, or by trusting in the observation of any outward
rites which God requires in his worship, etc. In a word, whatever it be,
whereby those that do not humble themselves before God in the acknowledgement
of their sins do deceive themselves, and would as it were deceive God, that is
the guile here spoken of. And this, I conceive, indeed is principally intended;
and that David mentions this here out of a detestation of those false
flatteries, wherewith for a time he had deceived himself, and so put off his
repentance.

Verse. 3. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old; through my roaring all the
day long.] It is evident, I conceive, that by keeping silence here David meant
his not confessing his sins, because, as in opposition to this, it is said
verse. 5. that he did at length acknowledge his sins. And because in the
following words he says, that his bones waxed old through his roaring all the
day long, I conceive it as evident, that he intends hereby to show, that it was
whilst he was sorely terrified in conscience, and perhaps also under the heavy
pressure of some sickness, or some other outward affliction, that he kept
silence, and confessed not his sins to God. So that the meaning of the words is
this; When I kept silence, that is, As long as I forbear to go to God,
confessing my sin, and begging mercy at his hand, but did still dissemble and
conceal my sins, and sought ease otherways, my bones waxed old, that is, my
strength decayed, or my inward parts were pained and withered and parched; (see
the Note Job 30.17. he alludes to sores that corrupt and fester, whilst they
are concealed from the Surgeon) through my roaring all the day long, to wit,
by reason of the terrors of Gods wrath that were upon him; as if he had said,
though I powered forth my sorrow with cries, more like the roaring of a beast,
then the complaints of a reasonable man, neither that nor any thing else gave
me any ease, but rather increased my misery, as long as I neglected to
acknowledge my sins.

Verse. 4. For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me, etc.] To wit, in
terrors of conscience, and perhaps likewise in some grievous outward
affliction; see the foregoing Note: my moisture is turned into the drought of
summer; that is, my radical moisture is dried up, as the moisture of the earth
is dried up in the heat of summer: see the Note Psalm. 22.15.

Verse. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid,
etc.] David repeats it here thrice, and with three several expressions, that
at length he acknowledged his sins to God, thereby to imply how full his
confession was, and that he hid nothing from him. And again, by that word I
said in the third clause, I said I will confess my transgressions, the
freedom of his confession is also employed, namely, that after some
deliberation with himself he voluntarily resolved upon it, as believing
assuredly that he should find mercy with God: and thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin; that is, thou did remit the punishment of my sin, (for so the word
iniquity is sometimes taken, see the Note Psalm. 31.10.) thou did withdraw the
stroke of thine hand that was upon me; or thou forgavest the evil and guilt
that was in my sin, that is, thou did assure me that thou had pardoned it,
and so my torment was presently eased.

Verse. 6. For this, etc.] That is, say some Expositours, for the pardon of sin.
But rather we must understand it thus: For this, that is, Because thou do so
readily forgive those that confess their sins, and seek to thee for mercy; or
because thou have dealt thus graciously with me: therefore shall every one that
is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found; that is, whilst
yet there is grace offered, before death, (for after death there is no seeking
for mercy, yea indeed at the hour of death men are hardly won to seek God in
a right manner) or before thou have pronounced an irrevocable sentence against
them, or before thou do withdraw thy spirit and grace from them, even whilst
they feel their hearts stirred within them to fly to the Lord for mercy, and so
they seek the Lord with all their hearts; for then is the Lord near at hand to
hear men's prayers, Isa. 66.2. Jer. 29.13. whereas if they quench these motions
of Gods spirit, the Lord perhaps may resolve never so to strive with them any
more. Surely in the floods of great waters, that is, in the greatest troubles,
see 2 Samuel 22.17. they shall not come nigh unto him, that is, to overwhelm, or
hurt him: so far shall he be from being punished in wrath for his sins, that
even when there is in the place where he lives a deluge of overflowing
calamities, though he may be in very desperate dangers, God will secure him.
And this therefore David applies to himself in the next verse, or proves it
from his own example.

Verse. 7. Thou art my hiding place, etc.] See the foregoing Note, and likewise
the Notes Psalm. 17.8, and 27.5: thou shall compass me about with songs of
deliverance; that is, by affording me many deliverances on all sides, thou
shall give me occasion to sing many songs of praise unto thee. It may also
imply, that God would give to those that were about him, or to the whole people
of God, occasion to praise him, both on his and their own behalf.

Verse. 8. I will instruct thee, etc.] Some take this to be inserted, as Gods
answer to the profession David had made in the foregoing verse of his
confidence in God; as if he had said, Thou may well rely upon me, for I will
instruct thee, etc. (see the Note Psalm. 25.4.) I will guide thee with mine eye,
that is, by keeping a watchful provident eye over thee; or by discovering to
thee my watchful care over thee, which shall put thee in mind to avoid every
evil way, as Christ counseled Peter, by casting his eye upon him, Luke 22.61.
But I rather take these to be still the words of David. As Psalm. 51.13. upon
his own repentance David promises to stir up others to repent too, Then will I
teach transgressors thy ways, etc. so here likewise, having repented, and
obtained pardon from God, and found great comfort therein, he undertakes to
instruct others, and to persuade them likewise, directing his speech as to
every man apart by himself, I will instruct thee, etc. I will guide thee with
mine eye, that is, by that which I have seen, and whereof I have had experience
in my self; or rather, by keeping a watchful eye, and looking to thee with
much solicitous care, as indeed Gods people ought to watch over one another.

Verse. 9. Be ye not as the horse or mule, that have no understanding, etc.] As
if he had said* Hearken to my counsel, and by my example be brought to repent,
and to turn unto the Lord: Be not like brute beasts that will not be ordered by
words, whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near to
hurt thee, to wit, to bite or kick thee; implying, that God had also ways to
tame men, if they would be stubborn against him; which are the sorrows
mentioned in the following words.

Verse. 10. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, etc.] As if he had said, If
wicked men will not repent, and turn unto the Lord, their consciences will be
often galled with the apprehensions of Gods wrath; and besides, many outward
plagues will the Lord bring upon them; (the bit and bridle wherewith God
subdues such refractory spirits) and at last they must expect the weeping and
wailing of hell: but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him
about; that is, he shall have comforts and blessings on all sides, and shall be
preserved from all dangers, the Lords protection compassing him as with a
shield, Psalm. 5.12.

Verse. 11. Be glad in the Lord, etc.] Hereby he implies what exceeding joy
follows upon faith, when men are thereby reconciled unto God, and are assured
of the pardon of their sins: for of that he speaks in this whole Psalm.

PSALM XXXIII.
Verse. 1. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, etc.] Thus as the foregoing
Psalm ended, so this begins: for praise is comely for the upright, to wit, in
regard they above others have such special and abundant cause to praise God,
so that no employment is fitter for them; as likewise because they alone do
truly know God, and heartily desire to glorify his name, and so from them it
is acceptable with God; whereas when wicked men, that have no taste of Gods
goodness, do undertake to praise God, they do but profane Gods holy name, and
therefore God abhors their praises: see Psalm. 50.16.

Verse. 2. Praise the Lord with harp.] This Instrument is first mentioned,
wherein David did much delight, and in the playing whereon he was eminently
skillful, 1 Samuel 16.18. It is called Psalm. 81.2. the pleasant harp.

Verse. 3. Sing unto him a new song.] This is required, either to imply, that to
him that attentively considers the works of God, there will still be occasion
of composing new songs of praise; or rather to imply with what fervency and
cheerfulness of spirit he desired they should praise God, because upon
occasions of unusual joy they were wont to compose new songs, and to fit them
with some rare and exquisite tune, and so they were sung and heard with the
more earnestness and delight. Yet some say, that by a new song is meant a song
that should never grow stale and out of date in the Church, where the people of
God do continually enjoy manifold blessings conferred upon them in Christ.

Verse. 4. For the word of the Lord is right, etc.] That is, All his commands
concerning the government of the world are just and equal, every way right and
unreprovable: and all his works are done in truth, that is, sincerely, without
any guile; and faithfully, according to what he has promised or spoken to his
people. Some indeed understand the first clause of the written word, to wit,
that that word of the Lord is right, that is, that what he has promised, yea
all that he has spoken therein, is faithful and true, sincere and without
deceit, yea every way blameless: of which see also the Note Psalm. 19.8. But
the first Exposition is the best, as agreeing with that which follows, verse. 6,
and 9.

Verse. 5. He loves righteousness and judgment.] That is, he loves to do
justice and judgment.

Verse. 6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, etc.] See the Notes
Genesis 1.1, 2, 3, etc. and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth, that
is, by his command: see the Note also Genesis 2.1. Yet some conceive that the
three persons of the holy Trinity are here severally mentioned.

Verse. 7. He gathers the waters of the sea together, as an heap, etc.] This
is meant of that gathering of the waters of the sea together in the first
creation, see the Note Genesis 1.9, and Job 38.8, 9, 10: yet because they are
still kept in the hollow places of the earth by the same almighty power, by
which they were at first disposed of there, it is expressed in the present
tense, He gathers the waters, etc. he lays up the depth in storehouses.

Verse. 10. He makes the devices of the people of none effect.] Though whole
nations do combine together, and set themselves to bring any thing to pass,
God can easily cross them.

Verse. 14. From the place of his habitation he looks upon all the inhabitants
of the earth.] So he calls the sons of men, as by way of contempt, to imply
the baseness even of the greatest of them, in comparison of the Lord, whose
throne is in heaven.

Verse. 15. He fashioneth their hearts alike, etc.] That is, all men's hearts,
none excepted, one as well as another. And this is ascribed to God, 1. because
he it is that creates the souls and spirits of men in their first conception,
with all the several faculties thereof, see the Note Numb. 16.22; and 2.
because he orders and disposes of their hearts and all the motions thereof,
as it is said of the kings heart Prove. 21.1. he turns it whithersoever he
will. And this is here expressed thus to imply, that therefore God must needs
exactly know all men, they being his workmanship, yea even the thoughts and
intentions of their hearts, and much more their works, which is expressed in
the next clause, he considers all their works.

Verse. 18. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, etc.] See
the Note Psalm. 11.7.

Verse. 20. Our soul waits for the Lord, etc.] This he speaks in the name of
the whole Church, to wit, that they would with all their souls wait upon God
for help in all their troubles.

PSALM XXXIV.
The Title. A Psalm of David when he changed his behavior before Abimelech,
etc. To wit, feigning himself mad; which circumstance seems here to be
expressed, because this tended much to the magnifying of Gods grace, that
notwithstanding his infirmity therein, yet God was pleased to deliver him; see
the Notes 1 Samuel 21.10, 11, 13. This is also one of the Alphabeticall Psalms,
his exceeding joy causing him to compose this Psalm with the more exquisite
art; but for this see the Note Psalm. 25.1.

Verse. 1. I will bless the Lord at all times, etc.] That is, as long as I
live, both in prosperity and adversity; I will never forget this wonderful
deliverance. And thus he ascribes his escape, not to that which he did, but to
the providence of God; which is more clearly expressed afterward verse. 4.

Verse. 2. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord, etc.] That is, from my very
soul I will boast of the Lords favor and goodness to me: the humble shall
hear thereof, and be glad; that is, they shall hear of my praising the Lord,
and out of love to God shall rejoice, that his name is so exalted: or rather,
they shall hear of my deliverance, and so shall be glad, both on my behalf,
that God has so preserved me, and reserved me still to sit on the throne of
Israel; and on their own behalf, as encouraged by mine example, cheerfully to
expect the like deliverance from God. For who are meant by the humble here, see
in the Note Job 22.29.

Verse. 3. O magnify the Lord with me, etc.] This may be spoken to all the
faithful in general, or in particular to the humble mentioned in the
foregoing verse

Verse. 4. He heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.] And indeed when he
was discovered and brought to Achish, he could not but be surprised with diverse
fears: as, lest Achish should slay him, and perhaps with great tortures, to
satisfy his revenge; or lest he should deliver him up into Saul's hands, whom
he knew now to be his enemy; and many such like.

Verse. 5. They looked unto him, and were lightened, etc.] This he speaks of
those, of whom he had said before verse. 2. the humble shall hear thereof, and
be glad; they (says he) looked unto him, to wit, unto God in prayer, with
faith and hope waiting upon God, see the Note Psalm. 5.3. and were lightened,
see the Note 2 Samuel 22.29. It may also be read, as it is in the margin, they
looked unto him, and they flowed unto him; and then the meaning is, that
encouraged by the Lords delivering him, they did in great numbers, and with
much earnestness, alacrity and boldness, not doubting of good success, flee
unto the Lord for succor: and their faces were not ashamed, see the Note Psalm.
25.2.

Verse. 6. This poor man cried, etc.] This some take, as spoken by David of
himself; and indeed very frequently in the Psalms David terms himself poor and
afflicted, as Psalm. 40.17. But I am poor and needy, etc. and so in many other
places: yet rather they are the words of those, of whom he had spoken in the
former verse, that admiring the goodness of God in David's deliverance, do here
allege it for their own encouragement. This poor man (say they) cried, and the
Lord heard him; this poor persecuted man, destined to death, and despised of
all men, he cried, and the Lord heard and delivered him.

Verse. 8. O taste and see that the Lord is good, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, Make trial, rest and rely upon the Lord alone, and see whether
you shall not find that God is very good to them that trust in him: and indeed
the faithful find much sweetness in it, when they can cast all their cares
upon God. But rather it is meant of observing the proofs that God gives of his
goodness, such as was that of Gods delivering him out of the hands of Achish;
O taste and see that the Lord is good, that is, Mark and observe it by
experience, that being affected therewith (as you must needs be, if you be not
senseless and stupid) it may yield much pleasure and delight unto your souls:
see 1 Pet. 2.3. Blessed is the man that trusts in him, to wit, because God
will be sure to do good to such.

Verse. 9. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints, etc.] This is prescribed as the
means, whereby men may make sure that God will be in a special manner good
unto them: and more particularly the aim of these words is, to persuade men,
not to take any other course to provide for themselves, as by deceiving and
oppressing others; which may appear by the following clause, for there is no
want to them that fear him, God will give them what they desire, or give them a
contented mind without it.

Verse. 10. The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger, etc.] This many
understand of rich and great oppressors, men ravenous as lions: see the Note
Job 4.10. But there is no reason why it may not be as well understood of the
beasts themselves, to wit, that young lions, that are strongest and most
ravenous, shall sooner be hunger-bitten, then they that seek the Lord, that is,
that fear God, shall want any thing that is good for them. See the Note Psalm
22.26.

Verse. 11. Come, ye children, hearken unto me, etc.] This expression David
uses, either as a Prince, because such they usually styled fathers, see the
Note 2 Kings 5.13. or rather as a prophet, because such were esteemed
spiritual fathers; and therefore the prophets disciples were called the sons
of the prophets, 2 Kings 2.3. and Christ called his disciples children, Joh.
13.33. Little children, yet a little while I am with you; and so did Paul the
Galatians, whom he had converted, Gal. 4.19. and that to make known how dearly
he loved them, thereby to render them the more willing to hear and embrace his
counsel: Or else it may be spoken as in the name of God, as knowing that he
spoke and wrote by the inspiration of Gods spirit, according to that 2 Samuel
23.2. The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue.

Verse. 12. What man is he that desires life, and loves many days, that he
may see good?] That is, that he may enjoy a blessed and happy life both here
and hereafter: see the Notes Job 7.7, and Psalm. 21.4. It is expressed by way of
interrogation, to imply, that if any man do really desire this, they must take
the way that is here afterward prescribed; and how strange it was that all men
should pretend a desire of this, and yet so few should really desire it, as is
evident because so few take the right way to attain it. This with the four
following verses is alleged by Peter, 1 Pet. 3.10, etc.

Verse. 13. Keep thy tongue from evil, etc.] Though all evil-speaking is here
forbidden, yet more especially that, whereby a man deceives or wrongs his
neighbor (for still he seeks to make good, that he that fears God shall be
well provided for, and needs not use any unlawful means to help himself) as is
clear in the following clause, and thy lips from speaking guile: and that
expression, keep thy tongue, implies, how slippery the tongue is, and prone to
offend, if it be not with much watchfulness restrained.

Verse. 14. Depart from evil, and do good.] Though this also may be understood
generally of all good and evil, yet more particularly it is meant of avoiding
the doing of any injury to our neighbors, and seeking to do them all the good
we can: and by joining these two together we are taught, that as it is not
enough barely to abstain from wronging any body; so neither will God be
pleased, if we defraud or oppress some, and then with goods so gotten do good
to others. And besides that expression, Depart from evil, may imply both, 1.
that men will be continually followed with temptations to evil, which therefore
they must most carefully avoid; 2. that the purity of man consists, rather in
abandoning the evil which we have done, then in keeping our selves pure from
evil.

Verse. 15. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, etc.] Because they that
thus walk in the fear of the Lord, not daring to return evil for evil, but
making peace with those that are enemies to peace, may seem likely to be
exposed to many injuries; this that follows is added for their encouragement.
For this first clause, see the Note Psalm. 11.7.

Verse. 18. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, etc.] That
is, whose hearts are even broken, so that they are no other then as dead men,
by reason of the extremity of their miseries and sorrows; and then withal
those that are greatly humbled hereby and afflicted in spirit, through grief
and fear of Gods displeasure because of their sins.

Verse. 20. He keeps all his bones; not one of them is broken.] The meaning
is, that God preserves the whole man, every member of his body; and much more
then his soul. Yet this must be understood with subordination to the Cross;
God will preserve his bones, unless the breaking of any one of them may tend
to the eternal good of his soul.

Verse. 21. Evil shall slay the wicked, etc.] That is, His sin shall destroy
him; or more particularly, The evil he practices against the righteous shall
prove his own ruin: yet some understand it of the evil of punishment, to wit,
that the wicked man shall, by the judgments that God brings upon him, be
irrecoverably cut off: and they that hate the righteous shall be desolate, or,
shall be guilty. See the Note Psalm. 5.10.

Verse. 22. The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants.] See the Note Psalm.
31.5.

PSALM XXXV.
Verse. 1. PLead my cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me, etc.] To wit,
who would gladly live peaceably with them, but that they are so implacably
contentious, and will not let me be quiet. In this first clause David desires,
that the Lord would maintain his innocence against those that falsely accused
him; in the next, fight against them that fight against me, that he would
withstand those that did unjustly persecute him. And thus he does engage God in
his quarrel, as knowing that the cause was Gods as well as his, who had chosen
and anointed him to be king.

Verse. 2. Take hold of shield and buckler, etc.] That is, either shield or
buckler, therewith to defend me; that they that presume so much upon their
arms may find, that there is a God who is armed with such power for the
defense of his servants, that against that their arms shall nothing avail them.

Verse. 3. Stop the way against them that persecute me, etc.] That is, that they
may not flee away and escape out of thine hands; or rather, that they may not
come at me to hurt me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation; that is, make me
to know by experience, that thou have undertaken my defense; or, assure me
inwardly by thy spirit, that thou will save me from mine enemies. And it may
well be that in this expression he alludes to those, that intending to relieve
a place besieged, are wont by messages to assure them beforehand, that they
will come to their succor.

Verse. 4. Let them be turned back, etc.] That is, Let them be put to a
shameful flight; or, Let them be disappointed of their purposes, and not be
able to go on forward with the evil they have plotted against me.

Verse. 5. Let them be as chaff before the wind, etc.] As if he had said, As
they have driven me up and down from one place to another, so let them be
scattered and flee before thee; or let them be ever in a restless condition,
driven up and down with the inward terrors and affrightments of their own
minds and consciences, not thinking themselves safe in any place: see the Note
also Job 21.18. and let the angel of the Lord chase them; as if he should have
said, Yea in stead of the wind, let an angel, of far more force and might then
the mightiest wind, pursue them so that they may not have any breathing time.
And this may be meant either of a good or an evil angel, as we see in Saul 1 Samuel 16.14.

Verse. 6. Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the angel of the Lord
persecute them.] That is, Let the way, whereby fleeing they seek to escape, be
fearful, dangerous and troublesome; as if he had said, Let them not know what
course to take, nor be able any way to escape, but fall at last under the
stroke of thine avenging hand. Whilst a man may go leasurely, he may go
safely, though it be in the dark, and in a slippery way; but being forced to
flee in such a way by the secret pursuit of an angel, what hope can there be of
escaping? That this is the meaning of these words we may see by the like
expression Jer. 23.12. Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways
in the darkness; they shall be driven on and fall therein.

Verse. 8. Let destruction come upon him at unawares, etc.] That is, against him
that persecutes me, indefinitely, see verse. 3. or it may be meant particularly
of Saul.

Verse. 10. All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which
deliverest the poor? etc.] This he speaks as in reference to that which he had
found by his own experience. That expression which he uses, All my bones shall
say, Lord, who is like unto thee? etc. some understand, as if he had said thus;
I who am at present quite consumed, nothing in a manner but skin and bones,
shall notwithstanding extol thy great name. But doubtless it is rather an
hyperbolicall expression of the strong desires he should have to set forth Gods
praise, if he vouchsafe to take his part against his enemies, All my bones
shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee? as if he should have said, Not my soul
only, but my whole man, all the members of my body, yea all my inward parts
will be so affected with thy goodness, and so inflamed with a desire to praise
thee, that my very bones, though senseless, could they speak, would break forth
into thy praises, and cry out, Lord, who is like unto thee? To which purpose
there are many expressions elsewhere, not much unlike to this: as that Psalm.
84.2. My heart and my flesh cries out for the living God; and that Psalm. 5.8.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice; and that Job 31.20. If his loins have not blessed me, etc. concerning
which see the Note there.

Verse. 12. They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul.] To wit,
as seeking to take away my life, whereby the soul is stripped or spoiled of the
body; or, as seeking to deprive me of all that might be any help or joy or
comfort to me; as to spoil me of all my goods, to drive me from my country,
and from the presence of my God in his worship and ordinances.

Verse. 13. But as for me, when they were sick, etc.] and consequently when they
were in any other misery, my clothing was sackcloth; I humbled my soul with
fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom: concerning which last
clause, there are many different Expositions, and diverse of them seem equally
probable. For some conceive that these words imply his perseverance in praying
for them, my prayer returned into mine own bosom; as if he had said, I found
my self still as mindful of them, as earnest to call upon God for them, as
ever, and so was ready still to renew my prayers for them again and again upon
all opportunities. Secondly, others think that David hereby intended to signify
the sincerity of his prayers, to wit, that there went nothing out of his lips
when he prayed, but his heart was affected accordingly, and so what he desired
for them, he desired it sincerely from his very soul. Thirdly, others take it
thus, that if his prayer prevailed not for them, yet it brought back a blessing
upon himself, God did recompense it into his bosom; at least his heart was
replenished with comfort thereby. Fourthly, others understand it of the same
blessings, that either he desired that of God for his enemies, which he could
be glad might be done to himself; or that God did that for him, which he did
beg of God for his enemies (both which do imply how sincerely he prayed for
them:) the like whereto we find Psalm. 79.12. Render unto our neighbors
sevenfold into their bosom, etc. And fifthly, others say it is meant of his
praying for them in secret; which may be alleged as a clear proof that he did
it sincerely, as truly grieving for their misery, and desiring their recovery,
and not for ostentation or making show of that which was not in his heart. And
indeed as they are said to laugh in their bosom (or, as we say, in their
sleeve) that rejoice in secret, but do not show it openly; so they may be said
to mourn or pray in their bosom, that do it secretly, no body taking notice of
any such thing: which may also seem the more probable, because this word (
bosom) does often in the Scripture signify secrecy, as Prove. 21.14. A gift in
secret pacifyeth anger, and a reward in the bosom strong wrath; and Psalm.
89.50. I do bear in my bosom the reproach of all the mighty people. But the
third and fourth of these Expositions, I think, are most agreeable to our
Translation.

Verse. 15. But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves
together, etc.] To wit, to rejoice and triumph together at my troubles, and to
consult and bandy together to further mine utter ruin: yea the abjects
gathered themselves together against me; that is, the scumme of the people: and
I knew it not; which is added to imply, either his integrity, in that he never
suspected any such thing, as not being conscious to himself of any cause that
he had given them to use him so; or his danger, in that not knowing their evil
purposes, he was the less able to prevent them; or their dissembling and
fawning upon him at the same time, which made him fearlesse of any such plots
that they had against him. They did tear me, and ceased not, to wit, with their
scoffs and calumnies and reproaches: which agrees with that Matthew. 7.6. Give
not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine;
least they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.

Verse. 16. With hypocritical mockers in feasts, etc.] This is meant either of
Saul's proud courtiers, who when they sat gorging themselves at their full
feasts, could rail against poor David, and seek his death; or else of those
court parasites, or base scurrilous jesters, that for the filling of their
bellies would say any thing against David, to please those that entertained
them: they gnashed upon me with their teeth, to wit, as if they would eat me.

Verse. 17. Lord, how long will thou look on? etc.] That is, only look on, and
not come in to my help? rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from
the lions; see the Notes Psalm. 22.20, 21.

Verse. 19. Neither let them wink with the eye, that hate me without a cause.]
To wit, by way of scoffing and rejoicing at my misery: for this may be
expressed by winking; whence is that Prove. 10.10. He that winketh with the eye,
causes sorrow.

Verse. 20. They devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the
land.] That is, that would fain have lived quietly and peaceably, though the
contrary be pretended, that we are the great disturbers of the kingdoms peace.

Verse. 21. Yea they opened their mouth wide against me, etc.] See the Note Job
16.10.

Verse. 22. This thou have seen, O Lord, etc.] This is spoken as in opposition
to that triumphing of his enemies at his misery, mentioned in the foregoing
verse, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it: as if he had said, Whilst mine enemies
rejoice in seeing my miseries, my comfort is, that thou, Lord, have seen them
too; though thou have suffered them to go on, as if thou did not see them,
yet I know well that thou have seen both my troubles, and their malicious
practices and insultations over me. Keep not silence: see the Note Psalm. 28.1.

Verse. 24. Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness.] To wit,
whereby thou art wont to plead the cause of the innocent against those that
oppress them: see the Note Psalm. 26.1.

Verse. 26. Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together, that rejoice
at mine hurt, etc.] As if he should have said, As they gathered themselves
together, verse. 15, to insult over me, and to plot mischief against me; so let
them be confounded together: implying, that God was able as with one blow to
overwhelm them all together with confusion, though they were never so many. As
for the following words, let them be clothed with shame, see the Note Job 8.22.

Verse. 27. Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my righteous cause,
etc.] That is, Let those that favor me, though they be not able to help me, be
glad both on my behalf, and likewise through experience they shall have thereby
of thy readiness to help the oppressed: yea, let them say continually, Let the
Lord be magnifyed, etc. And this he covertly opposes to his enemies exalting
themselves; as desiring that God might be exalted, maugre their pride and
lifting up themselves above his people.

PSALM XXXVI.
The Title. A Psalm of David the servant of the Lord.] So he styles himself
here, because God had anointed him to serve him as king in the government of
the kingdom of Israel; and in the confidence hereof he seeks to God in this
Psalm for help against his wicked enemies. Yet some conceive it is rather,
because being to set forth herein the profaneness of Atheistical wretches,
that would not be subject to God, and yet flourished, whilst the godly were in
trouble, he would hereby imply, that for all this he would be, and rejoiced to
profess himself to be, the servant of the Lord.

Verse. 1. The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is
no fear of God before his eyes.] That is, His wicked life does testify to me
within my heart, from the wickedness of his life it seems to me, or I do
certainly conclude, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. And this last
clause is alleged by the Apostle Romans 3.18. to prove the sinful and corrupt
disposition of all natural men.

Verse. 2. For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, etc.] To wit, by
persuading himself, upon false deceitful grounds, that what he does is not
evil; or that however no evil shall befall him thereby, he shall escape well
enough; or by applauding himself for doing those things wherein he pleases
himself, though he does displease God, out of a brutish stupidity and contempt
of God, until his iniquity be found to be hateful, to wit, by the wrath of
God that it brings upon him: or the meaning of this clause may be, that by his
so flattering himself, he is found to be hateful, either because this
applauding of themselves in their wickedness is to all men, that are not
desperately Atheistical, a most hateful thing; or because by thus emboldening
themselves, they proceed to such degrees of wickedness, that at length they
become detestable both to God and man.

Verse. 3. The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit, etc.] That is, they
tend to iniquity and deceit: he has left off to be wise, and to do good; that
is, he refuses all instruction, and suppresseth the very light of nature in
him, whereby men are enabled to know what is good and what is evil; and so
never minds the doing of that which is good, but rather gives over the doing of
that good which at first he did, though with a false and unsound heart. Yet
some understand this still of the words whereby the wicked man flattereth and
deceives himself in his evil ways, whereby he comes at last to be given over
to a reprobate sense, so that he makes no difference between good and evil.

Verse. 4. He devises mischief upon his bed, etc.] Which implies, both that he
is violently bent upon evil, in that he will break himself of his rest, that he
may contrive mischief; and that his own wicked heart is the chief cause of it,
in that of his own accord he meditates evil, when he has no outward enticement
or evil example to draw him thereto: he sets himself in a way that is not
good; he is resolved to run on in his unwarrantable ways: he abhors not
evil; to wit, no evil whatsoever; though he may not be guilty of every sin, yet
he does not avoid it because he abhorres it.

Verse. 5. Thy mercy (O Lord) is in the heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches
unto the clouds.] It is said Psalm. 57.10. thy mercy is great unto the heavens,
and Psalm. 108.4. above the heavens; but the meaning of all these expressions is
the same, namely, that the mercy and faithfulness of God, in making good what
he has spoken, are infinite, and above our reach and understanding, and all
the creatures in heaven and earth do declare the same. Some conceive that this
is inserted here, as by way of admiring that God should bear with, and do good
to such Atheistical wretches, as these he had now spoken of. But rather the
drift of these words is, to declare David's assurance, that notwithstanding all
this horrid impiety of so many desperate wretches, yet he knew well that God
was in the midst of all these confusions infinitely good and merciful and
just; as is farther expressed in the following verse.

Verse. 6. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains, etc.] That is, it is
firm and unmovable; or rather, agreeably to those expressions in the former
verse, it is infinitely high and great, above our reach, or eminently
conspicuous that all men may see it: thy judgments are a great deep; that is,
thy just and righteous dealings in the government of the world are
incomprehensible and past finding out; or they are very great, as the ocean,
being manifest above and beneath, yea in every place, which way soever we cast
our eyes.

Verse. 7. How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! etc.] Some understand
this likewise, and that which follows in the two next verses, of the
kindness which God shows to all the creatures. But rather from the kindness
of God to all the creatures he inferres here, that his loving kindness to his
children must needs be far more excellent. Therefore the children of men put
their trust under the shadow of thy wings; therefore thy people, (poor sinful
frail creatures) however they see the wicked triumph, do securely cast
themselves upon thy fatherly providence: see the Note Psalm. 17.8.

Verse. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house,
etc.] That is, with abundance of the choicest blessings, both temporal,
spiritual and eternal, which thou have stored up for them that are of thy
household and family. Thus, I conceive, these words may be generally taken: only
then we must remember, that earthly blessings can only be said to satisfy Gods
servants, in that they enjoy them as pledges of Gods fatherly love to them, and
providence over them. Yet, I conceive, it is chiefly meant of spiritual and
heavenly blessings: as 1. that they shall be refreshed and comforted, even to
the full satisfaction of their souls, and to the rendering of them contented
with their condition in other regards, whatever it be, with the graces and
comforts wrought in them by the word and spirit of God, and especially the
clear manifestation of his love and favor to them thereby; and so this may be
termed the fatness of Gods house, in relation to the Tabernacle, or in
relation to heaven, because the righteous in these joys of Gods spirit have as
it were a taste of the joys of heaven beforehand: and 2. that they shall be
abundantly satisfied with that fullness of joy and glory they shall have in
heaven, Gods dewlling place, so that they shall not hunger nor thirst any more,
nor desire any thing but what they there enjoy. And thou shall make them drink
of the river of thy pleasures; that is, thou shall yield them a constant
never-failing supply of those pleasures which thou only can give, or which
from thee shall successively flow in unto their souls. And this also must be
understood, as the former clause, of all the comforts which God affords his
people, both in this life, and that which is to come; but especially of those
which they enjoy by the light of Gods countenance, which (as by these
expressions David would imply) are as meat and drink unto the faithful.

Verse. 9. For with thee is the fountain of life, etc.] This seems to be added
in reference to the foregoing words, and thou shall make them drink of the
river of thy pleasures; for to make good this, David affirms here, that God is
the fountain of life, both because he has life in and of himself, and because
all the life that is in the creature, both temporal, spiritual and eternal,
flows from him, as rivers from their fountains, and so shall for ever, he being
an ever-springing fountain of living waters, that can never be drawn dry. And
because God by his spirit does work that life of faith and grace, which is the
spiritual life of his people, in relation thereto David might say, with thee
is the fountain of life. However, the following clause must accordingly be
understood, and in thy light we shall see light; to wit, though partly of that
light of life wherewith all men are enlightened from God, yet more especially
1. of the spiritual enlightening of Gods people here in this world; In thy
light, that is, by thine enlightening of us, and by the light of thy
countenance shining upon us, we shall see light, that is, we shall enjoy all
saving knowledge, comfort and joy; or by thy bringing of us truly to know thee,
we shall certainly enjoy true bliss and happiness: and 2. of their being
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light and life eternal; In thy
light we shall see light, that is, in thee, who art the true light, and the
fountain of light, we shall see thee who art that light inaccessible; (thus
some understand these words, because whereas here we see God only in his works
and word, by faith, and not by sight, as through a glass, darkly, in heaven we
shall see him in himself, face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12, and that not by the help
of any medium, as we see the Sun mediately by the air, but immediately in and
by himself) or else, in and by the light of thy glory, filling and transforming
us, we shall be made capable of beholding thee, who art the true light, face to
face, and so shall enjoy thy presence in glory for evermore.

Verse. 11. Let not the foot of pride, etc.] Having in the foregoing verse
prayed for the faithful in general, O continue thy loving kindness unto them
that know thee, etc. here, as reckoning himself one of that number, he adds,
Let not the foot of pride come against me; that is, let not proud men invade
me, or let them not be able to come at me, or trample upon me: and let not the
hand of the wicked remove me; that is, let them not be able to beat me off from
my confidence in thee, and from that way of truth and holiness wherein I have
hitherto walked; or, let them not put me to flight, or drive me from my
country, and the place of Gods worship. See the Notes Psalm. 11.1, and 13.4.

Verse. 12. There are the workers of iniquity fallen, etc.] To wit, when in
their pride they thought to invade me. See the Note Psalm. 14.5.

PSALM XXXVII.
The Title. A Psalm of David.] And composed it was by him in his old age, as is
clear verse. 25. I have been young, and now am old. It is another Alphabeticall
Psalm, concerning which see Note Psalm. 25.1; only there are here two verses
allowed to a letter, unless in four verses, where there is but one verse to a
letter, as in the other before.

Verse. 1. Fret not thy self because of evil doers, etc.] That is, as it is
expressed verse. 7. because they prosper in their ways; vex not thy self for
this, either by murmuring against God, or grudging against them.

Verse. 2. For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, etc.] That is, God
shall suddenly destroy them, as it were with one blow, as the grass is mown
down with one stroke of the sithe.

Verse. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, etc.] As if he should have said, Be
not drawn by the prosperity of wicked men to do as they do, but do you trust
in God, and do that which is good in his sight; so shall thou dwell in the
land, etc. that is, thou shall long dwell quietly and safely in the land which
God has given thee, without danger of being cut off or cast out. And this too
was to the Israelites, inhabiting the land of Canaan, a pledge of life eternal.

Verse. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord.] As if he had said, Whilst wicked
men delight themselves in their wicked ways, and outward prosperity, do thou
delight thy self in God, living by faith in him, as the fountain of all good.
See the Note also Job 22.26.

Verse. 5. Commit thy way unto the Lord.] That is, By faith and prayer cast all
thy affairs, and all the passages of thy life upon the Providence of God,
resigning all to his will, and waiting patiently for what he will do.

Verse. 6. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noonday.] That is, Though thy righteousness may be obscured
for a time, by the calumnies and false accusations of wicked men, or by the
heavy afflictions thou may undergo, wherein God may seem to deal with thee
as if thou were a wicked man; yet as certainly as the morning-light does at
last break forth, and dispell the darkness of the night, and so shines by
degrees brighter and brighter unto the perfect day, so certainly shall the Lord
cause thy righteousness manifestly to appear, either by discovering some way
or other the falsnesse of their slanders, and convincing men inwardly of it;
or by the rich blessings wherewith God shall lade thee, thereby testifying his
love to thee, and the high esteem that he has of thee: so that hereby, and
withal by his punishing the wicked that have flourished for a time, thy
righteousness shall appear as clearly as the morning-light, yea by degrees it
shall become as manifest as the Sun at noonday. And as confidently therefore
may thou expect that thus it shall be with thee, as men in the night do
expect the breaking forth of the day; if not here, yet at least in the life
that is to come; for, then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the
kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13.43. Your life is hid with Christ in God
(says the Apostle Col. 3.3, 4.) When Christ, who is our life, shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory. As for the word judgment, see the
Note Job. 27.2.

Verse. 7. Rest in the Lord, etc.] Or, as it is Psalm. 4.4. Be still, patiently
and quietly waiting upon God.

Verse. 8. Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil.] That is, In any wise be
sure that you fret not so, as thereby to be drawn to take those courses that
the wicked take, hoping by that means to be in the same prosperous condition
with them; or so as thereby to be overborn in your fretting to sin against God,
as by murmuring against his providence, or being any way injurious to them, etc.

Verse. 9. Those that wait upon the Lord, etc.] That is, that in their
afflictions and troubles do depend upon God for help, they shall inherit the
earth: for 1. the faithful only are by right of adoption through Christ the
lawful heirs of all things; 2. they only enjoy what they have by reason of
that right with true comfort and peace; 3. they are sure in time to be provided
for with whatsoever is good for them; and 4. though the wicked seek to destroy
them from the face of the earth, yet they shall not be able to do it: and that
this last is chiefly intended, we may see by that which follows in the next
verse.

Verse. 10. Thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.] To
wit, because he shall be grubbed up by the roots. See the Note Job 20.9.

Verse. 11. But the meek shall inherit the earth, etc.] See the former Note
verse. 9. and who are meant by the meek Psalm. 22.26: and shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace; that is, in their great plenty of all
good things, or rather in the inward tranquillity of mind which they shall
enjoy, that peace of God which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. whilst the
wicked are disquieted with continual troubles.

Verse. 12. The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his
teeth.] To wit, out of malice and envy. See the Note Psalm. 35.16.

Verse. 13. The Lord shall laugh at him, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 2.4: for he
sees that his day is coming, that is, the day appointed by the Lord for the
punishment of the wicked. So that by his day may be meant either the day of the
Lord, as the day of vengeance is called, Joel 2.1. or the wicked man's day, as
Job 18.20. (of which see the Note there) as the time when the woman with child
comes to be in pain is called her hour, Joh. 16.21. yea it may refer to that
day, when that mentioned in the two following verses shall come to pass.

Verse. 15. Their sword shall enter into their own heart, etc.] where the wound
must needs be mortal. The meaning is, that their mischievous attempts against
the righteous shall prove their own ruin. And their bows shall be broken,
that is, their plots and practices shall be frustrate. See the Note 1 Samuel 2.4.

Verse. 16. A little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of
many wicked.] To wit, 1. Because the wicked do often enrich themselves by
unjust means, and so have much vexation and trouble with them, and likewise
thereby do treasure up wrath against the day of wrath; whereas the righteous
with a little well gotten have much peace of conscience, with hope of heaven
hereafter. 2. Because the righteous use theirs well, and are the better for
them; whereas the wicked abuse theirs many ways, and are in many respects the
worse for them. 3. Because the righteous enjoy what they have from hand to
mouth, as the gifts of God, and the pledges of his fatherly love and care over
them, and so it is to them as manna from heaven, and hereby they enjoy much
sweet comfort, and are fully satisfied with what they have; whereas the wicked
have none of this joy nor satisfaction by their wealth. 4. Because God by his
blessing does usually make that the righteous enjoy to be more effectual for
their good, then is the abundance of the wicked; a little course fare makes
them more healthful and strong then the wicked are with all their plenty. And
5. because the wicked enjoys not his wealth long, as the righteous man does;
and this indeed agrees best with the following words.

Verse. 17. For the arms of the wicked shall be broken, etc.] That is, the power
of their great wealth; see also the Note Psalm. 10.15: but the Lord upholdeth
the righteous; that is, he will maintain and support them, though they be in
never so weak a condition.

Verse. 18. The Lord knows the days of the upright, etc.] That is, he takes
care of them at all times, and does daily supply their necessities; see the
Note Psalm. 1.6: or, he knows their condition at all times, and accordingly
provides for them; he knows their wants and dangers, and how and when to help
them: or, as he knows and has appointed the time how long they shall live,
so accordingly he provides for them; neither can any power of the enemy cut
short their days: and their inheritance shall be for ever; that is, the estate
they have shall be continued to them, and shall be transmitted to their
posterity for many generations; yea and besides this (some also add) after all
they shall have in heaven an eternal inheritance.

Verse. 19. They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, etc.] This may be meant
of any time of public calamity; or particularly of that evil time mentioned in
the following clause, to wit, the time of famine, and in the days of famine
they shall be satisfied; that is, God will provide for them, making them well
content with their portion, though it be but little, whilst the wicked in
abundance have never enough. But all these temporal promises must be
understood with exception of the Cross.

Verse. 20. But the wicked shall perish, etc.] To wit, in the days of famine,
of which mention was made in the foregoing verse; or, whilst the righteous are
saved, they shall perish even in their plenty: and the enemies of the Lord
shall be as the fat of lambs, to wit, when it is burnt upon the altar, or, when
it melts away before the fire; and so thereby may be also covertly employed,
that the wicked in their greatest prosperity are but as beasts fatted for the
slaughter: into smoke shall they consume away; that is, they shall perish
suddenly and utterly, not the least memorial of them being left behind them.

Verse. 21. The wicked borrows, and pays not again, etc.] To wit, because
the curse of God following him, though he tryes by all ways, right or wrong,
to enrich himself, yet he falls into poverty. But now some understand it of his
neglecting to pay his debts out of base covetousness, which suffers him not to
part with what he has, though thereby he defraud others; or of his not being
able to pay them, by reason of the excessive rate whereat he lives; and so they
conceive that this is added to show, that the wicked know not how to make a
good use of their estates, thereby to make good what he had said before verse.
16. A little that the righteous man has is better then the riches of many
wicked. But the first exposition is the best; and accordingly we must
understand the following clause, but the righteous shows mercy, and gives,
to wit, that God blesses him so, that he has both for himself and for others
too.

Verse. 23. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, etc.] This also
some understand of the Lords guiding him by his spirit, to do that which is
good and right in his eyes: and the next clause, and he delights in his way,
they understand thus, that it is a delight to the righteous man to walk in Gods
ways. But surely David speaks still of the outward prosperity of the
righteous, to wit, that God by his providence guides them in all their affairs
so, that they may find good success, and prosper therein: and the next words
are added, to show the cause hereof, namely, that God is pleased with their
ways, as finding them careful to approve themselves to him in all things, and
therefore he prospers them: and indeed some understand that last clause thus,
and he delights in his way, that is, God delights to see him thrive and
prosper in all his ways.

Verse. 24. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, etc.] Some also
understand this of the righteous man's falling into sin, to wit, that his falls
shall not be deadly, he shall repent and rise again. But rather it is meant of
his falling into outward calamities, to wit, that though he falls into any
affliction, yet first God does so mitigate his affliction, that it shall not so
utterly overwhelm him, but that he shall be able to bear it: and secondly, he
shall not perish thereby; the Lord shall raise him up, and recover him again,
by stepping in seasonably to his help; for, says he, the Lord upholdeth him
with his hand.

Verse. 25. I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.] This is not meant of any seeking relief
in want; (for so David himself desired bread of Ahimelech, 1 Samuel 21.3. and he
and his soldiers desired some supply of victuals from Nabal, chap. 25.8.) but
of living in a continual way of begging from door to door; which is denounced
as a curse against the wicked, Psalm. 109.10. Let his children be continual
vagabonds, and beg. Nor does it hence follow, that neither the righteous man,
nor his seed, are ever brought to this sad degree of misery; but only that it
does so rarely happen, that David in all his time had never seen it.

Verse. 26. He is ever merciful, and lends, etc.] See the Note above verse.
21: and his seed shall be blessed; that is, say some Expositours, men shall
praise them, and pray for them: but rather the meaning is, that notwithstanding
the good man's bounty, he shall leave his seed a good estate, or at least that
God shall bless them, not only with spiritual, but also with temporal
blessings.

Verse. 27. Depart from evil, and do good, etc.] See the Note above verse. 3.
and Psalm. 34.14. and dwell for evermore: see the Notes verse. 3, 9, and 18.

Verse. 28. For the Lord loves judgment, etc.] That is, to execute judgment;
or rather, the justice of men in their dealings.

Verse. 29. The righteous shall inherit the land, etc.] See the former Notes, as
before verse. 27.

Verse. 30. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks
of judgment.] Some conceive that this is added, as one great means whereby the
righteous man comes to be firmly settled in the land, to wit, that his speech
is so wise and just, that the wicked cannot get any advantage against him; or
to show why God preserves and blesses such, to wit, because such men are so
exactly careful to approve themselves to God, that they will not so much as
speak any thing, but what is wise and just and right. But I rather conceive
that the drift of adding these words is, to show what manner of man the
righteous man is, of whom so much has been here spoken; and withal happily to
set forth how such a one will behave himself, when the wicked flourish, and the
righteous are oppressed. And though some restrain these words, The mouth of the
righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment, to the
righteous man's instructing and exhorting others, to wit, that he does not only
give and lend to those that are in want, but also will seek their spiritual
good, by teaching them true wisdom and piety, what is just and right to be
done, and stirring them up thereto, by speaking to them of the just laws and
righteous judgments of God: yet I rather understand it more generally, that
his words are still full of wisdom and piety, and that he still speaks that
which is just and right; if the wicked prosper, he will not deny Gods
providence, nor speak any thing but honorably of Gods justice; and so in all
other things his speech always savours of uprightness, and is profitable to
others.

Verse. 31. The law of his God is in his heart, etc.] That is, not only in his
tongue, but also in his heart; to wit, because he understands it, he loves it,
he remembers and minds it upon all occasions, and has fully resolved to obey
it, the holy Spirit of God having written the Law in his heart, and having
stirred up in his heart affections, motions and desires fully agreeable
thereto; see the Note Deuteronomy. 6.6: none of his steps shall slide; that is, he
shall constantly persevere in Gods ways, not turning aside because of the
prosperity of wicked men, or for any threatenings or allurements from them; and
so then withal he shall not fall from his prosperous condition, nor shall the
wicked get any advantage against him.

Verse. 32. The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him.] This is
the rather here subjoyned, because that good which is said of the righteous in
the two foregoing verses is the main cause of the wicked man's rage against him;
and therefore he watches him, to wit, that he may get something against him
for which to condemn him: see the Note Psalm. 10.8, etc.

Verse. 33. The Lord will not leave him in his hand, etc.] That is, Though the
Lord may defer his help, till the wicked have surprised the righteous, yet
then he will deliver him, he will not leave him in his power; nor condemn him
when he is judged, that is, nor suffer him to be condemned when he is called
before them to be judged: to wit, unless God sees it may be more for his
glory, and his servants good, to let him suffer. Yea some understand this last
clause thus, that God will not condemn the righteous man, though the wicked man
do pass sentence upon him; intimating that God would make his innocence to
appear whilst he does suffer, and withal would acquit him, and punish his
enemies at the last day.

Verse. 34. He shall exalt thee to inherit the land, etc.] That is, He shall
raise thee out of thy troubles that thou may still inherit the land; of
which see the former Note, as before verse. 27: when the wicked are cut off,
thou shall see it; that is, thy self being secure and free from danger, thou
shall see the wicked to thy comfort destroyed: see the Note Job 22.19.

Verse. 35. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a
green bay tree.] Or, a green tree that grows in his own soil, which commonly
thrives and flourishes better, then those that are transplanted into another
soil.

Verse. 36. Yet he passed away, etc.] That is, he was gone, as it were in an
instant; and lo he was not, etc. See before verse. 10.

Verse. 37. For the end of that man is peace.] That is, quiet and prosperous:
see the Note Job 22.21.

Verse. 38. But the transgressors shall be destroyed together, etc.] See the
Note Psalm. 35.26. the end of the wicked shall be cut off; that is, their hope,
the end which they expected, shall not be; or rather this will be the end of
the wicked, they shall be cut off.

PSALM XXXVIII.
The Title. A Psalm of David to bring to remembrance.] That is, say some
Expositours, to record Gods praises for his deliverance out of that great
distress wherein he had been; or, to put God in mind of his sad condition,
that he might be won thereby to withdraw his hand, and to send him
deliverance, according to that, Psalm. 132.1. Lord, remember David and all his
afflictions. But rather I conceive the drift of this Title was to show, that
this Psalm was composed purposely to put himself and others in mind of the sore
affliction he had been in, and of his sins that had brought it upon him, and of
Gods mercy in his deliverance; that so, whereas men are naturally apt to forget
their former sicknesses and troubles, when once they are well and safe again,
by this Psalm it might still be brought fresh to his remembrance, and he might
for ever reap benefit thereby; and that others also might by his example learn
how to pray, and how otherwise to carry themselves in such a time of distress.
We have the same Title again Psalm. 70. And this is the third of those that are
called the Penitential Psalms; concerning which see the Note in the Title
Psalm. 6.

Verse. 1. O Lord, rebuke me not, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 6.1.

Verse. 2. For thine arrows stick fast in me, etc.] See the Note Job 6.4: and
thy hand presses me sore; to wit, as being still heavier and heavier upon me.

Verse. 3. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, etc.]
That is, My flesh is broken all over my body, or every member of my body is
full of pain and misery, through my sickness or sorrow, which thine anger has
brought upon me: neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin; see
the Note Job. 30.17.

Verse. 4. For mine iniquities are gone over my head.] It is an over-forced
exposition which some give of these words; to wit, that therefore he says his
iniquities were gone over his head, because they were more in number then the
hairs of his head; or because it surpassed his wisdom to know how to bear the
miseries they had brought upon him; or because they had deprived him of his
understanding, or brought his reason into bondage. Doubtless it is either
meant of the multitude of his sins, to wit, that they were grown to an
exceeding great height, so that he was even overwhelmed therewith; see the Note
Ezr. 9.6: or of the miseries also which his sins had brought upon him, to wit,
that he was in danger to be drowned and overwhelmed therewith, according to
that expression Psalm. 42.7. all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me;
which seems the more probable, because in the following verses he still
proceeds to recite the greatness of his miseries, thereby to move God to pity
him.

Verse. 5. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness.] That
is, my blockishnesse and stupidity: for he speaks this by way of detesting
himself for what he had done, and not as excusing himself in that he did it
through ignorance. As for those first words, my wounds stink and are corrupt,
either they must be understood literally, of the sores that were in his body,
(as the words in the following verse may also seem to import) which he calls
wounds, to intimate that he looked upon them as the wails or swelling tumors
(for so the original word may signify) which the rod of God had made in his
flesh, or the wounds of those arrows of which he had spoken verse. 2. Thine
arrows stick fast in me; or else figuratively, of any other miseries that God
had brought upon him, comparing them to stinking and fester'd sores, either to
imply the long continuance of them, or the sharp pains and sorrows which he
felt in himself by reason thereof. Yet some, I know, would have it meant of the
shame which his sins had brought upon him.

Verse. 6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly.] To wit, under the burden of
my sins, of which he had said before, verse. 4. that they were a burden too
heavy for him: and his meaning might be, both that his body was as it were
bowed together, through weakness occasioned by sickness, or some other
heartbreaking affliction; and that his spirit was also sorely oppressed and
humbled with grief, not being like those stout-stomached men, that will by
nothing they can suffer be brought to bow under the hand of God.

Verse. 7. For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease, etc.] To wit, some
loathsome sore, some impostume, or pestilentiall carbuncle: or else it may be
understood figuratively, of the grievous sorrows and perplexities he underwent
by reason of his afflictions; which he might also the rather term a loathsome
disease, because they made others reproach and abhor him. And there is no
soundness in my flesh: see the Note before verse. 3.

Verse. 9. Lord, all my desire is before thee, etc.] That is, Thou know all
the desires of my heart; or, I have in prayer laid all my desires before thee.
And this he says, either to imply, that he wondered therefore that God did not
grant him his desires; or to press God that he would grant them; or to assure
himself that God would hear and satisfy his desires.

Verse. 10. As for the light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me.] See the
Note Psalm. 6.7.

Verse. 11. My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore, etc.] To wit,
either out of pride or fear; they would not or durst not come near me to afford
me any friendly courtesy: see Job 19.13, etc.

Verse. 13. But I, as a deaf man, heard not, etc.] That is, When mine enemies
spoke such mischievous things against me, as is said in the foregoing verse,
whether I heard them my self, or heard it related by others, I was as silent as
if I had been either deaf or dumb, neither muttering against God, nor replying
upon them. But the chief drift of these words is doubtless to show, that when
their calumnies and false accusations were most mischievous, he was silent,
either because he could not be suffered to plead for himself, or rather because
he thought it better in patience and silence to swallow down these injuries,
and to commit his cause to God.

Verse. 15. For in thee, O Lord, do I hope; thou will hear, etc.] Or, thou will
answer, O Lord my God: and the meaning may be, that God would hear and answer
his prayer; or that he would hear and answer his enemies, to wit, by pleading
his cause against them.

Verse. 16. For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me,
etc.] To wit, as triumphing over me, when they see that my hopes and my prayers
fail me; or as if thou did favor them, and so thy name will be blasphemed.
This must needs be the meaning of the words according to our Translation. But
others, that do not insert those words ( Hear me) to make up the sense, as our
Translatours have done, take this to be alleged as a reason of his silence
mentioned before ver. 13, 14. to wit, that he would not reply any thing, lest
if he had through impatience spoken any thing that might provoke God to leave
him, then he might be made the scorn of his enemies; or lest they should have
derided him for what he spoke, and if things should fall out otherwise, then as
he made profession to hope, then they should insult over him; of which he had
often had experience: when my foot slippeth (says he) that is, when I offend
through infirmity in the hour of trial, or rather when I fall into any misery
(see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.35.) or when I begin to fall, or am but in danger to
fall; they magnify themselves against me, that is, both by word and deed they
triumph over me.

Verse. 17. For I am ready to halt, etc.] Some understand this literally, as
those passages before verse. 5, 6, 7. to wit, that he was like to be lamed with
his sickness and sores: Others understand it of his pronenesse to offend and
sin in the hour of trial, as is said in the foregoing Note; and that this is
here added as a reason why he kept silence, and would not reply upon his
enemies, or why he begged of God that he would preserve him. But I rather think
that it is meant of his falling into some irrecoverable misery, to wit, that he
was in danger to fall and to be utterly ruined, according to that of the
prophet Jer. 20.10. all my familiars watched for my halting; and that this is
added to move God to pity him, and to come in speedily to his help. And my
sorrow is continually before me; that is, I am continually in heaviness,
partly by reason of my continual misery, and partly through my grief for my
sins that have brought these miseries upon me.

Verse. 18. For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.] Very
many learned Expositours understand here by his iniquity and sin the punishment
of his iniquity, and so make the meaning of the words to be this; that David
would continually bewail the miseries which his sins had brought upon him. But
I rather conceive, that having mentioned his danger and grief in the foregoing
verse, he adds this, that he would still charge all that he suffered upon his
sins, that he would still confess and bewail them before God, even his sins,
rather then his afflictions, either as a ground of his hope that God would hear
his prayer, or as an argument whereby he seeks to move God to hear him.

Verse. 20. They also that render evil for good are mine adversaries; because I
follow the thing that good is.] That is, because I labor to live holily and
righteously. Yet some would restrain this to one particular, to wit, that
ungodly men hated him, because he was so strict in his government for the
punishment of sin.

PSALM XXXIX.
The Title. TO the chief Musician, even to Ieduthun.] The meaning is, that this
Psalm was delivered to Jeduthun, one of the three chief Musicians, 1 Chro.
25.1. or rather to his sons, and those other Levites that were of their
several Quires.

Verse. 1. I said, I will take heed to my ways, etc.] The sum of what David
says here in the beginning of this Psalm is this, that being in great
distress (whether it were by reason of sickness, or of the conspiracy of his
son Absalom against him, or any other particular, we cannot say) he determined
to look narrowly to himself, that he did not offend with his tongue; and yet
notwithstanding at last brake forth and spoke unadvisedly with his lips. I
said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; that is, I
resolved to watch so strictly over all my ways, to keep my self blameless
therein, that I might not so much as sin in my speech, to wit, either by way of
muttering against God, or returning evil for evil to mine enemies, or by
uttering any word that was not seemly for me. I will keep my mouth with a
bridle; that is, I will restrain my self from speaking, as men keep beasts in
from biting with a muzzle or bridle, to wit, by a firm resolution to keep
silence however I was provoked, by a diligent watching over my self that I
might no^ on a sudden forget my self, and by using all holy means to perform
this which I had undertaken; as by observing my passions, and by a speedy
suppressing any discontented motions and swellings that might arise in my
heart. For we must not think that David intended to give way to all kind of
distempers in his heart, and resolved only not to discover them in his speech:
but his meaning was, even by bridling his passions to keep his tongue in order;
or at least, if his heart should boil through discontent, yet even then to
bridle his tongue, if it were possible. As for that last clause, while the
wicked is before me, I know some restrain it to wicked men's being present with
him, to wit, that he would not speak a word whilst they were in his company,
though they should never so much provoke him; and that lest they should take
occasion to rejoice or insult over him, to reproach him, or blaspheme Gods
name. But I rather understand it thus, that he would be silent whilst he saw
the wicked flourishing in great prosperity, or so long as God should be pleased
to exercise him by the slanders, revilings and persecution of such wicked men.
However doubtless this he premiseth, either thereby to discover how exceeding
great his sorrow was, in that being thus beforehand resolved, yet he could not
at last contain himself; or by way of seeking mercy at Gods hands, in regard
his full purpose was to have bridled his tongue from all evil whatsoever,
though he could not do it.

Verse. 2. I was dumb with silence, etc.] That is, for a while I did what I
resolved; I was so long wholly silent, that I seemed in a manner to be dumb,
and not able to speak. I held my peace, even from good; that is, I forbear to
speak what I might well and lawfully enough have spoken, as from alleging any
thing that I might have said in mine own defense, from making my complaint to
God, and desiring justice at his hands, and such like; to wit, lest by degrees
I should have been brought to utter any thing that was evil, and whilst I
intended only to speak that which was good, some unseemly word might suddenly
slip from me; or lest mine enemies should misconstrue any thing I spoke: and my
sorrow was stirred; as if he should have said, At last my grief for wha^ I
suffered began to work within me, or rather was increased, to wit, by the
addition of new miseries, or new provocations from mine enemies, or by
suppressing it in silence, the hearts of men being apt to swell the more, and
to be the more bitterly pained, when sorrow has not a vent. I know these two
last clauses are otherwise understood by some Expositours, to wit, that he held
his peace even from speaking any thing that was good, and that for this he was
afterward grieved; or, that he was wholly silent, and his sorrow was stirred,
that is, though his sorrow was stirred: but the first exposition is the best.

Verse. 3. My heart was hot within me, etc.] To wit, his eager desire to speak
being as a fire shut up within him; or rather because his passions grew hot
within him, and set him as it were on fire, his grief for the misery he
endured, or his indignation against his enemies; whereby he became impatient,
and unable to bear the miseries and wrongs he suffered, perhaps particularly
that he should hear his enemies reproach him to his face, and yet must keep
silence: while I was musing, that is, whilst I sat plodding on my miseries, or
thinking of many things in silence, but not speaking; or whilst I was musing
whether I should speak, or still hold my peace; the fire burned, to wit, more
and more, insomuch that not my heart only, but my whole body, seemed to be on a
light flame. Thus I conceive the first part of this verse must be understood.
Yet some do understand it of a holy zeal in him, which would not suffer him any
longer to forbear speaking of good things. As for the last clause, then spoke I
with my tongue, the meaning of it doubtless is, that at last, not able any
longer to contain himself, he brake forth into words of impatience and
muttering against God: and many conceive that the words of impatience that he
uttered are those that are added in the next verse. Yet some Expositours would
have the meaning of it to be only this, that when he might not ease his mind to
men, he turned his speech at last to God, according to that which follows in
the fourth verse.

Verse. 4. Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it
is* that I may know how frail I am.] Or, what time I have here. Many learned
Expositours take these to be those words of impatience, of which he said in the
former verse, then spoke I with my tongue: only some conceive, that David
therein desired that God would presently put an end to his life, Lord, make me
to know mine end, etc. as if he should have said, How long shall I be in this
misery? since I am not like to see an end of my miseries, till I see an end of
my days, hasten therefore mine end, make me experimentally to know and see the
full period of this transitory life of mine: and then others hold that he does
only herein expostulate with God concerning his laying so great afflictions
upon him, notwithstanding the transitorinesse of his life, Lord, make me to
know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is, etc. as if he should
have said, Since, Lord, thou art pleased to handle me so severely, let me, I
beseech thee, know how long the time is, that thou have appointed me to live;
that so I may see whether in likelihood it may afford me a sufficient
recompense for the miseries I now suffer: if thou have appointed to lengthen
out my days for many ages to come, then indeed the hope of better days
hereafter might allay my grief; but if there be no such thing to be expected
(as indeed there is not) must it not needs seem hard to me, that having so
little a while to live, my life should be thus imbittered with sorrows? Neither
yet must we think that David did seriously hereby desire to know the just hour
of his death, but only in the heat of his spirit, by intimating his assurance
of the brevity of his life, to show what just cause he had to be impatient,
that he should be so continually in so sad a condition. But I rather, with
others, take these words to be added by way of correcting that heat and
impatience of spirit, and perhaps that murmuring whereinto with his tongue he
had broken forth; Lord, make me to know mine end, etc. that is, cause me
seriously to believe, and often to remember and lay to heart (which few do) the
frailty and transitorinesse of man's life, that so I may the more patiently
endure my troubles, as knowing that I cannot long live to endure them, and that
I may provide for mine end, and prepare my self against my change comes. Yea it
may also imply an approbation of Gods dealing with him; as if he had said, Thou
do well, Lord, by these afflictions thus to take me off from the vanity of
my former ways, and to make me see how frail a creature I am; and therefore I
willingly submit to thy hand, Lord, make me to know mine end, etc.

Verse. 5. Behold, thou have made my days as a hand-breadth, etc.] According to
the diverse expositions of the former verse, this also may be understood diverse
ways: to wit, either as spoken in a way of impatience; or as by way of
correcting his impatience; see the former Note: and mine age is as nothing
before thee; that is, the time of my life is as nothing in respect of thee, who
art eternal, before whom a thousand years are but as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8.
verily every man at his best state, that is, in greatest strength, and in his
most flourishing condition, is altogether vanity; see the Notes Job 7.16.

Verse. 6. Surely every man walks in a vain show, etc.] This seems to imply 1.
that man himself is but an empty representation and appearance of a man, as
when we see a man in a glass or in a dream, a picture or shadow of a man,
rather then a man indeed; and that because he is continually in such a frail
and changeable condition: 2. (which differs not much from the former) that the
life of man is but an imaginary life, an appearance of life rather then a life
indeed; namely, because it is so exceeding transitory, passing away in a
moment, as a shadow, Job 14.2: and 3. that the happiness and the good things
which he seems to enjoy, are but shadows of such things, there being no real
good nor happiness in them; his hopes are but vain hopes, and his enjoyments
are vain: in the continual labors and restless condition wherein he wearies
himself (which is employed in that word walks) he wearieth himself for very
vanity; as is more fully expressed in the following words, surely they are
disquieted in vain, etc. All which agrees with that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.31.
the fashion of this world passes away; and that which is said of the
prosperity of wicked men Psalm. 73.20. As a dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord,
when thou awakest, thou shall despise their image.

Verse. 7. And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.] As if he should
have said, Seeing the life of man is so transitory, and seeing all things
whatsoever, about which men busy and trouble themselves, are but mere vanity,
I will no longer disquiet my self, either about mine own miseries, or the
prosperous condition of others, but place all my hope, O Lord, in thee: let
others, if they will, set their hearts upon these earthly vanities; I have a
better hope, which will secure me against death, and against all changes of
this world; for my hope, Lord, is in thee.

Verse. 8. Deliver me from all my transgressions.] That is, Pardon my sins, (for
which indeed I am chiefly grieved) and free me from those afflictions which my
sins have brought upon me.

Verse. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.] This may
be meant of all his afflictions in general, or particularly of his silence
when wicked men did reproach him, of which he had spoken in the foregoing
verse: and it may be inserted here as an argument to move God to withdraw his
hand, or not to expose him still to their derision and scorn.

Verse. 11. When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make
his beauty to consume away like a moth.] which is easily and soon crushed to
dust; see the Note Job 4.19. Yet some understand this as if it were expressed
thus, thou like a moth make his beauty to consume away; that is, though thou
do not in a way of manifest vengeance bring some open judgments upon man to
destroy him, yet by a secret curse thou causest his health and strength, and so
also his beauty and comeliness, to consume and wast away: and indeed thus the
secret judgments of God upon men are usually expressed, as Isa. 51.8. the moth
shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool; and
Hos. 5.12. Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of
Judah as rottenness. However, the meaning of the words is doubtless this;
that when God undertakes to punish man for sin, whether it be in a way of
fatherly severity, or as a judge pouring out the fierceness of his wrath upon
wicked men for their iniquity, that is, according to what they have deserved,
he soon consumes their beauty and glory. For the word rebukes, see the Note
Psalm. 6.1.

Verse. 12. Hear my prayer, O Lord, etc. for I am a stranger with thee, and a
sojourner, as all my fathers were.] See the Note 1 Chronicles. 29.15. This phrase, I
am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, is all one as if he had said, Either
I am a stranger before thee, thou know I am a stranger here; or, I live by
faith with thee, I set thee before mine eyes, and my heart is continually set
upon thee, even whilst I am absent from thee, and live as a stranger here in
this world; or, I am a stranger here in thy land, and am wholly herein at thy
disposing. And this is added here as an argument to move God to hear and help
him; partly because the condition of strangers was to be pitied, in regard
they are subject to so many labors and troubles and dangers; and partly
because esteeming himself a stranger in the world, that was but a while to live
there, he did not set his affections upon things below, but did long and seek
after that heavenly country whether he was traveling. As for that last clause,
as all my fathers were, the drift of it is to desire, that as God had taken
pity of them, and helped them, because they were strangers, so he would
likewise deal with him.

Verse. 13. O spare me, that I may recover strength before I go hence and be no
more.] That is, I have but a little while to live here, and therefore let me
have a little breathing time, some small recovery of strength, that I may have
a little ease and refreshing before I die; see the Notes Job 14.6: or, either
ease me, or I am a dead man; I cannot continue long in this misery, and
therefore withdraw thine hand a little before I be irrecoverably gone; see the
Notes Job 7.8, 9. For indeed this seems to be spoken with some heat of passion.
Yet some conceive that David does hereby desire some mitigation at least of his
misery, that he might by faith be strengthened in spirit, and being freed from
his terrors, he might depart in peace, and finish his course with joy.

PSALM XL.
Verse. 1. I Waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard
my cry.] Those words in this Psalm verse. 6, 7, 8. sacrifice and offering thou
did not desire, etc. are clearly alleged by the Apostle as the words of
Christ Heb. 10.5, 6, 7. Yet because in other places of the Psalm it is as
clear, that David speaks of himself, most probable it is that he does so
throughout the Psalm; only in some places he speaks what properly belonged only
to Christ, as being a type of Christ, and as concerning the flesh the father of
Christ: see also the Note Psalm. 16.1. As for these first words, David does
therein from his former experience encourage himself to present to God those
following requests, verse. 11, etc. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he
inclined unto me; that is, he bowed himself to me, or he bowed his ear to me,
as in Psalm. 17.6, and 31.2. (for he seems to represent God, as harkening from
on high to hear one crying out of a deep pit, as he speaks of himself in the
next verse) or he inclined in his will to hear me. They that understand the
whole Psalm of Christ, hold that this is spoken of Christ's waiting upon God in
the time of his agony and passion, and of Gods hearing his cries; as when he
prayed in his agony, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me, etc.
and there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him, Luke
22.42, 43; and so likewise at other times in his passion, Heb. 5.7. when he had
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him
that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared.

Verse. 2. He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, and out of the miry
clay, etc.] That is, out of terrible and desperate dangers, from which there
seemed to be no hope that I should ever have been freed. For to express this,
he compares himself to one that was taken out of an horrible pit, that is, a
deep pit, which by reason of its danger and darkness, and the lamentable
noises therein, must needs strike those that are there with terror and
horror; or, as it is in the Hebrew, a pit of noise, so called, because of
waters that falling into it with great violence, make a roaring dreadful
noise; or because of the struglings and outcries they make that are in it, or
because when any thing is cast into deep pits, it will always make a great
noise: and where he stuck fast in miry clay, without a seeming possibility of
getting out. And some refer this to the greatness of Christ's terrors and
sufferings, and his deliverance from them both. And set my feet upon a rock,
and established my goings; that is, has brought me into a sure and safe
condition, where I might walk in my place without encumbrance or danger.

Verse. 3. And he has put a new song into my mouth, etc.] To wit, both by
affording me this new mercy, which occasioned the composing of this new song of
praise; and by suggesting this Psalm by the inspiration of his holy spirit, for
the use of his people, even praise unto our God: see also the Note Psalm. 33.3.
Many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord; that is, Many shall
take notice of the exceeding danger whereinto I was brought by the afflicting
hand of God, and how wonderfully he did upon my prayers deliver me, to wit,
either as being eyewitnesses of it, or by reading or hearing these things in
my song (for seeing is sometimes put for hearing, as Exodus 20.18. and all the
people saw the thunderings) and hereby they shall be brought, both to reverence
thee with a filial fear, and likewise to trust in thee in all their dangers.
Yet some apply this also to Christ, to wit, that many seeing what Christ
suffered for sin, should learn to fear sin, and seeing how God delivered him,
should encourage themselves by his example to trust in God; and especially,
that believing his suffering for them, they should assure themselves of
salvation thereby.

Verse. 4. Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his trust; and respects
not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.] That is, that respects not men
proud of their wisdom, power or greatness, so as to trust in them, or to
fear them more then God: or rather, that when he sees wicked men, that cared
not by what evil ways they advanced themselves, proudly exalting themselves in
their flourishing estate and prosperity, and putting their confidence therein,
yet does not so far like or affect, or make account of, or mind and admire such
men, as to approve of their way, and follow their example. For by such as turn
aside to lies is meant, such as forsaking God, as it were, do put their
confidence in lies, that is, in outward things, or in their own wisdom or
power, or any sinful courses, or vain imagination, or whatever else which may
seem to promise fair, but will deceive those that rely on them: see the Note
Psalm. 4.2. But they that take these also to be the words of Christ, by the
proud and such as turn aside to lies, understand Pharisaicall Justiciaries, and
false teachers.

Verse. 5. Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done,
etc.] This proves what he said in the foregoing verse, concerning the
blessedness of the man that trusts in the Lord: or it may be alleged as an
argument to stir up himself and others to trust in God; to wit, because the
many wonderful works which God has done throughout the world, do manifestly
declare his almighty power and goodness and providence, even as did that
deliverance which God had now afforded him in his particular; so that men may
well be stirred up thereby to trust in God, and may count them happy that do
so: but especially those which he has done for his people, which is expressed
in the following clause, and thy thoughts which are to usward; wherein the
word thoughts implies Gods sollicitous care for them: they cannot be reckoned
up in order unto thee; as if he had said, though men might think they had made
a full recital of them, with thee it would be found far short of what is in
thy works.

Verse. 6. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, etc.] They that hold
this whole Psalm is only to be understood of Christ, say, that having spoken of
the many wonderful works which God had done for his people, here he mentions
one particular, as the most wonderful of them all, to wit, his sending him to
expiate the sins of his elect people. Sacrifice and offering thou did not
desire; to wit, as things that were in themselves of any avail to satisfy thy
justice for the sins of thy people, but only as they were types and shadows of
that sacrifice which I was to offer for this end: for (says the Apostle Heb.
10.4.) it is not possible, that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away
sins. And hence it is, that in that place also the Apostle from these words
proves, that the ceremonial sacrifices were then abolished, and that God
desired them not any longer; to wit, because having required them only as
figures of a better sacrifice, when that was once offered, the other were to
cease; He takes away the first (says he) that he may establish the second.
But now if we understand these words as spoken by David concerning himself, yet
chiefly with reference to Christ, and as spoken also in the person of Christ,
who was to be of the seed of David, and of whom David was a type; then
accordingly these words may be here inserted either 1. by way of tendering
himself ready to obey the will of God in all things, who had done so much for
him; Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, as if he had said, for all
these great things that thou have done for thy people, thou did not desire
sacrifices and offerings, to wit, chiefly or of themselves, as being things
wherein, as considered in themselves, thou could take no delight, but only as
they were means appointed to stir us up to faith and repentance and new
obedience (and indeed so the like expressions are often used, as Ps. 51.16.
thou desire not sacrifice -- thou delightest not in burnt-offering, and Jer.
7.22, 23. I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I
brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or
sacrifices; but this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, etc. see
also Hos. 6.6. and Esa. 1.11.) no, the sacrifice that thou desire is that of
new obedience, without which all external sacrifices are with thee of no
esteem; which is intended in those following words, mine ears have thou opened,
or, as it is in the Hebrew, boared or dug: for hereby he means, either that
he had given up himself, and that God had accepted him to be his servant for
ever; (alluding to that law of boaring the ear of him that was to be a servant
for ever, Exodus 21.5, 6.) or that God had made him most ready to hear and obey
the commandments of God; whereas men are naturally like deaf men, for the
hearing and obeying of the will of God, God had given him a hearing obedient
ear, according to that Esa. 50.5. The Lord God has opened mine ear, and I was
not rebellious etc; or particularly, that God had caused him to understand the
spiritual meaning of the sacrifices, and so he did not rest in them, but was
careful to consecrate himself unto the Lord. Or 2. by way of opposing
Christs^offering up himself as a sacrifice for his people, to his own inability
to return any thing to the Lord, proportionable to the mercies he had received
from him; which he does by speaking thus, as in the person of Christ, Sacrifice
and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened, to wit, by
making me most willing to do what thou enjoynest me. The Apostle, following
the translation of the Septuagint, cites these words thus, but a body have thou
prepared me, Heb. 10.5: which is indeed all one in effect with this of David's,
mine ears have thou opened: for ears opened, and fitted for hearing and obeying
the will of God, do necessarily imply a body that must be employed in Gods
service; and so the ears may be here figuratively put for the whole body; and
the rather in this place, because by the hearing of the ears a man is prepared
to give up himself to the service of God, and the very end why Christ had a
humane body was, that he might obey the will of his Father in dying for his
elect people.

Verse. 7. Then said I, Lo, I come, etc.] This may be understood of David, Then
said I, Lo, I come, etc. that is, when thou had thus wonderfully delivered
me, and that I understood thou did not require sacrifice in comparison of new
obedience, or when thou had given me a hearing ear and a desire to obey thee,
then did I most readily engage my self thereto. For the following words, in the
volume of the book it is written of me, though some understand this of the book
of Gods eternal decree (which, they say, in regard of the secrecy of that
which is contained therein, may well be termed a book rolled up, as the Hebrew
word translated volume does indeed signify) yet because there is no probable
reason, why this secret book should be here alleged, I doubt not but it is
meant of the book of the old Testament, as is clear also by that which follows
verse. 8. yea thy law is within my heart. Nor is there any cause to question,
why David should say it was there particularly written of him, that he should
delight to do Gods will, etc. (for so that which was written in this book is
expressed in the following verse,) 1. because what is there enjoined in common
to all Gods people, believers are wont to apply to themselves, as if it were
written particularly of them; and 2. because it is there written of all the
elect and regenerate children of God, that they shall thus readily and
cheerfully obey Gods will. But principally doubtless this was spoken by David
in the person of Christ, tendering himself to perform the will of God concerning
man's redemption; Then said I, Lo, I come, that is, when thou had decreed,
that not legal sacrifices, but my offering of my self as a sacrifice, should
satisfy for the sins of thy people, then did I willingly undertake to come unto
Jerusalem to suffer there what was appointed: or rather thus, when thou had
opened mine ears, when thou had prepared me a body, then did I willingly
enter upon this service: for indeed the Apostle does clearly apply this to
Christ's coming in the flesh, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7. Wherefore when he comes into the
world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, etc. Then said I,
Lo, I come, etc. and then also that which follows, in the volume of the book
it is written of me, must be understood of the predictions that were both in
the promises and the types of the old Testament concerning the work of our
Redemption by Christ, no particular place being cited, because Christ is indeed
the main scope and sum of the whole Scriptures: whence is that which is said
of Christ, Luke 24.27. that beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he
expounded unto them in all the Scripture the things concerning himself; and
that Joh. 5.39.

Verse. 8. I delight to do thy will, O my God, etc.] This David might truly say
of himself; but chiefly it was spoken doubtless of Christ's readiness to do
that will of God, of which the Apostle says, Heb. 10.10. by the which will we
are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all,
according to that Luke 12.50. I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am
I straightened till it be accomplished! And indeed in others this disposition to
do the will of God can never be found, but as they are members of Christ, and
by grace derived unto them from him. As for the next clause, yea thy law is
within my heart, see the Note P^al. 37.31.

Verse. 9. I have preached righteousness in the great congregation, etc.] See
the Notes Psalm 22.25, and 31. It may be meant either of David's sounding forth
the praises of God for his faithfulness, etc. and so may be alleged here as
an argument to move God to hear his following requests, because God is the
readier to do good to men, when they are careful to give God the glory
thereof: or rather, of Christ's preaching the Gospel, by himself and his
Ministers. Yea and some would include too his teaching men Gods righteous laws;
which indeed he came not to make void, but pressed evangelicall obedience
thereto.

Verse. 10. I have not hid thy righteousness, etc.] To wit, through fear or
neglect.

Verse. 11. Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord, etc.] This
does clearly refer to that which went before. He had said verse. 9. I have not
refrained (or withheld) my lips from publishing thy praise; and hereupon he
inferres, therefore withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me: and so verse.
10. he had said, I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth; and
with reference thereto therefore he adds here, let thy loving kindness and thy
truth continually preserve me. Thus David prays to be delivered from his
danger. Yet many take both this, and the requests that follow, to be spoken in
the person of Christ, praying to be freed from his terrors, or from his
sufferings, by a glorious resurrection.

Verse. 12. Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, etc.] See the Notes Psalm.
38.4, and 31.10. and Deuteronomy. 28.15. so that I am not able to look up; that is, I
am not able to lift up my face, implying how sorely he was overburthened with
his miseries, or with grief, discouragement and astonishment of spirit thereby.
Yet they that apply the whole Psalm to Christ, understand this of the
iniquities of the elect imputed to Christ. They are more then the hairs of my
head, therefore my heart fails me: that is, my life fails me, I am ready to
die; or my wisdom, courage, confidence and strength fails me.

Verse. 14. Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul,
etc.] To wit, as men brought into so grievous and miserable a condition, that
they are even ashamed of themselves. See also the Notes Psalm. 35.26. Let them
be driven backward and put to shame that wish me evil: see the Notes Psalm.
6.10, and 35.4.

Verse. 15. Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame, etc.] That is, of
their filthy and shameful life; or rather, of the shame which they sought to
bring upon me: let that shame which they endeavored to cast upon me, befall
themselves, as a just recompense of their evil intentions against me.

Verse. 16. Let all those that seek thee, etc.] (See the Notes Chro. 16.11, and
Psalm. 9.10. rejoice and be glad in thee: see the Note Psalm. 35.27. Let such as
love thy salvation, that is, that neither hope for nor desire salvation from
any other way, but only from thee, say continually, The Lord be magnified; see
Psalm. 35.27.

Verse. 17. But I am poor and needy, etc.] That is, destitute and afflicted. See
the Note Psalm. 34.6.

PSALM XLI.
Verse. 1. BLessed is he that considers the poor, etc.] or, the sick or weak:
and indeed there are many passages in the Psalm, as verse. 3, 4, 5, etc. that
make this interpretation very probable. But if it be translated as it is in our
Bible, by the poor is meant in general the man that is in any distress or
affliction; Blessed is he that considers the poor, that is, that so thinks of
and weighs with himself the miseries that he undergoes, that he is thereby
brought from his heart to pity him, and out of compassion to comfort, help and
relieve him; or rather, that so considers of the man and his condition, as not
to pass any harsh and uncharitable censures upon him, as to judge him a wicked
man, and hated of God, because he is so afflicted, as Jobs friends dealt with
him. And this David doubtless spoke with reference to himself, yea and, as
some think too, with reference to Christ, because of that which is said
afterward verse. 9. which Joh. 13.18. is applied to Christ. Because when David
was in any great distress, his enemies were ready to conclude, that he was
cast off and forsaken of God, therefore he does here pronounce them blessed,
that did better judge of those that were afflicted; yea and covertly he does in
effect desire a blessing from God upon those, that had carried themselves more
friendly or comfortably to him in the time of his distress, then others had
done. As for the following words, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble,
and so on to the end of the third verse, I conceive they are meant of him that
considers the poor, and are added to make good what he had said concerning
the bliss of such a man, and to show how abundantly God would reward him: yet
they may be understood of the poor afflicted man; and so indeed they are
understood by the most of our best Expositours, namely, that they are added as
by way of confuting the unjust censures that are usually passed upon such a
poor man; the world is ready to judge him accursed of God; but there is no
ground for this, for on the contrary, the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble, etc.

Verse. 3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the b^d of languishing, etc.] That
is, The Lord will comfort and support him in his sickness, and at length
restore his strength again: thou will make all his bed in his sickness; that
is, thou will give him ease and rest, and afford him all things requisite for
his refreshing, as is done for a sick man when his bed is made soft by turning
it (for it is in the Hebrew, thou will turn his bed) and by stirring and
tumbling the ^eathers up and down, bolster, pillow, head, feet, every where,
that there may not be a hard place left in it. But yet many Expositours
understand this more generally, as a figurative expression of the comfort and
support which God affords such a man in any distress whatsoever. Because men
in great distress and heaviness of spirit are wont to cast themselves down
upon their beds, and there to lie like men half dead, hence are these
expressions, The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; that is,
when he is cast down under any sore affliction, the Lord will support and help
him, and not suffer him to sink under that pressure: thou will make all his bed
in his sickness; that is, thou will allay and assuage his sorrows, thou will
comfort his conscience, and give him inward quiet of mind; as when one gives
ease to a sick man by making and turning his bed. Yea some take it thus too,
that God would turn his bed of sickness to a condition of strength and health.

Verse. 4. I said, Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, etc.] As if he had
said, I have provoked thee by my sins to bring this misery upon me; therefore
be merciful and be reconciled unto me, and heal my soul, that is, heal me; see
the Notes Psalm. 6.2, 4, and 16.10: preserve my life, and save me from this
distress I am in; for I have sinned against thee: as if he had said, Seeing I
acknowledge my sin, have mercy upon me, and heal me; or, Seeing thou only have
brought this upon me because I have sinned against thee, whether should I go
but to thee only to be healed? Or it may be understood of a spiritual healing;
Heal my soul, to wit, of the sorrows wherewith it is wounded for my sins; or,
Heal my soul by pardoning me; for so this expression is used, 2 Chronicles. 30.20,
and so also in that clause Esa. 6.10. lest they see with their eyes, etc. and
convert and be healed; which is expressed by our Savior thus, Mark 4.12. lest
at any time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them.
However the drift of inserting these words here I conceive is this; Intending
to show, as he does in the following verses, how far his enemies were from
considering of his condition as they ought to have done, he premiseth this,
that he did not flatter himself in his sickness or distress, but
acknowledging his sin, craved mercy at Gods hands; but yet his enemies dealt
most unmercifully with him.

Verse. 5. Mine enemies speak evil of me, etc.] To wit, such as hated him, and
were his professed enemies, because they were curbed by the strictness of his
government: When shall he die, and his name perish? See the Note Psalm. 9.5.

Verse. 6. And if he come to see me, he speaks vanity, etc.] That is, When
mine enemy comes to visit me in my sickness or distress, he speaks nothing
but falsehood and flatteries, (see the Note Job 31.5.) to wit, in that he
pretends to be sorry for me, and to comfort me, and to tender me his advice,
and to do for me any office of love in a friendly manner: his heart gathers
iniquity to it self, to wit, either 1. by adding sin to sin, in that he covers
over his malice with such horrid hypocrisy; or 2. by inventing and contriving
all the several ways he can to ensnare me, or do me some mischief, thereby
seeking to satisfy and please his corrupt lusts and affections; or 3. (which I
like the best) by observing all he can in me, and drawing what he can from me,
and so laying all up together in his mind, as the ground of his unjust surmises
and censures concerning me, or of encouraging himself with hope of my ruin, or
of plotting some mischief against me: when he goes abroad he tells it; that
is, he acquaints his companions, for their encouragement, with all that he had
observed in me, or with that iniquity, those unjust surmises, he had gathered
concerning me, or the wickedness he had plotted against me.

Verse. 7. All that hate me whisper together against me.] That is, Both mine
open and secret enemies; or, both he that came thus to visit me, and his
companions, to whom he imparts his counsels.

Verse. 8. An evil disease, say they, cleaves fast unto him, etc.] That is, an
incurable disease, or an irrecoverable mischief has so seized on him, that he
can never be rid of it. Yea, because it is in the Hebrew, a thing of Belial
cleaves fast unto him, many Expositours hold, that hereby is meant some
disease or mischief, that God had brought upon David in a way of vengeance for
some horrid wickedness he was guilty of; as if he had said, An evil disease or
mischief with a vengeance does now cleave fast unto him.

Verse. 9. Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my
bread, has lift up his heel against me.] That is, has insolently and
ungratefully, and in a most reproachful and contemptuous manner risen up
against me, and abused me, when I was in an afflicted and dejected condition.
For in this phrase of lifting up his heel against him, he seems to allude to a
beasts kicking at his master by whom he is fed, or the custom of men's spurning
at or trampling upon those that are cast down on the ground, in a way of
despite and contempt. It is probable that David meant this of Ahithophel, or
of some other that was in special favor with him; yea it may be meant of
many, the singular number being put for the plural. But yet because David was
a type of Christ, and Christ in his sufferings was a pattern of all the
faithful, and does indeed suffer in all his members, our Savior affirms that
these words were fulfilled in Judas his betraying him, Joh. 13.18. that the
Scripture may be fulfilled, He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel
against me. And though some conceive that Christ did omit the first words, mine
own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, purposely because Christ did from the
beginning know that Judas would betray him, Joh. 6.64. and could not therefore
trust in him; yet I do not see but that the whole verse was applyable to Judas,
and was intended by our Savior, though he only mentioned the last words; and
that because Christ chose him to be one of his disciples, his constant household
attendants, whom he termed his friends Joh. 15.15. and did always carry
himself friendly to him, as to the rest, washing his feet amongst others, and
tearming him friend, even when he came to betray him, Matthew. 26.50. friend,
wherefore art thou come? (as indeed his kissing of our Savior did also carry
an outward semblance of friendship on his part) and because it was indeed a
matter of trust, at least in the judgment of others, that the word of
reconciliation and power to work miracles should be committed to him, that he
should be admitted to such a familiar converse with Christ, and that he should
be peculiarly trusted with the bag, Joh. 12.6.

Verse. 10. But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me, etc.] As if he should have
said, Though so many do either openly or by secret treachery seek my ruin, and
though they now confidently conclude I shall rise up no more; yet do thou,
Lord, show me mercy: and raise me up that I may requite them; that is, that I
may punish them according to their demerits, as by turning them out of his
court, or by some such public dishonor. But however this he desired, not out
of any thirst after private revenge, but out of zeal for Gods glory, and the
welfare of the godly in the land; and as knowing that by his place, being the
supreme magistrate, he was bound to punish all evil doers.

Verse. 11. By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy does not
triumph over me.] This may be understood as an expression of David's in the time
of his sickness or distress; as if he had said, By this I know well that thou
favourest me, because mine enemies I am assured shall not prevail over me. But
rather I conceive that it is added by way of rejoicing for his deliverance,
(the Psalm being composed by him when God had recovered him, or at least when
he was in a way of recovery) professing that hereby he was confirmed in the
assurance of Gods love to him, or more particularly of Gods good will in
appointing him to govern his people, because he had not suffered his enemies to
triumph in his ruin.

Verse. 12. And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, etc.] Some
understand this of the safety and prosperity of his outward condition, which
the word integrity in our Translation will not well bear. It is meant therefore
of the integrity of his heart and spirit; thou upholdest me in mine integrity,
that is, because of the justice of my cause, and because of mine uprightness;
or rather, in the midst of all these trials, thou have kept my heart sincere
toward thee, and have not suffered me to turn aside out of the right way. And
set me before thy face for ever; that is, thou have taken me to be one of
those whom thou do singularly favor (and have therefore chosen me to attend
and serve thee in that Regal power thou have conferred upon me; see 1 Kings
10.8.) whom thou will have in continual remembrance, over whom thou will still
keep a watchful eye, that as thou have at present, so thou may still upon
all occasions deliver me and preserve me, and whom thou will admit to enjoy thy
blessed presence for ever in heaven.

Verse. 13. Blessed be the Lord, etc. Amen and Amen.] This word Amen, subjoyned
in the close of any prayer, signifies both an earnest desire that what is
prayed for may be, and a firm believing that so it shall be. And whereas the
Hebrews divide the Psalms into five books, (which yet Luke speaks of as one
entire book, ^earming it the book Psalms, Act. 1.20.) here they end the first
book. And indeed with the like close of Amen and Amen, and Hallelujah, all the
other do likewise end; as may be seen in the end of Psalm. 72, 89, 106, and 150.

PSALM XLII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician, Maschil, etc.] See the Notes upon the Titles
of the 4. and 32. Psalms: for the sons of Korah, who were singers in the
Tabernacle and Temple, 1 Chro. 6.22, 31, and 2 Chro. 20.19. and so this Psalm
was composed for them, and delivered to the master of their quire, and that in
David's days was Heman, 1 Chro. 6.33. It may indeed be read also Maschil of the
sons of Korah: and therefore some conceive that the eleven Psalms which have
this Title, were composed by some of the sons of Korah, either in the
Babylonian captivity, or at some other time, perhaps in David's days; which
some judge the more probable, because they conceive it to be that Heman of the
stock of Korah, who is mentioned 1 Kings 4.31. amongst those men of eminent
note whom Solomon excelled in wisdom; and that Solomon is the rather compared
with him, because Solomon also excelled in poetry, and composed many Songs, as
this Heman also did. But for that, see the Note there. I rather conceive it was
composed by David for the sons of Korah: and because he complains of so long
absence from the house of God, some think it more probable that his exile in
Saul's days, then when Absalom drove him from Jerusalem, was the occasion of
composing this Psalm. But for this, see the Note Psalm. 43.1.

Verse. 1. As the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after
thee, O God*] Not being so much grieved for the loss of his goods, honors, or
other outward contentments, as for his absence from Gods house, he compares his
earnest desire to enjoy Gods presence in his Ordinances, to a hearts panting or
braying after the waterbrooks; because the heart being of a very hot and dry
constitution, is usually exceeding thirsty, especially in summer, or when she
is hunted, and dwelling in the deserts where there is little water, does
therefore the more earnestly pant and bray after the waterbrooks to quench her
thirst; and (say some) to save her self also from the hounds that pursue her.

Verse. 2. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, etc.] Who is the
fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9. the fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.13.
abundantly refreshing those that come to him. When shall I come and appear
before God? to wit, in his Sanctuary. And this implies also his hope, that in
due time God would bring him thither.

Verse. 3. My tears have been my meat day and night, etc.] To wit, either 1.
because with abundance of tears, gliding down his cheeks, his mouth was so
filled, that he might swallow them like meat; or at least because God gave him,
as I may say, his belly full of weeping; and therefore elsewhere in a like
expression there is express mention made of the plenty of tears, Psalm. 80.5.
Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink in
great measure: or 2. because he did as duly weep as he did eat his meat, yea
his tears were usually mingled with his meat, according to a like expression
Psalm. 102.9. I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping:
or 3. because forsaking his meat he gave himself wholly to weeping, that was in
stead of his food: or 4. because it was pleasing and delightful to him, and
did strengthen and revive him, as meat does a hungry man. While they
continually say unto me, Where is thy God? as if they should have said, Has
not that God whom you served so zealously, and on whom you relied with such
confidence, forsaken you at last? And thus, which grieved David most, the name
of God was dishonored.

Verse. 4. When I remember these things, I power out my soul in me, etc.] That
is, Giving the reins to my grief, I power out my sorrow in tears and
complaints, etc. see the Note 1 Samuel 1.15: or rather, I die and faint away with
grief; see the Note Job 30.16. As for those words, when I remember these
things, though some would have them referred to that which follows, concerning
his former resorting freely to the house of God; yet I conceive they must
necessarily be referred to what he had said before, both concerning his absence
from and his longing after Gods presence in his Sanctuary, verse. 1, 2. and
likewise concerning his enemies upbraiding him therewith, verse. 3. Only indeed
in the following words, he makes his former liberty the reason why the
remembrance of those things was so bitter to him; for, says he, I had gone
with the multitude, etc.

Verse. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, etc?] To wit, with grief? for
heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop, Prove. 12.25. Hope thou in God,
for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance, that is, the help
afforded me by his gracious presence, or by his looking favorably upon me;
implying that if God would but show himself, or look favorably upon him, it
would be enough. Yea I conceive that this expression he the rather uses,
because as by his being driven from Gods Sanctuary, the place of Gods special
presence, the Lord did as it were hide his face from him; so by bringing him
back thither, he hoped the Lord would again look favorably upon him. And this
he opposes to that bitter taunt of his enemies, where is now thy God?

Verse. 6. O my God, my soul is cast down within me, etc.] See the former Note:
therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, that is, the land
beyond Jordan; and of the Hermonites, that is, the people inhabiting by Hermon,
a mount in the utmost North-east bounds of the land of Canaan (yet because
Hermon was a long track of hills, some conceive that those hills are here
called the Hermonites (as those mountains that divide Germany and France from
Italy are called the Alps) and that they are mentioned thus in the plural
number, because David at several times hid himself sometimes in one of these
hills, and sometimes in another:) from the hill Mizar; which might be some hill
in those parts not mentioned elsewhere in the Scripture; or, if we read it,
from the little hill, as it is translated in the margin of our Bibles, it may
be meant of the hills in the South of Judea, which were little hills in
comparison of Libanus and Hermon on the North and Northeast (and so the utmost
bounds of the land of Judea are mentioned both on the East, North and South) or
of mount Hermon, and that he calls it, though a great mountain, a little
hill, in respect of Sion, which he so greatly magnifyed for its spiritual
dignity, or with relation to the farthest part of Hermon, where the hills are
but little. However the meaning is doubtless this, that being cast down for
his forced exile from Gods Sanctuary, to cheat himself herein, even where he
was farthest distant from it, from the farthest parts of the land, whither he
was glad to retire, he would remember God, to wit, either 1. as looking toward
the Tabernacle, and by faith in spirit representing to himself Gods gracious
presence there, whilst he was absent in body; or 2. as remembering the great
things that God did for his people, when he first brought them into the land of
Canaan, in those places without Jordan, where he then wandered up and down and
hid himself; as namely their victories over Sihon and Og, etc. or 3. as
remembering Gods power, faithfulness, goodness and promises.

Verse. 7. Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water-spouts.] As if he
had said, When thou do with great terror break forth in displeasure against
me, diverse and many overwhelming calamities do fall upon me, as if they did
call and invite one another to come, that they might all together violently
rush in upon me, or that they might follow thick and close one in the neck of
another; even as when great slouds or showers of rain do break in upon men, and
are in danger to overwhelm them: and therefore he adds, all thy waves and thy
billows are gone over me. By Gods water-spouts are meant the showers of rain,
which come pouring down from heaven, see the Note Job 38.25. (whereto comparing
his troubles, he covertly acknowledges that they came all from God) and the
noise of these water-spouts is the noise that these showers of rain make, when
they fall down upon the earth, or the claps of thunder that are with and before
these showers. And as for that first clause, Deep calls unto deep, either he
alludes therein to the mighty floods of rain pouring down from the clouds
above, and the streams breaking forth from the fountains of the great deep
beneath, one calling upon the other as it were, that they might together
overwhelm a poor creature; or to the overflowing of several rivers, after such
rains, whose waters by that means come together, as if they had called upon one
another that they might meet in one; or rather to the waves of the sea, that
come tumbling in together, or follow close one upon the neck of another, as if
each wave invited another; or else to the many mighty breaches that will be in
the sea in a tempest, whereinto one after another the ships seem to sink, as if
they should never rise up again, as if one of them called to the other to come
in to the swallowing up of such poor weather-beaten vessels, according to that
of the Psalmist Psalm. 107.26. they mount up to the heaven, they go down again
to the depths; their soul is melted because of troubles.

Verse. 8. Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, etc.]
That is, He will effectually assure my heart of his love; or rather, He will
with authority and power send deliverance and blessings, the fruits and
manifestations of his loving kindness to me. The like expression we have Deuteronomy.
28.8, and Psalm. 44.4. and the ground of it is, because if God wills any thing
to be done, it is enough; and because both the angels and all other creatures
are ready as it were at Gods command to help his servants: and in the night his
song shall be with me; see the Note Job 35.10: and my prayer unto the God of my
life; to wit, either by way of praising God for that his mercy, or by way of
seeking farther to God upon the encouragement of that he had already done for
him. Yet some understand this last clause to be added in this sense, that till
God did command his loving kindness in the day time, etc. he would follow God
with his prayers, the known means of obtaining mercies from him.

Verse. 9. I will say unto God, my rock, Why have thou forgotten me?] See the
Notes Deuteronomy. 32.4, and Psalm. 13.1.

Verse. 11. I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance.] Thus
he calls God, either 1. because God was ever his present and apparent help,
whom by the eye of faith he did still behold, and by experience did find ready
at hand to help him, and to cause him to see his salvation; or 2. because to
him only he was to look in expectation of help; or 3. because the help that he
knew God would afford him would cheer up his countenance, and clear it from
shame and weeping, and enable him to hold up his head, and show his face
amongst men, with courage and comfort.

PSALM XLIII.
Verse. 1. JVdge me, O God, and plead my cause, etc.] That is, Clear mine
innocence, and deliver me from mine enemies; see the Notes Deuteronomy. 32.36, and Ps.
35.1. against an ungodly nation, to wit, Saul and his wicked crew, or rather
Absalom and his conspirators. And accordingly we must understand the following
clause, O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man, either indefinitely,
as spoken of all his unjust and treacherous enemies, or particularly of Saul,
who often pretended fair to him, when he sought his ruin; or rather of
Ahithophel, a man of noted subtilty, or Absalom, who had cunningly stolen the
hearts of the people from him, and pretended a sacrifice at Hebron, when he
meant to rise up in rebellion against him: For this seems most probable,
because he speaks verse. 3. of going to Gods holy hill, to wit, mount Sion,
where the Ark was not in Saul's time: unless we will say, that though David
penned this Psalm with reference to his exile in Saul's days, yet he used that
expression, because he penned it after he was settled in the throne, and had
removed the Ark to Sion; which seems not so probable. However, doubtless he
mentions the ungodliness, injustice and deceitfulness of his enemies, thereby
to move God to pity and help him.

Verse. 2. For thou art the God of my strength.] That is, the God that give me
strength, and art my strength. See the Note Exodus 15.2.

Verse. 3. O send out thy light and thy truth, etc.] That is, Manifest thy
loving kindness and favor to me to the chearing of my heart, by sending me
help, and directing me what to do, that so I may come again to thy house,
where I may enjoy the light of thy presence, Word and Ordinances, and the truth
of thy promises may be made good unto me. See the Notes 2 Samuel 22.29. Esth.
8.16. Job ^9.^. and Psalm. 27.1. Yet some would have the accomplishment of Gods
promises to be all that is desired in these words; O send out thy light and thy
truth, that is, By doing what thou have spoken, cause the light of thy promises
to shine forth clearly, which now seem to be obscured and overclouded. As for
the following clause, let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy hill
and to thy tabernacles, though some hold this is meant of the hill whereon
Kiriath-jearim stood, whether the Ark was removed in the days of Samuel, 2 Samuel 7.1. yet I rather take it to be meant of mount Sion, for which see the
Note above verse. 1. and that he speaks of Gods tabernacles in the plural
number, either 1. because the Ark was removed to several places before it came
to be settled in the Temple; or 2. because the ^ent or tabernacle which David
pitched for the Ark, and the tabernacle which Moses built, were in two several
places all David's time, see 1 Chro. 16.37, 38, 39; or 3. because the tabernacle
consisted of two parts, to wit, the holy place and the most holy.

Verse. 4. Upon the harp will I praise thee.] See the Note Psalm. 33.2.

Verse. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 42.5, 11.

PSALM XLIV.
The Title. TO the chief Musician for the sons of Korah, Maschil.] See the Note
upon the Title Psalm. 42. By many passages of this Psalm it seems probable, that
it was not composed by David (because the people of Israel were never in his
days in so sad a condition as is here described) but that rather it sets forth
their condition in the Babylonian captivity, or afterward under the
persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes in the days of the Maccabees, and was
therefore composed by some of Korahs posterity, or some other holy man of God
that lived in those times. Yet there are some learned men that do rather think
it was composed by David, and that to represent the calamitous condition of
Gods people by reason of the oppression of the Philistines, and other
neighboring nations, even from the days of Samson unto his time: which indeed
is very likely, if not most probable.

Verse. 1. We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what
work thou did in their days, etc.] In the name of the whole Church the
prophet here mentions what had been by tradition from their fathers reported to
them, to wit, what work he did in their days: where the singular number is put
for the plural, what work, that is, what great and glorious works he did in
those times; or else it is meant of that great work particularly, of putting
the Israelites into possession of the land of Canaan, of which he speaks in the
following verse, How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and
plantedst them, etc. see the Note 2 Samuel 7.10.

Verse. 3. Thine arm and the light of thy countenance.] That is, thy favor. See
the Notes Numb. 6.25, 26, and Psalm. 4.6.

Verse. 4. Thou art my king, O God, etc.] That is, Thou, who have formerly done
such great things for thy people, art my king; (it is the people of Israel that
here speaks as one man, as being all united in body) therefore as a king
command deliverances for Jacob; for which see the Notes Psalm. 42.8, and 20.1,
and 24.6.

Verse. 5. Through thee will we push down our enemies, etc.] See the Notes Deuteronomy.
33.17: through thy Name, that is, through thy help, see the Notes, Psalm. 20.5,
7. will we tread them under that rise up against us; that is, we should subdue
them with ease, and use them with contempt, if thou would assist us.

Verse. 7. And have put them to shame that hated us.] See the Note Psalm. 40.14.

Verse. 9. But thou have cast us off, etc. and go not forth with our armies.]
To wit, as our Captain, to help us against our enemies. He may seem herein to
allude to that ancient custom of carrying out the Ark with them in their wars.

Verse. 11. Thou have given us like sheep appointed for meat, etc.] And not
reserved for breeding or for wool. The meaning of this expression is, that God
had brought them into such a condition, that they were in the power of their
enemies, as sheep are in the hands of the butcher, being no way able to resist
them, slaughtered every day, or in imminent danger to be slaughtered, no man
making any conscience of taking away their lives; and as if God esteemed them a
people good for nothing, but to be devoured with delight by their enemies: and
have scattered us among the heathen; and so those that were not slain, were
sold for slaves.

Verse. 12. Thou sellest thy people for naught, etc.] What is meant by Gods
selling his people, see in the Note Deuteronomy. 32.30: But by selling them for naught
here is meant, either that they were sold amongst the heathens at a poor, base
price, for little or nothing as we use to say; or that they were given up to
their enemies, as a thing of no value; or that, whereas when men sell any
thing, they use to receive a valuable price for it, God had parted with his
people, and received nothing for them; which some think is also intended in the
following words, and do not increase thy wealth by their price: as if they
had said, Thou gettest nothing, but only loosest by the bargain, in that thou
have lost the people that were thy portion and inheritance, and have not taken
any other people in their stead; yea in that the people to whom they were sold,
did not yield him any acknowledgement, nor did him any homage, as a recompense
for his loss. But indeed others understand this last clause, and do not
increase thy wealth by their price, either 1. as intimating at what a low rate
they were sold; God did not do as men use to do, that seek to enhaunce the
price of what they sell, making what trial they can to see who will give most:
or 2. as implying, that God had not done it with expectation of some greater
benefit, that might redound to him hereafter; as those that when they sell not
for present money, do sell at the dearer rate: or 3. that God suffered their
enemies to have them upon what price and condition they pleased, in that he
made them not pay dear for their conquest, but suffered them to subdue them so
easily, without any considerable loss or damage to themselves. But however,
observable it is, that whilst they call themselves still Gods people, Thou
sellest thy people for naught, there is therein an intimation of their hope,
that yet for all this God would at last remember the interest he had in them.

Verse. 14. Thou make us a by word among the heathen, etc.] See the Note
Deuter. 28.37: a shaking of the head among the people; see the Note Job 16.4.

Verse. 15. My confusion is continually before me, etc.] That is, It is ever in
my mind, that I can never forget it; or, I am continually an eye and
ear-witnesse of that which overwhelms me with confusion, to wit, the reproaches
of their enemies: and the shame of my face has covered me; that is, my face is
full of shame and blushing; or, I am so ashamed, that I dare not look up, and
am loath men should see me.

Verse. 16. For the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth, etc.] To wit,
not us only, but even our God also: by reason of the enemy and avenger; see the
Note Psalm. 8.2.

Verse. 17. Yet have we not forgotten thee, etc.] To wit, by forsaking the true
Religion to please our enemies: and this is alleged as another argument to
move God to help them.

Verse. 19. Though thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, etc.] That
is, though thou have sorely afflicted us, in a place of horrid terrors and
desperate dangers, being continually in the power of men, fierce and cruel as
dragons. He alludes to those dens and wildernesses, which were usually the
habitation of dragons, as was that great and terrible wilderness Deuteronomy. 8.15.
which the Israelites went through, wherein were fiery serpents and scorpions;
and to the same purpose also is the following clause, for even therein likewise
there may be an allusion to the dreadful darkness of those dragons dens: and
covered us with the shadow of death, concerning which see the Notes Job 3.5,
and Psalm. 23.4.

Verse. 20. If we have forgotten the name of our God, etc.] That is, if we have
forgotten our God, to wit, by any defection to their Idol-Gods; see the Note
Psalm. 5.11.

Verse. 21. Shall not he search this out? etc.] That is, If this we had done, it
could not have been hid from God; and he therefore knows that it is not so; to
him we appeal. Or, If we had done this, God would have known it, and would have
called us to an account for it; the temptation of Gods seeming to have forsaken
us would not have excused us, and therefore we durst not do it. For he knows
the secrets of the heart; and much more such open defections to Idolatry.

Verse. 22. Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, etc.] That is, So
far are we from any such apostatizing from thee, that for thy sake, and the
constant profession of thy truth, are we continually afflicted and martyred:
(and this he alleges also to move God thereby to plead their cause.) And
indeed the sufferings of the faithful, both in Babylon and in the days of the
Maccabees, were for their constancy in the true Religion; and therefore does
the Apostle urge this place to encourage Christians in their sufferings, Romans
8.36. we are counted as sheep for the slaughter: see above verse. 11.

Verse. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction, etc.?
To wit, notwithstanding we have not forgotten thee, as they had said before
verse. 17. see the Note Psalm. 13.1.

Verse. 25. For our soul is bowed down to the dust, etc.] That is, Through the
heavy weight of our afflictions, we are brought down to the lowest degree of
misery; or we are as dead men ready to drop into the grave: see the Notes Psalm.
6.5, and 22.15. Our belly cleaves unto the earth, that is, we are no better
then dead men; or, we are irrecoverably cast down and trodden under foot. Yet
some would have this understood of their falling down on the ground, and lying
there till their bellies seemed as it were to be glued to the earth, by way of
humbling themselves before the Lord.

Verse. 26. Redeem us for thy mercies sake.] That is, thereby to manifest and
magnify thy mercy; or, because thou art merciful. And thus though they had
before alleged their integrity, verse. 17, 18, 19; yet now for the procuring of
help, they plead nothing but Gods mercy.

PSALM XLV.
The Title. TO the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, for the sons of Korah,
Maschil. A Song of loves.] See the Note upon the Title Psalm. 42. The last
words, a song of loves, show that the Psalmist, whoever it was, composed this
Psalm, as an Epithalamium or marriage-song. Now though the Apostles testimony
Heb. 1.8, 9, that what is said here verse. 6, 7. is spoken of the Messiah, be a
sufficient proof, that the main scope of this Psalm is to set forth the love of
Christ and his Church, Christ the Bridegroom, and the Church his spouse and
bride, as they are called Joh. 3.29. (and therefore indeed there are some
passages in the Psalm, as in verse. 2, 6, and 16, which cannot properly be
applied to any but Christ) yet I hold it most probable, that it was also
written with respect unto Solomon, (as a type) and his marriage with the
daughter of Pharaoh (of which see the Note 1 Kings 3.1.) and that because there
are many passages, that seem clearly to allude at least thereto, as is evident
verse. 8, 9, 10, etc. and because it is much like the Canticles or the Song of
Solomon, and as it were an Epitome of that. So that I conceive it is called A
song of loves, not as some would have it, because it sets forth the love of God
to his Jedidiah, (of which see the Note 2 Samuel 12.25.) but because it
celebrates how lovely Solomon and his bride were to be to each other; but
especially the spiritual love of Christ and his spouse the Church. As for that
word Shoshannim, To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, thereby doubtless is
meant, either some song that began with this word, to the tune whereof this
Psalm was to be sung; or some musical instrument that was to be used in the
singing of it. And because the word seems clearly to be formed of an Hebrew
word that signifies six, it is most probable that thereby is meant
six-stringed instruments; or, as some would have it, instruments whereon were
many engravings of lillies, which are six-leaved flowers. And indeed some
Interpreters, because of that derivation of the word, do thus translate it,
upon Shoshannim, that is, upon lillies: and that either as in reference to
their wedding garlands, that were made much of lillies; or as intending by
these lillies, Christ and his Church, who are indeed often for their sweet and
beautiful graces, and for their flagrant love one to another, compared to
lillies, as Cant. 2.1, 2. I am the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the
valleys, As the lilly among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

Verse. 1. My heart is enditing a good matter, etc.] That is, matter of singular
excellency, pleasure and delight. The drift of this preface was to show, that
the argument of this Psalm was concerning great and high mysteries; it was not
meant merely of an earthly mortal prince, but of a person of far greater
excellency, and contained those things, which being read with understanding
must needs be pleasant and delightful, asswaging the sorrows and chearing the
hearts of those that read them. It is in the Hebrew, My heart boyleth or
bubleth up a good matter, and this expression seems to intimate, that his heart
being enflamed by the spirit with the love and admiration of Christ and his
kingdom, and even leaping for joy at the consideration thereof, he was stirred
up with such a fervent desire to declare these things, that he could not
forbear to power them forth with plenty of words. I speak of the things which I
have made, that is, the verses which I have made, or rather, the things which I
have expressed in this my poem, concerning the king, to wit, Solomon, but
chiefly the King of kings, the promised Messiah. As for those last words, my
tongue is the pen of a ready writer, that is, a quick writer, or a shorthand
writer, or a ready expounder of the law, see Ezra 7.6. they seem to imply, 1.
that he should write and speak nothing, but what came from his heart; 2. that
his pen and tongue were guided by the Holy Ghost, as the pen is by the hand of
the writer; 3. that he did with much alacrity and readiness of mind write and
utter what the spirit did dictate to him; and 4. that he did it not after much
study and meditation, but by the present and speedy prompting of Gods spirit.
Yea some would have it also imply the elegancy of his speech, because those
that write most neatly do not stay long upon the drawing of their letters, but
write with a ready and a nimble stroke.

Verse. 2. Thou art fairer then the children of men, etc.] Here the Bridegroom
is extolled 1. for his beauty; this being one thing which makes a man amiable
in the eyes of his spouse, and which usually procures a prince favor amongst
his people, If we refer it to Solomon, it must be taken as a poetical
expression of his surpassing comeliness, namely, that he was fairer then any
other person. But understanding it of Christ, whom doubtless the Psalmist did
chiefly intend, it must be referred to that spiritual beauty, whereof the
prophet speaks Isa. 33.17. Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: for
herein Christ, though true and very man (which is here employed) did surpass
all the children of men; 1st, in that he was also true and very God; 2ly, in
that he was free from the least stain and blemish of sin, holy, harmless,
undefiled, separated from sinners, Heb. 7.26; 3ly, in that he was adorned with
the gifts and graces of Gods spirit in all excellency and perfection, far above
all other men whatsoever, for in him were hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2.3. he was full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.14. neither did God
give the spirit by measure unto him, Joh. 4.34; and 4ly, in that his life was
so transcendently just and holy. And therefore though in other respects, namely
in regard of his humbled and low estate and passion, that was true which the
prophet spoke Isa. 53.2. he has no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see
him there is no beauty that we should desire him: yet in regard of this
spiritual beauty, he excelled all the children of men. And 2. for his
eloquence, grace is powered into thy lips. For by grace in the lips is meant
speech or power of speaking so, as may procure grace and favor amongst men,
which we call speaking with a grace, according to that Eccles. 10.12. The words
of a wise man's mouth are gracious, that is, procure great favor and
acceptance: or, that may work grace in others, that may minister grace unto the
hearers, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 4.29. and then this phrase of pouring forth
this grace into his lips does imply, both that it was plentifully powered forth
upon him, and that it did abundantly flow forth from him. Now though this was
indeed eminent in Solomon, insomuch that all the earth sought to Solomon to
hear his wisdom, 1 Kings 10.14. yet was it far more clearly accomplished in
Christ, both in regard of the matter of his teaching, the glad tidings of
salvation in the sweet and precious promises of the Gospel; and also in regard
of its mighty efficacy in working upon the consciences of men, especially in
his own personal teaching; whence it is said, that all bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, Luke 4.22. that
he taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7.29. and
that never man spoke like him, Joh. 7.46. As for the last clause, therefore God
has blessed thee for ever, some conceive that it holds forth the effect of
those glorious endowments he had before spoken of, namely, that upon those two
grounds, because of his beauty and the grace of his lips, therefore God had
blessed him for ever, by conferring upon him an everlasting kingdom, according
to that Joh. 10.17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my
life, etc. and that Phil. 2.8, 9. He humbled himself, etc. wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, etc. But others (and I think better) take this to be
added, as the cause of those endowments formerly mentioned; therefore, that is,
in conferring these excellent gifts upon thee, God has blessed thee for ever,
Gods blessing being the cause of conferring them upon thee for the perpetual
good of thy people; or, therefore, that thou might excel all others in thy
beauty and the grace of thy lips, and might work these things in others, God
has blessed thee for ever.

Verse. 3. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, etc.] Here the
Bridegroom is extolled for his regal dignity, or for his prowess and power in
military affairs, which is a great ornament to kings, that are exalted of God
for the preservation of their kingdoms. Only it is expressed in a poetical
manner, as by way of encouraging him to make use of, and to show forth his
power; Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, that is, Take unto thee thy royal
authority; or, show forth thy prowess and royal power, and arm thy self, for
the subduing of the elect, the defense of thy people, and the vanquishing of
thine and their enemies. For the sword is here mentioned, as the ensign of
regal power, as it is Romans 13.4. or, as the arms whereby he should vanquish
his enemies: and hereby, as we refer it to Christ, is meant the word of God,
that sharp two-edged sword which comes out of the mouth of Christ, Rev. 1.16.
As for the last words, with thy glory and thy majesty, they import as much as
if it had been said, as becomes thy glorious estate and majesty; or, whereby,
as the ensigns of thy prowess and regal power, thou may appear glorious
and full of majesty, and so become renowned and famous, not only amongst thine
own subjects, but even amongst thine enemies also, and may defend thy
majesty and dignity against all principalities and powers whatsoever.

Verse. 4. And in thy majesty ride prosperously, etc.] That is, Go on
successefully in the exercise of thy regal power, and in conquering and
subduing all thine enemies. And indeed because Solomon lived in so great peace,
it is evident that this was principally meant of one greater then Solomon, even
of Christ, and so employed a prophecy, that he should proceed on with
wonderful speed and success, and that for a long time together (for so much
that word ride prosperously does import) in vanquishing Satan, and in
conquering and subduing the world by the ministry of the Gospel. As for the
following words, because of truth and meekness and righteousness, some
conceive that these are spoken of, as the chariot whereon he should ride in
triumph, and become glorious and renowned in the world. However I conceive they
do clearly affirm, that as by these Solomon should prosper in the exercise of
his regal power, and become a glorious King, (and not only by outward pomp,
much less by violence, injustice and oppression, as many other princes sought
to do) according to that Prove. 20.28. Mercy and truth preserve the King, and
16.12. the throne is established by righteousness: so also much more that
Christ should prosper and prevail, first, by truth, that is, his faithfulness
in making good his word to all that rely thereon, and by the truth of the
Gospel revealed wholly by him; secondly, by meekness, causing him not to
disregard the meanest, and to spare and pardon his bitterest enemies, when they
submit themselves to him, see Za. 9.9; and thirdly, by righteousness, both in
being exactly just to all in the administration of his regal power, and also
by bringing in that everlasting righteousness Dan. 9.24, whereby sinners are
justified before God, yea and by making his subjects also inherently righteous.
Yet some hold that truth and meekness and righteousness are here mentioned,
not as the means whereby he should prevail, but as those things for the
maintenance whereof his power should be employed.

And thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.] That is, By thine own
almighty power, without any help from others, thou shall accomplish those
things wherein thou shall be terrible to thine enemies. For this expression,
that his right hand should teach him terrible things, seems only used to imply,
either that by his power he should be enabled to do terrible things, because
teaching enables men to do what they are taught; or that by his almighty power
he should experimentally see what great and terrible things should be done by
him.

Verse. 5. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the kings enemies, etc.] That
is, in the heart of thine enemies, O king; which is added to intimate the
reason of his prevailing, namely, because God had appointed him to be king over
Sion. Now by his arrows are meant both first, the words of the Gospel, and the
preaching thereof, which with great efficacy do pierce the hearts of men, (and
it may well be, which some add, that it is said in the heart of the kings
enemies, because the words of Christ, when they enter the hearts of men, are
wont to stick and remain there) whence also is the like expression concerning
Christ Isa. 49.2. in the shadow of his hand has he hid me, and made me a
polished shaft, etc. and secondly, the judgments wherewith he strikes his
obstinate enemies. And accordingly we must understand the following clause,
whereby the people fall under thee: to wit, either that by his judgments
Christ should slay them; or that by his Gospel they should either be brought to
fall down and adore him, and submit themselves to him, being thenceforth dead
unto sin, and living unto righteousness, or else should be wounded mortally:
for indeed to some they are the favor of life unto life, and to others the
savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2.16.

Verse. 6. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, etc.] These words of the
Psalmist in this and the following verse are alleged by the Apostle Heb. 1.8,
9. to prove the Godhead of Christ. And indeed though Princes are sometimes
called Gods, (of which see the Note Exodus 22.28.) yet because no mortal man is
any where in the Scripture called God absolutely, it must needs be that the
Psalmist did intend this principally of Christ. And the like may be gathered
also from that which is said here concerning the eternity of his kingdom, and
the exact righteousness of his kingdom; seeing Solomon sat not long on his
throne, and toward the later end of his reign swerved strangely from his
former righteousness. Yea because Solomon's kingdom was so soon shattered in
his son Rehoboam, lest the faith of Gods righteous servants, that had heard of
the promise made to David concerning the perpetuity of his kingdom, should be
staggered hereby, it is most probable that the Psalmist did here purposely seek
to stablish their hearts, by putting them upon the expectation of a king that
was to come out of that stock, but greater then he, whose throne was to
continue indeed for ever and ever.

Verse. 7. Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness, etc.] As Christ
has always manifested this in the righteous exercise of his regal power; so
especially in his suffering the wickedness of his people (so much he hated it)
to be punished in his own body, that so he might also satisfy Gods justice, and
present his people pure and spotless before him: therefore, that is, to this
end, that thou might love righteousness, and hate iniquity, see the Note
above verse. 2. God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows. Now for the understanding of this, we must know that there may be
herein an allusion, either to the ointment wherewith Solomon was anointed on
his wedding day above his fellows, above his companions and Bride-men, as being
far more precious then theirs; and which therefore may be called the oil of
gladness, because it was used on a day of such gladness: or else to the oil
wherewith he was anointed at his Coronation; called the oil of gladness,
because it made glad not Solomon only, but the people also over whom he was to
reign, see 1 Kings 1.39, 40; and wherewith it may be said that he was anointed
above his fellows, both because he was exalted thereby above all his brethren,
and because through the unction of Gods spirit, which was signified thereby, he
excelled all the Princes of the earth in wisdom, as is largely expressed 1
Kings 4.30, 31. etc. But however, principally no doubt this is meant of Christ,
and his anointing with the Holy Ghost, according to that Act. 10.38. God
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power; and that either
with respect to his outward inauguration to his office at his Baptism, when
the Holy Ghost came down upon him in the likeness of (...) dove, Matthew. 3.16.
or to the superabundant pouring forth of the gifts of the Holy Ghost upon his
humane nature. And then this is called the oil of gladness, because as in the
sign, oil was accounted an emblem of gladness, being much used in times of
feasting and gladness, Psalm. 23.5. Thou preparest a table before me in the
presence of mine enemies, thou anointest my head with oil, my cup runs over,
and not only good to make the face to shine, but also to cheer the heart, Ps.
104.15, whence it is that the oil of joy is opposed to mourning Esa. 61.3: so
in the thing signified thereby, the anointing of Christ with the Holy Ghost,
was in Christ the cause of all the bliss and comfort procured by him for his
Church, and being derived from him to the faithful, it is the spring of all
their comfort and joy. As for those words, above thy fellows, they may be meant
of Christ several ways: as that he was anointed with the oil of gladness,
first, above all men partakers of the same flesh and blood with him; or
secondly, above all Christians, who are made partakers of Christ, Heb. 3.14,
and with him are partakers of the same holy unction, and of all the privileges
he has purchased for them, being made the sons of God, joynt-heirs with
Christ, Romans 8.17, yea kings and priests unto God, as he is, Rev. 1.6; or
thirdly, above all that were set apart by special calling to the regal power,
as Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, or any others. And indeed, considering that
he was both God and man, that there was never man advanced to such an eminency
of dignity, as to be both king, priest and prophet, and to have the preeminence
therein above all, the King of kings, the chief priest and the chief prophet,
and that he had such a fullness of the spirit, even without measure, so that
all that have grace received it of his fullness, and so was superabundantly
replenished with all the gifts and graces of the spirit in all perfection, it
may well be said that he was anointed with this oil of gladness above his
fellows.

Verse. 8. All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes and cassia, etc.] This
may be meant of the ordinary royal attire of Solomon, which we may see was
very gorgeous, by that which Christ says concerning the lillies of the field,
Matthew. 6.29. to wit, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one
of these: or else of his nuptial attire, when indeed men were wont to be in
their greatest bravery; see the Note Psalm. 19.5. And then for the smell of
these garments, either it may be intended to have been from that sweet and
precious ointment, wherewith he was anointed king; or else rather from those
perfumes made of myrrh and aloes and cassia, and such like aromaticks,
wherewith they were wont in those countries very much to perfume their
garments; of which see the Note Genesis 27.27. As for the following words, out of
the ivory palaces, etc. the meaning must needs be, that when Solomon came out
of his palaces adorned with ivory, his garments smelt of myrrh, etc. or that
those his garments were brought to him out of his ivory palaces or wardrobes,
where they had been laid in such spices and perfumes. For that the kings of
Judah had such rich wardrobes, and treasuries for spicery and perfumes, is
evident 2 Kings 20.13: and though we read in the story of Solomon only of a
throne of ivory which he had, whereto the like was not made in any kingdom, 1
Kings 10.18, 20; yet because it was so usual in those times to adorn their
houses with ivory, see 1 Kings 22.39. and Amos 3.15, it may well be thought
that it was so also in Solomon's magnificent buildings. And then those last
words, whereby they have made thee glad, are meant either of these palaces so
sumptuously built; or rather of his perfumed garments; or of the spiceries,
oils and perfumes wherewith they were sweetened: and hereby they, that is, those
that gave these things, or used them for Solomon's service, are said to have
made him glad, either because they were brought as honorable presents chiefly
from foreign countries; or because there is a virtue in such odoriferous
things to cheer and revive the spirits of men, Ointment and perfume, says
Solomon himself, rejoice the heart, Prove. 27.9. But now for Christ, of whom
these things are principally meant, first, by his garments smelling of myrrh,
aloes and cassia are meant, either the humanity, the body and soul, wherewith
his Godhead was veiled and covered as with a garment, (as indeed the soul also
of man is in that respect said to be clothed with the body, 2 Cor. 5.2.) or
else rather those royal and precious gifts and graces of Gods spirit wherewith
he was adorned, and the most perfect holiness and righteousness of his person
and life; and wherewith also he is clothed in his members, both as his
righteousness is imputed to them, and as from that fullness of grace that is
in him there is grace derived unto them according to their measure, to make
them also inherently holy and righteous: for these may be well said to yield a
sweet smelling savor, either with respect to the sweetness of the doctrine of
the Gospel, that brings the glad tidings of this righteousness for the
salvation of men, refreshing afflicted consciences, and being the savor of
life unto life to those that believe it, 2 Cor. 2.16; or else with respect to
that amiable sweetness that was in his words and deeds, savouring of heaven,
and of his royal dignity and riches, and which also is in some proportion in
the graces and holiness of all his members, their prayers and praises, etc. or
with respect to the same of Christ, procured by his holiness, and the great
things that he has done for his people, whereby his very name is become sweet
and delightful to those that hear it, Cant. 1.3. Because of the savor of thy
good ointments, thy name is as ointment powered forth; therefore do the virgins
love thee; or to the good esteem which the holiness of the Saints and members
of Christ procures, a good name being better then precious ointment, Eccles.
7.1. Secondly, by the ivory palaces of Christ may be meant, 1. those out of
which his sweet smelling garments of righteousness were brought, to wit, the
pure and spotless humanity of Christ; which may be judged the more probable,
because the body of man is frequently compared to a house or tabernacle, as in
2 Cor. 5.1, 2. and because Christ himself called his body a temple, Joh. 2.19;
or 2. those out of which are brought the righteousness wherewith Christ is
clothed in his members, to wit, the pure and holy Churches of Christ, or the
holy, gracious and precious souls of the faithful; or 3. rather those out of
which Christ the bridegroom came, to wit, out of heaven, and the bosom of his
Father, Joh. 1.18. from whence he brought the Gospel to us. And thirdly, as
that last clause, whereby they have made thee glad, respects Christ, it must
needs be meant either of the delight he takes in the sweet conversation of his
members, that by their piety and amiable walking, as Christians, they do even
make glad the heart of Christ* or of the joy he takes in the sweet savor of
the Gospel for the salvation of men, and the glory wherewith he is made glad in
heaven upon his accomplishment of the will of his father.

Verse. 9. Kings daughters were amongst thy honorable women, etc.] Because it
is said that Solomon had so many wives and concubines, 1 Kings 11.3, many
expositours conceive that these are his honorable women here spoken of: yet
withal they add, that by mentioning this, or by shadowing forth the
conversion of the Gentiles hereby, the Spirit of God does not approve this
polygamy of Solomon's; but that only it is mentioned to set forth his exceeding
state and magnificence, that amongst these he should have so many that were
kings daughters; yea though by kings we mean only such petty kings, and
presidents of countries and cities, as were in many places in those days. But
I rather conceive that by these honorable women are meant his maids of honor,
that he had to attend upon his Queen, or his Bride-maids, the friends of the
Bride, invited to be of the solemn train of those that attended her on her
wedding day; and that they were indeed of royal and Princely descent, and not
called kings daughters (as some would have it) only because their carriage was
so stately, and their attire was so gorgeous and princelike, that they showed
as if they had been so many kings daughters.

Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir.] That is, in cloth
of gold, and that made of the purest gold; or so richly adorned with chains,
bracelets, jewels of gold, together with a crown of gold upon her head, as if
she had been all over covered with gold. And this is meant of Pharaohs
daughter, that was beloved and honored by Solomon above all his wives, and
therefore is said to stand at his right hand; see the Note Genesis 35.18. But now
as these passages must be applied to Christ, 1. some hold that by his Queen is
meant the Israelites that did first believe; and by his honorable women, the
Gentiles that were afterward converted, and as it were married unto Christ: 2.
others by his Queen understand those that have wholly renounced the world, and
given up themselves to Christ; and by his honorable women, those that being
outward visible members of the Church, do know Christ better, and have some
kind of affection to him, more then others that are not within the pale of the
Church; but yet are not truly united to Christ, only they follow the Queen,
till they attain a greater perfection with her: but 3. others, and I think upon
best grounds, conceive that by these honorable women is meant the multitude of
believers of several kingdoms and nations, who all have their honor from
Christ, and do all honor the catholic Church; and that it is mentioned to the
glory of Christ, that many of noble and royal descent should be of this
number; and that by his Queen is meant the Church in general, the spouse of
Christ: who is said 1. to stand at Christ's right hand, both because of the
great love that Christ bears her, and because he has imparted of his power and
authority to her, and does rule in and by the Church; and likewise because she
is made a sharer with him in his kingdom and glory, Job 17.24. and shall be
there exalted to the next degree of dignity to himself, even above the angels,
(to which some add also, that her standing at Christ's right hand implies, her
continuing constant to Christ;) and 2. to be in gold of Ophir, with respect to
her rich attire of grace and good works here, and of glory in heaven.

Verse. 10. Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear, etc.] That
is, hearken diligently to what thy husband shall say; or rather, to what I
shall now say unto thee. Some conceive that this is spoken in the person of him
that was to lead the Bride, and to give her to the Bridegroom, because such
were wont to give advice to the Bride as they went along with her; and that by
calling her daughter he intended no more, then if he called her young maid or
virgin. But most take these to be the words of the prophet; and why he calls
her daughter, see in the Note Psalm. 34.11. Forget also thine own people, and
thy fathers house; that is, 1. never be troubled for parting with thy parents,
friends, country and people, being honored with such a husband as thou art
now to be married to; 2ly, prefer him before all relations whatsoever,
according to the law of marriage, Genesis 2.24; and 3ly, abandon wholly that
idolatrous and false religion wherein thou were brought up, as if thou had
never known it, and learn and embrace the true Religion professed amongst the
people of God, to whom thou art now joined. And the pressing of this with so
many words, Hearken, consider, and incline thine ear, is, because it is so
hard to get men off from those corruptions and evil ways, which they have
sucked in as it were with their first milk, and whereto they have been long
inured. But now understanding this as spoken to the Church, these words,
Hearken, O daughter, etc. may be understood as an admonition, that she should
carefully attend the preaching of the Gospel, and be instructed thereby: and by
forgetting her own people and her fathers house is meant, that all that give up
their names to Christ, must 1. utterly renounce the devil, whose children all
men are by nature; 2. abandon all those corruptions which they had brought into
the world with them from the loins of their parents; 3. forsake all those evil
courses and errors in religion, whereto they had been inured by corrupt
education, and society with the men of this world, out of which they were
taken; yea and as it respects the Jews, the forsaking of that legal worship
formerly enjoined them; and 4. be willing to forsake all that is dear to them
in this world, that they may cleave unto Christ, as wives do to their husbands,
see Mat. 10.37. and Luke 14.26. If any man come unto me, and hate not his
father and mother, etc. he cannot be my disciple.

Verse. 11. So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty, etc.] And thus his love
shall abundantly recompense the loss of thy father and former friends: for he
is thy Lord, that is, thy husband and head, yea and thy Sovereign too; and
worship thou him, that is, reverence and serve him, and yield him all due
obedience. But now understanding this of Christ and his Church, her beauty is
both the imputed righteousness of Christ, and that inherent holiness and
righteousness wherein she is renewed after the image of God; and in the
worship she is required to yield to him, even that divine worship is included,
which is due only to God: the word ( him) is emphaticall, and worship thou him,
that is, him and him only.

Verse. 12. And the daughter of Tire, etc.] That is, the inhabitants of Tire,
see the Note 2 Kings 19.21. shall be there with a gift, that is, shall come to
thy marriage, or to thy husbands court with great presents. And Tire is here
particularly mentioned, because it was the nearest and the most famous of all
the cities of the Gentiles, a city most renowned in those times for navigation
and traffic, and for her mighty wealth, and therefore likely to bring the most
choice and curious presents; whence it is said of her, that she heaped up
silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets, Zac. 9.3. and she
is called Isa. 23.8. the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose
traffickers are the honorable of the earth; see also Ezekiel. 28: and so this
must needs be a great honor to Solomon, that so great and famous a city should
bring presents to him, as by way of homage; and the alleging of it a strong
argument to move his Bride to forget her fathers house. And to the same purpose
is the following clause, even the rich among the people shall entreat thy
favor: for if it must not be limited to the rich amongst the Tyrians, as some
would have it, yet however it must be understood of seeking the favor of
Solomon and his wife by presents and otherwise; and that this should be done by
the rich and great ones of diverse nations, even the Jews Solomon's own people
being also included. And indeed we read of great presents that were brought to
Solomon by the kings round about him far and near, see 1 Kin. 10.24, 25, though
especially by the king of Tire, 1 Kin. 5.1, etc. Now hereby, as it refers to
Christ, is also intended, 1. that the Gentiles of every nation should submit
themselves to Christ: for though this was literally accomplished in the
conversion of many even of the inhabitants of Tire, see Mar. 3.8. Act. 21.3, 4;
yet here under this one particular all other nations of the Gentiles are
comprehended. And 2. that amongst others many princes and nobles, and of the
great and rich ones amongst the people, should seek to be admitted to be
members of the Church; and that many more should protect and favor the Church,
and many ways do her good, though they did not by a true faith submit
themselves to Christ.

Verse. 13. The kings daughter is all glorious within, etc.] I see not why
Solomon's Bride may not be called here the kings daughter with respect to her
father the king of Egypt: yet in a manner all Expositours hold that this title
is given her in reference to Solomon, and that his spouse is called his
daughter, either because she was by him as it were begotten unto God; or rather
with respect to the tender love he bare her. And then for this, that she is
said to be all glorious within, the meaning of that is, either 1. that her
chief glory consisted in this, that she was admitted to such a familiar privacy
with the king; or 2. that when she sat in the inmost rooms of the kings palace,
she was there in her greatest glory, because those rooms were most gorgeously
set forth with all kind of bravery and glorious furniture; or 3. that she used
to be gloriously attired, not only when she went abroad in public, but also
when she stayed within, as being indeed adorned (which may be employed) only for
the delight of the king, and not that others might gaze upon her; or 4. (which
I like the best) that the inward virtues and endowments of her mind were her
greatest ornament and glory. However, as it is spoken of the Church, who is
both the spouse and daughter of Christ, the great king of the Church, by whom
she is begotten again, and therefore called princes daughter Cant. 7.1, the
meaning must needs be, that she is not glorious in the outward pomp and bravery
of the world, the outward face of the Church being usually very miserable and
afflicted; but only in the spiritual ornaments of the inner man, which are not
apparent to the outward eye of men; being herein like a Bride within doors,
whose bravery is not seen till she goes forth to meet her husband: it does not
yet appear what we shall be, says John, 1 John 3.2. As for the last clause,
her clothing is of wrought gold, see the Note above verse. 9.

Verse. 14. She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needle work, etc.]
In these words, she shall be brought unto the king, some think the Prophet
alludes to a custom in those times, to wit, that queens used not to come to
their husbands unless they were sent for; see Esth. 4.11, and 5.2. But rather
it is spoken in reference to the custom of leading the Bride to the
Bridegrooms house: and accordingly in the next clause, the virgins her
companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee, by those virgins are
meant, not her handmaids, as some would have it, called her companions, only
because they were always in her company attending upon her; but her
bridemaids, that to honor her attended her on her wedding day, and are
therefore called her companions, the same that were before verse. 9. called her
honorable women: As concerning the spiritual meaning hereof, see the Note
there. Only this I must add, 1st, that by their being brought unto the king
may be meant, 1. the bringing of the Church in general in to Christ, or the
bringing of particular Christians into the communion of the Church by the
ministry of the Gospel; and 2. the translating of them to be with Christ in his
kingdom and glory, when both the living and the dead shall be caught up
together in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air* and so shall we ever be
with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17: and 2ly, by the raiment of needle-work^ or the
embroidered garment, wherewith the Church is adorned, is meant that variety of
gifts and graces which Christ has conferred upon his Church; because such
garments use to be wrought with silks of diverse colors and diverse kinds of
works: and 3ly, that particular Christians are here called virgins following
the Church, the Bride, that is, treading in the steps of the faithful in all
ages that have gone before them, not so much because he speaks of the Gentiles,
elect but not yet called, not yet brought unto Christ, but afterward admitted
into fellowship and communion with the Church of the Jews (which is the reason
that some give for it;) as with reference to their purity and sincerity, and
the incorrupt profession they make of the faith of Christ, according to that of
the Apostle 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present
you as a chaste virgin to Christ.

Verse. 15. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought, etc.] As is wont
to be at weddings. Now though herein may be comprehended the rejoicing of God
and Christ, and the holy angels for the conversion and salvation of the elect;
yet I conceive it is chiefly meant of the spiritual rejoicing of all true
believers both here and hereafter, Joh. 16.22. They shall enter into the kings
palace: which may be spiritually meant both of the Church and heaven.

Verse. 16. In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children, etc.] To wit, in as
great glory and renown as ever thy fathers were. Because these words in the
Hebrew are in the masculine gender, Expositours for the most part take them to
be spoken to the Bridegroom: yet considering that in other places terms of the
masculine gender are used, where the Scripture speaks of women, as Nu. 27.7.
and elsewhere, and especially that these words seem so clearly to have
reference to that which was before said to the Bride, v. 10. forget also thine
own people and thy fathers house, it must, I conceive, needs be yielded, that
though we should take it, that the prophet here directs his speech to the
Bridegroom, yet he meant that the Bride should take this which was spoken to
him, as spoken intentionally to both jointly together; namely, that their
children and posterity should become as great and glorious, as either of their
Progenitors had been: which is more fully expressed in the following clause,
whom thou may make princes in all the earth; implying, that his dominions
should be so far enlarged, that he might give several kingdoms to his
children to inherit. It is true indeed that this promise, (which had a
condition of obedience covertly annexed, as all temporal promises have) was
not made good to Solomon and his Bride, because by their sines they forfeited
this mercy: for besides that we read not that ever Solomon had any children by
Pharaohs daughter, he had not any son that was a king but only Rehoboam, that
succeeded him in the kingdom of Israel, and he through his own folly had soon
the greatest part of his kingdom torn away from him. But hereby therefore it
is evident, that this was principally spoken of Christ and his Church. Of
Christ it may be understood thus: In stead of thy fathers shall be thy
children, etc. as if he had said, In stead of thy Progenitors, O Christ, of
the Jewish nation, of whom thou art descended, thou shall have the Christian
Church for thy children, being begotten again by thy word and spirit, according
to that Heb. 2.13. Behold, I and the children which God has given me, and that
title given thee of old, the everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. And then of the
Church, who is termed the mother of all believers, Gal. 4.25. it may be
understood thus: In stead of thy fathers, meaning their fathers after the
flesh, or the Patriarchs, into whose stock the Gentiles being ingrafted are
become the seed of Abraham; shall be thy children, those believers whom thou
shall bring forth unto Christ in great abundance: see Isa. 49.18. And then for
the following clause, whom thou may make princes in all the earth, as it
implies the large extent of Christ's kingdom, so also the great dignity that
Christ should confer upon his; first the twelve Apostles and their
successors in stead of the twelve Patriarchs, whom Christ calls children Joh.
13.33. and by whom he subdued the world, and gave laws unto all the nations of
the world; and then also all other Christians whatsoever, who are made kings
and priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. Not that Christ has conferred upon them any
civil power, (for even those that rule in the Church are as servants rather
then Lords) but that in Christ their head they are admitted to some
participation of his spiritual and eternal kingdom; and by his Gospel, the
scepter of his kingdom, which he has left with them, they do, as it were, by
his power and authority, subdue and govern the world, and shall one day judge
it: see Matthew. 19.28. Luke 22.29. 1 Cor. 6.3.

Verse. 17. I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations, etc.] As if
the prophet had said, By these things which I have made concerning thee, O
king, as it is verse. 1. I will cause thy name to be remembered in all
generations; which must needs be meant of Christ. And thus he foretells the
constant preservation of the Psalms in the Church; and under the perpetuity of
Christ's name, the stability and perpetuity of the Church is employed.

PSALM XLVI.
The Title. TO the chief Musician for the sons of Korah, etc.] See the Note
upon the Title Psalm 42. A Song upon Alamoth; see the Note 1 Chronicles. 15.20.

Verse. 1. God is our refuge and stength, etc.] See the Note Exodus 15.2. Ours,
who are his people: for this Psalm seems to have been composed, by way of
praising God for delivering Jerusalem out of the hands of many violent and
mighty enemies, that sought her ruin.

Verse. 2. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea.] That is, though there
should be never such terrible alterations, confusions and desolations in all
the kingdoms throughout the world, so that the whole world should seem to be
turned upside down, and there should be no likelihood of any place of rest for
the Church. But see the Note Psalm. 23.4.

Verse. 3. Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, etc.] That is, swell
and rage; or be muddy and foul. However the meaning is this: though all the
nations of the world do raise great combustions, even to the terror and
endangering of many kingdoms and great ones in the world (for that may be
intimated in the following clause, though the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof) and though they tumultuously assemble themselves together for the
ruin of the Church, foaming out their own shame Jude 13. like the troubled sea
when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.20. For by
many waters in the Scriptures is often meant many people: see the Note Numb.
24.7.

Verse. 4. There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God
etc.] To wit, Zion; so called, because it was, as is added in the next words,
the holy place of the Tabernacles of the most high, that is, the holy city,
where the Arc was placed in a Tabernacle: see the Note Ps. 43.3. many
Expositours hold that this is meant of the river Kidron, 2 Samuel 15.23, or of
the the streams of Gihon or Shiloah, 2 Chronicles. 32.30, which flowed into that
river, and then compassed half the city of Jerusalem: and accordingly that
which is here said they understand thus; that whilst the whole world seemed to
be in an uproar round about them, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, knowing
themselves to be under the protection of the Almighty, did quietly rejoice in
the pleasures which that little river yielded them, both by its watering the
place and making it fruitful, and in the defense which it was to the city. And
thus, they say, this little river is opposed to the raging waters, of which the
prophet had before spoken, to wit, the tumult of their enemies round about
them; and the delight they quietly took in the one, to the terrors that were
threatened by the other: which they seek to make good by comparing this with a
like place Isa. 8.6. where the Jews are blamed, for being discouraged with
their seeming weak condition, desiring to strengthen themselves by the aid and
power of the kings of Israel and Syria, as not thinking themselves safe under
Gods protection, under the expression of refusing the waters of Shiloah that
go softly, and rejoicing in Rezin and Remaliahs son. But though there may be
in these words an allusion to these brooks that watered Jerusalem; yet I doubt
not but the river here directly intended, the streams whereof shall make glad
the city of God, is the presence of God amongst them, who is the fountain of
all good, and by whose beneficence just matter of gladness and joy was
continually derived to them: and so in the following verse that which is here
figuratively expressed, is clearly explained, There is a river, the streams
whereof shall make glad the city of God etc. God is in the midst of her; she
shall not be moved etc. for which see the Notes Psalm. 16.8, and 21.7. Yea and
because the ministry of the word, and the operations of Gods spirit, are the
chief evidences of Gods gracious presence amongst his people; it may be
figuratively applied to either of these, that they are the river, the streams
whereof make glad the city of God: see Joh. 7.38.

Verse. 6. The heathens raged, the kingdoms were moved, etc.] Though some
understand this last clause of the shaking of those kingdoms, by the avenging
hand of God, that raged against his people; yet I rather take it, that both
these clauses intend one and the same thing, to wit, that many nations of the
heathens did in a rage rise up in a tumultuous manner against Gods people. And
then by way of opposition it follows, he uttered his voice: that is, the Lord
thundered from heaven; or, the Lord promised deliverance to his people; or, he
gave some manifest tokens of his indignation against them, and miraculously
helped his people without any humane means (for to this purpose the like
expressions are used 2 Samuel 22.8. etc.) or, his will and command was that it
should so be: and then, the earth melted, that is, the inhabitants of the
earth, or the enemies that had as it were overspred the face of the earth,
fainted and perished, and were gone in an instant. Now though this may be
generally understood, as that which has and does befall the Church in all
ages: yet more probable it is, that the prophet here speaks of some particular
deliverance, which was the occasion of penning this Psalm.

Verse. 7. The Lord of hoasts is with us, etc.] See the Note Genesis 2.1: the God
of Jacob is our refuge; see the Note Psalm. 20.1.

Verse. 8. Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in
the earth.] To wit, by the mighty havoc he has made amongst the enemies, that
from several countries were gathered together against his people. Now this
also may be understood, either of the great works that God has done for his
Church in all ages; or of that particular, upon which this Psalm was composed.

Verse. 9. He makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth: he breaks the
bow etc.] As if he should have said, By this which God has done, you may see,
that he can and does, when he is pleased, put a full end to all the wars
throughout the world. The expression is much like that Esa. 2.4. they shall
beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks;
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more.

Verse. 10. Be still, etc.] This is here inserted to show, that by those
judgments forementioned, which God had executed, he did in effect say to men,
as is here expressed, Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among
the heathen, to wit, either by their submission to me, or by their confusion.
And it may be spoken either to his own people, that they should quietly wait
upon God without fear or murmuring, or troubling themselves to seek help
elsewhere: or rather to his enemies, who worshipped false Gods, that they
should give over their rage against Gods people; or that without any tumultuous
disturbance of affections, they should seriously consider what God had done,
and thereby know that the God of Israel was the only true God, against whom
there was no contending: see the Note Psalm. 4.4.

PSALM XLVII.
Verse. 1. O Clap your hands (all ye people) etc.] That is, all ye tribes of
Israel (for so this expression is sometimes used, see Psalm. (66.8. and Zach.
11.10.) or all ye nations of the world, For because of those words verse. 5. God
is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet, it is probably
conceived, that the solemn removing of the Ark, either by David or Solomon,
which was done with much joy, with shouting and with the sound of a trumpet, 2 Samuel 6.14, 15. 1 Kings 8.3, etc. was the occasion of composing this Psalm: and
because that was a shadow and type of the ascension of Christ into heaven, it
must be principally understood of the joy of all nations therein.

Verse 2. For the Lord most high is terrible, etc.] To wit, to all that are his
and his peoples enemies. And this also is meant of Christ, whom God has made
King over all the earth; as is expressed in the following words, he is a great
King over all the earth: see the Note Psalm. 2.8.

Verse. 3. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.]
This may be meant of the nations round about, that were subdued by the people
of God in the days of David, But especially it must be understood of the
calling of the Gentiles: of whom the Israelites might say, that they were
subdued unto them, and brought under their feet, either with reference to
Christ, who was of the stock of Israel, and is the head of the Church; or
because they were brought in by the Gospel preached by the primitive Church of
the Jews, the Apostles and others, and so being joined to them were brought
under the government of Christ amongst them, the branches of the wild
olive tree being graffed in amongst them, Romans 11.17. for which see Isa. 2.2,
3, 4. And that this must be understood of this spiritual subduing of the
Gentiles is evident, because the Psalmist speaks of such a subduing, as was to
be matter of such exceeding great joy to the people that were subdued, as is
expressed before verse. 1. O clap your hands, all ye people, etc.

Verse. 4. He shall choose our inheritance for us, etc] That is, Having taken us
for his adopted sons and daughters, he will set apart for us that inheritance
that he has promised us. Now as this is spoken in reference to the Israelites,
the inheritance here intended was partly the land of Canaan, which was never
conferred upon them in the full extent as it was at first promised, till the
days of David and Solomon (see the Notes Genesis 15.18.) but principally the
kingdom of heaven, whereof Canaan was a type: But as it refers to the Church
of Christ, both of Jews and Gentiles, it is only meant of heaven, that
incorruptible and undefiled inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. unless we also include,
that God will provide a place of habitation for his Church even here in this
world. As for the following words, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved, we
must know 1. that by Jacob may be meant either the Patriarch Jacob himself,
(and the drift of the words is then to show, that the excellency that God did
at first confer upon Jacob in the covenant that God made with him, was from him
derived to the whole Israel of God) or else the seed of Jacob, see the Note
Psalm. 24.6. 2ly, that it is either the land of Canaan which is here called the
excellency of Jacob; and that not so much because it was a land flowing with
milk and honey, as because of Jerusalem, and the Sanctuary therein, in which
God was present amongst them in his word and worship; for this is often termed
the excellency of the Israelites, as Ezekiel. 24.21. Behold, I will profane my
Sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, and the desire of your eyes, etc.
Amos 6.8. I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces; see also chap.
8.7. and Nahum 2.2: or else, the glorious condition that is prepared for Gods
people in heaven: or, more generally, all those glorious things which were
promised to the Israel of God; as that they should be Gods peculiar people, and
that to them appertained the kingdom and priesthood and Temple, with all the
glorious privileges of the Church. And 3. that those last words, whom he
loved, are purposely added to show, that it was of Gods free grace and love,
that there were such excellent things designed for Jacob, according to that
Romans 9.13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

Verse. 5. God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.]
Some conceive that this is spoken in reference to that ancient manner of
calling the people together in the time of the law, by the sound of trumpets;
at which times it might be said, that God was gone up with a shout, etc.
because thereby they were stirred up to honor God, and there God was present
and entertained, as it were, amongst his people with joyful acclamations, as
their Lord and King. But I rather take it to be meant, as is before noted verse
1. of the removal of the Ark (for which also see the Note Numb. 10.35.) and
under that type, of the Ascension of Christ by his own power into heaven. For
having spoken in the foregoing verse of the inheritance of the Saints in
heaven, He shall choose our inheritance for us, he takes occasion from thence to
speak of Christ's ascending thither in triumph, as a conqueror, having
vanquished Satan, sin and death, and sent forth his servants to subdue the
nations by the word of his Gospel. Yea and this of his being gone up with a
shout, and with the sound of a trumpet, some understand of the solemn
attendance and joy of the angels when he ascended into heaven; and that the
rather, because it is said 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. that the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump
of God, and Act. 1.11. it was said to them that were eyewitnesses of Christ's
ascension, This same Jesus which was taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in, in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

Verse. 7. For God is the kin of all the earth, etc] See the Note verse. 2. Sing
ye praises with understanding; that is, understanding and attending what ye
sing; which indeed they only do, that are spiritually enlightened with the
saving knowledge of God and of Christ. Yet some understand it of singing
skilfully, and therefore render it, as it is in the margin, sing ye praises
every one that has understanding. However observable it is, that these words,
sing praises, are five several times repeated in this and the foregoing verse;
to signify how vehemently desirous he was that this should be done, and that
men should do it with all possible fervency, and that too constantly, and
without ceasing.

Verse. 8. God reigns over the heathen etc.] To wit, as having all nations
under his power; see the Note also verse. 2. God sits upon the throne of his
holiness, that is, his holy throne; which may be the Ark, or mercy-seat that
covered it, according to that Psalm. 99.1. The Lord reigns, let the people
tremble, he sits between the cherubims etc; or else heaven, which Christ
calls Gods throne Matthew. 5.34. and where he sits at the right hand of God,
having all power given him both in heaven and in earth.

Verse. 9. The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of
the God of Abraham, etc.] Some understand this of the heads of the Tribes, and
the Nobles of the people, assembling together when the ark was to be remooved
by David or Solomon: see 2 Samuel 6.1.1 Kings 8.1. But doubtless, as the Psalm
was intended as a prediction of Christ's ascension, these words must be
understood of the coming in of many Princes of the Gentiles upon the preaching
of the Gospel, to join themselves to the Church of the Jews, accounting it
their greatest honor, not that they were princes, but that they were of the
number of Gods people; as indeed all that became Christians, were, thereby
incorporated into the Church of the Jews, as the Apostle speaks Ephe. 3.6: who
are rather here called the people of the God of Abraham, because that very name
Abraham signifies the father of many nations, see the Notes Genesis 17.4, 5. and
to him that promise was made, In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed, Genesis 22.18. Only we must withal note, that the words in the Hebrew
may be translated, as they are in the margin of our Bibles, The voluntary of
the people are gathered unto the people of the God of Abraham, and so they must
be understood of the voluntary coming in of the Gentiles, to join themselves to
the Church of the Jews, according to that, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power. As for the following clause, for the shields
of the earth belong unto God etc. Some take it thus, that all the Princes of
the earth are under the disposing power of God, and so no wonder though even
their hearts are swayed by him to submit to Christ's scepter, whereby he is
greatly exalted: for, say they, princes and magistrates are called the shields
of the earth, because they are for the defense and protection of the people; as
we see Hos. 4.18. her rulers with shame do love, Give ye, which is in the
original, her shields with shame do love, Give ye. But others take it thus,
for the shields of the earth belong unto God, that is, by Gods providence the
inhabitants of the earth are many ways defended, as by so many shields. And so
they take this to be added, as that whereby the Gentiles should be moved to
join themselves to the people of God, namely, that they might be under his
protection, wherein God is greatly exalted.

PSALM XLVIII.
Verse. 1. GReat is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God,
etc.] To wit, Because though God has manifested his transcendent greatness
throughout the world, yet above all he has done this in Jerusalem, and in his
Church, whereof Jerusalem was a type, as being the city of God, and the
mountain of holiness; of which see the Note Psalm. 2.6: and though the men of
the world would not see nor magnify this greatness of God, yet his people have
always done it. Now from that which is said afterward, verse. 3, etc. God is
known in her palaces for a refuge; for lo the kings were assembled, etc. it is
generally held, that this Psalm was composed upon occasion of some notable
deliverance, which God had afforded the city Jerusalem, when the neighboring
kings had conspired against her.

Verse. 2. Beautiful for situation, etc.] Mount Sion is here said to be 1.
beautiful for situation, not only because it had so pleasant a prospect, and
was a place that yielded such delight in every regard, but also especially with
respect to its beauty from the Temple, Gods dewlling place: and 2. the joy of
the whole earth, not so much because those that resorted thither from far
countries, were so much delighted with the goodly sight of the city and Temple;
as because those that resorted thither to worship from all parts of the earth,
as the Ethiopian Eunuch did Act. 8.27, were so exceedingly cheared thereby, and
especially because the Gospel, that went out of Zion Isa. 2.3. was indeed the
joy of the whole earth: 3. on the sides of the North; which is so diversely
expounded, that some hold the meaning is, that it was in the South of the city,
by the side of the North, or opposite to the North; and others, which seems
more agreeable with the words, that it was on the North side of Jerusalem,
whence is that vaunting speech of the Assyrian, Isa. 14.13. I will sit also
upon the mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North: and 4. the city
of the great king, meaning the city of David, as it is called 2 Samuel 5.7, or
rather the city of God, the great king of the world.

Verse. 3. God is known in her palaces for a refuge.] That is, In the houses of
this city built like palaces for the stateliness of them, God, as is well
known, is the refuge of his people; they are not secured so much by their forts
and bulwarks, as in other cities, as by the presence of God amongst them. Or by
her palaces may be meant her very forts and bulwarks, which for their
sightlinesse and beauty are called palaces, and so the words may imply, that
God was the defense even of their fortresses and defenced places.

Verse. 4. For lo, the kings were assembled, etc.] That is, They have several
times combined together against Jerusalem: as when the Philistine Princes, upon
David's taking the fort of Zion, came up against him, and spread themselves in
the valley of Rephaim, 2 Samuel 5.17, 18; and when the Ethiopians came against
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.7; and when the Moabites and Ammonites and others invaded the
land in Iehoshaphats days, 2 Chronicles. 20.1, 2; and when the kings of Syria and
Israel besieged Ahaz in Jerusalem, 2 Kings 16.5; and when Sennacherib sought to
take the city in Hezekiahs time, who doubtless had many petty kings in his
army, 2 Kings 18.17. Or it may be meant of some one of these in particular,
which was the occasion of composing this Psalm. They passed by together, that
is, they altogether vanished on a sudden; or rather, they marched on together
to surprise Jerusalem.

Verse. 5. They saw it, etc.] That is, They saw the city, and so were amazed;
or, they saw how wonderfully God appeared for the city, and so they marvelled,
etc. that is, by this means they were astonished, and perplexed, and fled away.

Verse. 6. Fear took hold upon them there, etc.] That is, even whilst they were
before Jerusalem, and so were even ready to besiege it, flattering themselves
with assurance that they should take it, and striking the inhabitants with
great terror, suddenly they themselves were surprzied with fear; or, when they
began to turn their backs to escape away, fear took hold of them, and marred
their flying: and pain as of a woman in travail; that is, 1. suddenly, 2. in
greatest extremity, 3. irresistably, and 4. with a continual succession of
griefs, even as throes come upon a woman in travail.

Verse. 7. Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an East Wind.] That is, with
a tempestuous wind; see the Note Job 38.24. And what is meant by the ships of
Tarshish, see in the Note 1 Kings 10.22. Some would have them so called from
Tarsus, a chief haven-town in Cilicia, Act. 21.34: which cannot be, for it
could not be three years voyage going thither and coming back, as it was with
Solomon's navy that went to Tarshish, 2 Chronicles. 9.21. However, this here, I
conceive, is spoken as by way of similitude, as if it had been thus; As thou
breakest often the strongest ships that sail in the sea by some violent wind,
so do thou break in pieces the combined forces of thy peoples enemies. Yet
because there is express mention in 2 Chronicles. 20.2. that of that great army
that invaded the land of Judah in Iehoshaphats days, some came from beyond the
sea, some conceive that this was spoken particularly with reference to the
breaking of those ships. But the first exposition is the best; though I yield
that it may be taken generally, that when ever Gods people are invaded by sea,
there, as well as by land, God appears for them, and does often with his
tempests break their ships in pieces.

Verse. 8. As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord, etc.] That
is, What we have heard promised in thy word and by thy prophets, we have seen
fully made good to thy people; and what we have heard thou have done for our
fathers, the same we have seen done for our selves.

Verse. 9. We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy
temple.] This may be referred to the time after the deliverance, which God had
afforded Jerusalem, whereof he had spoken before verse. 3, 4, etc. and then the
meaning is, that they had remembered the loving kindness of God, and had
praised his name for it. But most Expositours refer it to the time before that
deliverance, as if he had said, Being in great streights and fears, we thought
of thy loving kindness, and trusting therein, we waited patiently, and thou
have not failed our expectation. As for those last words, in the midst of thy
temple, they are added, not to limit their thinking of Gods loving kindness
only to that place, as if they thought not of it any where but there: but 1.
because that was the sign of Gods dwelling amongst them as his people, and so
hereby he would imply, that they thought of that love he bare them as his
peculiar people, whereof the temple was a token and pledge; and 2. because
there they heard out of his word of the tender love he bare them, and were by
these thoughts stirred up and encouraged to pray unto him. But this, as the
rest, must be especially applied to the Church, the true Temple of God.

Verse. 10. According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the
earth, etc.] Some make this a parallel place with that verse. 1. Great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised, and so understand it thus; that as Gods Name
is above all names, God infinitely excelling all the great ones of the world,
so is his Name accordingly exalted with transcendent praise throughout the
world. Others give the sense of the words thus; Thou art known, and accordingly
praised unto the ends of the earth; or, wherever thy Name shall be heard, thou
shall be praised for thy wonderful works; or, wherever the fame of this great
deliverance afforded thy people shall be spread, or generally the fame of all
thy noble acts, accordingly shall thou be praised throughout all the earth; or,
which to me seems the best, that which thou have revealed of thy self, thou
do indeed make good by thy glorious works, and so give all the earth
occasion to praise thee. Thy right hand is full of righteousness; to wit, in
regard of the many and many proofs thou give of thy righteousness, by
preserving thy people, and destroying their enemies; yea in regard that thou
art holy and righteous in all that thou do.

Verse. 11. Let mount Sion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad.] That
is, the people of Judah, to wit, because of Gods judgments on their enemies;
see the Note 2 Kings 19.21: or the lesser cities, towns and villages of Judah,
which were as daughters to the mother city Jerusalem; see the Note 2 Samuel 20.19.

Verse. 12, Walk about Sion, etc.] This is a poetical description of the
continued splendor, stateliness and strength of the city Jerusalem; and so
also under that figure, of the spiritual magnificence, the large extent and
strength of the Church in the days of the Gospel. For this calling men to view
her round about, was to imply either 1. that they should not find that there
was the least breach made in her walls, or that her towers, bulwarks, or
palaces were any way defaced, notwithstanding the late engagement of her
enemies against her, see verse. 4, 5, etc. or 2. how beautiful, spacious, and
for strength impregnable that city was. Yet is not this city thus represented,
as if her ourward fortifications could make her invincible, but as appearing in
these glorious signs of Gods love and care and blessing upon her, to be the
city God had chosen to dwell in, and thereby impregnable, as he had said before
verse. 3.

Verse. 13. Consider her palaces, etc.] Some render it, Raise up her palaces,
that is, highly esteem and commend them: but the translation in our Bibles best
agrees with the former expressions, Consider her palaces, to wit, how they
stand still in their full beauty, or, how beautiful and strong they are: that
ye may tell it to the generation following, to wit, how miraculously God has
preserved them; or how many and how splendid they are. And herein also (as some
learned men observe) is covertly employed, that there was a time coming, when
the beauty of that earthly Jerusalem should not be to be seen; that so we might
expect, that what is spoken here of the beauty and perpetuity of that earthly
Jerusalem, must be chiefly made good in that spiritual Jerusalem, the Church
of Christ.

Verse. 14. For this God is our God for ever and ever, etc.] As if he had said,
This God, whom we assuredly know to be the only true God, who has chosen
Jerusalem to be his dewlling place, and thereupon has thus beautified and
protected it, is our God, and so will be for ever and ever: see Isa. 25.9.

PSALM XLIX.
Verse. 1. HEar this, all ye people, etc.] The scope of this Psalm being to
show, that neither wicked men had any cause to glory in their prosperity, nor
the righteous to be dejected with their adversity, because it concerned all men
to know this, that they might not stumble at this seeming strange dispensation
of Gods Providence, as all naturally are prone to do, therefore he calls upon
all to hear; and urges diligent attendance, that they should hear and give
ear, to imply the excellency of what is here taught, and men's backwardness to
learn it. Yea and there may be a prediction covertly hinted, that this Psalm
should be preserved for the use of Gods people of all nations.

Verse. 3. My mouth shall speak of wisdom, etc.] This he adds to stir up
attention; the rather calling those things he meant to deliver wisdom and
understanding, either to assure them, that however some things he should speak
of might seem common and trivial, as that which he delivers here concerning
the necessity of every man's dying, etc. yet in truth it was a great point of
wisdom seriously to lay these things to heart; or else by way of opposing the
judgment of worldly men, who count it the only wisdom to gather riches by
any means whatsoever, whereas indeed (as here is showed) true wisdom teaches
to slight and vilify these transitory things: and the meditation of my heart
shall be of understanding; that is, I will utter nothing rashly, but what after
serious meditation I shall find very useful to make men truly wise and
understanding.

Verse. 4. I will incline mine ear to a parable; etc.] What is meant by a
parable, see in the Note Numb. 23.7. And by saying I will incline mine ear to
a parable, he implies two things: 1. that he would deliver nothing but what God
by his spirit did reveal to him, and so nothing but what was weighty and right;
for he would hearken to the spirit instructing him, before he would undertake
to instruct others; according to that Isa. 50.4. The Lord God has given me the
tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as
the learned: and 2. that he would himself hearken to those instructions which
he gave to others in this Psalm; for in this expression I will incline mine
ear, he seems to allude to musicians, that are wont to bow their ears to
their Instruments, to mark whether they be exactly tuned or no. I will open my
dark saying upon the harp; meaning in this Psalm, which he intended should be
sung with a harp. And here he calls that which he had to deliver a dark saying,
not because of the obscurity of the expressions, wherein he meant to deliver
it, as is evident by that expression he uses, I will open my dark saying; but
to imply, that the things he meant to speak of were deep and profound
mysteries, and such as to natural men would be dark riddles: such as is that
which follows in the next verse, that a good man has no cause to be afraid in
the day of distress and trouble etc. So that the drift of the whole verse is,
to show how deep and weighty the things were, of which he intended to speak.

Verse. 5. Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my
heels shall compass me about?] This is that parable and dark saying which in
the foregoing verse he promised to entreat of in this Psalm: and because he had
said, that he would incline his own ear to hear what he delivered for the
instruction of others, he propounds that which he meant to deliver in his own
person, though he intended it should be received as a common truth, which might
likewise be applied to any other of Gods faithful servants; wherefore should I
fear in the days of evil etc.? 1. By fearing here may be meant a man's being
terrified at the apprehension of any approaching evil, or a man's being dismayed
or discouraged at any thing that seems strange or unreasonable to him,
according to that verse. 16. Be not thou afraid when one is made rich etc. 2. By
the days of evil may be meant, either the days of any affliction or distress
or persecution, or the time of old age or death, or, as some would have it, the
day of judgment. 3. By the iniquity of his heels is meant, either the iniquity
of his own ways and works, the sinful courses wherein he had walked, (and
some limit it also, to those unjust ways whereby he had supplanted others, and
caused them to fall, according to that Joh. 13.18. He that eats bread with me
has lift up his heel against me,) and consequently the punishments which his
evil deeds would bring upon him; or else the iniquity of his adversaries, in
persecuting and pursuing him close at his heels, or in laying snares to
entangle him. Now accordingly may these words be several ways expounded;
Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels
shall compass me about? that is, Wherefore should I do any thing to make my
self rich and great in the world, or to help my self in any streights I fall
into, which should afterward overwhelm me with fear in the days of Gods
wrath, when the punishment of the evil I have done shall encompasse and ensnare
me, or pursue and overtake me? or 2. Wherefore should I suffer my heart to sink
with fear in the days of any distress that befalls me, or when sickness and
death shall surprise me, whch I may well look upon as the fruits of mine own
iniquities? as if he should have said, There is no cause why I should fear in
such times of calamity and distress, yea though they were mine own iniquities
that brought me to be ensnared and compassed herewith. And the reason of this
is given afterward verse. 15. to wit, because he was assured of Gods love to
him, and that God would in due time deliver him from all his troubles, yea even
from the power of death it self, which wicked ungodly men could not expect; But
God, says he, will redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he shall
receive me Or 3. thus, (which I like the best) wherefore should I fear in the
days of evil, etc? that is, when wickedness reigns, and ungodly men rage,
seeking to ensnare me, and pursue me at the heels, when I am pressed or
compassed about with afflictions and calamities, public or private, there is
no cause why I should be dejected with fear; and that because (as is expressed
in the following part of the Psalm) whilst mine enemies trust in outward
perishing things, I trust in the Lord, who though he may suffer wicked men to
persecute his righteous servants for a time, and that perhaps by way of
correcting them for their iniquities, yet in due time he will not fail to
deliver them, and to break the pride of their great enemies. This I conceive is
the best exposition of the words: only I may add, that some conceive it is
death which he terms here the iniquity of his heels, and that because to
Christ and his members death is indeed no more, but the bruising of their heel,
Genesis 3.15. 1 Cor. 15.55, 57.

Verse. 6. They that trust in their wealth, and boast, etc.] This is added as a
reason of that which was employed in the foregoing verse, why the children of
God should not do any thing to enrich themselves, that should afterward
expose them to the fears which usually follow a guilty conscience in the days
of evil; or why they ought not to be dismayed and troubled at the prosperity of
wicked men, or to be afraid in the days of adversity, when ungodly great men
do persecute and oppress them; namely, because riches are such vain things,
and so unable to help those that have them in greatest abundance in the days
of evil. They that trust in their wealth, to wit, as thinking themselves
sufficiently defended thereby, and so securely despising the judgments of God,
and undertaking in a manner whatever they please in the confidence of their
great wealth; and so they that boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches, that is, that are puffed up with their great estates, as if they had
gotten all by their own policies and labor, etc. and so live in all pomp,
pride and excess, despising and wronging others; alas, they trust and glory in
a vain shadow, that can do them no good in an evil day, and they that fear
their greatness are indeed afraid of a shadow, as is expressed in the
following verses.

Verse. 7. None of them can by any means redeem his brother, etc.] To wit, from
dying, as is expressed verse. 9; or from the power of death, when he is dead, by
procuring that he may be restored to life again. And if a man cannot do this
for his brother, much less can he do it for himself.

Verse. 8. ( For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it cease for
ever.] That is, Their soul is so precious, that nothing can be given of
sufficient value for the ransom of it, and therefore there can never be any
way found to redeem it.

Verse. 10. For he sees that wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish
person perish, etc.] Some by wise men here understand those that have so much
understanding, as to make use of their wealth; and by the fool and the brutish
person, such as defraud themselves of the comfort they might take in their
riches, and only hord up wealth that they may leave it to others: others
understand by wise men, those that are spiritually wise and godly; and by the
fool and the brutish man, such as are carnal wicked men; and thence they
conceive are those different expressions, that the wise are said to die, but
the fool and the brutish person to perish. But I understand the words rather in
the most general sense, and conceive that the drift of them is to show, that
death is the end of all men whatsoever; and that when that hour comes, they
must all part with the wealth of this world, and leave it to others. And yet
some understand that last clause, and leave their wealth to others, of leaving
it to strangers, and not to their own posterity or family; according to that
which is said elsewhere, Eccles. 6.1, 2. Luke 12.19. and Psalm. 39.7.

Verse. 11. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever,
etc.] That is, They verily think within themselves, that they shall dwell in
their houses for ever; or that their posterity shall continue for ever, see the
Note Exodus 1.21. or that the houses they build shall remain for ever, which the
following words and their dwelling places to all generations make the more
probable. All these ways the words may be understood: and accordingly the
drift and scope thereof may be, either 1. that these mighty men do carry
themselves so, as if they thought they should live for ever, yea though by
daily experience they see the contrary; (for this aggravation of their
brutishness is employed by subjoyning this upon that which went before verse.
10.) or 2. that at least they expect, that their memory shall in their
posterity and in their stately dwellings and great revenues be continued for
ever, and therefore they set their hearts upon these outward things: in stead
of seeking to assure themselves that their names are written in heaven, they
are only sollicitous to make their names famous upon earth; and therefore they
call their lands after their own names, to wit, to perpetuate the memory of
their names; as Alexandria was called of Alexander, and Caesarea of Caesar, etc.

Verse. 12. Nevertheless, man being in honor abides not, etc.] That is, The
man that is in honorable condition, but is brutish and wicked, and
understands not, as is expressed afterward verse. 20, continues not in his
honorable estate; if God does not whilst he lives strip him of his worldly
dignities, yet at least death will surely pull him down: he is like the beasts
that perish; that is, in regard of the present life, which such men only mind,
dying he passes away as the brute beasts do; and then they are forgotten, as
the beast is when it dies, and there is no more reckoning made of them then of
beasts, that dying of themselves are left in the field as carrion to rot and
putrify. The first clause, man being in honor abides not, was commonly by the
ancients understood of the sudden fall of our first parents from that estate of
honor wherein God at first created them. But the whole context shows that this
cannot be here intended: the most that can be said herein is, that there may be
a secret allusion to Adams fall, to wit, that as he continued not in his
glorious condition, so neither do these wicked men abide long in their pomp and
outward prosperity.

Verse. 13. This their way is their folly, etc.] That is, This their constant
practice, to wit, in pursuing worldly riches and greatness, and seeking to
perpetuate the memory of their names by their stately dwellings, etc. (for this
refers to that he had said before verse. 11.) is no better then mere folly, or
discovers their folly, however they account it a high point of wisdom: Or it
may be referred to that which was said in the foregoing verse; This their way,
that is, this which is the issue and event of their way, to wit, that they
abide not in honor, but perish as the beast does, is their folly, that is,
manifests their folly. Yet their posterity approve their sayings: that is,
though they by experience see the vanity and folly of these ways of their
fathers, who after all their dreams of living here for ever, and of the
perpetuity of their names, die as others, and are buried in oblivion; yet they
approve of their counsel and commands, whereby they advised them to mind these
things chiefly (these are the sayings of their fathers which some conceive are
here meant): or, they approve of their sayings, that is, in that they think and
speak and do the same things, treading exactly in the steps of their fathers.
For even the deeds of their fathers do proclaim what their judgments are, and
therefore even with respect thereto it may be said, that their children do
approve their sayings.

Verse. 14. Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them
etc.] That is, As the silly sheep are by flocks driven into a narrow pin-fold
or into the shambles, that they may be killed and eaten, being no way able to
make any resistance, nor ever fearing any danger they are in: so shall these
great ones, whom the whole world could hardly satisfy, be brought thick and
threefold in great numbers, and lodged together in the narrow compass of a
grave, under the power and tyranny of death; where, for all their former
greatness and bravery, they shall be made worms meat, yea meat for the worm
that never dies; death both temporal and eternal shall feed on them, and that
for ever, the wicked in hell being as the grass is to the beast, that still
growing continues still to be meat for it: And the upright shall have dominion
over them in the morning; that is, though they die as well as others, yet at
the last day, the day of the general resurrection, which is as it were the
morning, the dawning of that new day of eternal life which shall never have
end, when all that sleep in the dust Dan. 12.2. shall awake and rise, and the
darkness of the ignorance affl^ctions of this life coming to an end, the
Saints shall behold Christ the sun of righteousness appearing in his glory
face to face, they shall have dominion over these great ones, that had before
in this life tyrannized over them, to wit, in and by Christ their head, whose
footstool they must be made, according to that 1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know that
the Saints shall judge the world? This I conceive is the meaning of this
clause. Yet some understand it otherwise; and the upright shall have dominion
over them in the morning, that is, they shall soon get the better of them, and
be in a better condition then their great oppressors. As for the last clause,
and their beauty (or strength) shall consume in the grave from their dwelling,
the meaning is, that from their magnificent dwellings, where they had lived in
so great pomp and state, they should be brought to the grave, where their glory
and strength together with themselves should rot and consume away, their great
wealth being no way sufficient to secure them. Yet some would have it to be
understood thus, that the glory they had gotten from their stately dwellings
should consume away; or that whilst they consume in the grave, their very
dwellings by degrees do lose their names. But the first exposition is the best.

Verse. 15. But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, etc.] As if
he had said, Though riches cannot redeem the rich, yet God will redeem me from
the power of death, and from the grave, see the Note Psalm. 16.10: for he shall
receive me; that is, of his own free grace he will receive me to himself, my
soul at my death, my body at the resurrection. And thus David applies that to
himself, which in the foregoing verse he had affirmed of the righteous in
general, and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning.

Verse. 16. Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, etc.] That is, Be not
dismayed nor overcome with fear, because of the power which such have to
oppress the righteous; or, Be not dejected nor discouraged, as fearing whether
God does not favor such rather then thy self, because God prospers them whilst
thou art afflicted.

Verse. 17. For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away, etc.] And therefore
1. such a one is no way to be envied, since his bliss and life do perish
together; and 2. there will be no longer any cause to fear them, because they
will not in another world have any power to hurt, as here they had.

Verse. 18. Though whilst he lived, he blessed his soul, etc.] To wit, in that
1. he applauded himself for his happiness in his wealth and outward
greatness, 2. he flattered himself with vain conceits of Gods savor, and that
he should still continue in his prosperous estate, and gave himself all the
content and delight he could in the enjoyment of his plenty: and men will
praise thee, when thou do well to thy self; that is, though others also
extol thy bliss, and flattering thee do uphold thee in this folly, and
confirm thee in these vain conceits, when thou make much of and pamperest thy
self. But now all this is supposed to be whiles he lived, implying, that when
death came, that would soon confute all these vain conceits of the rich man,
and that then his flatterers would praise him no longer.

Verse. 19. He shall go to the generation of his fathers, etc.] That is, He
shall be gathered to the grave and Hell, whether his wicked progenitors are
gone before him: they shall never see light; that is, they shall never more see
the light of the living here, nor shall ever see the joys and life eternal of
the Saints in heaven, but shall remain for ever in outer darkness.

Verse. 20. Man that is in honor and understands not, is like the beasts that
perish.] To wit, both in life and death; see the Note above verse. 12.

PSALM L.
The Title. A Psalm of Asaph.] Or, for Asaph, for he was one of David's chief
Musicians, see the Notes 1 Chronicles. 25.1, 2; and withal a prophet, and composer
of Psalms, as is evident 2 Chr. 29.30. of which see the Note Ps. 1.1.

Verse. 1. The mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, etc.] The scope of this
Psalm was, to inform the Israelites of old (and in them all mankind) how God
required his people to serve and honor him, to wit, that he regarded not the
outward ceremonial service, which himself had appointed, unless it were
accompanied with that spiritual service of faith and new obedience, which was
signified thereby; and so thereby to reprove that gross and destructive
conceit, which prevailed so much in all ages amongst the Jews, that God would
be pleased with his outward ceremonial service, without the other of obedience
to his moral law: all which is evident by that passage wherewith the prophet
does close this Psalm, verse. 23. whosoever offers praise, glorifyeth me; and to
him that orders his conversation aright will I show the salvation of God. Now
to this end, in the beginning of this Psalm the prophet, as it were in the
person of a Crier or Herald sent from God, does proclaim and make known, that
God, (whom for their greater terror herein he terms The mighty God) would
enter into a controversy with his own people about this, and not only plead
this cause against them, but also as a judge from his tribunal pronounce
sentence against them, and punish them even before all the world for this their
gross hypocrisy. The mighty God, even the Lord has spoken; that is, he has
determined and made known, to wit, that which follows verse. 7, etc. that he
would give sentence in this controversy, and judge his people for thinking to
please him with the outward pomp only of external rites and sacrifices, Hear O
my people, and I will speak, etc. and so this may have reference to the Lords
making known his mind herein by the Psalmist, that so what he delivers here
might be received as an oracle from heaven: the Lord has spoken, to wit, by me
his messenger; and called the earth from the rising of the Sun unto the going
down thereof, that is, all the inhabitants of the earth, or all the creatures
on the earth, to wit, to be witnesses of this solemn judgment; which is added,
to show the weightiness of the cause wherein God intended to give sentence, and
for the greater confusion of his people, as implying that God would discover
their hypocrisy before all the world. The expression used is much like those
Deuteronomy. 4.26. and 32.1. Give ear O ye heavens, and I will speak, etc. concerning
which see the Notes there. I know that some Expositours take this to be a
prediction of the last judgment: and very many have taken it as a prophesy of
the abrogation of the ceremonial law by Christ. The mighty God, even the Lord
has spoken, that is, Christ has spoken by the word of the Gospel, and called
the earth from the rising of the Sun, etc. that is, has invited all mankind to
the faith and obedience of that word of salvation. But I take the former
exposition to be clearly the best; namely, that the words contain, rather an
expostulation with the people of God in those times about the worship of God
then enjoined, then a prophesy of the future kingdom of Christ. Because the
most wicked amongst them were so prone to think, that they had done as much as
needed to be done, if they had observed the rites of the ceremonial law, he
not only tells them, that these without faith and purity of heart were nothing
worth, but also assures them, that God would judge them for this, and would
discover their hypocrisy before all the world.

Verse. 2. Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, God has shined.] They that
apply this 1st part of the Psalm to the 1st or 2d coming of Christ, do
accordingly understand these words, either of the Lords glorious manifesting
himself in the Church of the new Testament, the spiritual Sion, of which see the
Note Ps. 2.6. and of the Gospels coming forth at first out of Jerusalem, and
then passing forth throughout the world; or of Gods appearing from his heavenly
Sion in great glory to judge the world. But I rather take it to be a
description of the Lords coming forth as a Judge, to pronounce sentence in that
great controversy amongst his people, concerning the right performance of that
service which he had required of them in the sacrifices and other external
rites of the ceremonial law. And for the better understanding hereof we must
note, 1. that because Sion was the place God had chosen for this service,
therefore is God here described as coming forth out of Sion to give sentence in
this cause; thereby to imply, that the judgment here passed tended not to the
overthrow of the ceremonial law enjoined by Moses, but rather to its
establishment in the right use of it, according as God here declares the true
ends of those external rites to have been: and that whereas the carnal
worshippers amongst his people would be ready to object, We know that God has
shined to us out of Sion, there he has given us a law, and therefore nothing
ought to be imposed upon us that is not there prescribed; this would no way
help them, since by the very rule of that law God would judge them, according
to that which our Savior in a like case said to the Jews Joh. 5.45. Do not
think that I will accuse you to the Father; there is one that accuses you,
even Moses, in whom ye trust: 2. that by that expression, Out of Sion God has
shined, the prophet intended, either to set forth the glorious majesty
wherewith God would manifest himself in judging those that had corrupted his
worship, alluding therein to the custom of Judges, that are wont to cloth
themselves with glorious robes, when they are to sit in the judgment seat; or
else to imply, how clearly God would explain this doctrine concerning the
ceremonial worship, so that there should be no obscurity in it, but every one
should clearly see how they ought therein to worship God: and 3. that Sion is
here called the perfection of beauty, because there God had revealed himself to
his people, and was worshipped by them, whilst all the world besides lay in
dismal darkness.

Verse. 3. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence, etc.] See the Note
Exodus 14.14. As if he had said, Though God may a while forbear wicked men
amongst his people, that think to delude him with mere formalities of outward
services and sacrifices, yet in due time he will certainly appear, and will
with great severity judge those that do this, for their gross perverting of
his law; even with the same terror wherewith at first he delivered the law at
Sinai, will he judge these men for their gross abuse of his law; which is
clearly employed in the following words, A fire shall devour before him, and it
shall be very tempestuous round about him. As for those words, Our God, in the
first clause, either the prophet does therein join himself with the true
worshippers of God, implying thereby, that however the profaner sort derided
those few that worshipped God in spirit and truth, yet their God would appear
as a just judge to the terror of those that pretended themselves to be his
people, but worshipped him not as his people were appointed to do: or else he
speaks it in the name of the whole people of Israel, to assure them that even
that God, whose people they professed themselves to be, and who had given them
the law by the hand of Moses, would certainly judge them for corrupting his
worship. How they apply these words that understand them of the first or second
coming of Christ, as is before noted, we may easily conceive: for either they
must be referred to Christ's proceeding against carnal hypocritical
worshippers by the powerful efficacy of the Gospel, according to that the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 10.3, 6; or else to that flaming fire wherein he shall
appear when he comes again to judge the world.

Verse. 4. He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he
may judge his people.] That is, He will call both heaven and earth, and all the
creatures therein, to bear witness to his proceedings in the judgment he
would pronounce against his people; intimating, that he would discover their
cause so clearly, that if his people should not be convinced, the very heavens
and earth and all the creatures therein should bear witness against them: see
the Note above verse. 1. I know that some understand this, of Gods calling the
heaven and the earth to give up their dead at the last judgment, that they may
be brought to stand before Gods tribunal; or of their being called to bear
witness to his majesty, when he should come in glory to judge his people;
alluding still, as before, to the glory wherein God appeared at the giving of
the law on mount Sinai: and others understand it of the creatures being
subservient to Christ for the saving of his elect people, when he should come
in the flesh, and abolish the ceremonial law. But the first exposition is far
the best.

Verse. 5. Gather my Saints together unto me.] Here the Lord cites as it were
the parties before him, between whom there was a controversy concerning
sacrifices and other outward rites of his worship. For by his Saints he means
the whole people of Israel: and this title he gives them, either because they
were all such by calling and outward profession (and so in regard of the wicked
amongst them there may be a kind of Irony in the words, covertly taxing them
for not being such as they professed themselves to be;) or because there were
some holy ones amongst them, that did sincerely worship him, and so, for their
sakes, though but a few, this honorable title is given to them; the
denomination being taken from the better part, as when the Church with us,
though a mixed company, is called holy. And then for that clause which is
added, those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice, either it is
spoken with reference to that solemn ratifying of the Covenant betwixt God and
the people of Israel by sacrifices at mount Sinai, whereof we read Exodus 24.4,
8; or else rather more generally in relation to all the sacrifices they offered
at all times, they being all seals of the Covenant betwixt God and them;
according to the custom of those times, that when men made a Covenant one with
another, they offered sacrifices to confirm their Covenant; and so this is
added, to show the true end of sacrifices, which was to be seals of the
Covenant which God had made with that people, and so thereby covertly to tax
those, who minded not the Covenant, whereby they were bound every way to carry
themselves to the Lord as became his people, but only contented themselves with
the mere outward service of offering sacrifices. I know that some Expositours,
that limit the word Saints to the holy (...) amongst Gods people, do
accordingly also expound this clause, those that have made a co^enant with me
by sacrifice, that is, those that have not rested in the mere outward service
of sacrifices, but have also minded the covenant, whereof the sacrifices were a
sign: and that others conceive it is added, with reference to the wicked
hypocrites amongst them, those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice,
that is, those that thought the covenant betwixt me and them was only about
sacrifices; which therefore having given me, they concluded they had done
enough, and that for this I was bound as by covenant to them. And so likewise
for the first clause, Gather my Saints together unto me, some hold that the
Jews, who had made a covenant with God that they would serve him with
sacrifices, are here called to appear before Christ, determining the abrogation
of the ceremonial law: and then others take it to be spoken to the angels, who
at the day of the last judgment are to gather the elect together, Matthew.
24.31. But the first exposition suits best with the scope of the Psalm.

Verse. 6. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness, etc.] As if he
should have said, Though now this people carry it away with a great deal of
confidence, as if they had fulfilled all righteousness in giving him the
sacrifices he required of them, and so do obscure his righteousness by the
mists of these frivolous pretenses; yet when he shall appear to judge them, he
will from heaven discover his righteousness, and make it manifest before all
the world, that he was not satisfied with such external shows of service,
whilst their hearts were profane and wicked. This phrase therefore of the
heavens declaring his righteousness, does either only imply the heavens
bearing witness against this people, concerning the righteous sentence which
God should pronounce against them, according to that which is said in the
foregoing Notes verse. 1. and 4; or else it is used to imply (which is much to
the same effect) how clearly the righteousness of God, in proceeding so
against them, should be discovered. For because the light of the heavens
discovers things to men, and that which from heaven is manifested all the
inhabitants of the earth must needs see; therefore that which is made most
clear and manifest is said to be revealed from heaven. Yet, I say, some too
understand this of the clear revealing of the righteousness of God in the
days of the Gospel; and others of the angels executing judgment upon wicked
men at the last day, Matthew. 13.39, 41. As for that last clause, for God is
judge himself, it may imply 1. that it is no wonder therefore though the
heavens be ready to serve him; and 2. rather, that whereas they had hated and
despised the godly, when they had testified against their contenting themselves
with the bare formalities of sacrifices, now they should not be able any longer
thus to flatter themselves, because God himself would now decide this
controversy by his sentence, who is the only just judge, from whom nothing can
be hidden, who will not be corrupted, nor can judge unjustly.

Verse. 7. Hear, O my people, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testify
against thee.] See the Note Deuteronomy. 4.26. Hereby the Lord implies, that his
controversy with them was, because having by covenant taken the Lord to be
their God, they had not carried themselves toward him as became his people;
and that the main thing he always required of them was, that they should hear
and obey his voice, according to that Jer. 7.22, 23.

Verse. 8. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt-offerings,
to have been continually before me.] To wit, in that they were appointed to be
offered every day. See the Note Psalm. 40.6.

Verse. 11. I know all the fowls of the mountains, etc.] That is, They are mine,
and provided for me; and therefore I can make use of them as I please.

Verse. 12. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, etc.] As if he had said, If
this could be, I need not require a sacrifice of thee; since all the creatures
in heaven and earth are at my command.

Verse. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, etc.] As if he had said, Let that be
the constant sacrifice thou offerest to God, without which indeed other
sacrifices are nothing worth. And observable it is, that though these are
expressed as the words of God to his people, yet he does not say, Offer unto me
thanksgiving, but, Offer unto God thanksgiving; which is to imply, that upon
this ground, because he was God, an infinite almighty spirit, it must needs be
no better then gross folly to think, that he should be delighted with outward
sacrifices. And pay thy vows unto the most High; that is, thy vows of
thanksgiving and obedience. See also the following Note.

Verse. 15. And call upon me in the day of trouble, etc.] Thus to the duty of
praising God, he adds that of prayer also: and under these are comprehended
also all the inward worship we owe to God, as faith in God, the knowledge, love
and fear of God, etc. without which we cannot either praise God, or pray to God
as we ought to do. And he expresses particularly calling upon God in the day
of trouble, either because then men are wont to pray most fervently; or to
show, that in our greatest troubles we must still put our trust and confidence
in God. Nor needs it seem strange, that praising God is in the foregoing verse
set before prayer here, both because even when we come first into the world, we
owe God a sacrifice of praise, were we able to give it, even for the mercies
conferred upon us from our first conception, before any day of trouble can put
us upon prayer; and likewise especially, because the acknowledgement of that
glory which is due to God, as the fountain of all the good we can expect from
God, is the very first spring of prayer: and therefore some understand the
following clause, of glorifying God by prayer. But I rather take it thus; I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, to wit, by thanksgiving, and a
holy life.

Verse. 16. But unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth?] To wit, by
pretending thy self to be one of my people, or by talking of my laws and
covenant. And thus the Lord rejects not only sacrifices, but even the more
spiritual services of praise and prayer, when the men that perform them are
wicked. Some, I know, understand this of teachers and magistrates, and their
urging Gods laws and covenant upon others. But though this may be included, yet
I do not think that the words are to be limited hereto.

Verse. 18. When thou saw a thief, then thou consentedst with him, etc.] To
wit, by joining with him therein; or at least by approving the evil of his
ways: and have been partaker with adulterers; to wit, by living in the same
uncleanness with them, or at least by conversing familiarly with such lewd
persons. Some learned Expositours do, I know, understand both these peculiarly
of those priests and judges amongst the Israelites, who for bribes were wont to
justify thieves and adulterers that were brought before them, and so were
partakers with them, according to that Isa. 1.23. Thy princes are rebellious,
and companions of thieves; every one loves gifts, etc: and accordingly they
also expound the following verse, Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue
frames deceit, of the false and cunning pretenses, wherewith they sought to
hide and palliate their wickedness, when they proceeded so unjustly in
judgment. But though these may be included amongst others, yet I see no reason
why the words should be limited to these only.

Verse. 20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother, etc.] Those words
thou sit some refer to those that sit in the place of judgment, and there
pass false and unjust sentences against their brethren; and others to the
custom of idle persons, that when on their ale-benches or elsewhere they sit
chatting together, are wont to slander their brethren. However it seems to
imply, that when they spoke evil of their brethren, they did it not out of
sudden passion, but deliberately, and for a long time together.

Verse. 21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence, etc.] See the Note
above verse. 3. thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self;
that is, one that could not know sins committed in secret, no more then thou
can; or rather, that I did approve of thy wickedness, and so consequently am
as bad as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine
eyes; that is, I will openly and clearly discover all thy sins particularly,
and to thy confusion and shame will fully convince thee of them, and so make
thy self to see that which now thou would hide from me. The phrase that is
here used, of setting his sins in order before his eyes, seems to imply, either
that they should be as clearly discovered to him, as if he should see them
fairly written in a roll or catalogue before his eyes; or that they should be
presented to his conscience, as witnesses to accuse him, or as soldiers to
fight against him.

Verse. 22. Now consider this, ye that forget God, etc.] Thus God speaks of
himself in a third person, purposely to put them in mind what a dangerous thing
it was to despise God: and then in the following words, lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver, there is an intimation given, 1. that if
they did not repent and turn to God betimes, it might be ere long too late; and
2. that such was Gods power, that if he once began to take vengeance on them,
none could deliver them.

Verse. 23. To him that orders his conversation aright, etc.] To wit, as one
that truly fears me, and does not only in an outward ceremonial service make a
show of worshipping me, will I show the salvation of God, that is, the
salvation promised shall be made good to him; I will save him both here, and
eternally hereafter: and so it shall appear that he has sought me in a right
manner. Here again God speaks of himself in a third person, to express what he
says with the greater emphasis; To him will I show the salvation of God: as if
he should have said, He shall find by proof, that it is not in vain to trust in
me the great God of heaven, and to approve himself to me.

PSALM LI.
The Title. A Psalm of David etc.] See the Note upon the Title of the 6. Psalm:
when Nathan the prophet came unto him; one prophet to another, as when a
physician is sick, and not able to prescribe physic for himself, other
physicians come to visit him: after he had gone in to Bathsheba; which was
well-nigh a year, if not more, after his sin was committed with her; see the
Note 2 Samuel 12.1. So that this is thus expressed, 1. to aggravate his
wickedness, in continuing impenitent so long after he had fallen into such
gross sins; 2. to magnify the Lords mercy, in seeking to recover him out of
his sin, that was so regardlesse of the Lord and his own soul; and 3. that
hereby he might publicly acknowledge his sin to all the Church of God, that
had been scandalized thereby.

Verse. 1. According unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my
transgressions.] To wit, out of thy debt-book. And observable it is, 1. that it
was not the putting by or removal of those grievous calamities, which Nathan
had threatened should come upon him, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 12, that he so earnestly
beggs of God; but the pardon of his sins: and 2. that he pleads the multitude
of Gods tender mercies in reference to the multitude and the greatness of his
sins, in regard whereof he could only comfort himself in the superabundance of
Gods grace. But why is David so earnest herein, since Nathan had already
assured him, that God had pardoned him, 2 Samuel 12.13.? I answer, 1. because
even where sin is pardoned, yet repentance is a duty on our part required; and
2. because it was necessary for the farther strengthening and the comforting of
his grieved soul.

Verse. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity etc.] That is, from the guilt of
mine iniquity. For still he begges here, I conceive, for pardon, and not for
purging and sanctifying grace, as some would have it. And by that expression,
wash me thoroughly, (wherein doubtless he alludes to the ceremonial washings
enjoined by the law) he again implies how exceeding filthy he judged his sins,
and how dangerously he was defiled thereby.

Verse. 3. For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.]
That is, it comes upon every occasion into my thoughts, to the continual
wounding of my soul: see the Note Psalm. 50.21. Now this David alleges as a
motive to move God to pardon him, and that upon two grounds: 1. because God had
promised to pardon those that did thus acknowledge and confess their sins with
truly broken and grieved hearts; and seeing therefore he openly registered his
sin, to be read by all men, in this Psalm he desires that God would blot it out
of his book: and 2. because this discovered that he did now heartily beg
pardon of God, in that it proceeded from a soul continually afflicted and
terrified with the remembrance of his sins, and all the aggravating
circumstances thereof.

Verse. 4. Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight, etc.] These last words in thy sight are added, either 1. to imply that
God judged it evil, according to that usual phrase in the Scripture, of doing
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: or 2. to intimate, that it was a
wickedness very displeasing to God, there being in the phrase used an allusion
to men, that are wont to discover their displeasure in their countenances when
they are angry; which agrees well with that which is said of this very sin of
David's with the wife of Urijah, 2 Samuel 11.27. the thing which David had done
displeased the Lord: or rather 3. hereby to aggravate his wickedness, that he
had not feared to do that in the sight of the Lord, which he was very careful
to hide from the eye of man. The greatest difficulty in these words is, why
David should say, that he had sinned only against God, seeing the wrong that he
had done to many by his sins was so notorious, as to Bathsheba, and Urijah, and
those that were slain with him, and to all that he had drawn in to be
isntrumental to him in his sins, and that thereby took occasion to blaspheme,
yea to the whole kingdom, who were by these foul sins exposed to Gods wrath,
and actually indeed involved in the miseries of a civil war, when Absalom and
Sheba rebelled against him. Now though to this some answer, that David's meaning
was, that God was the only Judge that could punish him for the evil he had
done, and that because kings have no other tribunal above them, by which they
can be tried and condemned; so that though when subjects sin, they may be said
to sin against God and the king, yet when kings sin, it may be said of them in
regard of their subjection to punishment, that they only sin against God: and
others, that his meaning was, that God only knew the evil he had done; and so
they would make this expression, Against thee, thee only, have I sinned,
parallel with that Matthew. 18.15. If thy brother shall trespass against thee,
etc. that is, by a private offense, which thou only know: Yet I conceive the
true answer is this; that these words, Against thee, thee only, have I sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight, are to be taken as spoken not simply, but
comparatively; as if he had said, Though I have many ways sinned against men,
yet the wrong I have done to man is nothing in comparison of the wrong and
dishonor and contempt I have done unto thee, O Lord; and so consequently my
grief for the injury I have done to men, is nothing in comparison of the
anguish I find in my soul for the offense I have committed against thy Majesty,
and for despising thine eye that was upon me. And indeed by the like phrase the
captivity of the Jews in Babylon is called an evil, an only evil, Ezekiel. 7.5.
that is, the greatest evil that ever befell that nation. And this agrees fully
with that acknowledgement David made of his sin, when Nathan charged him with
it, I have sinned, says he, against the Lord. Neither could any thing be
spoken, if we thus understand the words, that could tend more clearly to the
aggravating of his sins, and the discovery of the danger of his condition,
and consequently to make way to pardon, then this does, to wit, that he had
sinned against the great God of heaven and earth, that had done so great things
for him: because this is indeed the greatest aggravation of all sin
whatsoever, that it is an offense against God; and because from hence he could
not but infer, that however his sins might be hidden from men, yet they
could not be hidden from God; though man had no power to punish him, yet that
could not free him from Gods judgments; though men should excuse or extenuate
his sins, yea though all the world should acquit and absolve him, yet enough
it would be for ever to wound his soul, that his own conscience told him he had
sinned against God.

That thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
judge.] 1. Some refer this to the first words of the Psalm, verse. 1, 2.
Have mercy upon me, O God, etc. that thou might be justified when thou
speak, etc. that is, that it may be clearly seen, that thou art faithful
and just in making good thy promises, (which may be referred either to the
general promises made in the Word concerning Gods pardoning penitent sinners,
as that Deuter. 30.1, 2, etc. or to that particular promise God had made to
David, of a perpetual kingdom, that should be settled on his seed) and be
clear when thou judge, that is, that men may not say when thou correctest thy
servants, that thou do not stand to thy promises. Again, 2. some refer
these words to the clause immediately going before, Against thee, thee only,
have I sinned, etc. that thou might be justified when thou speak, and
clear when thou judge: for the clearing whereof they say, that this particle
( that) that thou might be justified, etc. does not imply that this was the
end of David's sinning, but that this was a supernatural event that followed
thereupon; David does not say, that he sinned purposely that God might be
justified, but that this event did through the all-ruling providence of God
follow upon his sinning against God, that God was justified in what he had
spoken, and cleared when he judged. And if it be questioned, wherein God was
justified and cleared by occasion of David's sin: to this they answer 1. that
Gods faithfulness was hereby singularly approved, in that notwithstanding
David had provoked the Lord to displeasure, by committing such gross sins,
yet God continued faithful in making good his promises to him, both those
general promises of being merciful to him in his justification and salvation,
and that more special promise of giving him a seed, that should have an
eternal kingdom settled upon him, which was made good to him, yea and that
too by Bathsheba, with whom he had sinned: or, 2. that Gods justice and
faithfulness was hereby manifestly set forth, in that though God failed not to
make good his promises to him, yet withal he did also make good the evil he
had threatened against him by the prophet Nathan, and was most just in bringing
that evil upon him. So that whereas when David fell so foulely, with whom God
had made a covenant, that of his seed he would raise a Savior to his Church,
some might be ready to cavil, that now there was no likelihood, that from a
man thus fallen from the state of holiness a seed should be raised, by whom
Gods elect should be saved, and thus some blame might be charged upon God, for
suffering one whom he had so highly honored, thus to fall; David here on the
contrary professes, that his sin was so far from being any just ground of
the least aspersion that could be cast upon God, that rather by his sin the
justice and faithfulness of God was the more clearly discovered. And that thus
these words must be understood, they labor farther to prove, by Paul's
alleging this Text Romans 3.4. to prove that God was so far from being any way
liable to be charged with failing in his promises made to the Jews, when he
suffered the greatest part of them through their unbelief to fall short of the
grace that had been promised them, that on the contrary his faithfulness was
rendered the more conspicuous thereby; in that though the Jews had broken
covenant with God, yet God was faithful in making good his promises to them,
in that remnant which he reserved to himself, who did by faith embrace the
grace that was tendered them in Christ. For hereby it appeared that God was so
true and faithful, that the wickedness of men could not make void his
faithfulness; and on the other side, that man was so false, that no
faithfulness in Gods dealings with him could keep him faithful to God. What
(says the Apostle) if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the
faith of God without effect? God forbid; yea let God be true, but every man a
liar: as it is written, That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and
might overcome when thou art judged. Where we must note, that though the
last clause is rendered otherwise then it is here in the Psalm, because the
Apostle cites it as it is in the Septuagint, and might overcome when thou
art judged, yet the sense is the same: for the meaning is, that if any men
should foolishly charge God about this sin of David, God would be cleared, and
they would be condemned, and so God would have the better of them. But 3.
others (which I like the best, because it is not so intricate an exposition as
the former is) refer this last clause, that thou might be justified, to the
words in the foregoing verse, I acknowledge my transgression, etc. that thou
might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge: as if
he had said, I confess the evil I have done, not so much for mine own sake, as
for thy glory, that thou might be justified when thou speak, that is, in
all which thou spakest by Nathan, when he reproved me, and denounced the sore
afflictions which should come upon me, and be clear when thou judge, that is,
when thou do bring the judgments upon me which thou have threatened.

Verse. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive
me.] That is, I was born guilty of Adams sin, which I committed in his loins,
yea in my very conception in my mothers womb I was all-over tainted and defiled
with original sin. Now this he mentions for his farther humiliation before
God; as if he had said, I have not only sinned in this matter of the wife of
Urijah, but I am indeed of a cursed sinful nature, and so have been prone to
sin all my days: no sooner was that substance whereof I was made warmed in my
mothers womb, but I was overspread with sin, and so I was born into the world
with a very spring and fountain of all sin within me; and this is that which
abaseth me most of all.

Verse. 6. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts, etc.] Though some
limit the truth here mentioned to the sincerity of a poor penitent in laying
open his sin before God, and so hold that David, by affirming here that God
loved inward sincerity in the confession of sin, did covertly imply, that he
had with a true and sincere heart confessed his sin before God, and therefore
hoped that God would pardon him: yet I rather understand thereby all
uprightness of heart in general; thou desire truth in the inward parts; as
if he had said, Thou that art a God of truth, desire integrity and sincerity
in the heart, not only an outward conformity to thy will, but also that the
inward man be free from all deceit and falsehood: and that the aim of David in
mentioning this was, thereby to intimate either his hope, that therefore God
would not cast him off in displeasure, because however he had sinned greatly,
yet he trusted he might safely say, that his heart notwithstanding was sincere
toward God; or else rather, how odious his impurity must needs make him in the
sight of God, to wit, both that natural sinfulness and impurity, wherein he
had in the foregoing verse acknowledged himself to have been conceived and
born, and also that falsenesse and deceitfulness of his heart, which was
discovered in his late sins, especially in that he had used such a deal of
fraud and guile in seeking to hide them. As for the next clause, and in the
hidden parts thou shall make me to know wisdom, almost all Expositours read
it, and in the hidden part thou had made me to know wisdom; and accordingly
they hold, that as in the foregoing clause David aggravated his sins from the
consideration of that purity and sincerity which God desired and loved in his
children, compared with his own sinfulness and falsnesse of heart, so here he
aggravates his sin from the consideration of that measure of saving knowledge
and grace, which God had wrought in him before he fell into those gross sins:
in the hidden part, that is, inwardly in my heart, which the Apostle calls the
hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. thou had made me to know wisdom, that
is, thou had not only taught me to see and understand the true way of
salvation, but also with my heart and affections to approve and like of it, to
know it feelingly, experimentally and effectually; and this it is that makes my
sins out of measure sinful, that after thou had so savingly enlightened me,
I should yet fall so foulely. But now if we read it, according to our
translation, and in the hidden part thou shall make me to know wisdom, then
it is clear that herein he declares his hope, that God would yet be merciful
to him, in furnishing his heart with all necessary knowledge.

Verse. 7. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean, etc.] In these words
David alludes clearly to the legal rites of cleansing those that were legally
unclean by leprosy or otherwise, by the sprinkling of the blood of their
sacrifices and the water of expiation upon them with a sprinkle of hyssop: and
so likewise to other legal sprinklings; for which see Heb. 9.13, 19. compared
with Lev. 14.4, 5, etc. Numb. 19.6. and Exodus 24.8. with the Notes on these
places. So that his desire is, that the Lord would do that for him, which was
signified by those legal sprinklings with hyssop, (and without which those
outward sprinklings were indeed nothing worth) namely, that God would, by
applying the blood of Christ to him, thoroughly cleanse his leprous soul, and
make him pure and acceptable in his sight. And so likewise in the next clause
he alludes to the legal washings, wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow.

Verse. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness etc.] That is, By the immediate
voice of thy spirit, assuring my heart that thou have pardoned my sins, and
likewise in the ministry of thy word particularly, by causing me with joy to
embrace thy promises of pardon, and to apply them to mine own soul. To which
some add also, that he desired hereby, that Nathan, or some other prophet,
might be sent to him with those joyful tidings, that God had pardoned his
sins: and therefore, they say, it may well be, that Nathan did not return that
answer, The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die, so soon as David
upon Nathans reproof had acknowledged his sin; (though they be all related
together 2 Samuel 12.13, as elsewhere things done at several times are joined
together in the scriptures recording of them) but that after David had some
time mourned for his sins, Nathan came again with that joyful message. But of
this there is no certainty at all.

Verse. 9. Hide thy face from my sins.] As if he had said, Seeing my sin is ever
before me, as he had said before verse. 3. let it not be before thee, but do
thou hide thy face, not from me, but from my sins.

Verse. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, etc.] As with respect to what he
had said before concerning the corruption of his nature, verse. 5. Behold, I was
shapen in iniquity, etc, and as apprehending himself deprived in a manner of
that holy disposition and power of godliness, which God had formerly wrought
in him, as before he begged for pardon, so here for the sanctification of Gods
spirit. And because for the work of regeneration there is no disposition of
nature that tends thereto, nothing in nature out of which the spirit can
produce such an effect, therefore he terms it a creating of a clean heart in
him. And renew a right spirit within me; that is, a disposition and inclination
of nature, not crooked and perverse, as all men's are naturally, but just and
right, according to the straight rule of Gods law, and which might carry him
on, to do that only which was right in Gods sight. As for the word renew,
though it may have reference to that uprightness wherein man was at first
created; yet I rather conceive it has reference to his former piety, which he
now found greatly decayed in him, wherewith he desires to be established again:
and therefore some render it, a constant spirit.

Verse. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, etc.] That is, Cast me not out
of thy favor: yea and consequently it may well be, which some hold, that this
also implies a desire that he might not be deprived of the evidences of his
favor formerly enjoyed; to wit, 1. that he might not be cast out from the
presence of God in his sanctuary, as Cain was, for shedding blood, see the Note
Genesis 4.16; and 2. that he might not be cast off from serving God in the regal
office, as Saul had been: and take not thy holy spirit from me; whereby he
means both those sanctifying and saving graces, wherewith God by his spirit had
endued him; (which are indeed often greatly impaired by the sins of the
faithful, and of themselves are in danger to be utterly lost, though through
Gods mercy, which David here begges, they are continued in them) and likewise
those gifts of Gods spirit, wherewith God had furnished him for his regal
office.

Verse. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, etc.] That is, of thy
saving my soul eternally in heaven, and of thy providence over me for my
preservation here from temporal dangers: and uphold me with thy free spirit;
that is, keep up my heart in the assurance of thy love, the hope of life
eternal, and a firm resolution of yielding thee sincere obedience in all
things; and that by thy free spirit, that is, by that free disposition of
spirit which thou art wont to work in thy children, or (which is much to the
same purpose) by that spirit of thine, whereby thou art wont to work in thy
children a true freedom from the bondage of sin, according to that of the
Apostle 2 Cor. 3.17. where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, a
readiness of mind, freely and cheerfully and sincerely, without any
by-respects, in all things to obey thy laws, and a holy magnanimity, boldly and
freely to profess themselves thy children, Romans 8.15.

Verse. 13. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways.] That is, By mine
example I will cause them to see how infinitely merciful thou art to poor
penitent sinners, and withal how in all things thou requirest them to carry
themselves if they desire thy favor. And to this some add also his declaring
how severely God often afflicts his own children, when they sin against him.
But however David's main drift in these words was to imply, that he would
endeavor that as his sin had been an occasion of much hurt to others, so his
repentance should likewise be improved for the good of others.

Verse. 14. Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, etc.] Some understand this thus;
that David desired here that God would pardon those sins whereby he had
deserved that God should cut him off, and have his blood for the blood he had
shed; or for which he had threatened that the sword should never depart from his
house. But according to our translation, it is clearly meant of that guilt he
had drawn upon himself by shedding the blood of Urijah and others: the pardon
whereof David here again desires, because men that lie in their sins are not
fit to praise God, which in the next clause he was to promise to God. And my
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness; that is, thy faithfulness in
performing thy promises, (which may be also particularly referred to that
promise made by Nathan 2 Samuel 12.13.) or that righteousness whereby thou do
justify sinners: see the Notes Psalm. 5.8, and 22.31.

Verse. 15. O Lord, open thou my lips, etc.] Herein he desires of God, 1. that
by Gods mercy to him he might have occasion to show forth his praise; see the
Note Psalm. 40.3: 2ly, that he would free him from the guilt of his sins, which
otherwise might well stop his mouth, and must needs make him unfit for this
service; see Psalm. 50.16: and 3ly, that God would give him a will and desire to
praise him, a prepared heart and quickened affections, and all other abilities
requisite for this service.

Verse. 16. For thou desire not sacrifice, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 40.6.

Verse. 17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.] That is, This is the
sacrifice which is all in all with God, in stead of all, better and more
pleasing to God then all other sacrifices. And this is here inserted, because
David is here speaking of the sacrifice of praise, which a penitent sinner
promises to God upon pardon of sin obtained; whose praise is therefore the
more acceptable to God, because it proceeds from a heart that has been so
broken.

Verse. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, etc.] That is, Of thine own
free grace and good will, and according as thou shall be pleased and shall see
fit, do good to thy Church and people (for by Sion here is meant the whole
people of God, that met together to worship God in Sion; and figuratively also
the whole Church of Christ, see the Note Psalm. 2.6.) build thou the walls of
Jerusalem; that is, maintain, defend and strengthen thy Church, and that city
in particular which is the chief glory of the kingdom. Because 1. David by his
sin had already done much hurt among the people, (for many of them had been
slain by the sword together with Urijah; many had been scandalized, the
faithful grieved, and the profession of godliness stained;) 2. he knew that
God might happily (as he often did) punish the whole land for the sins of their
king; yea and 3. being anointed king, that he might be a type of Christ, the
Head of the Church, and he out of whose loins the Messiah was to come, by his
sins he had done as much as in him lay to ruin the whole kingdom of Christ:
therefore he prays here for Sions welfare, as well as for the pardon of his
own sins, Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: and as if by his sins he had
made a breach in Jerusalems walls, he desires God to repair the hurt that he
had done, and make up the breach, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. When David
succeeded Saul, he found the kingdom in a very bad case: Now fearing lest upon
his grievous sins God should break forth in displeasure against him, as he had
done against Saul, and should by letting loose some enemy upon them, or by any
other judgment, interrupt the peace and prosperity of the people, and so the
perfecting of Jerusalems building should be hindered, (the main part whereof,
which was the building of the Temple, was not yet begun,) the reformation
intended and begun should be frustrated, and the settling and ordering of the
way of Gods worship should fall to the ground, and God should as it were
retract what he had so graciously spoken concerning Sion, Psalm. 132.14, etc.
the Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation. This is my
rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it: I will abundantly
bless her provision, I will satisfy her poor with bread; I will also cloth
her priests with salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy, etc. I
say, out of the fear of these evils, he closes this Psalm with this prayer for
the welfare of Jerusalem.

Verse. 19. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness,
etc.] See the Notes Deuteronomy. 33.19, and Psalm. 5.4. with burnt-offering and whole
burnt-offering; some of which were of birds and beasts that were all burnt upon
the altar, and some were things without life, such as flower, oil, etc. and
were sometimes wholly burnt, as in every meat offering for the priest, Levit.
6.23. However, that which David says here is this, Then shall thou be pleased,
etc. that is, When the Temple is built in Jerusalem, the place which thou have
chosen; or rather, when thou art reconciled unto me, and so thereupon, when
thou shall also be favorable unto thy people, then shall thou graciously
accept, not only of the sacrifices which I shall offer for my self, which
whilst I should lie under the guilt of the sins I have committed, I know thou
would never regard, but also of the peoples sacrifices, which with much
forwardness and cheerfulness they shall then bring to thine altar; Then,
says he, shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar.

PSALM LII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician, Maschil, etc.] For this word Maschil, see
the Note upon the Title of the 32. Psalm. A Psalm of David when Doeg the
Edomite came and told Saul, etc. and so thereupon at Saul's command had slain
Ahimelech with fourscore and five priests besides, and had destroyed the city
Nob and all that was therein. For that this Psalm was composed after that
bloody massacre of Doeg, those words do evidence verse. 4. Thou love all
devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue: see also the Note 1 Samuel 22.9.

Verse. 1. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? etc.] Doegs
boasting might be, either of the evil he had done, or of farther mischief he
intended to do, or of the success of the false tale he had told to Saul;
whether in regard of the evil he had thereby brought upon the Priests of the
Lord, or of the favor he had thereby obtained with Saul, and the preferment
perhaps and rewards he had thereupon conferred on him: and accordingly the
drift of this interrogation, Why boastest thou thy self in mischief? is either
to imply, that it was a high degree of wickedness to boast of such a villainy,
in stead of fearing vengeance from God; as if he had said, How dare thou thus
to boast thy self? or else to signify that there was no just cause for his
boasting, both in regard there was nothing worthy of such triumphing in that
which he had done, and because in the conclusion it would be found there was
nothing gotten by it. And so those words, O mighty man, may be added also,
either by way of Irony, as if he had said, A great deal of valor and prowess
you have shown in slaying a company of unarmed men, the Priests of the Lord,
yea women and children, no way able to resist you; or else to imply the ground
of his vain boasting, to wit, either his present greatness, as being a man in
great place, and of great power with Saul, 1 Samuel 22.9. or the great
preferments he expected from Saul. And then for the last words, the goodness
of God endures continually, they are opposed to Doegs boasting; and import as
much as if David had said, God is ever good to his, and hereon I rely against
all thy vaunts and threatenings: neither thy might nor wickedness can frustrate
Gods goodness; though God may afflict his servants for a time, yet he will
deliver them again as often as he afflicts them, and will never be weary of
helping them: yea he is good to them even when he suffers wicked men to prevail
over them.

Verse. 2. Thy tongue devises mischiefs, etc.] That is, it utters those things
wherewith thou have devised to do mischief: and thus Doeg is charged, that he
did not rashly and unadvisedly utter those things to Saul, that had brought so
much mischief upon the Priests of the Lord, but that he had plotted it
beforehand: like a sharp rasour, working deceitfully; to wit, when in stead of
cutting off the hair, it cutteth a man's throat. I know some would have those
last words, working deceitfully, to be only spoken of Doegs tongue, and that
with reference to the snares that were laid thereby for the ruin of Gods
faithful servants. But I rather think that these words are to be referred both
to Doegs tongue, and likewise to the rasour whereto his tongue is compared: for
as his tongue is compared to a sharp rasour, because as a sharp rasour does
suddenly and easily, as it were with a touch, take off all the hair to the very
roots, yea and may wound deeply in stead of shaving, if it goes awry; so Doegs
tongue had suddenly, with a few words speaking, caused not only fourscore and
five of the Priests to be cut off, but also all the inhabitants of Nob, yea
even their children and sucklings, 1 Samuel 22.19: so it is also compared to a
sharp rasour, working deceitfully, because as a rasour may be said to work
deceitfully, when in stead of trimming a man, it does, as in a trice, when no
such thing is feared, cut a man's throat; so it might be said also of Doegs
tongue, that it did work deceitfully, because being created for Gods glory and
the good of men, he had therewith deceived Saul, making him believe that
Ahimelech had conspired with David against him, when there was no such thing,
and thereby had also brought ruin upon Ahimelech and his family, to whom he
had carried himself with all fairness a little before, when he was with him in
the Tabernacle.

Verse. 3. Thou love evil more then good, etc.] See the Note 1 Samuel 22.10.

Verse. 4. Thou love all devouring words, etc.] This is spoken with reference
to that horrid massacre of the Priests and the inhabitants of Nob, 1. Sam.
22.18, 19. wherein such multitudes were on a sudden swallowed up, and all by
means of Doegs wicked tongue; to which he the rather ascribes this act of
devouring, in allusion to the natural use of the tongue in drawing in the meat
to the throat, which is to be swallowed down.

Verse. 5. God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, etc.] To wit, as thou have
destroyed the Priests of the Lord: he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out
of thy dwelling place; though being become great through Saul's favor thou
may judge thy self unmovable: and root thee out of the land of the living;
that is, and cut off thee and all thy posterity, as thou did destroy not the
priests only, but their children too: see also the Note Psalm. 27.13.

Verse. 6. The righteous also shall see, and fear.] That is, Though wicked men
may close their eyes, and refuse to take notice of it; yet the righteous shall
observe it; and finding hereby how sure God is to take part with his servants
against those that oppress them, it will not only make them afraid of doing
any such evil as Doeg has done, but will also cause them every way to fear God
the more, not abandoning the profession or ways of godliness, when they see
the wicked triumph.

Verse. 7. Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in
the abundance of his riches, etc.] As was evident in that he was not afraid to
offend God, that he might enrich himself: and strengthened himself in his
wickedness; that is, encouraged himself in the wickedness he had committed,
or sought to advance himself, and to make himself great and mighty by that his
wickedness.

Verse. 8. But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God, etc.] As if he
had said, Though I be now in a poor despised condition, and banished from the
Church and people of God; yet I doubt not but that I shall therein continue in
a flourishing estate, enjoying with others the comfort of Gods Tabernacle, and
yielding fruit delightful and profitable both to God and man: see the Note
Psalm. 23.6. Now the ground of this his hope he adds in the next words, I trust
in the mercy of God for ever and ever.

Verse. 9. I will praise thee for ever, because thou have done it, etc.] That
is, thou have destroyed Doeg; or, thou have made me like a green olive tree;
or, thou have caused me to trust in thy mercy. For it may be referred either to
any of those things which God had already done for him, when he composed this
Psalm, as his delivering him from the plots of Doeg and others, who might often
have ruined him, encouraged by the success of Doeg in the evil he had brought
upon the priests of the Lord, had not God wonderfully preserved him; or to
those things which he knew God would do, as the destruction of Doeg, and the
reducing of him to a flourishing estate amongst the people of God, of which he
speaks, through the assurance of faith, as if it were done already, I will
praise thee for ever, because thou have done it: as if he had said, What others
are too often wont to ascribe to chance or to themselves, I ascribe wholly to
thy providence over me. And I will wait on thy name; that is, being encouraged
by this experience, I will wait on thee, thy power, grace and favor; or thy
word and promises; see the Notes Psa. 5.11, and 20.1. Yea some limit it to that
particular promise made to David concerning the kingdom. As for that last
clause, for it is good before thy saints, either it may be referred to that
waiting upon God which he had promised, it is good before thy saints to wait
upon thy name, that is, it will be good and profitable to stir up them to wait
likewise upon God in the like cases; or, it is good before thy saints, that is,
thy saints will account it good to wait upon thee: or else it may be referred
to the Name of God, I will wait upon thy name, for it is good before thy
saints; that is, thy name is good before thy saints. However wicked men, though
God does never so much good for them, are not sensible of it, but rather thy
name is hateful and dreadful to them; yet to thy saints it is good, they know
it to be so, and have had experience of it, and therefore to them it is amiable
and delightful, they hope in it, and call upon it; and the rather it will be
such to them, when they shall hear of this mercy afforded me.

PSALM LIII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician upon Mahalath.] It is generally held, that
this was the name of some musical Instrument, or some known song, to the tune
whereof this Psalm was to be sung.

Verse. 1. The fool has said in his heart, etc.] This Psalm is the same almost
with Psalm 14; only in some few places there is some little difference: and
therefore for this see the Notes there. Some say that, because that which is
here delivered is so necessary to be often thought on, therefore David left it
upon record in two several Psalms.

Verse. 5. There were they in great fear, where no fear was, etc.] As if he had
said, And so those that are now such a terror to others, shall come to be
terrifyed themselves: those desperate men that feared not God, and called not
on his name, shall be in great fear, where no fear was; that is, God shall
strike them with terror on a sudden when they are altogether fearlesse; or,
when there is indeed, in regard of that which they fear, no cause at all of
fear. As for the following words, they are spoken to every faithful man that
had been in danger of such Atheistical oppressors: for God has scattered the
bones of him that encampeth against thee; that is, he has broken their power;
or, he has slain them, tearing them, as it were, in pieces, as a lion does his
prey: thou have put them to shame, to wit, by overcoming them, God also thereby
manifesting his displeasure against them; whence it is that he adds, because
God has despised them.

PSALM LIVE.
The Title. TO the chief musician on Neginoth, etc.] For this word Neginoth,
see the Note on the title Psalm. 4. A Psalm of David, when the Ziphims came,
etc. of which see the Note 1 Samuel 23.19. For though the Ziphims did a second
time also endeavor to betray David into Saul's hands, 1 Samuel 26.1, 2. and both
times David was brought thereby into very great danger, which might give just
occasion for composing this Psalm; yet the words here in the Title, Does not
David hide himself with us? seem rather to point out that first discovery of
the Ziphims, 1 Samuel 23.19.

Verse. 1. Save me, O God, by thy name, etc.] As if he should have said, Seeing
all outward means fail, save me by thy self, even by thine own immediate power;
see the Note Psalm. 20.1: and judge me by thy strength; see the Note Psalm. 26.1.

Verse. 3. For strangers are risen up against me.] So he terms his
persecutours, as elsewhere also strange children, Psalm. 144.7: either because
they were in their minds alienated from God, and estranged from the faithful
servants of God; or because they were mere strangers to that piety and
goodness which should be in the people of God; and so also consequently
because though they professed themselves Israelites, yet they were not such
indeed, but were in Gods account no better then heathens, aliens and strangers
from the commonwealth of Israel, 1 John 2.19. for which see the Note Psalm.
10.16; or else because they carried themselves most inhumanely to him, more
like Barbarians, Philistines or Babylonians, then like Israelites, and such as
were his brethren of the same tribe with him. However, observable it is, that
David in these words seems to comfort himself with this, that God would surely
take part with his own servant, rather then with those that were mere strangers
to him.

Verse. 4. The Lord is with them that uphold my soul.] That is, with my friends
and followers, that do what they can to preserve my life; and so though they
be but few and weak, yet God being with them, I need not fear.

Verse. 5. He shall reward evil unto mine enemies, etc.] To wit, by bringing
that upon them, which they intended to bring upon me. It is in the Hebrew, He
shall reward evil unto those that observe me; that is, that watch for an
opportunity to ruin me: which might indeed most fitly be said of the Ziphims,
whose work enjoined them by Saul was, to observe and mark all the
lurking-places where David hid himself, and then to acquaint him with it: see 1 Samuel 23.22, 23. Cut them off in thy truth, that is, in thy justice; or,
according to thy promise; which some also restrain to the promise made to David
concerning the kingdom.

Verse. 6. I will praise thy name, O Lord, for it is good.] See the Note Psalm.
52.9.

PSALM LV.
Verse. 1. GIve ear to my prayer, O God, etc.] Some conceive, it was the
distress David was in, when the men of Keilah were like to have betrayed him
into the hands of Saul, 1 Samuel 23. that occasioned the composing of this Psalm;
others, that it was the rebellion of Absalom. And indeed though nothing can be
concluded herein, yet many passages in this Psalm, (as those especially verse.
9, 10, 12, 13.) do seem much to favor this last opinion.

Verse. 2. I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise.] The drift of these words
is to imply, that his distress and sorrow was so great, that when he came to
make his complaint to God, he could not do it without a doleful noise of
weeping, sighing and sobbing, yea sometimes not without breaking forth into
piteous outcries.

Verse. 3. Because of the voice of the enemy, etc.] That is, their threatenings,
vaunts and insultations, or the false slanders they raised against him: as we
know Saul's courtiers accused him of seeking to get the kingdom from Saul; and
Absalom and his party accused him of neglecting the government of the people,
2. Sam. 15.3. Yet some conceive, that it is the clamours and shoutings of the
forces raised to pursue him, when they were so near at hand, that they were
even ready to assault and surprise him, that David here means by the voice of
the enemy. As for the next clause, he therein terms these his enemies wicked
men, because of the oppression of the wicked, chiefly in reference to his own
innocence, and the injustice of their oppressing him. And so likewise by the
next words, for they cast iniquity upon me, either he means that they falsely
charged much iniquity upon him, whereof he was no way guilty; or, that in their
counsels they determined to deal most injuriously with him; or, that they did
actually bring many unjust troubles upon him, even whatever their wicked and
malicious hearts could devise against him; and that because they did not only
hate him in their hearts, but were also transported with rage and fury: which
is employed in the last words, and in wrath they hate me.

Verse. 4. And the terrors of death are fallen upon me.] That is, deadly
terrors; see the Notes 2 Samuel 22.5, 6: or the fear of death frequently
striking me with terror.

Verse. 6. And I said, O that I had wings like a dove, etc.] In this wish of
David's, that he could suddenly fly away out of the reach of his enemies, he
seeks to imply both how sad his condition was, in that he could choose to live
in some desolate solitary place, which is contrary to nature, that desires the
society of men, yea to live amongst wild beasts in a wilderness, as he
expresses himself verse. 7, Lo then would I wander far off, and remain in the
wilderness, rather then be in such continual perplexity by reason of the
malice of his enemies against him; and withal how desperate his dangers were,
even such, that without a miracle he could not hope to escape. And then in
expressing this, he desires the wings of a dove: not only because this fowl
amongst others is noted to be very swift of flight; but also because the dove,
being a gentle and harmless bird, and withal weak and fearful, that is wont
when she sees any storm coming, or is in danger of any bird of prey, to fly
away into the holes and clefts of the rocks in desolate places, and there to
sit mourning by her self, was fittest to resemble his condition, who being
unjustly pursued by his enemies, was therefore desirous, if it were possible,
to get out of their reach.

Verse. 8. I would hasten mine escape from the windy storm and tempest.] That
is, from the violent storms of persecution, which his enemies were raising
against him: and in this expression some conceive he alludes to doves flying
away to some place of shelter, when they see a storm coming upon them; as is
observed in the foregoing Note. But however, in those words, I would hasten
mine escape, we may see how hopeless for the time he judged his condition, in
that he had no desire to stay and wait a while to see whether it might not ere
long be better with him; but if he might have his wish, all his desire was to
hasten away straight out of the reach of his enemies. In relation whereto those
words of David to his servants, when he fled out of Jerusalem because of
Absalom, may not seem unworthy our observation, 2 Samuel 15.14. Arise, and let us
flee; make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly.

Verse. 9. Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues, etc.] That is, Divide them
in their counsels, that they may not agree; and so let this be their ruin. The
phrase that David here uses seems to have reference to the Lords crushing of
the Babel-builders, Genesis 11. by dividing their tongues. But however, observable
it is, that according to this prayer of David, the conspiracy of Absalom was
indeed defeated by the division of his counselors. As for the following words,
for I have seen violence and strife in the city, though some understand them to
be indefinitely spoken of the open wickedness that abounded in every place; as
if he had said, that openly in town and city men did as boldly exercise all
kind of violence, injustice and oppression, as robbers did in their
lurking-places, to spoil those at unawares that passed by them: yet I rather
think that David does herein complain of the injustice, violence and seditious
distempers, which he found in Keilah, or rather in Jerusalem, when he was
forced to fly thence because of the Insurrection of Absalom; and therefore he
speaks of it, as that which himself had seen, and not which he had heard by
relation from others, I have seen violence and strife in the city.

Verse. 10. Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof, etc.] That
is, the men in whom he had seen such violence and strife, as he had said in the
foregoing verse: or rather, they, that is violence and strife, go about it
upon the walls thereof, that is, they compa^^e and environ the city like walls.
The meaning of this expression I conceive is this; that violence and strife,
and so all kind of injustice and wickedness, had wholly possessed the city, and
did rule and reign in it; so that whereas the walls of a city are made to
secure the inhabitants from violence and oppression, there quite contrary they
were hemmed in with violence and strife as with walls: or they were under the
power of violence and strife as of garrison soldiers upon their walls, so that
the godly could no where be free from violence and injuries: mischief also and
sorrow are in the midst of it; that is, in every house and in every company;
there is no place free.

Verse. 11. Deceit and guile depart not from her streets.] That is, they are
openly and constantly practiced amongst them.

Verse. 13. But it was thou, a man, mine equal, etc.] Because after David was
king he could have no equal, therefore some conclude that this must be meant
of some of Saul's courtiers, with whom David lived as his equals. But I see not
but that it may be Ahithophel of whom this is spoken, understanding the words
thus; But it was thou, a man, mine equal, that is, one that was in as high
esteem both with me and others, as I my self was, to whom I carried my self no
otherwise then if he had been mine equal, my second self: my guide, that is,
my chief counselor, whose advice in all things I was still ready to follow;
see 2 Samuel 15.12, and 16.23.

Verse. 14. We took sweet counsel together, etc.] The ground of this expression
is, because friends are wont to take much sweet content and delight in
communicating their secret counsels one to another: and walked unto the house
of God in company, that is, together, or amongst the companies that flocked
thither in great number to worship God there.

Verse. 15. Let death seize upon them, etc.] That is, let some violent death
surprise them suddenly and unexpectedly, and carry them away, and so frustrate
all their counsels: and the same may likewise be intended in the following
clause, and let them go down quick into hell, or, the grave; namely, that they
might be cut off on a sudden, without any disease or sickness foregoing. Yet
doubtless he alludes, at least, to the earths swallowing up of Korah, Dathan
and Abiram, Numb. 16.33. see also the Note Psalm. 28.4. For wickedness is in
their dwellings and among them; that is, in all their dwellings, and in all
their meetings; or, it is every where to be found amongst them, in all their
habitations.

Verse. 17. Evening and morning and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud.] To wit,
out of the anguish and sorrow of my heart, and the fervency of my spirit in
calling upon the Lord. He names the evening first, because the Hebrews
accounted the evening the beginning of the day.

Verse. 18. He has delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against
me, etc.] That is, He has preserved me in as much peace and safety, when mine
enemies fought against me, as if I had been in no danger; or, He has delivered
my life from danger, and settled me in a peaceable condition. Yea some expound
it thus, He has delivered my soul in peace, that is, without any trouble or
stirring on my part. As for the next words, for there were many with me, either
it may be meant of his enemies, that there were many with him, to fight against
him; or else of his helpers, that there were many with him to protect him,
(though his friends were false to him) meaning Gods holy angels; see 2 Kings
6.16.

Verse. 19. God shall hear and afflict them, even he that abides of old, etc.]
That is, the eternal and immutable God, who abides still the same that he
has been of old in all former generations; and therefore as he has been
always ready to hear the prayers of his servants, and to afflict and punish
their wicked enemies, so he will be still. Because they have no changes,
therefore they fear not God; that is, because they go on in a constant way of
prosperity, and there is no alteration or change in regard of any adversity
that befalls them, therefore they boldly despise God. Yet many Expositours
understand it thus; Because they are obstinately wicked, there is no change
wrought in them, they are no way bettered by any of Gods dealings with them,
therefore they fear not God. But the words in our Translation will hardly bear
this exposition.

Verse. 22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, etc.] It
may be read, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, Cast thy gift upon the Lord,
etc. and then by gift is meant either that affliction which God allots a man
for his portion, for the exercise of his faith, etc. according to that of our
Savior Joh. 18.11. the cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink
it? or else rather the gift which any man desires of God; as if David had said,
(speaking both to himself and others) Whatever gift thou desire from God,
refer it wholly to his provident care over thee: when thou have made known
thy desire to God, cast thy care for the obtaining of this gift which thou
desire merely upon God. And indeed being thus understood, it is all one in
effect with that translation which we have in our Bibles, Cast thy burden upon
the Lord, that is, thy cares and troubles, which lie heavy upon thee. And he
shall sustain thee; to wit, by providing for thee, protecting and upholding
thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be moged; that is, to be utterly
ruined and cast down: see the Note Psalm. 13.4.

Verse. 23. But thou, O God, shall bring them down into the pit of
destruction,etc.] That is, the grave and hell: bloody and deceitful men shall
not live out half their days; to wit, which they desire and hope to live, and
which in the ordinary course of nature they might live. Yea and to this some
add also, that when such men do live longer, their life is usually accursed,
full of inward terrors, and worse then any death.

PSALM LVI.
The Title. TO the chief musician upon Ionath-elem-rechokim, etc.] Some take
these also to be the first words of some known song, to the tune whereof this
Psalm was to be sung. But yet others translate the words thus, touching a soul
that suffers violence from a band of strangers; and others better thus, upon
the dumb dove in a far country: wherein they say David terms himself a dove,
because being fled to the Philistines, he was there as a dove amongst many
birds of prey; for which also see the Note Psalm. 55.6; and dumb, because though
he heard there many reproachful speeches against God and his people, yet he
was forced to be silent; neither durst he besides complain of the wicked
dealings of Saul and his courtiers, for fear of exposing the people of God to
the scorn and derision of the heathen. Michtam of David; see the Note on the
title of the 16. Psalm: when the Philistines took him in Gath; which I conceive
must needs be meant of that story 1 Samuel 21.14, 15. though, because there is
another Psalm before, to wit Psalm. 34. that was composed upon that occasion,
some conceive that this was penned when he was again in danger the second time
he went thither, 1 Samuel 29.3, 4.

Verse. 4. In God I will praise his word.] That is, I will praise God for his
word: as if he had said, Though God may seem to disregard me, yea to be against
me; yet having his promise, that he will never fail his, but will protect and
bless them, and having withal his express promise made to me by Samuel
concerning the kingdom, on this word of his I will rest, and in this I will
rejoice, and bless God for it. This I conceive is the plain meaning of these
words. Yet some make this to be the sense of them; In God I will praise his
word, that is, with Gods help I doubt not but I shall have occasion to rejoice
in his holy promises. And some likewise understand it of the word of Gods
decree, to wit, that whatever God should decree concerning him, he would praise
God for it.

Verse. 6. They hide themselves, etc.] To wit, that they may carry their plots
the more closely, and may lie in wait unawares to do me a mischief: they mark
my steps when they wait for my soul; that is, they watch to lay snares for me;
or, they mark and observe all my actions and conversation, to see if they can
pick a quarrel or get any advantage against me; or, they watch my goings, that
they may follow and pursue me, which way soever I turn my self: and all this,
because they wait for my soul, that is, to take away my life; for nothing less
will content them.

Verse. 7. Shall they escape by iniquity? etc.] As if he should have said, They
think by taking away my life, to secure themselves, and to settle Saul and his
posterity in the kingdom: but shall this do it? Is iniquity, which provokes
God to take vengeance, likely to secure them from vengeance? No doubtless;
this will rather hasten their destruction: and this therefore he desires God to
manifest in the following words, in thine anger cast down the people, O God.

Verse. 8. Thou tellest my wanderings, etc.] That is, Thou do: exactly know in
what a restless condition I have lived many years together, being driven up
and down from one place to another, and no where suffered to abide in quiet:
put thou my tears into thy bottle; that is, let them not be lost and shed in
vain, do not despise and disregard them, but be mindful of them, and let it be
seen that thou make precious account of them. He compares the tears that he
shed, when he was as it were in the wine press of affliction, to the wine that
is pressed out of the grapes, every drop whereof they are careful to save.

Verse. 12. Thy vows are upon me, O God, etc.] That is, By vows made to thee in
the hour of my distress, I took upon me to return thee praise, if thou did
deliver me; and so there lies an obligation upon my soul, and therewith much
care and sollicitousnesse of spirit, to make good my engagements. The very same
expression we have Act. 21.23. we have four men which have a vow on them.

Verse. 13. For thou have delivered my soul from death, etc.] See the Note Psalm.
6.4. and 1 Samuel 21.13: wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling? that is,
seeing thou have delivered me thus from the jaws of death, will thou not also
support me, that I may not sink through despair in any future trials and
troubles, and keep me from falling into any sinful practice, though my
temptations be many and great? or, wilt not thou still preserve me, that I may
not be overthrown by mine enemies, or fall under the power of them that seek my
ruin? see the Note Job 12.5: that I may walk before God, to wit, trusting in
him, seeking to please him, enjoying his grace and favor, and having him
always before mine eyes; see the Note Genesis 17.1: in the light of the living,
that is, here in this world: yet some understand it also of the light of
heaven. The same is intended as where the Scripture speaks of the land of the
living: for which see the Note Psalm. 27.13.

PSALM LVII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician, Al-taschith, etc.] Many Expositours hold
that this also was some musical Instrument, or the first words of some song,
to the tune whereof this Psalm was to be sung. Yet because Al-taschith
signifies Destroy not, therefore others hold that this is prefixed in the
Title, either as a memorial of that memorable passage, when there was such an
opportunity offered for slaying Saul, and David did not only restrain his own
affections with this thought, that he must not destroy the Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 24.6. but also stayed Abishai from doing it, when they found him asleep in
his camp, and that by using these very words, Destroy him not, as they are
expressed 1 Samuel 26.9. (which is therefore only improbable, because we have the
same in the Titles of other Psalms, as Psalm. 59, and 75, which were not penned
upon any such occasion;) or rather as a memorial of Gods mercy, who was
pleased, when he was in such desperate danger, to give a command that he should
not be destroyed; or to express the argument of the Psalm, to wit, that it is
a deprecatory Psalm (and such the rest also are that have this Title) made when
he was in danger of death, and wherein he begs of God that he might not be
destroyed, notwithstanding his enemies pursued him so fiercely. Michtam of
David, when he sled from Saul in the cave; to wit, the cave of Adullam, 1 Samuel
22.1; or the cave in the wilderness of En-gedi, 1 Samuel 24.1. where Saul by
Gods providence fell into David's hands, but that, as is above said, he would
not destroy him.

Verse. 1. My soul trusts in thee, etc.] That is, Though I have taken this
cave for a hiding place, yet my trust is not in that, but in thee; see the
Notes Psalm. 33.20, and 1 Samuel 24.22: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I
make my refuge; herein, as some think, he alludes to the wings of the Cherubims
over the mercy-seat; for this expression see the Notes Ruth 2.12, and Psalm.
17.8.

Verse. 2. I will cry unto God most high, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 9.2: unto God
that performs all things for me; which may be referred to the accomplishment
of David's affairs, to wit, that all that was done by him or for him, was
accomplished by the all-ruling power and providence of God; or else to the full
performance of all things that God had promised; or else to the perfecting of
all things which the Lord undertook to do for him, to wit, that God did not
leave his work imperfect, but did surely finish it in his own good time. And
observable it is, which some do here note, namely, that expressing this in the
present tense, he performs all things for me, David does imply, that even
then in the great dangers he was in, God was carrying on his purposes of mercy,
though in outward appearance things seemed to work contrary thereto.

Verse. 3. He shall send from heaven and save me, etc.] That is, say some, He
shall send his angels to save me; but for the meaning of this expression, see
the Note 2 Samuel 22.17: from the reproach of him that would swallow me up; that
is, from the ruin which mine enemies intend to bring upon me (for had they
herein prevailed over David, it would have tended to the reproach of him and
his cause) and especially from the slanderous and scornful insulting speeches,
wherewith they reproached him. And indeed so it was, when David following Saul
out of the cave had pleaded his cause with him, and Saul thereupon had
acknowledged his innocence and condemned himself, 1 Samuel 24.16, 17. God shall
send forth his mercy and his truth; that is, God shall send help because of his
mercy and truth; or, by helping me God shall manifest unto all men his mercy to
me, and his truth in making good his promises. The first clause may be
rendered, as in the margin of our Bibles, He shall send from heaven and save
me; he reproacheth him that would swallow me up: and then the meaning is, that
God would bring reproach upon his enemies, to wit, by destroying them, and so
by disappointing them of their hopes, and frustrating their plots and attempts
against him.

Verse. 4. I lie even among them that are set on fire, etc.] That is, men of a
hot, fierce and furious spirit, that being enflamed with wrath and envy, are
continual incendiaries to inflame others against me. And by saying that he did
lie amongst such men, he would imply, that he was amongst them, as one that was
cast down, weak and helpless, waiting upon God, but no way able to resist
them, nor knowing which way in regard of men to turn himself for succor. Even
among the sons of men; so he terms his enemies, either by way of contempt,
because they were, notwithstanding their greatness in Saul's court, but weak
flesh and blood, as other men are; or else to imply, that however they
pretended themselves the sons of God, yet they were not indeed such, but mere
carnal men, void of all piety and grace: whose teeth are spears and arrows,
and their tongue a sharp sword; where by terming their teeth spears and arrows,
he intends to set them forth as cruel monsters, that were greater destroyers
then any beasts of prey could be; or else their teeth are thus described
together with their tongue, both being the instruments of speech, to imply,
that by their slanderous and mischievous tongues they did most cruelly wound
and tear both him and others, the righteous servants of God.

Verse. 5. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; let thy glory be above all
the earth.] As if he had said, Thy glory lies at the stake in the dangers of
thy servant, and therefore by delivering me manifest the glory of thy power and
goodness etc. to be above all the creatures in heaven and earth; or, show
forth thy glory, that both angels and men throughout the earth may admire and
praise thy name.

Verse. 6. They have prepared a net for my steps, my soul is bowed down, etc.]
That is, I am so encompassed with their net, that I am in a manner overwhelmed,
and ready to fall under their power; or, my soul is even pressed down with
fear, as birds that will couch down and lie close to the ground to hide
themselves from danger: see the Notes also Psalm. 38.6, and 44.25. They have
dug a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are fallen themselves: and
so indeed it was with Saul, who seeking to surprise David, did himself fall
into David's hands in the cave, where he might have slain him.

Verse. 7. My heart is fixed, O God, etc.] That is, I am confidently persuaded
that thou will deliver me; according to that Psalm. 112.7. his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord: or, I have fully determined to praise thy name; and
therefore it may be translated, My heart is prepared, O God, etc. as being
cheerfully ready to praise thy name, I will sing and give praise.

Verse. 8. Awake up, my glory, etc.] That is, my soul, or my tongue; see the
Note Genesis 49.6. Yet some understand it of his skill in composing Psalms, or of
the holy spirit of God wherewith he was inspired when he did compose them; and
others of his harp, for his skillful playing whereon he was very renowned: and
indeed that follows in the next words, awake psaltery and harp.

Verse. 9. I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee
among the nations.] That is, both among Jews and Gentiles; and most probable it
is, that this he spoke as a type of Christ, and as foreseeing the calling of
the Gentiles: see the Note 2 Samuel 22.50.

Verse. 10. For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, etc.] See the Notes Psalm.
8.1, and 36.5.

PSALM LVIII.
Verse. 1. DO ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation, etc.] Some
conceive that by this word congregation any pack of wicked men may be meant,
that combined together against David. But I rather think it is meant of those
that were in place of authority; as if he had said, You that are Saul's
counselors and judges, by your place ye ought to speak righteousness, and
judge uprightly, even as God does, whose person ye represent, Isa. 45.19. I the
Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are right: and indeed in your
proceedings against me this you pretend to do, you color over your practices
against me with a pretense of zeal for justice, and for the good of the
kingdom: but such is the clear justice of my cause, that I dare appeal to your
selves; when to flatter Saul for your own advantage, you can slander one that
you know is guiltless, and that has deserved so well both of him and the
whole kingdom, is this to speak righteousness? judge your selves: do ye judge
uprightly, O ye sons of men see the Note Psalm. 57.4.

Verse. 2. Yea, in heart you work wickedness, etc.] Hereby David would imply,
that they did not only speak and do that which was wicked, but that they also
did it wittingly, having plotted and contrived it before in their hearts; and
so consequently, that the mischief they did, proceeded not from humane frailty,
and the over-bearing power of any sudden temptation, but from the mere
wickedness of their hearts: you weigh the violence of your hands in the earth;
that is, the evil and injustice which you have plotted in your hearts you
afterward act openly, not in a corner, but in the sight of all men. And by
this phrase, you weigh the violence of your hands, he implies 1. that
deliberately they contrived to execute the evil they had conceived in their
hearts; and 2. that in all the violence wherewith they oppressed him and
others, they pretended justice. A pair of balances is the emblem of justice,
because that does exactly determine the just weight of things, making no
difference between gold and lead; and therefore to imply that they pretended to
weigh all things duly, and to deal with all men exactly, according to the
balance of justice, and yet did notwithstanding oppress men with much
violence, he expresses it thus, that they weighed the violence of their hands
in the earth.

Verse. 3. The wicked are estranged from the womb, etc.] To wit, from God and
his people, and from all holiness and righteousness; as the Apostle says of
natural men, that they are alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. See the
Note Psalm. 54.3: they go astray as soon as they be born; that is, even from
their childhood. Now though this be the natural and common condition of all
mankind, yet David mentions it here with respect to his enemies, and as an
aggravation of their wickedness, as implying thereby, that it was by long
custom grown uncurable. By his restraining power God does so bridle the
corruptions of some graceless men, that they are of a more harmless
conversation then others are; and if they do at some times break out into some
lewd courses, yet they recover themselves, and give over such courses again:
but now of his enemies David would imply this, that they had been desperately
wicked even from the cradle; which is that the Prophet also intended in Isa.
48.8. thou wast called a transgressor from the womb. As for the following
words, speaking lies, that particular of their lying and slandering is perhaps
the rather expressed, because lying is usually one of the first sins of young
children.

Verse. 4. Their poison is like the poison of a serpent, etc.] That is, Their
virulent disposition and wickedness is as deadly to men, against whom as
serpents they spit out their venom and malice, as the poison of serpents is:
they are like the deaf adder, (or asp) that stops her ear, etc. Some writers
report of the asp, that to prevent the charmer, she is wont to lay one ear
close and hard to the ground, and to stop the other with her tail, that she may
not hear his enchantments. In reference hereto, or at least to the common
conceit of people herein, David here compares his enemies, that would by no
means be persuaded to desist from their wicked courses, though these
persuasions tended merely to their good, to these adders or asps, that thus
stop their ears against the charmer, when he seeks only to rid them of their
poison, and to make them harmless. And it may be that he had herein particular
respect to Saul and his courtiers, in that after they had heard that moving
Apology of David 1 Samuel 24.9. they left not off to persecute him; which some
therefore think was the occasion of penning this Psalm. We have several other
places of scripture, that allude to that which is said of the serpent and the
charmer; as that Eccles. 10.11. Surely the serpent will bite without
enchantment, and that Jer. 8.17. I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you,
which will not be charmed: but yet this does not justify charms, see Deuteronomy.
18.10. for similitudes are often taken in the scripture from sinful practices,
as from the thief Rev. 16.15. See also Luke 16.8, and 18.1. etc.

Verse. 6. Break their teeth, O God, etc.] See the Notes Job 4.10. and Psalm.
3.7, and 10.15.

Verse. 7. Let them melt away as waters, which run continually, etc.] That is,
like waters congealed to snow or ice, which when they are melted by the sun or
rain, do continually run away till they be quite wasted and gone: and
observable it is, that whilst his enemies might seem in the eye of reason, for
their strength and unmoveablenesse, like so many mountains and rocks, yet by
faith he looked upon them as so many heaps of snow or ice, that might soon come
to nothing. Yet some hold that David compares them here to floods of water,
that continually pass away: for which see the Note Genesis 49.4. When he bends
his bow to shoot his arrows, that is, the wicked man, let them be as cut in
pieces, that is, as arrows that being shot do snap in sunder, and so can never
do hurt.

Verse. 8. As a snail which melts, let everyone of them pass away, etc.] The
snail is said to melt, either 1 because being trodden upon, it presently turns
into a slimy water; or 2. because being once out of the shell, it soon spends
its moisture, and through the heat of the sun it wastes and dies; yea some say
that if salt be put upon it, hereby it will melt to water; or 3. because the
snail lives not long, but within a while wastes away, and leaves her shell
empty. But however here again it is worth the observing, that by way of
contempt he compares his mighty dreadful enemies to such a poor creature as
the snail; which though it may seem to threaten with its horns, yet alas there
is no danger nor dread in them. Like the untimely birth of a woman, they shall
not see the sun; that is, as an untimely birth dies before it be born, and so
never sees the sun, so shall it be with them, in the midst of those great
designs they have conceived in their minds, they shall be cut off, and so they
shall not be able to bring them to effect.

Verse. 9. Before your pots can feel your thorns, he shall take them away as
with a whirlwind, etc.] That is, Before your pots can be well warmed, by the
burning of the thorns which you put under them, God shall suddenly and
violently cut them off as with a whirlwind: so that the meaning is, that look
as thorns put under a pot, though they be soon kindled, and with a great
crackling noise do suddenly break forth into a mighty flame, yet are soon burnt
away, before the pot can come to feel, as it were, the heat of the fire; so God
should take away David's enemies before they had made the least progress in a
manner in those great designs, which rashly, and with a great deal of fury they
at first undertook: and therefore he adds, both living, that is, whilst they
are yet vigorous and lively, in the very flower of their lives, see the Note
Psalm. 55.15; and in his wrath, that is, in his just indignation against them.

Verse. 10. The righteous shall rejoice, etc.] Meaning himself and others: when
he sees the vengeance; yet not simply at the destruction of their enemies, but
because themselves are delivered, and God is glorified in their destruction:
and therefore it is said also in the next words, He shall wash his feet in the
blood, not of his enemies, but of the wicked. And by that phrase of washing his
feet in their blood is employed, 1. in what abundance their blood should be
shed, so that the righteous might as conquerours walk up to the ankles in
blood, according to a like expression Psalm. 68, 23. that thy foot may be dipped
in the blood of thine enemies; and 2. that the righteous should be refreshed by
the shedding of these wicked men's blood; as men used in those times to refresh
themselves by the washing of their feet. To which also some add, that he
should hereby become more pure and holy in all his ways, as being stirred up
thereto by Gods judgments on the wicked.

Verse. 11. So that a man shall say, etc.] That is, Many men shall say, not only
the righteous, who having been staggered before, shall hereby recover
themselves, but also wicked men, being forced by this clear evidence to the
acknowledgement of these truths; Verily there is a reward for the righteous:
verily he is a God that judges in the earth; that is, he observes and judges
those things that are done here below; neither is all the punishment of the
wicked reserved to the world to come.

PSALM LIX.
Verse. 4. THey run and prepare themselves without my fault, etc.] That is, With
all eagerness they prosecute the business, making all the have and all the
preparations they can, that they may apprehend and slay me causelessly: awake to
help me, and behold; that is, do not seem to disregard me any longer, but take
notice of the violent proceedings of mine enemies, and likewise of mine
innocence and danger.

Verse. 5. Awake to visit all the heathen.] and consequently all such brutish
people, enemies of God and all goodness, as the heathens are. For either by
the heathens here he does particularly mean Saul, and his crew that sided with
him, for which see the Note Psalm. 10.16; or at least by desiring God to visit
the heathen, he does covertly also desire the like against them; because if the
heathens were ^it to be destroyed, much more they that professed themselves
Gods people, and yet were as bad as the heathens: which is more clearly
expressed in the following words, be not merciful to any wicked
transgressors; that is, any that are obstinately wicked, and that will not be
reclaimed; see the Note Psalm. 28.4.

Verse. 6. They return at evening, etc.] As if he had said, Having come and gone
all the day long, seeking to apprehend me, they return again in the evening,
being never weary of prosecuting their cursed design. It is an expression of
the diligence of Saul's officers in pursuing the life of David. They make a
noise like a dog, that is, as a dog grinns and snarles and barks, so do they,
with threatening words and furious gestures, express their rage and madness
against me; or, they follow me with open mouth, as hounds pursue their game,
barking and yelping as they go: and go round about the city; that is, whilst
some beset my house, others go up and down the city, to search me out, or to
lie in wait for me in every place. Thus these words are commonly expounded. Yet
because when Saul's officers carried him word that David was sick, being deluded
by Michals device, he sent them back again, some hold that the first words,
they return at evening, are meant of that return of Saul's messengers; and
accordingly that the following words are meant of the madness of Saul's
officers, and their eager searching for David, when they saw how they had been
deluded; they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city.

Verse. 7. They belch out with their mouth, etc.] That is, They pour out, as in
a way of boasting, many vile and wicked speeches, slanderous and furious
threatening words: swords are in their lips; that is, they talk of nothing but
slaughter and blood, murdering and throat-cutting; every word they speak is as
a sword, see the Note Psalm. 57.4. For who, say they, does hear? the meaning
whereof is, that they encouraged themselves in these speeches, 1. because no
man heard their threatenings, that would give David notice of it; and 2. because
they minded not Gods all-hearing ear, yea and perhaps thought that God minded
not what is done here amongst men: see Psalm. 10.11.

Verse. 9. Because of his strength will I wait upon thee.] That is, Because of
Saul's strength, I will rest with patience upon thee, without whom by his
strength I know he can do nothing.

Verse. 10. The God of my mercy shall prevent me.] That is, The God that is and
always has been merciful to me, shall help me, either before I come to be in
any great danger, or at least before Saul shall do me the mischief he intends:
see also the Note Psalm. 21.3.

Verse. 11. Slay them not, etc.] That is, Cut them not all off on a sudden; lest
my people forget, that is, lest my followers, or my countrymen, or the people
over whom thou have appointed me to reign, forget thy mercy to me, and thy just
wrath upon mine enemies, and the sins whereby they provoked thee to punish
them; or, lest being freed by this means from the afflictions which they
formerly endured from them, they should grow forgetful of serving thee.
Because judgments suddenly executed are usually as suddenly forgotten,
therefore David prays that God would rather destroy them by degrees, that his
people might for their spiritual advantage have them the longer in their eye,
as spectacles of Gods vengeance. Yea and herein withal too 1. he bridles
himself from that which is natural to men, an over-eager desire of the present
destruction of his enemies; and 2. he covertly taxes the people for being so
ready to forget the great works of God. Scatter them by thy power; that is, by
thine almighty power (which is here opposed to Saul's great strength mentioned
before verse. 9:) break them in pieces, and bring them to such misery, that they
may wander up and down, some one way and some another, not knowing where to
find any relief or refuge: and bring them down, to wit, from that lofty
condition wherein now they live. All which he begges, for the good and in the
name of all Gods people: and therefore he adds those last words, O Lord our
shield. Many expositours take this to be spoken by David, as a type of Christ,
concerning the dispersion of the Jews; whom God has not utterly destroyed,
but scattered through the world, that his people (Jews or Christians) might
not forget their sin, nor the wrath that is fallen upon them for their
despising and crucifying the Lord of glory.

Verse. 12. For the sin of their mouth and the words of their lips, etc.] See
the Note above verse. 7: let them even be taken in their pride; that is, when
they are in the height of their prosperity and pride; or, let them be punished
for their pride, which is indeed the ground of all their cursed speeches; or
let them be ensnared in their own pride, let that which they have in their
pride attempted against me prove their own ruin: and for cursing and lying
which they speak, that is, their execrations and slanders. And this too some
apply to the blasphemous speeches of the Jews against Christ.

Verse. 13. Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be, etc.]
That is, let their wealth and worldly greatness wast by little and little,
till they come to nothing, and far from being what they now are: or thus,
When thou have kept them long enough in an accursed wasting condition, as
spectacles of thy wrath for the instruction of others, then destroy them
utterly from the land of the living: and let them know that God rules in
Jacob, unto the ends of the earth; that is, let these men know, when they come
to be destroyed, that God rules in his church wherever it is spread unto the
ends of the earth; or, let men know, even the heathens unto the end of the
earth, by hearing of so famous a judgment upon the wicked adversaries of the
godly, that God rules in Jacob.

Verse. 14. And at evening let them return, etc.] This is added in reference to
that which was said before ver. 6. as if he had said, Let their judegment be
answerable to their sin: as now they run up and down to take me, returning in
the evening, and make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city; so at
evening let them return, to wit, when they have all day run up and down for
meat, and let them make a noise like a dog, howling for hunger, and go round
about the city, to beg their bread, and no where find it, as is more fully
expressed in the next verse.

Verse. 15. Let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not
satisfied.] Or, If they be not satisfied then they will stay all night, and so
lie pinched with hunger all the night long: see the note Job 15.23.

Verse. 16. But I will sing of thy power, etc.] Thus he ascribes his escape to
God, though it were by the device of his wife Michal: yea I will sing aloud of
thy mercy in the morning; that is, say some, when they thought to have had me
in their power, alluding to Saul's commission to his officers, 1 Samuel 19.11. to
watch him, and to slay him in the morning.

Verse. 17. Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing, etc.] He terms God his
strength, in opposition to what he had said verse. 9. of Saul's strength.

PSALM LX.
The Title. TO the chief Musician upon Shushan-eduth, etc.] Shoshannim the
plural number of this word Shushan, we have in the Title of the 45. Psalm,
concerning which see the Note there. And because Eduth signifies a testimony
or beautiful ornament, therefore some translate Shushan-Eduth, the Lilly of
the Testimony, because this Psalm was a glorious testimony of David faith and
thankfulness; or because praying in this Psalm for the good success of his
forces gone out against the nations here mentioned, he insisteth largely on the
glorious promises that God had made concerning the kingdom of David, and the
enlarging of his peoples territories, verse. 6, etc: and others, the lilly of
beauty or ornament, because this Psalm shows that the kingdom of Israel should
be glorious and eminent above other kingdoms, as the lilly is above other
flowers: and others, a six-stringed instrument of the Testimony, because the
Priests used to play hereon before the Ark, which was called the Testimony.
Michtam of David, to teach: the same I conceive is intended in this clause, as
is in those Titles, A Psalm of David, Maschil, Psalm. 32, and, A Psalm of David
to bring to remembrance, Psalm. 38. concerning which see the Notes there. Yet
some would express the particulars which this Psalm was intended to teach: as
that it was to teach posterity the great things that David had done; or to
teach that God would fully make good his promise concerning the land of Canaan,
though hitherto a good part of it had been kept from them: yea and some hold
that these words imply, that the Levites were to teach it their scholars, that
it might be sung as a triumphant song when David should return with triumph. As
for the following words, when he strove with Aram Naharaim, etc. see the Notes
2 Samuel 8.3. and 13.

Verse. 1. O God thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, etc.] This is
spoken of the sad condition, wherein the people had been, not only in the days
of the judges, but also more lately under Saul, especially toward the later
end of his reign, when partly by reason of Saul's cruelty to the Priests and
other the godly of the land, and partly by reason of the frequent invasions of
the Philistines and other bordering nations, the Israelites were often sorely
distressed, and sometimes forced to fly and hide themselves in several places:
see 1 Samuel 13.19, and 31.7. Yea and it may comprehend all the time when there
was civil war between David and the house of Saul, in the beginning of David's
reign; all which time the land was under great afflictions, and that justly for
their sins, as he intimates in the next words, thou have been displeased.

Verse. 2. Thou have made the earth to tremble, thou have broken it, etc.]
Either this is spoken in reference to the inhabitants of the land, that God
made their hearts to tremble, and that he had broken them in pieces with civil
dissentions; or else the meaning is, that God had brought such grievous
troubles upon them, that the earth seemed as it were to tremble under them as
with an earthquake, and to be ^ent asunder.

Verse. 3. Thou have showed thy people hard things, etc.] That is, Thou have
brought upon us many grievous miseries; see the Note Psalm. 4.6: thou have made
us to drink the wine of astonishment; that is, thou have brought us to such a
condition, that we are astonished and tremble and stagger, full of horror and
trouble of spirit, dull and stupid in the evils that are fallen upon us, and
even bereaved of sense and understanding, not knowing what to do, or which way
to turn our selves, no otherwise then as if we had been made to drink of some
venomous or enchanted cup. See the Note Psalm. 11.6.

Verse. 4. Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee; that it maybe
displayed because of the truth.] This may also be understood of those foregoing
evil times, whereof David had spoken hitherto: as if he had said, To make good
the truth of thy promises, and to let thy people see how faithful thou art in
all thy promises, even in those times thou have returned in mercy to them that
feared thee, and have led them forth to sight with their enemies, and have made
them victorious over them. For by giving a banner to them that feared him is
meant, not only that God had led them forth and encouraged them to go forth
with banners displayed against their enemies, but also that he had given them
the victory in the day of battle, whereof displayed banners were a sign. And if
we understand it thus, of what God had done for his people in former times
after he had sorely afflicted them, then is it alleged as an argument to move
God to do the same for his people now again. But I rather think that David
speaks here of what God had done at present for them. And accordingly by the
banner displayed is meant, either Gods anointing David to be the king of his
people; as if he had said, Though thou have many years thus afflicted thy
people, yet now thou have raised up a banner to them that fear thee, in that
thou have given me to be king to this people, whom they follow cheerfully, and
under whose conduct they have fought succesfully against their enemies: or
else, the many victories which God had given them; and then it is as if he had
said, However it has been formerly, yet now for their sakes that fear thee,
and to strengthen our faith with assurance that thou will make good all thy
promises, and particularly those concerning the enlarging of our dominions, by
the many victories given us for the gathering together and encouragement of thy
scattered and disheartened people, as often as we go out with our armies we
return victoriously; not as formerly, with most of our ensigns and soldiers
lost, but as conquerours with banners displayed; and hereby we are heartned
with assurance, that God will still subdue our enemies under us.

Verse. 5. That thy beloved may be delivered, etc.] This may be referred to the
foregoing verse, as another reason why God had lifted up a banner to them that
feared him, to wit, that those his beloved ones might be delivered, who before
were in danger to be overrun by their enemies round about them; or else rather
it is to be referred to that which follows; as if it had been expressed thus,
Save with thy right hand and hear me, that thy beloved may be delivered. This
and the seven following verses we have again in the end of the 108. Psalm.

Verse. 6. God has spoken in his holiness, etc.] That is, say some, in his
Sanctuary. But the meaning hereof they make to be this, that God had promised
him that the kingdom of Israel should be settled upon him and his seed for
ever: and though this promise was brought to him by Samuel first, and lately by
Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.11, 12, etc. yet for the assured certainty of it he looked
upon it no otherwise, then as if it had been an oracle given by God himself out
of his Sanctuary. But I rather understand it thus: God has holily and
faithfully promised the kingdom to me and mine: as he is a holy God he has
promised it; and therefore he can no more fail of performing his promises, then
he can cease to be a holy God: so that it is all one in effect as if he had
said, God has sworn by his holiness; according to that Psalm. 89.35, 36. Now
hereupon David adds, I will rejoice; as if he had said, And herein I will
rejoice, and will cheerfully enjoy the victories and kingdom which God has
given me. Though God has given me great encouragement by the success of my
wars, and has given me great cause thereby to think that God, who was offended
with his people in the days of Saul, is now become favorable again to them;
yet that which I build upon is the promise of God: I did not by any faction
exalt my self to be king, but God promised the kingdom should be mine. And
this promise, together with his rejoicing in that God had already, and would
yet farther perform it for him, he expresses in the following words, I will
divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth; that is, God has put all
the land of Canaan, both the country within Jordan, where Shechem stood, and
the country without Jordan, where Succoth was, under my absolute dominion, and
has appointed it to be left unto my posterity by right of inheritance. The
phrase used alludes to the power that lords have to divide a land which is
brought under their subjection, as Joshua did the land of Canaan. And the
rather does he mention these places, (together with Gilead and Manasseh in the
following verse) because they had stood out longest against David, and had most
obstinately sided with Ishbosheth, see 2 Samuel 2.8: and therefore the certainty
of Gods promise was herein most notably discovered.

Verse. 7. Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine, etc.] See the former Note:
Ephraim also is the strength of mine head; the ground of this expression is,
because this tribe was above others numerous and strong, and had many that were
famous men of valor and expert in war, concerning which see the prophesies
concerning this tribe Genesis 48.19. and Deuteronomy. 32.11: and either he alludes
therein to the heads of those beasts that are armed with horns, making Manasseh
and Ephraim the horns wherewith he would gore his enemies; or else the meaning
is, tha^ Ephraim was the strength of his head, that is, of his kingdom and
sovereignty, his headship and principality; or that from them he would have
many to be of his lifeguard; and so the like phrase is used 1 Samuel 28.2. for
which see the Notes there. Judah is my lawgiver, which is said either because
in Jerusalem, which was in Judahs portion, the great council of the Sanhedrim
was kept, see the Note Numb. 11.16. as likewise David's sovereign court of
justice, Psalm. 122.5. there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the
house of David; or 2. because he meant chiefly out of this tribe to choose his
princes, judges and counselors, that should give laws to the people, and be
subservient to him in the government of the kingdom; or 3. because out of his
loins (who was of this tribe) there was still to be a king sitting on the
throne of Judah, according to that prophesy (whereto he alludes) Genesis 49.10.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc.

Verse. 8. Moab is my washpot, etc.] Though in the foregoing verse he gloried in
the Israelites subjection to him, yet the services he there assigns to them are
ingenuous and honorable, because he was to rule over them as brethren; but
these now assigned to the foreign nations, that were subdued by him, are baser
and servile. Moab is my wash-pot; or, wash-boul; that is, I will make no more
reckoning of them, then a man does of a pot provided to wash dishes in, or
rather to wash his feet in (for that in those Eastern countries they used to
do very frequently) I will employ them in the basest of services, making them
the scullions of my kitchen: yea, and it may imply also, that he would no more
scruple the destroying of them, then a man would to throw an earthen pot
against the ground and dash it in pieces; see the Note 2 Samuel 8.2: Over Edom
will I cast out my shoe; that is, I will trample upon the Edomites, as a
vanquished people, and will take possession of their country, as mine by
conquest, see the Note Ruth 4.7. Or else this phrase may imply, that he would
use them as his slaves: for this phrase may be taken from that contemptuous
carriage of masters toward their slaves, when they in anger throw their shoes
at their heads, or at least in a way of scorn do throw them at them, intending
they should make them clean, or bring them after them. And this he expresses
in the future tense, because the Edomites were not wholly subdued. Philistia,
triumph thou because of me; to wit, as becomes subjects to honor the victories
of their king. It may be read also, as it is in the margin of our Bibles,
triumph thou over me; but then it must be understood as spoken in a way of
mocking them: as if he had said, You Philistines were wont to domineer and
triumph over us, and now of late to scorn me, as if I should never have been
able to subdue you; but now you see God has brought you in subjection to me:
And indeed in Psalm. 108. this clause is expressed thus, Over Philistia will I
triumph.

Verse. 9. Who will bring me into the strong city? etc.] That is, the strong
cities of Edom; as is employed in the next words, who will lead me into Edom? as
if he had said. Having vanquished the Edomites in the open field, as is
expressed in the title of this Psalm, how shall I now come to subdue their
defenced cities? And indeed that the cities of the Edomites were very strong,
appears plainly by that of the prophet to Edom, Obad. 3. The pride of thine
heart has deceived thee, thou that dwell in the clefts of the rock, whose
habitation is high, that says in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the
ground? But yet many Expositours do rather think that Rabbah of the Ammonites
is the strong city here intended, 2 Samuel 12.26. and that chiefly because it may
seem strange, that there should be mention here made of all the bordering
enemies of Israel round about, and yet nothing said of them.

Verse. 10. Wilt not thou, O God, which had cast us off? etc.] Thus David
gives a hint again, how much better it was with Gods people now under his
government, then it had been in Saul's reign, that they might acknowledge that
God was pleased with the settling of him in the throne.

PSALM LXI.
Verse. 1. HEar my cry, O God, etc.] Several expositours hold that this Psalm
was composed by David, as a prayer of the people of God: but I see no
convincing reason, why it may not be as well understood as spoken by him in his
own name.

Verse. 2. From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is
overwhelmed, etc.] To wit, with fear, care and sorrow: see the Note 2 Samuel
15.30. For because here verse. 6. he styles himself king, it may seem most
probable that this Psalm was composed when he was fled from Absalom even unto
Mahanaim, which was in the utmost borders of the land without Jordan, 2 Samuel
17.24: and though thereupon many expositours hold, that the first clause should
be translated, from the end of the land will I cry unto thee; yet I should
rather think that it may purposely be expressed in those words, from the end of
the earth, to imply, that although he should be driven not only to the end of
the land, but to the end of the earth, yet even from thence he would cry to God
for help: see the Note Psalm 42.6. Lead me to the rock that is higher then I;
that is, which is so high above me, that I of my self am not able to climb up
to it; meaning this, Do thou bring me into an estate of more sure safety, then
I by any power or forces of mine am able to attain.

Verse. 4. I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever, etc.] Though there be in
these words a clear promise, that when God should bring him back again to
Jerusalem, he would constantly worship God in his Tabernacle, concerning which
see the Note Psalm. 23.6: yet I conceive the chief thing intended therein is, to
imply that he doubted not, but doing so, he should there find sure and constant
protection, see the Note Psalm. 27.5. which is farther explained in the next
clause, I will trust in the covert of thy wings, for which see the Notes Ruth
2.12. Psalm. 17.8, and 57.1.

Verse. 5. For thou, O God, have heard my vows; etc.] That is, my prayers, which
with vows annexed I offered up unto thee; thou have given me the heritage of
those that fear thy name; that is, those present and future blessings, which
are the peculiar portion of those that truly fear God, and wherein the men of
the world have no share at all, as the love and favor of God etc. Others
conceive that this heritage of those that fear Gods name, given to David, was
either the enjoyment of Gods holy ordinances in his tabernacle, which indeed
the faithful did esteem their choicest heritage, and whereof he had spoken in
the foregoing verse, I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever; or else the quiet
possession of the land of Canaan, which God had promised to his people, and
which was indeed never conferred upon them in the largest extent thereof till
the days of David, but now was given to him, in regard of the government
thereof, and to his seed after him.

Verse. 6. Thou will prolong the kings life, and his years as many
generations.] See the Note Psalm. 21.4.

Verse. 7. He shall abide before God for ever, etc.] That is, He shall
constantly enjoy Gods favor and protection: see the Note above verse. 4. and
likewise Psalm. 56.13. But understanding it of Christ, it may be meant of his
appearing in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. O prepare mercy and truth,
which may preserve him; that is, Furnish him with those graces which are wont
to preserve both the persons and thrones of princes, to wit, mercy and
compassion, truth and equity and upright dealing; according to that of Solomon
Prove. 29.14. The king that faithfully judges the poor, his throne shall be
established for ever; see the Note Psalm. 45.4: or else rather, Provide means
for his preservation out of thy mercy and faithfulness to him.

Verse 8. So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, etc.] See the Note Psalm.
34.1: that I may daily perform my vows, namely, my vows of praise and
thanksgiving; for they only can be daily performed. And herein he referres to
what he had said before verse. 5. for thou, O God, have heard my vows.

PSALM LXII.
Verse. 1. TRuly my soul waits upon God.] David breaks forth into these words
abruptly, as one that had been long struggling with a temptation* sometimes
inclining one way, sometimes another; but yet at last having gotten the day,
concludes with confidence, Truly my soul waits upon God: as if he had said,
Let Satan or mine own corrupt heart suggest what they will to the contrary,
though the Lord may seem to have forsaken me, in that he suffers mine enemies
continually to molest me, yet truly my soul waits upon God.

Verse. 2. I shall not be greatly moved.] According to that of the Apostle, 2
Cor. 4.8, 9. we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed: see 1 Cor. 10.13. See the Notes also
Psalm. 13.4, and 16.8, and 21.7. and 37.24.

Verse. 3. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? etc.] That is,
against me? why do so many of you conspire mischief against one poor man? ye
shall be slain all of you; as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering
fence, that is, ye cannot stand long, ere long ye will fall both suddenly and
violently; any small thing shall make you fall headlong, yea your own envy and
wickedness shall ruin you, as a bowing wall and a tottering fence will fall
even with its own weight. A wall when it cracks and bulks out may seem twice as
broad as it was, and therefore to stand very firm; but yet it is certainly near
to ruin; and so David says it would be with his enemies: though they were
swollen with pride, and might look and talk bigly, yet ere long they would
certainly fall, and be utterly ruined in an instant. We have an expression much
like this Isa. 30.13. wherefore this iniquity shall be to you, as a breach
ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at
an instant.

Verse. 4. They only consult to cast him down from his excellency, etc.) That
is, the man mentioned in the foregoing verse, whom they sought to cast down
from the regal dignity whereto God had anointed him: they delight in lies,
that is, in slanders and false flatteries; or rather in those evil practices,
which will deceive those that rely thereon. See the Note Psalm. 4.2.

Verse. 7. In God is my salvation and my glory.] See the Note Psalm. 3.3.

Verse. 8. Trust in him at all times, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 34.1. Ye people
pour out your heart before him. See the Notes 1 Samuel 1.15. and Psalm. 42.4.

Verse. 9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a
lie, etc.] To wit, because they are poor, weak creatures, able of themselves to
do neither good nor evil; and withal they are unstable and inconstant, and
oftentimes deceitful and perfidious: to be laid in the balance, they are
altogether (or, alike) lighter then vanity; that is, if men do well weigh
things in the judgment of right reason, and do make just trial of them, they
will find that all men are alike mere vanity, or that if all mankind together
be put in one scale, and vanity in the other, vanity will overweigh them. Now
the drift of inserting these words here is to confirm his foregoing advice,
that men should trust in God, by showing the vanity of trusting on men. Yet
some think the aim of this clause is to show, that men may safely trust in God,
because men are such poor vain creatures, no way worthy their admiration or
fear.

Verse. 10. Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery, etc.] That
is, Trust not in the wealth that is gotten by oppression and robbery, nor in
those sinful practices, or in any such like; think not by any such evil
courses to accomplish your desires. And he calls this becoming vain in robbery,
because men do vainly deceive themselves, when they trust in such things; to
which purpose the like expression is used Jer. 23.16. Hearken not unto the
words of the prophets, that prophecy unto you; they make you vain: yea and it
may imply also, that it argued lightness and vanity in them to be so ready to
catch at these things for their safety and defense; and that it would make them
be vile and foolish in the eyes of others. If riches increase, to wit, though
it be in a lawful way, set not your heart upon them; that is, do not trust in
them, nor dote on them, so as to be proud of them, and anxiously sollicitous to
preserve or increase them.

Verse. 11. God has spoken once; twice have I heard this, etc.] That is,
oftentimes; so that there is no question to be made of it. See the Note Job
33.14.

Verse. 12. Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy, etc.] The sweet content he
took in thinking on Gods mercy makes David turn his speech to God, Also unto
thee, O Lord, belongs mercy; so that thy servants may with confidence rest
upon thee: for thou rendrest to every man according to his work; and therefore
the righteous may in this regard also trust in God, as assuring themselves that
God will protect and bless them, and punish their wicked enemies.

PSALM LXIII.
The Title. A Psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.] To wit,
the forest of Hareth, 1 Samuel 22.5. or the wilderness of Ziph, 1 Samuel 23.14,
and 26.1, 2. both which were in the tribe of Judah, and David often in both of
them in great distress and danger, by reason of the incessant persecution of
Saul.

Verse. 1. My soul thirsts for thee, etc.] To wit, to enjoy the presence of
God in his Tabernacle; see the Note Psalm. 42.22: my flesh longs for thee
(which is added, because when the soul of a man does earnestly desire any
thing, the body will be likewise stirred and affected therewith:) in a dry and
thirsty land where no water is; that is, a land that being chapt through
drought, does seem to thirst for water, and when it comes, drinks it in
greedily like a thirsty man; or, a land wherein the inhabitants or passengers
for want of water are dried up with thirst: and indeed the word in the
original signifies a weary land, that is, a wilderness, through which
travelers could not pass without much faintness and weariness. Now thus
David describes the place where he was, 1. to imply his faith and confidence in
God, in that being in such streights he did not forget God, nor cast away his
hope in him, but rather his distress made him long the more after God; and 2.
to express thereby the fervency of his desires after God, in that as great as
his wants were being in such a dry and barren wilderness, yet he minded not
his streights in such outward respects, in comparison of his desire to enjoy
Gods presence in his Sanctuary. Yea and it may imply also that the place where
he hid himself was as void of spiritual comforts, as it was of water; and that
the parched ground thirsted not more after water, then he did after God.

Verse. 2. To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the
Sanctuary.] Some conceive that David in these words desired, that he might be
as effectually refreshed with the consideration of Gods power and glory, even
whilst he was in that dry wilderness, as ever he had been in the Sanctuary.
But I rather conceive that David's desire herein is, that he might again enjoy
the signs of Gods powerful and glorious presence in his Sanctuary, with the
same refreshing to his soul, as he had formerly done; to wit, the Ark (for
which see the Notes 1 Samuel 4.21. 1 Chronicles. 16.11. and 2 Chronicles. 6.41.) and all
other the holy Ordinances that were thereto be enjoyed.

Verse. 3. Because thy loving kindness is better then life, my lips shall
praise thee.] His aim herein may be to imply, either 1. that however he was at
present in a sad condition, in a place that was altogether comfortless, and
withal in continual danger of his life; yet being assured of Gods favor,
which may justly be preferred before life it self, he should in that alone have
abundant cause to bless God: or 2. that when he was restored to the enjoyment
of the signs of Gods loving kindness in his Sanctuary, he would there praise
Gods name, and that not so much for his deliverance, as for that discovery of
Gods loving kindness, which was far better then life it self: or 3. that there
was more assurance for a man's safety in Gods loving kindness, then there was
in life it self, or in all the natural advantages that tended to the
preservation of life, so that the assurance of Gods favor might be a juster
ground of praising God even in the greatest dangers, then any safety in regard
of his outward condition could yield.

Verse.4. Thus will I bless thee, while I live, etc.] This word ( thus) may
have reference to diverse particulars. Thus, that is, as I purpose and do at
this present, though in great distress; or thus, that is, Being thus restored,
according to my desire, to thy Sanctuary, there I will openly praise thee. But
I rather think it refers to those affections he had described to be in himself
concerning his desire after Gods Tabernacle; Thus, that is, being thus
affectionately desirous of enjoying thy presence in the Sanctuary, and
esteeming thy loving kindness better then life it self, I will bless thee,
while I live, that is, wherever and in what condition soever I am. I will lift
up my hands; to wit, in praising thee, or in praying to thee; as if he had
said, Being thus delivered I shall be for ever encouraged to pray unto thee;
see the Note Job 11.13: in thy name, that is, to thy name, as it is elsewhere
expressed, Psalm. 9.2; as if he had said, I will call upon thee: yet it may be
understood diverse other ways; in thy name, that is, through thy help; or, at
thy command; or, trusting in thy goodness and mercy.

Verse. 5. My soul shall be satisfied, as with marrow and fatness, etc.] This,
with that which follows in the next verse, may be meant, either of the time
when he should be restored to Gods Sanctuary again, to wit, that then
remembering on his bed the comforts he had found in Gods Ordinances, and the
enjoyment of Gods presence therein, his soul should be abundantly satisfied
therewith; or else of the time of his exile in the wilderness, to wit, that
even there, when he could not come at Gods Tabernacle, and when he was in no
little want of outward things, yet remembering God, his soul should be
abundantly satisfied with spiritual comforts. For the phrase here used, see the
Note Psalm. 36.8.

Verse. 6. When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night
watches.] That is, at several times of the night, for they divided the night
by several watches: see the Note Judge. 7.19.

Verse. 7. In the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.] To wit, as chickens that
sleep securely and with content under the wings of their dams. See the Notes
Ruth 2.12. and Psalm. 17.8, and 57.1.

Verse. 8. My soul follows hard after thee, etc.] As if he should have said,
Though I be driven far from Gods Tabernacle, and God may seem to have cast me
off; yet out of the strength of my affections to him, and through faith in his
mercy and the fatherly love he bears to me, even in this afflicted condition,
notwithstanding all the discouragements that lie in my way, my thoughts are
still running after God; neither do I cease constantly to desire and seek with
all earnestness after his favor, yea and after his favorable presence in his
Sanctuary. And then for the following words, thy right hand upholdeth me,
either they are added 1. as the motive that encouraged him to follow so hard
after God, namely, that God had still preserved him, and supported him in all
his troubles; or else 2. as the effect of his so pressing after God, to wit,
that because he did thus trust in God, therefore God did uphold him; or 3. as
the means whereby he was enabled in so sad a condition to persevere still in
seeking after God, namely, because God by his spirit did support him.

Verse. 9. But those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into the lower
parts of the earth.] That is, They shall be laid in the grave, or thrown into
hell, or hide themselves in caves and dens.

Verse. 11. But the king shall rejoice in God, etc.] This he speaks of himself
in the third person, believing assuredly that God would yet in time make good
his promise to him concerning the kingdom: every one that swears by him,
that is, by God, shall glory; that is, all that truly worship God, that truly
fear and serve God, shall triumph when God shall destroy mine enemies, and
exalt me to the throne, as knowing that hereby the good of the people in
general shall be promoted, and that in my kingdom the kingdom of the
promised Messiah shall begin to shoot forth. Because swearing by God is
appointed as a part of divine worship Deuteronomy. 6.13. therefore usually in the
Scripture it is figuratively put for the whole worship of God; as Isa. 45.23.
unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear, and Isa. 65.16. he that
swears in the earth shall swear by the God of truth. Yet withal this may
particularly imply such as did sincerely appeal to God, as the witness of
their innocence: and therefore unto these are opposed, in the following clause,
those that speak lies, but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped;
to wit, either by being cut off and destroyed; or by being so confounded with
shame, that they shall not dare to utter any such lies any more.

PSALM LXIV.
Verse. 1. PReserve my life from the fear of the enemy.] That is, Preserve me
from being afraid of the enemy; or from the evil which I fear the enemy should
do me.

Verse. 3. Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows, etc.] See
the Note Psalm. 57.4.

Verse 4. That they may shoot in secret at the perfect, etc.] That is, at me,
who am perfectly clear of the least evil intended ever against them. See the
Notes Psalm. 11.2, and 26.1.

Verse. 5. They commune of laying snares privily; they say, who shall see them?]
That is, the snares they have laid; or themselves that laid the snares: see the
Note Psalm. 59.7.

Verse. 6. They search out iniquities, etc.] That is, They seek to lay diverse
iniquities to my charge; or they devise and plot how they may unjustly oppress
and ruin me: and accordingly the following words, they accomplish a diligent
search, do set forth their diligence in plotting mischief against him; and
perhaps also in trying all ways to effect and accomplish what they had so
contrived. Only indeed this last clause may be translated otherwise, we are
consumed by that which they have thoroughly searched: and then the drift of the
words is, to imply the exceeding danger the righteous servants of God were in
by reason of these crafty plots of their enemies, namely, that in the judgment
of their enemies the righteous could never escape their snares, and were no
better then dead men already; and that in true judgment, if they were left
unto themselves, it could be no better with them. And therefore he adds, both
the inward thought of every one of them and the heart is deep; that is, they
are full of deep dissembling, craft and subtilty: so that hereby they are
charged 1. that they did not carry on their designs with open fury and
violence, but whilst they were silent and dissembled outwardly, they
maliciously contrived mischief against him in their hearts; and 2. that being
men of a deep reach, they found out many unexpected ways of deceit and
mischief.

Verse. 8. So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves, etc.]
This is thus expressed to signify, 1. that when Gods wrath was fallen upon
them, they should accuse and condemn themselves; 2. that the evil intended
against David by their bitter words should fall upon themselves; 3. that their
slanders and bitter words should be the means of their own ruin; and 4. that
at least this should bring down Gods vengeance upon them. However he implies,
that thus they should be slain with their own sword, and that the arrows they
shot against David should recoil back, and wound themselves: see before verse. 3.

Verse. 10. The righteous shall be glad, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 58.10.

PSALM LXV.
The Title. A Psalm and Song of David.] See the Note on the Title of the 30.
Psalm. Because of several passages in this Psalm, verse. 3, 9, 10, 11, etc.
many Expositours conceive that it was composed, when after the three years
famine in David's time, God was pleased by sending a seasonable rain to give
them hopes of a plentiful harvest, 2 Samuel 21.

Verse. 1. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Sion, etc.] It is in the
original, Praise is silent to thee* O God, in Sion; and many observable
particulars this implies: as 1. that God is good unto his Church in a special
manner above others, and gives them daily new occasions of praising him; 2.
that his Church are the only people that do truly know God, and so the only
people that know how to praise him; 3. that God did only accept of the worship
which they performed, and the praise which they offered, Sion being the only
place where God would be worshipped; 4. that whereas others, though they live
upon Gods blessings, yet mind not the Donour, Gods people are still careful
and ready for every mercy to return praise; and 5. that even in the worst times
the people of God will with patient silence wait upon him, in assurance that he
would give them occasion to praise his name.

Verse. 2. O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.] Here
David begins to reckon up the benefits for which God was most worthy to be
praised in Sion; and accordingly in the first place he pitcheth upon this, that
he was most ready to hear the prayers of his people; insomuch that all flesh,
that is, all sorts of men of all nations, though but dust and ashes, poor,
frail, helpless creatures, might hereby be encouraged to draw near in prayer
unto him, the glorious God of heaven and earth. And thus the words do also
covertly imply a prophecy concerning the calling of the Gentiles.

Verse. 3. Iniquities prevail against me, etc.] Here David mentions another
great mercy which God affords his Church, for which they were especially bound
to praise him, and that is his pardoning their sins: and it is added here as
that which must encourage them to go to God in prayer, of which he had spoken
in the foregoing verse. Iniquities prevail against me; as for our
transgressions, thou shall purge them away: which is as if he had said, Though
our iniquities be such, that they may justly provoke thee to displeasure, yet
thou will pardon them, and purge them away, to wit, by an expiatory sacrifice,
which shall be offered up for them. For by this phrase of iniquities prevailing
against him, diverse things may be employed: as 1st, that his opposition against
them had not been such, but that they had overcome and foiled him; 2ly, that
they had brought him into subjection and bondage to them; 3ly, that they were
so many and great, that he was not able to bear them, but was likely to sink
under the burden of them; and 4ly, that they had brought Gods judgments upon
him: and indeed by other passages in this Psalm it seems probable, that it was
composed when the people of God had been under some sore judgment. As for
David's expressing this in the singular number, Iniquities prevail against me,
whereas the following words are in the plural number, as for our
transgressions, thou shall purge them away, the reason of this is, either
because he speaks in the name of the whole people, as it were collectively in
one body, and that the rather, as being their king and head; or else because,
this Psalm being intended as a form of thanksgiving for the use of the people,
he would hereby teach every man, as it were by his example, to confess his own
particular sins.

Verse. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, etc.] Here still farther
mercies are added, for which God was in a special manner to be praised in
Sion: and he begins with that of Gods choosing them of his own free grace to be
his people, this being the first spring of that mentioned in the foregoing
verse, to wit, his pardoning their sins; and then in the following words adds
diverse others, Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach
unto thee; to wit, by receiving them to thy favor, who were enemies by nature,
by taking them into so near a relation to thee, as to be thy peculiar people,
yea thy children, such as may continually have free access unto thee, as are
through Christ made one with thee, and to whom thou will communicate thy self
unto all eternity: that he may dwell in thy courts* see the Notes Psalm. 15.1,
and 23.6: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, etc. See the
Note Psalm. 36.8.

Verse. 5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of
our salvation, etc.] That is, Because of thy righteousness, to wit, thy
faithfulness, which moves thee to make good thy promises to thy people, see
the Note Psalm. 51.14, or thy justice, which moves thee to aid all those that
are wronged and oppressed, thou will answer us when we call upon thee from thy
tabernacle and temple, (which is one of the Privileges of Gods people
mentioned in the foregoing verse;) and that by executing strange and unusual
judgments upon our adversaries, and by many miraculous deliverances afforded
us, which shall be terrible to our enemies, and dreadful to thine own people:
and it is likely that David speaks of these terrible things, in reference to
the signs and miracles which God wrought in Egypt, and at the giving of the
law. As for the following clause, wherein he terms God the confidence of all
the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon the sea, this is
added, either 1. to imply, that the Gentiles should also be sharers with the
Jews in these mercies, when they also should become the people of God; or 2.
to intimate, that by those forementioned terrible things, which God should work
for his people, many that dwelt far off from his people should be won to
pray unto and to trust in God; or 3. to set forth the power of this God, who
should do such great things for his people, and so give them such special
occasion to praise him in Sion, by showing that all the inhabitants of the
world, far and near, have their dependence wholly upon God, in whom they live,
move, and have their being: see the Note Psalm. 22.9. whence it is also that by
a secret instinct of nature all nations are moved to look to God in their
dangers, though they be indeed ignorant of the true God.

Verse. 6. Which by his strength sets fast the mountains, being girded with
power.] That is, which God, being endued with an almighty power, does cause the
mountains to stand fast, so that neither the winds nor floods can remove them,
nor do they sink under their own weight, as great buildings of men often do for
want of a firm foundation. I conceive that David adds this large description
that here follows, of the great works of God throughout the world, either 1. to
show that it was no such strange thing, that God should extend grace at last to
the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews, since from the first creation God had
been very good to all the inhabitants of the world, and had done great things
for them; or 2. to set forth the mighty power of that God, from whom his people
expect such terrible things to be done for them; or 3. because, though all the
world receive benefit from these great works of God, yet only Sion looks on
them as blessings from God, and returns him praise for them.

Verse. 7. Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and
the tumult of the people.] Some conceive that the last words, and the tumult of
the people, are added by way of explaining what he meant in the first words, to
wit, Gods appeasing the tumults and insurrections of unruly people, whereby
kingdoms and commonwealths are endangered: and indeed by seas and the waves
thereof in the Scripture great armies and tumults of people are usually meant;
as Jer. 51.42. and so Esa. 17.12, 13; see also the Notes Psalm. 46.3, 6. But I
rather choose the plainer exposition, that in the first words he speaks of Gods
stilling the seas, to wit, both by keeping them within their bounds that they
overflow not the land, and by making them quiet at his pleasure, when they are
most tempestuous; and that then in the next words he adds, that after the same
manner likewise he stilleth the tumult of the people.

Verse. 8. They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens,
etc.] Any great works of God, wherein there is any special impression of his
majesty and glory, may be termed Gods tokens; and therefore some understand
hereby the sun, moon and stars, which are seen in the remotest parts of the
earth, and of which God said in the first creation, Genesis 1.14. Let them be for
signs. But because David speaks here of such tokens as should make men afraid,
I rather conceive that hereby is meant such works of God as are looked upon by
men as tokens of his anger, as namely 1. thunder and lightening, and hail, and
earthquakes, and comets, and other strange meteors seen often in the air; or 2.
those miraculous signs which God wrought for the good of his people and the
ruin of their enemies, as the dividing of the red sea, etc. the fame whereof
was terrible to the nations far off; or 3. the judgments which he executes
upon wicked men, such particularly (say some Expositours) as disturb the peace
of kingdoms; for they conceive this is spoken in reference to the tumult of
the people mentioned in the last words of the foregoing verse. As for the
following words, thou make the outgoings of the morning and the evening to
rejoice, thereby is meant, either 1. that God makes all the men of the world
from East to West to rejoice with his manifold blessings: or 2. that he makes
all men to rejoice in the outgoings of the sun in the morning, (an expression
used likewise Psalm. 19.6. His going forth is from the end of the heaven) and so
likewise of the moon and stars in the evening; as the tokens beforementioned
are a cause of terror to men, so these of rejoicing: or 3. that by giving
peace to the inhabitants of the earth, to wit, through the terror wherewith
the nations are restrained and kept in, by reason of those tokens of Gods wrath
mentioned in the foregoing clause* men may go out cheerfully in the morning,
and the wild beasts in the evening, without terror or danger; according to
what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 104.20, 23: or 4. that when men go out to walk
in the cool of the morning and evening, he makes them to rejoice, in beholding
how the earth is enriched with all kind of plenty: or 5. that he makes the
outgoings of the sun in the morning, the moon and stars in the evening, to
have a cheerful and pleasant aspect, as if they seemed to laugh or to sing; as
we see the like poetical expression used again verse. 13. to set forth the
pleasant look of fields covered with corn. And indeed the two last expositions
seem to me the most probable.

Verse. 9. Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it, etc.] To wit, as men are
wont to visit their friends, carrying wine and sweetmeats, or some such like
junkets with them; see also the Note above on the Title: thou greatly enrichest
it with the river of God, which is full of water; that is, say some
Expositours, the river Shiloah, which ran close by Jerusalem, the city of God;
or the river of Jordan, the chief river of Canaan, Gods holy land, which used
at times to overflow its banks, and so to make the land the more fruitful. But
I rather conceive that it is those sweet and plentiful showrs of rain sent
from God out of heaven, or the clouds from whence the rain falls, that is here
called the river of God; and that hereby is intimated, that seasonable showrs
were to the land of Canaan to enrich it with plenty, in stead of those great
rivers wherewith other countries are watered, see the Notes Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11,
12; and in stead of those brooks and rivulets, which husbandmen draw into their
grounds to make them fruitful.

Verse. 11. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, etc.] Two things may be
employed in this phrase: 1. that the plenty of corn and flowers and fruit etc.
which God of his goodness caused the earth to bring forth, was an ornament to
it, like a coronet or garland upon the head of a man; and 2. that God blessed
the whole circle or revolution of the year, that in every part of it there were
still some fruits of Gods bounty thereon to be seen: and thy paths drop
fatness; that is, thy clouds; whereon God is elsewhere said to walk and to
ride as in a chariot, as Psalm. 104.3. and Nahum 1.3. or else the meaning is
only this, that it is he only that makes the earth rich and fruitful; and in
the expression used there may seem to be an allusion to that which is commonly
said of men's careful visiting their grounds, to wit, that every field is best
dunged by the dust that falls from the masters feet.

Verse. 12. They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, etc.] That is, such
places as are not manured and tilled, and are less frequented of people; see
the Notes Job 38.25, 26: and the little hills, though in summer they are most
parched, and in winter most pinched with cold, rejoice on every side, to wit,
as being full of vines and other pleasant fruit trees etc. and so the
inhabitants do thereupon rejoice; yea themselves have a pleasant aspect, as it
is usual with the latin poets to say prata rident: and so likewise the next
verse must be understood. See the Note before verse. 8.

PSALM LXVI.
Verse. 1. MAke a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands.] Hereby the Psalmist
expresses how earnestly he desired that God might be glorified, in that he
could wish that, if it were possible, all nations might be won to praise his
name, as indeed there was just cause for all to do. But see farther in the
Notes upon Deuteronomy. 32.43. and 1 Chronicles. 16.23, 24.

Verse. 3. Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works? etc.] The Psalmist
bids them thus to direct their speech to God, because when men set God before
their eyes in any holy service they undertake, it makes them perform it the
more heartily and fervently. And by putting all nations upon the
acknowledgement of Gods terrible works, he covertly encourages the people to
trust in God, who could do such terrible things to their enemies. Through the
greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee: see
the Note 2 Samuel 22.45.

Verse. 5. Come and see the works of God, etc.] That is, Weigh well with us the
wonderful works of God; see also the Note Psalm. 46.8: he is terrible in his
doing toward the children of men; that is, those profane men that are
adversaries to the people of God; or all mankind in general. And it may be
spoken by way of contempt, to intimate how base and vain they are in comparison
of God.

Verse. 6. He turned the sea into dry land, etc.] That is, the red sea: they
went through the flood on foot; that is, Jordan: there did we rejoice in him;
that is, our nation, or we his people; for thus they speak of themselves as one
body with their forefathers, to show that the wonders wrought for their
forefathers were a just ground of encouragement for them. We have the like
expressions Psalm. 81.5. and Hos. 12.4.

Verse. 7. He rules by his power for ever, etc.] As if he had said, And
therefore what he has done for his people in former times he can do still:
his eyes behold the nations, to wit, to observe their ways, to rule and
overrule them as he pleases: let not the rebellious exalt themselves; to wit,
because this omnipotent all-seeing God can easily destroy them.

Verse. 10. Thou have tried us as silver is tried.] That is, with very sore and
many afflictions, as silver is tried in a hot fire and many times; see Psalm.
12.6, and the Note upon Job 23.10: yet not to destroy us, but to purge away our
corruptions: and therefore when God tries his people with lighter afflictions,
he says on the contrary, Isa. 48.10. Behold, I have refined thee, but not with
silver, or, as silver.

Verse. 11. Thou broughtest us into the net, etc.] That is, into bondage, or
into great streights and dangers on every side: thou laidest affliction upon
our loins; that is, by sore afflictions thou have bereaved us of all strength,
and made us exceeding weak and feeble; or, thou have suffered men to bind us in
chains; or, thou have laid very heavy burdens of affliction upon us; or, thou
have caused men to use us like pack-horses, beating us, and laying intolerable
burdens upon us.

Verse. 12. Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, etc.] That is, we lying
upon the ground, as those do that are wounded in battle, our enemies ride over
our heads; or, they ride us like beasts, because they that ride upon beasts are
lifted up above their heads, or do, as it were, fit or lean over their heads.
However, the meaning is only this, that their basest enemies, having brought
them into subjection, did insult over them and abuse them with all possible
cruelty, scorn and contempt. And indeed we have the like expression Isa. 51.23.
But I will put it (that is, the cup of trembling) into the hand of them that
afflict thee, which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and
thou have laid thy body as the ground and as the street to them that went over.

Verse. 15. I will offer unto thee burnt-sacrifices of fatlings, with the
incense of rams.] That is, with the smoke arising either from the whole
burnt-offerings of rams, or from the fat of rams, which in peace offerings was
only burnt upon the altar; for this it is that is here called incense, to show
that how unsavory soever it might be in it self, yet through Christ, of whom
all these sacrifices were types, it was a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
unto God. Yet some understand this of incense, that was burnt with their
sacrifices.

Verse. 17. I cried unto him with my mouth, etc.] Some conceive that these words
with my mouth are added, to show the certainty of this truth, that God is most
ready to hear the prayers of those that call upon him; as if a husbandman
should say, to prove that God is most ready to bless the work of his hands
that is industrious in his calling, With these hands of mine did I till this
ground and sow it, and thus and thus God was pleased to bless my labors. But
for this see the Note Psalm. 3.4. And he was extolled with my tongue; to wit, by
my returning him praise, when he had granted my requests; or, by my praying;
for God is greatly exalted by his servants flying to him in all their
necessities, as their only hope and refuge.

Verse. 18. If I regard iniquity in mine heart, the Lord will not hear me.] That
is, If I have any evil intention in that which I beg of God, according to that
Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it
upon your lusts; or, if I wittingly allow my self in, or give my self over to
any sin whatsoever, praying, but the whilst, through inward self-flattery,
delighting in any sin, and purposing to nuzzle my self therein, yea though it
should be only some inward lust of my heart, God would not regard my prayers.
This I conceive is the drift of these words: yet it may well be also that the
Psalmist intended hereby to justify himself against the slanders of his enemies.

Verse. 20. Blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy
from me.] So that though he did not regard iniquity in his heart, as is said
before ver. 18. yet he ascribes it wholly to the mercy of God, that his prayers
were not rejected.

PSALM LXVII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician on Neginoth.] See the Note on the Title of
the 4. Psalm.

Verse. 1. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine
upon us.] There seems to be a clear allusion in these words to that form of
prayer used by the Priests in blessing the people, Numb. 6.25, 26. for which
see the Notes there, as also Psalm. 31.16. But yet what is here desired, the
following verse does more fully show.

Verse. 2. That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all
nations.] As if they had said, We do not desire merely that it may be well with
us, but that thy way, that is, thy dealings with thy people, which are all
mercy and truth, Psalm. 25.10. (see the Note there) may be known upon earth,
that is, to all the inhabitants of the earth, and thy saving health among all
nations, that is, and that the way which thou have ordained for the saving of
thy people may be known amongst all nations. Because the sad calamities, which
the Church did often lie under, were as a stumbling block to other nations,
through their misunderstanding Gods intentions therein, and kept them off from
joining themselves to the Church; therefore the people of God do here desire,
that God, by the discovery of his favor to his people, would let all the world
see his way to his people, etc. to wit, how dearly he loves them, how tenderly
careful he is over them, to provide for them, to protect and deliver them, and
to order all things for their salvation, and not for their destruction, that so
this might bring in the heathen nations to join themselves to the Church of
God. So that by the way of God here is meant, 1. generally all the ways of his
special goodness and mercy to his people; and 2. more particularly and
especially that way of his saving health, as it is expressed in the second
clause, that is, that way which God has ordained for the eternal salvation of
his people through Christ: whence it is that Christ is called the way, Joh.
14.6. and Gods salvation, Luke 2.30; as also the doctrine of the Gospel is
called the way of the Lord, Act. 18.25, 26. This is the chief thing which the
Church here desires may be made known to all nations; and so the words covertly
imply that great mystery of the calling of the Gentiles.

Verse. 3. Let the people praise thee, O God, etc.] That is, thee the true God,
abandoning their false gods, whom they have hitherto served: which is repeated
in the following verses again and again, to show that they could never
sufficiently rejoice in, or be thankful for those inestimable benefits, which
they should all enjoy under the kingdom of Christ.

Verse. 4. For thou shall judge the people righteously, etc.] The meaning is,
that though God suffers his people sometimes to be afflicted by their enemies
for their good, yet he will surely deliver them at last, ordering and guiding
them in all things for their advantage; yea and that especially by making them
righteous, and obedient to all his righteous commandments. The like is often
prophesied concerning Christ's kingdom, as Isa. 11.4. and in diverse other
places.

Verse. 6. Then shall the earth yield her increase, etc.] Many understand this
figuratively, to wit, either that in all parts of the world many converts
should be brought in to the Church, and so the earth should yield a mighty
harvest of holy men to God; or else that the elect of all nations should bring
forth the fruit of repentance and praise, and of a holy life and conversation,
to the glory of God: and so they say the same thing that is here intended, is
expressed more in the end of the next verse, and all the ends of the earth
shall fear him. But I rather understand it literally, that God should bless
his people by causing the earth to yield abundant increase: only we must know
then, that under this particular all other outward blessings are comprehended;
as the following words do also imply, and God, even our own God, shall bless
us.

Verse. 7. God shall bless us, etc.] These words are here again repeated,
thereby covertly to cry down, as it were, either the infidelity of those that
would not trust in so sure a refuge, or the ingratitude of those that lived
upon Gods blessings, but would not acknowledge the Donour.

PSALM LXVIII.
Verse. 1. LEt God arise, let his enemies be scattered, etc.] As if he should
have said, If God do but stir or show himself, even that will be enough for
the scattering of his enemies. Because this Psalm begins with the very words,
which were still used by Moses when the Ark was to remove, Numb. 10.35. it is
most probable that David composed it, when after his diverse glorious victories
over the Philistines 2 Samuel 5.20, etc. he resolved to remove the Ark from the
house of Obed-Edom to Zion with great triumph and joy, 2 Samuel 6.12. But yet
because those words verse 18. of the Psalm, Thou have ascended on high, etc.
are by the Apostle applied to the ascension of Christ into heaven Ephesians. 4.8, it
cannot be denied that David did look upon that triumphant removal of the Ark,
as a type of Christ's glorious ascension, who was indeed that angel of Gods
presence, Isa. 63.9. whom they tempted in the wilderness. 1 Cor. 10.9. And
accordingly these words may covertly contain a prophecy of the stability of
David's kingdom, especially in Christ, and of the subduing of all his enemies.

Verse. 2. As smoke is driven away, so drive them away, etc.] That is, Though
they mount aloft for a time, and seem very terrible to others, as the smoke
does when at first it overspreads and darkens the sky, yet let them perish
suddenly: but see also the Note Psalm. 37.20. And to the same purpose is the
following clause, as wax melts before the fire, so let the wicked perish at
the presence of God: but see the Note also Psalm. 22.14.

Verse. 3. But let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God, etc.]
David seems here to oppose the exceeding joy of the Israelites at the carrying
of the Ark to Zion, to the sad condition they were in under Saul and the
judges, especially when the Ark was taken by the Philistines: but see also the
Notes Psalm. 5.11, and 32.11, and 58.10. And observable also it is, that whereas
in the foregoing verse the wicked are said to perish at the presence of God,
here on the contrary the righteous are said to rejoice before God: the presence
of God, that is deadly to the wicked, is a joy to the righteous.

Verse. 4. Extol him that rides upon the heavens, etc.] See the Notes Deuteronomy.
33.26, and 2 Samuel 22.11: by his name IAH; which is an abbreviation of Jehovah
(of which see the Note Exodus 6.3.) as Eli of Elohim: but the meaning is, that
they should praise him, who is the only true God, and so has made himself
known to be, and that especially in his word, wherein by his name he has
distinguished himself from all the false Gods of the heathens.

Verse. 5. A Father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his
holy habitation.] That is, in heaven, see Deuteronomy. 26.15; or, in the land of
Canaan, see the Note Exodus 15.13; or, in his Tabernacle, where he is always
present amongst us, and ready at hand to help, see Psalm. 26.8. But under these
particulars of Gods favor to the fatherless and widows David intends chiefly
to imply, that God is ready to help his poor oppressed people, when they are
destitute of all outward succor.

Verse. 6. God sets the solitary in families, etc.] That is, He blesses the
barren with many children; for they are the barren that are here called the
solitary, either because the reproach of barrenness amongst the Jews made such
delight much in solitariness, not caring to be in company; or rather, because
their houses might be deemed solitary, in regard their families were not
increased with children. But yet this expression of setting the solitary in
families may be extended to the Lords bringing of them home to live peaceably
and quietly in their own houses, and amongst their kindred and friends, that
had been driven away, and so wandered about as exiles in deserts and solitary
places. But the rebellious dwell in a dry land; that is, in a condition
destitute of all comforts, and where they are exposed to manifold miseries. And
some conceive that this is spoken in reference to the rebellious Israelites
perishing in the wildernesse^

Verse. 7. O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, etc.] For this
expression see the Note Lev. 27.17.

Verse. 8. The earth shook, etc.] See Exodus 19.18: the heavens also dropped at
the presence of God; sweating, as it were, with terror and toil. But the words
both of this and the foregoing verse seem to have been taken out of Deborahs
song, Judge. 5, 4, 5; for which therefore see the Note there.

Verse. 9. Thou, O God, did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did confirm
thine inheritance when it was weary.] As if he should have said, After thou
had brought us into the promised land, thou did still manifest thy fatherly
care over us, in that thou did yearly refresh the land with seasonable
showrs, and thereby did renew the strength of that thine inheritance, (see
the Note Exodus 15.17.) when it was dried up and spent, wearied as it were with
the scorching heat of the Sun, so that it grew faint for want of water, and not
able to yield fruit any longer. This I conceive is the meaning of this place.
Yet some understand it of Gods refreshing his people, his inheritance (see the
Note Deuteronomy. 4.20.) with the showrs of the Gospel: see the Note Deuteronomy. 11.11.

Verse. 10. Thy congregation has dwelt therein, etc.] This is added to show the
reason why God did yearly bless the land with such increase, namely, that his
people might be provided for, whom he had planted there; and that the rather,
because it was indeed almost a miracle, that such a spot of ground, as Canaan
was, should nourish so many millions of people, which is not now sufficient, as
some report, to nourish the thousandth part of them. Thou, O God, have prepared
of thy goodness, to wit, this land, or rather this fruitful increase of the
land, for the poor; that is, thou give so great an increase, that even the
poor are provided for; or, thou have provided liberally for thy poor people:
and so he calls them, either to intimate that their condition would have been
soon poor enough, if God had not so provided for them; and in reference to
their poor condition in the wilderness, or in Egypt, or their ancestors; and
all to magnify Gods goodness in setting his heart upon such a wretched people.
See the Note Deuteronomy. 26.5.

Verse. 11. The Lord gave the word, etc.] Here David begins to speak of the
victories God had given his people; wherein he insists the longer, because the
praising God for some late victories obtained was one chief thing intended in
this Psalm. The Lord gave the word; that is, By vanquishing their enemies for
them, God put a triumphant song into the mouths of his people; or, he caused
the tidings of several glorious victories to be brought to them: great was the
company of those that published it; that is, in every town and village the
women came out, (for the word in the original here is in the feminine gender)
and that in great multitudes, to sing songs of triumph: concerning which
custom see the Note 1 Samuel 18.6. That this may be also applied to the
publishing of the glad tidings of Christ's victories over the world and death
and Hell by the ministers of the Gospel, who bring this treasure to men in
earthen weak vessels, I deny not: but that it should be here intended, I cannot
see.

Verse. 12. Kings of armies, etc.] This may be taken as that song of triumph
which the women should sing, employed in the foregoing verse; or else as the
words of David, wherein he continues the relation of the Churches victories:
Kings of armies; that is, Kings attended and furnished with diverse and mighty
armies: did flee apace; to wit, as stricken with great terror: yea the words
in the original, did flee, did flee, may imply, that they were often and
suddenly put to flight, and that they fled several ways and far away, see
Deuteronomy. 28.25. And she that tarried at home divided the spoil; that is, the
women that stayed at home: and the meaning is, either that the soldiers had
such rich spoil, that at their return they had much to give away amongst their
wives and daughters and friends; or that the enemy was so wholly vanquished,
that the women did not fear to go out to gather the spoil that was left in
the field; and so the mighty became a prey to weak ones. And this may be
applied also to the victories of the Church in the days of the Gospel, over
her enemies spiritual and temporal.

Verse. 13. Though ye have lien among the pots, etc.] This also may be taken as
a part of the women's song before mentioned, wherein they encourage the people
of God; or rather as the words of the Psalmist, wherein from the great things
he had recited, which God had done for his people, he encourages them to trust
in God for the time to come. Though ye have lien amongst the pots; that is,
though ye may be for a time in great darkness and distress, in great
streights and poverty, kept in the basest bondage and drudgery, like
kitchin-scullions, that lay themselves down to sleep amongst the pots, or, as
some say, like those scullions in an army (which may be indeed particularly
intended, because the Psalmist is here speaking of war) that skulk by night
amongst the pots, there to shelter themselves from the cold winds and rain, and
so are all-over besmeared with dirt and smoke and soot: yet shall ye be as the
wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold; that
is, God will bring you again to a very prosperous condition, and make you
glorious by deliverance. Yea and it may also imply, that those afflictions
should not impair their spiritual dignity and beauty, but should rather
promote it, in that their faith and courage and other graces should shine the
more brightly. And how this may be applied to that purity and glory, wherewith
Christ shall clothe those that were most wretched and loathsome in their
natural condition, we may easily conceive. As for his comparing them to doves,
see the Note Psalm. 55.6.

Verse. 14. When the Almighty scattered kings in it, etc.] That is, in the land
of Canaan, Gods inheritance mentioned verse. 9: it was white as snow in Salmon;
to wit, say some expositours, with the bones of the slain scattered thereon.
But considering how this is joined with the foregoing verse, I rather think
that in saying the land was white as snow in Salmon, on the lofty tops whereof
they say the snow used to lie all the year long, David intended to signify,
that by those victories God had given them, the land was brought, as it were
miraculously, into a flourishing, prosperous and joyful condition, (which
whiteness signifies) that was in a darksome and doleful condition before.

Verse. 15. The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan, a high hill, etc.] Here
David begins to set forth the chief privilege which God had afforded his
people, and which was indeed the fountain from whence all other blessings did
flow in unto them, namely, that God had chosen to dwell amongst them as his
peculiar people; for to intimate this he extols mount Sion, whether they were
now carrying the Ark, the sign of Gods presence, equalling it with or exalting
it above all other hills whatsoever in this regard. For so the words must needs
be understood, as they are rendered in our Translation, The hill of God is as
the hill of Bashan, etc. as if he had said, Though Sion the hill of God be but
a barren and a small low hill of it self, yet being now chosen of God to be the
settled place of his habitation, in this regard it is no whit inferior to that
rich and fruitful and lofty hill of Bashan, (for which see the Note Psalm.
22.12.) but does rather excel it. And hereby also is employed, that the
kingdom of David seated in Sion, and so consequently of Christ, did far excel
all the kingdoms of the world, in regard of this prerogative of Gods dwelling
amongst them as his people: which is also the drift of the following verse,
wherein he checks all hills for their proud lifting up themselves, seeing all
their eminency was nothing being compared to that of Sion; Why leap ye, ye high
hills? this is the hill which God desires to dwell in, etc.

Verse. 17. The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels,
etc.] Or, many thousands of angels, as if he had said, an innumerable multitude
of angels. To show what a sure defense God was to his people, amongst whom he
dwelt in Sion, David tells us here, that God was continually attended with an
innumerable company of angels, whom he could send forth when he pleased, as
chariots of war to fight against the enemies of his people: the Lord is among
them as in Sinai, in the holy place; that is, God is among this mighty host of
angels as their Lord, having them all under his power and command, and who is
in himself a surer defense then all the angels can be; and that in his holy
place in Sion, as he was formerly in Sinai, (which may also be intended here
under those words his holy place) see the Note Deuteronomy. 33.2: which David here
mentions to imply, that Gods presence now in Sion was by virtue of that
covenant which he made with them in Sinai, that they should be his peculiar
people; and that he was present there by revealing his will unto them, as he
was formerly in Sinai by giving them his law. Thus commonly these words are
understood. But yet many learned Expositours understand them of the angels
attending Christ in his ascension into heaven, and that this is said here of
Christ's ascension, in allusion to the multitudes of horsemen and chariots that
attended the Ark when it was carried up into Sion; which was a type, they say,
of Christ's ascending into heaven. And indeed it is evident Act. 1.10. that the
angels were present with Christ when he ascended into heaven. And if they
attended him when he came into the world, honoring his birth with a hymn of
praise, Glory to God in the highest, etc. Luke 2.13, 14, according to that Heb.
1.6. when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let
all the angels of God worship him; well may we think that they also attended
him in his glorious and triumphant ascension into heaven, praising him for his
victories over our spiritual enemies, as in Revel. 5.11, 12. Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing.

Verse. 18. Thou have ascended on high, etc.] The Apostle does expressly apply
this to the ascension of Christ Ephesians. 4.8: for having said verse. 7. that unto
every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ,
to prove that the spiritual gifts which are severally dispensed to Christians
are given them by Christ, he alleges this place, Wherefore he says, when he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men: and
that he alleges it with respect to the ascension of Christ is evident verse.
9, 10. Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he descended first into the
lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the same also that ascended up
far above all heavens, etc. Some learned Expositours do therefore hold, that
David in this place does as a prophet speak directly and immediately of Christ,
taking occasion from the promises he had before mentioned, which God had made
to his people, to speak of Christ the fountain of all Gods promises, and from
the removing of the Ark into Sion, to speak of the heavenly Sion, where into
Christ, the true Ark of the Covenant, God manifested in the flesh, is ascended
up. Thou have ascended on high; that is, Thou, O Lord Christ, after thou had
humbled thy self even to the very grave, did rise again, and have ascended
triumphantly into the highest heaven: thou have led captivity captive; that is,
thou have led away many captives, or thou have carried away thy enemies into
absolute captivity, to wit, the world, sin, death, and Satan; even those
principalities and powers (as the Apostle speaks Col. 2.15.) whom having
spoiled on the Cross, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them. I
know indeed that some learned men do by the captivity that was led captive
understand the elect, Christ's redeemed ones, whom having rescued from the
bondage of Satan, that they might serve him, he carried them with him
triumphantly into heaven, to wit, in that by his ascension he opened a way for
them, that they might follow him thither; whence is that of the Apostle Ephesians.
2.6. that God has raised us up together with Christ, and made us sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. But the first exposition is doubtless the
best. As for the next words, thou have received gifts for men, which is
rendered by the Apostle, and gave gifts unto men, it is meant, doubtless, of
the gifts of the holy Ghost, which Christ, after he was ascended to the right
hand of his father, did abundantly power forth upon his officers and other his
members, whereof the fiery tongues that lighted on the Apostles at the feast of
Pentecost Act. 2.3. were a visible sign; for so the Apostle explains this place
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Nor need we stumble at it, that the Apostle says and gave gifts
unto men, whereas it is here in the Psalm, thou have received gifts for men,
both these expressions being all one in effect; and that either 1. because (as
some would have it) Christ gave gifts to his officers that he left behind him,
that he might receive from them those whom they converted, that were brought in
as an offering to God, to whom they were to live; according to that of the
Apostle Romans 15.16. where he says that he preached the Gospel, that the
offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy
Ghost; wherein he might be said to receive gifts for men, in regard that Christ
caused many to be thus brought in unto him, not for his own advantage, but for
his Churches benefit: or 2. rather, because Christ as Mediator received the
gifts of the holy Ghost from the Father, that he might give them to his
servants, as he says Matthew. 11.27. All things are delivered unto me of my
father, and Joh. 14.26. the comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom my father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and Joh. 15.26. when the
comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father: or 3. (which I
like the best) because in an usual scripture phrase, thou have received gifts
for men is as much as to say, receiving thou have given gifts unto men; as in
Hos. 14.2. that which is rendered in the margin of our Bibles, Take away all
iniquity and give good, is in the original, and receive good, that is, take
and give good to thy people; and so Exodus 25.2. that which is in our
Translation, speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering,
is in the original, that they take for me an offering; and so it is here, thou
have received gifts for men, that is, thou have taken and given gifts unto men:
and thereupon that follows verse. 19. Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us
with benefits. Yea, for the rebellious also; that is, those that do long stand
out rebelliously against the Gospel, as is expressly evident in many of the
Jews, that would not submit to Christ, when he preached the word of life unto
them, and yet after the ascension of Christ were won to the Christian faith,
and received the gifts of the holy Ghost: that the Lord God might dwell among
them; that is, amongst those that were won to join themselves to God in
Christ as his people, and that partly in Gospel Ordinances, the outward signs
of Gods presence among them, and partly in their hearts by faith and other
gifts of his spirit, and afterward eternally in heaven. And so these words do
imply, that Christ did not ascend into heaven, that he might be far off from
his Church; but rather that he might be the more effectually present amongst
them by the gifts of his spirit, according to that promise Matthew. 28.20.
feeding them with his own body and blood, and teaching and guiding them in the
ways of life by his own holy spirit. Thus we see how this place must be
understood of the ascension of Christ. But yet I see not why the words may not
be understood, as they are by many other of our best Expositours, as spoken to
God, and that with relation to the carrying up of the Ark into Sion, after many
glorious victories that God had given to David over his enemies; though withal
mediately and principally they were meant of Christ's triumphant ascension into
heaven, of whom David we know was a special type. For indeed to the type the
words may be very fitly applied, as well as to Christ, 1. because in Saul's
time, by the enemies frequent distressing the Israelites, the glory of the God
of Israel had been much obscured, whereas now by David's subduing the heathen
the glory of God was highly exalted again, therefore in relation to David's
taking the strong and high places of the enemy, or rather of the advancing of
Gods glory thereby, and his triumphant going up into Sion, in the Ark, the sign
of his presence, David speaks thus to the Lord that had given him these
victories, and had brought his enemies into bondage to him, Thou have ascended
on high, thou have led captivity captive: and 2. because not God, but his
people, yea and many of the wicked rebellious ones amongst them, were enriched
by the spoils of their enemies, and the tribute they were forced to pay, as a
ransom for their lives and liberty, and yet it was God that had brought them
into subjection, therefore he adds those words, thou have received gifts for
men, yea for the rebellious also: and 3. because by these victories, which
David and his people had obtained over their enemies, God had made it evident,
that he dwelt amongst them as his peculiar people, for their protection and
assistance, therefore is that last clause added, that the Lord God might dwell
among them. But however, whether we refer it to the type or antitype, there
is doubtless in the several expressions here used an allusion to the custom
of Princes riding in triumph after some great victories obtained: as namely 1.
to their ascending up into their triumphant chariots, or their riding up in
their chariots to some place of eminency, such as was the Capitol in Rome; 2.
to their leading of their prisoners bound before them; and 3. to their casting
of medals and pieces of money to the people, as they rode in triumph amongst
them.

Verse. 20. Unto God the Lord belong the issues from death.] That is, He has
many and diverse ways to deliver his people from the most desperate dangers;
see the Note Psalm. 3.8. And this is here mentioned, with that which follows, as
an effect of the ascension of Christ.

Verse. 21. But God shall wound the head of his enemies, etc.] That is, He shall
wound them mortally: and the same is repeated again in the next clause, and the
hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses; that is, as
persevereth obstinately in opposing Christ and his Church: only because long,
shaggy and bushy hair was usually worn by men out of pride, and makes those
that wear it to look the more fiercely, therefore this expression of wounding
their hairy scalp may probably imply, that God would irrecoverably wound his
proudest and fiercest enemies. Yet some understand it of Christ's vanquishing
our spiritual enemies, as conceiving the words have relation to that old
promise, that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head.

Verse. 22. The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my
people again from the depths of the sea.] That is, God has decreed or
promised, that though his people should be in as desperate danger, as they were
when formerly they fought with Og, that terrible giant, and mighty king of
Bashan, yet he would cause them to return with triumph, laden with the spoils
of their vanquished enemies, as he did then; and though they should seem to be
in the very jaws of death, as when they went through the red sea, yet he would
deliver them and bring them safe out of all their dangers, as he did then. So
that this phrase of bringing his people again from Bashan, etc. does either
imply his causing them to return with victory from fighting with their enemies,
or rather that their deliverances from such desperate dangers should be as a
resurrection from the dead, as if God should have brought them back again from
the grave. As for those first words, The Lord said, etc. the meaning is not,
that God had then made any such express particular promise; but that thus much
was intended in the general promises that he had made for the preservation of
his people; or that thus much might justly be concluded from that former
experience they had had of the great things that God had done for them.

Verse. 23. That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, etc.] See
the Note Psalm. 58.10.

Verse. 24. They have seen thy goings, O God, etc.] This may not unfitly be
understood of Gods going forth with his people in their wars, to subdue their
enemies before them: for having spoken in the foregoing verses, how God would
make his people victorious over their enemies, as in former times when they
fought with the king of Bashan, and when they were carried through the red sea;
in relation thereto this may be added, They, that is, the enemy to their
terror, and thy people to their great encouragement, have seen thy goings, O
God, that is, they have seen how thou have gone before thy people, as their
captain, to cause their enemies to sly before them; or, they have seen the
strange way thou made for them, when thou ledst them through the red sea. But
yet because of that which is added in the following verses, I rather conceive
that the Psalmist begins to set forth the triumphant pomp of those that sang
praises to God for their victories: to wit, either that which is described
Exodus 15.1, 20, 21. after the drowning of Pharaoh and the Egyptians in the red
sea, of which mention was made before verse. 22; or rather that of David's
carrying up the Ark into Sion with great solemnity, as is largely described 1
Chro. 15. which was the occasion of composing this Psalm. They have seen thy
goings, O God; that is, They that flocked together to behold this glorious
sight, have with great joy seen how thou wentest up in triumph amongst thy
people: even the goings of my God, my King, in the Sanctuary; that is, they
have seen thy goings, O God, who dwell in thy Sanctuary, where thou hear
the prayers of thy people, and from whence thou come forth to their help; or,
they have seen how thou wentest up amongst thy people, when they went to praise
thee in thy Sanctuary: which is farther described in the following verse, The
singers went before, etc.

Verse. 26. Bless ye God in the congregations, even the Lord from the fountain
of Israel.] This may be understood either as the words of the Psalmist, or as
the triumphant song sung by the people, hinted in the foregoing verse, the
singers went before, etc. And it is diverse ways expounded by Interpreters: as
1. that the people of God are thereby stirred up to praise God from their
hearts, the fountain from whence all praises must flow that will be accepted of
God; or 2. to fetch their praises from the Scriptures, the fountain of Gods
Church, from whence they must learn how to serve God; or 3. to bless the Lord
Christ, who was descended from the Patriarch Jacob, of whom, as concerning the
flesh, Christ came, Romans 9.5. But I think the meaning of the words is best
expressed in the margin of our Bibles, Bless ye God, even the Lord, ye that
are of the fountain of Israel, that is, all ye tribes that are sprung from
Israel; see the Note Deu. 33.28. Yet some make this the meaning of the words;
ye that are of the fountain of Israel, that is, that are true Israelites, the
genuine children of that faithful and pious patriarch: and others understand
the words mystically; ye that had your spiritual being, as members of the
Church, from the fountain of the Gospel preached, which from Israel, out of
Sion flowed into all nations.

Verse. 27. There is little Benjamin, with their ruler, etc.] That is, with
their rulers or princes; or, with him that was the head of their tribe: which
might be the rather added here, to show that this tribe, though it was the
least of all the tribes, see the Note 1 Samuel 9.21. and therefore called here
little Benjamin (happily also in allusion to Benjamins being the youngest and
least amongst all the sons of Jacob;) yet was a distinct tribe by it self, and
had their Ruler amongst the Heads of the tribes, as others had: the princes of
Judah and their counsel, that is, their counselors; or, with their company,
that is, those of the people of the tribe that came along with them. However I
conceive the drift of this verse is, to describe the pompous train of those
that attended the Ark, when it was carried up into Sion: and though some
conceive that Benjamin and Judah are expressed, and so also afterward the
princes of Zebulun and the princes of Naphtali, because these tribes had a
special stroke in those victories which David had lately obtained, and that
Benjamin is named first, because that tribe went first in the train; yet I
rather think that the Psalmists aim was, by naming the chiefest and the meanest
of the tribes, Judah and Benjamin, these two that were nearest to Jerusalem,
and Zebulun and Naphtali, that were farthest off, figuratively to imply that
all the tribes were there; and that the rather to show, that the civil wars
being ended, and all the kingdom reduced to obedience, the whole nation was
now unanimously joined in seeking to promote the worship of God; and that
Benjamin is named first, that David might not seem to neglect that tribe that
had been most violent for Saul's family against him. As for those that apply
this whole Psalm to Christ, they understand this verse of the Apostles, who
were many of them of the tribe of Judah, as being the brethren of Christ; and
many of Galilee, where lay the portion of the tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali;
and by little Benjamin they understand Paul, who was the last called of all the
Apostles, and termed the least of the Apostles, and was indeed of Benjamins
tribe. But there is no necessity of applying all the passages of the Psalm to
the days of the Gospel.

Verse. 28. Thy God has commanded thy strength, etc.] That is, God that has
taken thee for his peculiar people, has established thy kingdom with great
strength, and has given thee strength to vanquish thine enemies: strengthen, O
God, that which thou have wrought for us; that is, settle and strengthen more
and more the kingdom and dominion thou have conferred upon us; confirm,
continue and increase the victories thou have given us, and the benefits thou
have bestowed on us. And this also may be applied to the kingdom of Christ.

Verse. 29. Because of thy temple at Jerusalem, etc.] That is, Because thou art
present amongst us in thy Temple which shall be, or thy Tabernacle which is at
Jerusalem (for it may be referred to either of them, see the Note 1 Samuel 1.9.)
and do manifest this by the wonderful things thou do for us: shall kings
bring presents unto thee; that is, the kings that shall successively rule over
thy people shall bring gratulatory sacrifices and offerings unto thee; or
rather, kings of foreign nations shall bring presents unto thy people, by way
of acknowledging that thou, the great God of heaven and earth, dwell amongst
them as thy people: see 1 Kings 10.24, 25. But this may be also understood as a
prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles.

Verse. 30. Rebuke the company of spear-men, etc.] That is, as the word in the
original signifies, men armed with long spears like unto reeds, or made of
reeds; their canes or reeds being, they say, in those countries hard and
strong, like the wood of trees. Some indeed render this, Rebuke the beast of
the reeds: and because reeds are wont to grow in watery and fat grounds, whence
is that Isa. 35.7. the parched ground shall become a pool, etc. in the
habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be grass, with reeds and rushes;
therefore by the beast of the reeds some do understand voluptuous men, or
people that are proud and bold by reason of their wealth and plenty, like
cattle that feed in a fruitful soil. But I take it to be more agreeable with
that which follows to take the words thus; Rebuke the beast of the reeds, that
is, Destroy, or drive away, or blast the endeavors of those mighty, savage and
barbarous enemies of thy people, that are like unto those wild beasts that use
to lurk amongst the reeds; or, as some would have it, fierce and subtle, like
the Crocodile that uses to lie in the reeds of Nilus in Egypt; whence they say
it follows in the next verse, Princes shall come out of Egypt, etc: the
multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the people; that is, their mighty
Princes or commanders in war, with the meaner people that follow them, see the
Note Psalm. 22.12: till every one submit himself with pieces of silver; that is,
with pieces of money, or lumps and wedges of silver: scatter thou the people
that delight in war; to wit, those that causelessly make war upon thy people.

Verse. 31. Princes shall come out of Egypt, etc.] This, and that in the
following verse, is clearly a prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles; Egypt
and Ethiopia being perhaps named in stead of all, because they were above
others most grossly idolatrous and wicked: Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her
hands unto God; to wit, by yielding up themselves to him as his captives, by
praying to him, or begging mercy of him, or by presenting to him their gifts or
tribute.

Verse. 32. Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth, etc.] See the Notes Psalm.
47.1, 2.

Verse. 33. To him that rides upon the heaven of heavens, which were of old,
etc.] That is, who is a God of infinite majesty, the most high God, that from
the beginning of the world has swaied and governed the heavens and all things
contained therein; and therefore it is fit that all kingdoms and nations
should serve him: lo, he does send out his voice, and that a mighty voice; see
the Notes Psalm 29.3, 4, etc.

Verse. 34. Ascribe ye strength unto God, etc.] This is spoken in reference to
what he had immediately before said concerning the thunder; and see the Note
Psalm. 29.1: his excellency is over Israel; that is, his majesty, the excellency
of his power and goodness, etc. is in a special manner manifested amongst his
people, in his care over them above others, in the miraculous victories he has
given them, and other the glorious things he has wrought for them: and his
strength is in the clouds; that is, his power is eminently seen there; which
again has reference to what he had said in the foregoing verse of the thunder:
as if he had said, And thus has God two glorious thrones, whereon he is seen
in his majesty, one in his Church on earth, and the other in heaven.

Verse. 35. O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places.] That is, as some
conceive, both out of heaven, and out of thy tabernacle; which indeed agrees
with what was said in the foregoing verse: but see the Note Psalm. 43.3. and see
also Psalm. 47.2.

PSALM LXIX.
Verse. 1. SAve me, O God, etc.] It is evident by many passages of this Psalm,
that in the New Testament are applied to Christ, as we may see verse. 4, 9, 21,
and 22, that David wrote this Psalm of himself, as he was a type of Christ; and
therefore what is here said in the beginning of this Psalm, may be understood
of the Passion of Christ; Save me, O God, see Matthew. 26.34: for the waters are
come in unto my soul; that is, I am filled and even choked up with waters, to
the unavoidable endangering of my life. See the Notes 2 Samuel 22.5. and Psalm.
32.6.

Verse. 4. They that hate me without a cause are more then the hairs of mine
head, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 7.3, and 25.3. Yet many conceive, that it was
in particular reference to this place, that Christ said of the Jews hatred
against him Joh. 15.25. that it was that the word might be fulfilled that is
written in their law, They hated me without a cause. As for the last clause in
this verse, then I restored that which I took not away, it seems to have been a
proverbiall speech, used commonly concerning those that suffered for those
things of which they were not guilty; and so it may be used here by David,
either to imply generally that they did not only most injuriously oppress him,
but also pretended therein to proceed against him in a way of justice, as
against a malefactor; or else more particularly, that in spoiling him of all
that he had, they clamoured against him, that it was but to make satisfaction
to the justice of the law which he had transgressed. But now, if we understand
it of Christ, the meaning must needs be, that he suffered for other men's
offenses, not for his own, according to that Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. surely he has
born our griefs, etc. and so did indeed satisfy divine justice for man's robbing
God of his glory.

Verse. 5. O God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from
thee, etc.] Understand this as spoken by Christ, and then the meaning must be
this, Thou, Lord, know that the sins for which I suffer are only the sins of
thine elect, which are mine merely by imputation: but understand it of David,
and then either we must take it as spoken ironically, O God, thou know my
foolishness, etc. that is, thou know whether I be guilty, or (which is all
one in effect) that I am no way guilty of that foolishness, that is, that
wickedness, those grievous sins which mine enemies would charge upon me; and
so this expression is much like that of the Prophet, Jer. 20.7. O Lord, thou
have deceived me, and I was deceived: or else rather as an acknowledgement of
his failings, yet withal implying a profession of his innocence in those
things whereof they accused him; as if he should have said, Though I am
foolish, I confess, and have many ways offended thee, which thou know
right well; yet withal thou know that I am no way culpable in those things
which they would lay to my charge.

Verse. 6. Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for
my sake, etc.] To wit, as apprehending that thou have forsaken me, because thou
come not in to my help, notwithstanding all my confidence in thee, and my
frequent and fervent prayers unto thee, and so being discouraged by mine
example; or, as failing of that help which they expected from me, who had often
been an instrument of their preservation. But now if we refer these words to
Christ, they seem to contain a desire, that he might be supported in that great
work of man's redemption, that so those that had fixed their faith and hope on
him might not be ashamed (as indeed all his disciples must needs have been, if
he had not after his crucifying triumphed over death by his resurrection, which
is evident by that sad complaint of those two Luke 24.21. We trusted that it
had been he that should have redeemed Israel,) but might always find God ready
to grant their desires in whatever they should ask in his name, which the
following clause may seem to imply, let not those that seek thee be confounded,
etc.

Verse. 7. Because for thy sake I have born reproach, etc.] That is, for my
endeavoring to walk piously, to oppose the corruptions of the times, and to
approve my self to thee in all my ways; and more particularly for my yielding
to take the kingdom upon me, which I did not out of any private ambition, but
merely at thine appointment. But now Christ may be said to have born reproach
for Gods sake, either because he underwent it in obedience to Gods will, or
because he did all those things, for which men reproached him, out of piety and
obedience to God.

Verse. 8. I am become a stranger unto my brethren, etc.] That is, My nearest
friends, for fear of displeasing Saul and other mine enemies, stand aloof from
me. But if we refer this to Christ, it may be meant either of the Jews in
general, according to that Joh. 1.11. he came unto his own, and his own
received him not; or else more particularly of his disciples forsaking him,
Matthew. 26.56. and Peter's denying him verse. 70; yea and perhaps of his own
kinsmens despising him, of which it is said Joh. 7.5. that neither did his
brethren believe in him.

Verse. 9. For the zeal of thine house has eaten me up, etc.] By the house of
God here may be meant, 1. the Tabernacle of God, toward which David showed
much zeal, both in that he was, whilst he might, a most frequent and devout
observer of all the service of God therein, and especially in that he was
grieved for the neglect and corrupting of that truth and purity of worship,
which should have been maintained and preserved therein, and highly offended
with those that were the cause of it; and 2. the Church and people of God, for
which he was zealous, in that he so earnestly desired and sought their welfare,
and was troubled and displeased to see, that they who were called by Gods name
and professed themselves Gods people, should yet indeed deny God, and corrupt
his religion, and seek the ruin of those that were indeed the people of God.
And then by his being eaten up with this zeal may be meant, 1. that it had
exhausted and consumed, as it were, his moisture and vital spirits; or 2. that
it had wholly turned him into fire, as things eaten are turned into the nature
of him that eats them; or 3. that being transported herewith, it made him
wholly to forget and disregard himself, not in the least minding his own credit
or safety; or 4. that it had exposed him to be devoured by the rage of his
enemies. How this is applied to Christ, we see Joh. 2.17. As for the next
clause, and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me, 1.
we must know, that God may be said to be reproached by any wickedness
committed by ungodly men, contrary to the laws and commandments of God, and
particularly by any opposition that is made against his truth, any corruption
that is brought into his worship, and any wrong that is done to his servants
for his sake: and 2. that David might say, that the reproaches wherewith they
reproached God, did fall upon him, 1. because his enemies reproached him for
Gods sake, for his being so sollicitous to obey Gods will; or 2. because in
regard of his interest in God, he took himself to be reproached in the
reproaches of his God; or 3. because he took to heart the reproaches wherewith
they reproached God, as much as, yea more then if himself had been reproached
by them; or 4. because he grieved as bitterly for their sin and misery that
thus reproached God, as if himself had been guilty of their sins. And indeed
this last some conceive to be most probable, because the Apostle applying these
words to Christ, Romans 15.3. does from thence undertake to prove, that
Christians ought rather to seek to please their neighbors for their good, then
themselves, as Christ for our good was content to undergo the guilt of our
sins and the punishment due thereto, Even Christ, says the Apostle, pleased
not himself, but as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee
fell on me; to wit, in that the sins of the elect were imputed to Christ, and
he suffered the curse which they else should have suffered.

Verse. 10. When I wept and chastened my soul with fasting, etc.] To wit, as
bewailing both Gods dishonor, and their wickedness, and begging of God that
they might repent and be saved, (and that because I saw my zeal against them
other ways discovered, did no good, but only enraged them the more against
me;) that was to my reproach, that is, they derided me for my piety and (as
they judged it) my vain confidence in God.

Verse. 12. They that sit in the gate speak against me, etc.] That is, say some,
those that sit begging in the gate. But doubtless the meaning is, that the
magistrates spoke against him, or the people that assembled before the courts
of justice; for which see the Notes Genesis 22.17. and Psalm. 9.14: this being a
great aggravation of his misery, that they, whose office it was to defend his
innocence, should in the seat of justice seek his ruin: and many learned
Expositours take the next clause as an expression of the same thing, namely
that the great ones, whom he calls drinkers of strong drink, (for so it is in
the original) sang songs of him. But reading it as it is in our Bibles, and I
was the song of the drunkards, the meaning is, that the baser sort of debauched
people did also scorn and deride him. And so David hereby seeks to express,
that in all places, both public and private, and by all sorts of persons, from
the highest to the lowest, he was traduced and reproached daily.

Verse. 13. But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable
time, etc.] As if he had said, Notwithstanding all these discouragements, I
continue still to pray unto thee, O Lord; or, whilst mine enemies do thus wrong
me, by prayer I seek to thee for shelter; and my prayers, however mine enemies
deride me for them, do find acceptance with thee. And now referring this to
Christ, the acceptable time mentioned may be, that when he had fully
accomplished the work of man's redemption, according to that clause of our
Saviors prayer Joh. 17.1. Father, the hour is come, glorify thy son: see also
Heb. 5.7. O God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy
salvation; that is, with that salvation, which in all faithfulness and truth
thou have promised thy servants.

Verse. 18. Deliver me because of mine enemies.] That is, because their rage and
violence is so great against me, even seeking my life; or, because though I be
not worthy of deliverance, yet they, in regard of their wickedness and unjust
persecuting of me, are certainly worthy to be destroyed; or, that they may not
triumph over me, and be hardened in their sins and in their persecuting of the
righteous and innocent, but that rather I may triumph over them.

Verse. 20. Reproach has broken mine heart, etc.] This may be meant of the
reproaches wherewith they reproached both God and himself, As for those words
which are added, and I looked for some to take pity, but there was none, etc.
how they were accomplished in Christ, when all his acquaintance stood afar off
from him, Luke 23.49. see the Note before verse. 8. Yet they may also imply,
that Christ had not the least assistance from man in the work of our redemption.

Verse. 21. They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink.] That is, In stead of comforting me, by their scoffing and
opprobrious speeches, they added to my affliction, as if they should have given
me gall and vinegar in my hunger and thirst. The last clause, concerning their
giving him vinegar to drink, was doubtless literally accomplished in Christ,
when they gave him vinegar upon the Cross, Matthew. 27.48; and therefore it is
said Joh. 19.28. I conceive in reference to this place, that when Christ said,
I thirst, (which was the occasion of their giving him vinegar to drink) he
spoke this purposely that the Scripture might be fulfilled. As for the first
clause, they gave me also gall for my meat, diverse learned men think that was
also literally accomplished in Christ, when coming to Golgotha Matt. 26.34.
they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall. But because this was only
mingled with the drink, and cannot therefore so properly be said to be given
him for meat, therefore this may seem more questionable; though I see not why
the words should be restrained to so strict a sense.

Verse. 22. Let their table become a snare before them, etc.] There is in these
words an allusion to birds, who going to feed on the meat that is laid as a
bait for them, are often catched in a trap or snare; and the imprecation herein
expressed seems also to have reference to the complaint in the foregoing verse;
as if he had said, As they have given me gall for meat and vinegar for drink,
so let their plenty and dainties prove no better in the conclusion then gall
and vinegar to them: whence it may be that the Apostle Romans 11.9. citing this
place, but not tying himself to the very words, but only to the sense, adds
these words, and a recompense, Let their table be made a snare -- and a
recommence unto them. But however by their table here is meant, first, their
outward bodily food, and so the curse is that their plenty on their table, and
consequently whatever might be to them a support of life, and a means to
refresh them, might prove an occasion of insnaring them in sin, and of bringing
mischief and destruction upon them; as is evident by those more general words
that follow, and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a
trap: and 2. of the word of God, the food of their souls; and so the curse is,
that by perverting the Scripture, and by their not believing the word of the
Gospel, they should be the more hardened, and so this their spiritual food
should prove the savor of death unto death unto them; which may well be
acknowledged to be intended here, because the Apostle Romans 11.9, etc. applies
this with the following verses to the blindness of the Jews. I know that some
hold that this, Let their table become a snare, was accomplished in the Jews,
when being assembled to eat the Passover at Jerusalem, they were there
besieged, taken and destroyed by the Romans. And how we ought to judge of such
imprecations as these, see in the Note Psalm. 28.4.

Verse. 23. Let their eyes be darkened that they see not, etc.] According to
that which is threatened Deuteronomy. 28.28; concerning which see the Note there: and
make their loins continually to shake; to wit, through fear or weakness, or
the pressure of intolerable burdens.

Verse. 24. Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger
take hold on them.] This implies many and grievous judgments; such as they
should no way be able to escape, and should be of long continuance, and besides
inflicted in a away of wrath: and this some do particularly restrain (as they
do also the following verse) to the final destruction of Jerusalem, and the
wrath that did thenceforth seize upon the Jews; see 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.

Verse. 25. Let their habitation be desolate, and let none dwell in their
tents.] To wit, by destroying their land, towns and cities, together with the
Temple; or by destroying them and their posterity in a great measure, and
causing the rest to be carried away as captives into strange countries: which
agrees with that our Savior did also threaten the Jews with Matthew. 23.38.
Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.

Verse. 26. For they persecute him whom thou have smitten, etc.] That is, They
insult over, and with all despite and cruelty seek utterly to ruin, me and
others, whom thou as a father have corrected: and it may also be peculiarly
applied to Christ, who was Isa, 53.4, 5, smitten of God and afflicted, wounded
for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: and to the same purpose
is the following clause, and they talk to the grief of those whom thou have
wounded; to wit, by scoffing at them, and by upbraiding them with their
sufferings.

Verse. 27. Add iniquity to their iniquity, etc.] It may be read, as in the
margin it is, Add punishment of iniquity to their punishment; that is, Let
them be punished with one plague upon another; or, Let them be punished
eternally, where there shall be a supply of never-ceasing wrath. But reading it
as it is in our Text, the meaning must needs be as if he had said, As they have
added affliction to my affliction, so let them be delivered up to a reprobate
sense, that they may add sin to sin, till they have filled up the measure of
their iniquity. As for the following clause, and let them not come into thy
righteousness, either the desire therein is 1. that they might be hardened in
their sins, and so might never repent and become righteous; or 2. (which
implies the same) that God would not justify them, Let them not come into thy
righteousness, that is, Do not pronounce them righteous, let them not partake
of that righteousness or faithfulness, whereby thou art always certainly
wont to absolve and justify those that do truly believe and repent, (see the
Note Psalm. 51.14.) and so it is the same with that which is added in the next
verse, that they might not be numbered amongst the righteous; or 3. (which I
like the best,) that they might never come into heaven; for that is indeed
called righteousness elsewhere, as Psalm. 24.5. concerning which see the Note
there.

Verse. 28. Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, etc.] That is,
Let them not be of the number of those that were from all eternity chosen and
ordained both to the life of grace and of glory hereafter; and accordingly when
they die, let them be cast into hell; as it seems to be more clearly expressed
in the following clause, and not be written with the righteous. Yet withal I
conceive, that this phrase of blotting them out of the book of the living may
also imply a desire, that however by outward profession they might be of the
number of those that were the Church and people of God, and thereupon might
accordingly hope and boast that their names were written in heaven, yet God
would not own them for such, yea that God would manifest that they were
reprobates, to wit, either by casting them out of the Church, (as we see the
Jews are not now the people of God, but the Gentiles are succeeded in their
room) or by casting them out into utter darkness. The expression here used is
the same with that Ezekiel. 13.9. concerning the false prophets, they shall not be
in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of
the house of Israel, etc. I know indeed some understand both of being cut off
by death. But for this and other things, see the Note Exodus 32.34.

Verse. 29. But I am poor and sorrowful, etc.] That is, afflicted and
brokenhearted, see Psalm. 40.17; yet some apply it to the poverty and low
estate of Christ: let thy salvation, O God, set me on high; that is, let it set
me above the reach of mine enemies, see the Note Psalm. 28.9. But this too some
understand of Christ's ascension.

Verse. 31. This also, etc.] Having said in the foregoing verse, I will praise
the name of God, etc. he adds, This also shall please the Lord better then an
ox or bullock, that has horns and hoofs: and either the drift of these last
words that has horns and hoofs is, to set forth what bullock he meant, to wit
one that was young and tender, whose horns began to bud forth, and whose hoofs
began to harden, or one that was for years ripe and fit for sacrifice, thereby
to set forth that thanksgiving was more acceptable to God then any the choicest
sacrifice; or else they are added by way of slighting those legal sacrifices
of brute beasts, in comparison of that reasonable service of praise; as if he
had said, the calves of our lips, so the prophet calls our praising God Hos.
14.2. is a sacrifice far more acceptable to the Lord, then calves or bullocks
that have horns and hoofs.

Verse. 32. The humble shall see this and be glad, etc.] See the Notes Psalm.
34.2, and 40.3. and your hearts shall live that seek God; that is, your hearts
that were in a manner dead within you, because of mine or your own sad
distresses, shall be revived again; see the Note Psalm. 22.26.

Verse. 33. For the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners.]
That is, his servants that are brought into the straights of any distress by
Gods afflicting hand for their sins; or those that are persecuted and bound for
his sake, or for his truth and cause.

Verse. 35. For God will save Sion, and will build the cities of Judah, etc.]
David foreseeing by the spirit of prophesy the great calamities that would
befall the land and people of Israel in succeeding times, does here foretell,
for the encouragement of the faithful, that the reformation begun amongst them
by the setting up of his throne, should be carried on; that God would preserve
Sion, the place of his public worship, (with which he begins, because the
maintenance of Gods worship was the foundation of all their happiness) and
that he would cause the whole kingdom to prosper and flourish unto the coming
of Christ, of whose kingdom his was a type: and withal the same he intends
also concerning the Church of Christ, Gods spiritual Sion; see the Note Psalm.
2.6: that they may dwell there, and have it in possession; that is, that the
faithful Israelites may dwell long in Sion and in the land of Canaan, see the
Note 2 Samuel 7.10. and that the faithful may continue in the Church, and after
this life may dwell for ever in the heavenly Canaan.

Verse. 36. The seed also of his servants shall inherit it, etc.] This must be
understood, as the former verse, 1. of the faithful Israelites continuing in
the land which God had given them; (and some understand it of the times when
the Jews shall be converted to Christ) and 2. of the true believers abiding in
the Church, and at last for ever with God in heaven.

PSALM LXX.
Verse. 1. MAke haste, O God, to deliver me, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 40.13,
etc. where we have this whole Psalm almost word for word.

PSALM LXXI.
Verse. 1. IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, etc.] Many passages in this Psalm
make it most probable, that this Psalm was composed by David in his old age,
when his son Absalom was risen up against him, see verse. 9, and 18. But for the
two first verses, see the Notes Psalm. 31.1, 2.

Verse. 7. I am as a wonder unto many, etc.] That is, say some Expositours,
either 1. because thou have so wondrously advanced me, raising me from keeping
sheep, to sit on the throne of Israel, and have always hitherto so
miraculously preserved me; or 2. because I walk so strictly, and because my
ways seem so strange to them, in that I restrain my self from that liberty and
from those pleasures to which others give up themselves, and can so willingly
expose my self to so great troubles for conscience sake, and then bear them too
with patience and cheerfulness, according to that which Peter says to the
faithful in those times 1 Pet. 4.4^ they think it strange that you run not
with them to the same excess of riot; or 3. because thou have now forsaken me,
who have always served thee so constantly, and trusted in thee with so much
confidence. But I rather conceive the meaning is, that because of his uncouth
ways, and because of the grievous afflictions which God had brought upon him,
raising up his own son against him, that sought to bereave him both of his life
and kingdom, they gazed and pointed at him in a way of wonder, as some fool or
madman; yea they withdrew themselves and fled away from him, as some
detestable monster, one that was the shame of mankind, not worthy to live
amongst men, and by whom it was pity the earth should be any longer defiled: in
opposition to which therefore he adds, But, let them judge as they will of me,
thou art my strong refuge. And indeed we find the like expressions used
elsewhere much to the same purpose, as Isa. 8.18. and Zach. 3.8. and 1 Cor. 4.9.

Verse. 8. Let my mouth be filled with thy praise.] That is, Let me have cause
to praise thee, and enable me to praise thee freely, abundantly and
continually, that I may have nothing else in a manner in my mouth, but thine
honor and praise; see the Note Job 8.21.

Verse. 12. O my God, make haste for my help.] As if he had said, And hereby
disprove what mine enemies boast of, to wit, that thou have forsaken me: and
his own confidence that they were herein deceived, he implies in those words, O
my God.

Verse. 14. But I will hope continually, etc.] This has reference to that
foregoing desire verse. 12. that God would make have to help him; and is as if
he had said, that however, though God should defer to help him, yet he would
still wait in hope upon God.

Verse. 15. My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all
the day, etc.] That is, thy faithfulness and justice, manifested in saving and
delivering thy righteous servants; see the Note Psalm. 51.8: for I know not the
numbers thereof; that is, for thy mercies and deliverances are innumerable, so
that I shall never want matter of praising thee, nor can ever sufficiently
extol thy name. Others, I know, give an exposition of these words that is
somewhat different from this; my mouth shall show forth thy righteousness,
that is, I will, the best I can, generally declare thy justice in punishing the
ungodly, and thy salvation, to wit, in the preservation and deliverances of thy
righteous servants; for I know not the numbers thereof, that is, I must needs
confess, that both thy judgments on the wicked, and thy mercies to the
righteous, are more then I can reckon. But the first exposition is the best.

Verse. 16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God, etc.] That is, I will
walk daily in the confidence of Gods strength, and not of mine own; whatever I
undertake and wherever I go, I shall go on in assurance of assistance and
protection from the almighty God; however weak I am in my self, and however
violent mine enemies be against me, and though I meet with never so many and
great troubles and hindrances and discouragements in my way, yet I shall go
on with cheerfulness, courage and confidence, not falling back, or turning
aside to the right hand or the left, for any evils I may meet with in my
course: I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only; that is,
I will not mind any other helps or supports, but will rely upon thy
faithfulness solely and wholly. I know some do restrain the first clause
either to his praising God (for having said in the former verse, that his mouth
should show forth Gods righteousness, etc. here he adds, say they, that he
would enter upon this work in Gods strength) or else to his going out to war
against his enemies, or his persevering to withstand them in the maintenance of
his just cause in the confidence of Gods aid. But I conceive it is best to
understand it more generally, of his resting upon Gods power and help in all
things whatsoever.

Verse. 17. O God, thou have taught me from my youth.] That is, say some, by the
holy instructions of my parents and teachers, and withal by thine own spirit:
or rather, thou have taught me experimentally even from my youth by many
wonderful deliverances, how good and faithful thou art, how tenderly careful
thou art over me, and what a strong and sure refuge thou art to all that fly
unto thee: and thus I have been trained up from my childhood, to trust in thee,
and to fly to thee in all my troubles.

Verse. 18. Forsake me not until I have showed thy strength to this generation,
and thy power to every one that is to come.] That is, to succeeding
generations; to wit, either by recording it in the Psalms, see the Note Psalm.
45.17; or by relating it to them who should report it to those of another
generation, and so it should be successively made known in all ages.

Verse. 19. Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high.] See the Notes Psalm.
36.5, 6.

Verse. 20. Thou, which have showed me great and sore troubles, etc.] See the
Note Psalm. 4.6: shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the
depths of the earth; that is, from those desperate dangers, wherein I seemed to
be as a man that was dead and buried. See the Note Psalm. 42.7.

PSALM LXXII.
The Title. A Psalm for Solomon.] Some read it, A Psalm of Solomon, and hold
that it was composed by Solomon: only seeing in cannot be denied that this
Psalm was one of David's prayers, because of those words in the close of this
Psalm verse. 20. The prayers of David the son of Iesse are ended; they say
withal, that the Psalm is no other but the prayer which David made for Solomon
a little before his death, when by David's appointment he was anointed king of
Israel, his father yet living, 1 Kings 1.39. and that it was only brought into
the form of a Psalm by Solomon. But whether it were composed by Solomon, or, as
others rather think, by David, however it was for Solomon, that is, concerning
Solomon, or, for Solomon's sake; as being written by way of 1. congratulating
him for the honor which was newly conferred upon him; 2. of praying to God for
him, that his kingdom might be just, prosperous and lasting; and thereby also
teaching the people what they should beg of God on his behalf; 3. of
propounding to him the pattern of Christ's perfect government, that imitating
him in his government, he might draw down the blessings here mentioned upon
him; and 4. by way of foretelling what his government should be. Only we must
know, that though Solomon alone be expressly named here, yet what is desired for
him is covertly also desired for all that were to succeed him in that throne,
even unto Christ, in whom the kingdom was to be established for ever, and of
whom Solomon was a type, in regard whereof even he also is called Solomon Cant.
8.12. see the Note 2 Samuel 12.24. And indeed that this Psalm is chiefly meant of
Christ, is evident, because there are many passages hereof that cannot properly
be meant of Solomon, as those verse. 5, 7, 8, 11, and 17; and that verse. 8. is
expressly applied to Christ, Zach. 9.10.

Verse. 1. Give the king thy judgments, O God, etc.] This prayer may be
understood as made by David, either in his own name, or in the name of the
people: Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the
kings son; that is, to Solomon. For though some by the kings son in the second
clause understand Solomon's posterity; yet I rather think it is Solomon that is
here called both the king and the kings son, this being peculiar to him, and
which could not be said either of Saul or David, that sat in the throne before
him, that he was made king by right of succession of Gods appointment, as the
son and heir of David the king. Only withal we must also include Christ, who,
as man, was the son and heir of David, Luke 1.32. the Lord God shall give unto
him the throne of his father David; and in regard of his divine nature, the Son
of God, the great King of heaven and earth. And then for the thing desired for
Solomon in these words, it is, that God would enable him to govern his people
justly, according to that form of righteousness prescribed in his Word: for by
Gods judgments and Gods righteousness is meant, either the knowledge of that
way of righteous government prescribed in Gods law; or those gifts and graces
which God was wont to give to magistrates, that they might justly govern the
people; or an ability and holy will to govern according to that exact pattern
of Gods righteous governing the world. So that it is in effect the same with
that which Solomon begged of God for himself 1 Kings 3.9. But now as these
words are referred to Christ, the accomplishment is most clear: for as the
Father committed all judgment unto the Son, Joh. 5.22; so he adorned his
humane nature with a fullness of all grace requisite hereunto, see Isa. 11.2,
3: and therefore some note, that in reference to Christ this is spoken rather
by way of prophesying what should be, and by way of congratulating the graces
and just government of Christ, then of praying that this might be.

Verse. 2. He shall judge, etc.] That is, When thou have thus fitted him for the
government of thy people, as is before said, then he shall judge thy people
with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment: and most fitly might this be
said of Christ, the true Melchisedech, (see the Note Genesis 14.18.) of whom it
was prophesied Isa. 32.1. Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness. See
also Isa. 11.4. and the Note Psalm. 43.1.

Verse. 3. The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by
righteousness.] That is, say some Expositours, By reason of the righteousness
of his government, there shall be such peace, that the barrennest parts of the
kingdom shall be husbanded, and shall yield the fruits of the earth in
abundance; which is indeed the usual effect of peace: see the Note 1 Kings
4.25. But rather I conceive it is a metaphorical expression; as if he had
said, that all kind of peace and prosperity should grow up and flourish in
every part of the kingdom, the earth should yield as fair a crop of peace and
prosperity as of other the fruits of the earth; as we use to say of any thing
that is plentiful, that it may be found growing under every hedge. And the
mention that is made of the mountains and hills, is either only because Judea
was a mountainous and hilly country; or else to imply how the kingdom should
in every place flourish in this regard; as it is a sign of the universal
fruitfulness of a land, when even the mountains, the most barren places, do
yield a rich increase; or that even those places should be safe and peaceable,
where wild beasts and robbers were wont to lurk. However, in this prophesy of
the peace of his government, there is an allusion certainly to the name of
Solomon; concerning which, as also how this may be applied to that peace which
Christians enjoy by Christ's subduing Satan, sin and death, see the Notes Genesis
14.18. 2 Samuel 12.24. and 1 Kings 4.24. And withal observable it is, how this
agrees with that of the prophet Isa. 32.17. And the work of righteousness
shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for
ever.

Verse. 5. They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, etc.] This
may be understood, either as spoken to the king, for whom he had hitherto
prayed; and so the meaning must be, that because of his wisdom and justice in
governing his kingdom, the people should reverence and fear him, and yield him
willing and ready obedience; as it is indeed expressly said of Solomon, 1
Kings 3.28. that all Israel feared the king, for they saw the wisdom of God
was in him to do judgment: or else rather as spoken to God, They shall fear
thee, etc. as if he had said, By the righteousness of the kings government, O
God, religion shall be promoted, and men shall be brought willingly and
sincerely to fear and serve thee. But now because it is said that this should
be as long as the sun and moon endure, etc. that is, to the end of the world,
this must needs be referred to Christ, whose kingdom must continue for ever.
For we see in the later end of Solomon's reign, there was a great defection to
idolatry amongst the people, and at last his own servants rose up against him;
and when his son came to the throne, ten of the tribes revolted from him.

Verse. 6. He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grass, etc.] That is,
Whereas tyrants are like storms of wind and hail, that destroy the fruits of
the earth, he shall be like sweet showrs, that make the fruits of the earth to
grow up and flourish, because by the justice of his government the people of
God shall flourish in every regard. But especially is this accomplished in the
kingdom of Christ, by whose doctrine (for which see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.2.) and
by the righteousness and goodness of whose government, the Church shall
flourish and be enriched with all kind of blessings, especially spiritual;
their hearts shall be cheared with comfort, and they shall bring forth
abundantly the fruit of a holy life and conversation: besides that it might be
the more fitly said, He shall come down like rain, because his kingdom is in a
special manner from above, Joh. 3.31. see also Hos. 6.3.

Verse. 7. In his days shall the righteous flourish, etc.] That is, There shall
be many righteous ones, and they shall be exalted and be prosperous in every
regard; which most fitly suits with Christ's kingdom, who not only blesses the
righteous, but makes men righteous, and by the preaching of the Gospel amongst
the Gentiles did wonderfully increase the number of them* and abundance of
peace so long as the moon endures; see the Notes above verse. 3, and 5.

Verse. 8. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto
the ends of the earth.] That is, from the red sea, or, the salt sea, unto the
mediterranean sea, and from the river Euphrates, unto the desert that lies
Southward beyond the utmost bounds that way of the land of Canaan. Concerning
these bounds of the kingdom of Israel, see the Note Exodus 23.31: and how this
was accomplished in Solomon's days, but especially in the spreading of Christ's
kingdom all the world over, see the Note 1 Kings 4.21. and the Note also on
the Title of this Psalm.

Verse. 9. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, etc.] That
is, The most remote and barbarous nations shall submit themselves to him, or
seek his favor: and his enemies shall lick the dust; that is, they shall kiss
the ground when they come before him in token of reverence (for that was the
custom of those Eastern countries when they bowed to their kings;) or they
shall bow their faces to the very ground, as if they meant to lick the dust:
and hence these two are joined together Isa. 49.23. they shall bow down to thee
with their face toward the earth, and lick the dust of thy feet.

Verse. 10. The kings of Tarshish, etc.] See the Note 1 Kings 10.22. and of the
isles shall bring presents; to wit, by way of tribute and homage: the kings of
Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts; that is, as it is commonly thought, the kings
of the nations inhabiting Ethiopia and Arabia the happy, descended from Seba
and Sheba, the son and grandchild of Cush, Genesis 10, 7. But see also the Notes 1
Kings 10.1. Psalm. 45.12. and 68.31.

Verse. 11. Yea, all kings shall fall down before him, etc.] This cannot be
meant of Solomon, unless we take it as figuratively spoken, all kings, that
is, all any thing near about him. But in Christ it is and shall be literally
accomplished.

Verse. 12. For he shall deliver the needy, etc.] That is, He shall rescue them
from those that by fraud or violence wrong and oppress them; and this shall
make men willing to submit to his government. But though this, with that which
follows in the two next verses, is clearly spoken of deliverance from external
injuries, yet as it is referred to Christ, it may be also understood of his
delivering poor sinners from the spiritual tyranny of sin and Satan, and of
saving their souls.

Verse. 14. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence, etc.] That is,
their life, as the following words show: and precious shall their blood be in
his sight; that is, whereas many men, princes and great ones especially, regard
the shedding of poor men's blood no more then the spilling of a little water, he
shall show that he makes precious account of the blood even of the meanest and
most contemptible amongst the people, 1. by being sparing in shedding their
blood, see 2 Kings 1.13. 2ly, by defending them against those that would shed
it, and 3ly, by taking vengeance on those that did shed it, especially when it
is shed for Gods cause, in regard the Lord does then the more prize it, when
thereby his truth is confirmed, and his cause maintained.

Verse. 15. And he shall live, etc.] To wit, long and prosperously; but see the
Note Psalm. 21.4: and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba; to wit, by way
of tribute and presents, 1 Kings 10.15: which is added to imply both how rich
and potent a king he should be, as indeed it is said of Solomon 1 Kings 10.23.
that he exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches; and also with what
affection and willingness they should submit to his government; for to signify
this, was that ancient custom of bringing presents to their princes, see the
Note 1 Samuel 10.27. And withal, especially as it is referred to Christ, it
implies, that men should willingly contribute of any thing they had, for the
promoting of his kingdom and glory. Prayer also shall be made for him
continually: which as it is meant of Christ, does either imply that men should
pray for the coming of this their Messiah, or else rather for the advancement
of his kingdom, and for the Church his body; which was in part fulfilled, when
the children cried in the Temple, Hosanna to the son of David, Mat. 21.15: and
daily shall he be praised; Christians endeavoring to honor him both by word
and deed.

Verse. 16. There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the
mountains, etc.] That is, so fruitful shall the land be, that though but a
handful of corn be sown in the earth, and that upon the top of the mountains,
where by reason of extreme cold in winter, and heat in summer, the ground is
usually barren, yet it shall yield such mighty corn, so thick and so high, that
being shaken with the wind, it shall rusle and make a noise like the thick bows
of the lofty trees on mount Lebanon. And hereby also is employed the abundance
of all other things that should be in those times, and that the smallest
beginnings should through Gods blessing grow to great abundance. Yea and some
understand it too of the sowing of the seed of the Gospel, and of the great
increase and flourishing estate of the Church and kingdom of Christ, that
should follow hereupon. And they of the city shall flourish as the grass of
the earth; that is, as the earth shall every where yield a great increase of
grain, so shall every city yield as great an increase of men, so that they
shall be every where as plentiful as the grass of the earth, and they shall be
too in a flourishing condition. And how both these were literally accomplished
in Solomon's reign, is expressed 1 Kin. 4.20. Judah and Israel were many as the
sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry.

Verse. 17. His name shall endure for ever, etc.] If we refer this to Solomon,
the meaning may be, that for his wisdom, his just and gentle government, and
the prosperity of his reign, his glory and renown should be continued even
after he was dead for many generations. But referring it to Christ, the meaning
must be, that he and his kingdom should continue for ever; as likewise that
his name should be continued in his spiritual offspring, that should be
called Christians: see the Note above verse. 5. And men shall be blessed in him;
that is, if we refer it to Solomon, men shall propound him as a pattern of one
eminently blessed, saying, the Lord bless you as Solomon was blessed; see Genesis
48.20: but referring it to Christ, the meaning is, that in and through Christ
believers should attain perfect bliss and happiness, according to that
promise made to Abraham, Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all the families of the earth
be blessed.

Verse. 18. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous
things.] To wit, by his own power: and this seems to be added in reference to
the wonderful goodness of God in continuing the kingdom to Solomon's
posterity, notwithstanding many of them did so often provoke God to have
utterly destroyed them; but especially with reference to Gods wonderful works
in the Churches redemption by Christ, her miraculous preservation maugre the
rage of Satan against her, and the many other benefits we enjoy by his kingly
office.

Verse. 19. Let the whole earth be filled with his glory, etc.] This seems also
to be spoken with respect to the times of the Gospel. Amen and amen: see the
Note Ps. 41.13.

Verse. 20. The prayers of David the son of Iesse are ended.] For the adding of
those words, the son of Iesse, see the Notes 2 Samuel 23.1. It is evident that
the 86, the 110, and diverse of the following Psalms besides, were composed by
David; and therefore it well may be questioned why it is said that here the
prayers of David are ended. But to this diverse answers are given by
Expositours: as 1. that this was the last Psalm that David composed, and happily
placed last in the order of the Psalms, and that since the order of the Psalms
was transposed: or 2. that this was the last of the Psalms which David joined
together in a book; and that the following Psalms (wherein there are some also
that David himself did afterward compose) were collected by some other holy
man of God, and joined to that book of Psalms which David had formerly made: or
3. that this is added here, because hither to we have had David's Psalms, but
now those that next follow were composed by Asaph and others. And indeed if it
were clear that the following Psalms were not composed by David, it might well
be said in this regard that here the prayers of David are ended, though some
Psalms of David's making be afterward inserted; as it is said, The words of Job
are ended, because his reasoning with his friends does there end, though some
words that Job spoke are afterward inserted in that book, as chapter 40.3, 4, 5,
and chapter 42.1, 2, etc.

PSALM LXXIII.
Verse. 1. TRuly (or yet) God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart.] That is, that are upright-hearted amongst the people of God. Yet some
would have the meaning of these words to be this, that they whose hearts are
clear from passion do know God to be good, though others being under temptation
and disturbed with passion cannot often be so persuaded. With the like abrupt
expression the 62. Psalm begins; concerning which see the Note there.

Verse. 2. But as for me, etc.] As if he had said, Though this be so, and I knew
it well enough, as having had frequent experience of Gods manifold goodness,
both to my self and other his faithful servants, and though I have always
endeavored in all things to approve my self to God: yet my feet were almost
gone; that is, I was almost transported beyond the bounds of piety, even to the
accusing of God in words, at least in thought, of injustice and
unfaithfulness; or, I had almost fallen from this persuasion of heart
concerning the goodness of God to the righteous, and from believing the truth
of Gods promises, yea almost from the uprightness of my ways, yielding to do
as those wicked men did, whom the Lord thus prospered. And observable it is,
that all sinful slips were so grievous to David, that he laments here even
that his steps had wel-nigh slipped.

Verse. 4. For there are no bands in their death, etc.] This may be understood
either 1. of the sodainnesse of their death, to wit, that they drop, as it
were, on a sudden into the grave, without any foregoing sickness or pain;
which then is more fully set forth in the following clause, but their strength
is firm, not wasted by any foregoing sickness, see the Note Job 21.13: or 2.
of the gentleness and easiness of their death, that they do not die a hard
and bitter death, either by reason of inward gripes and pinches of conscience,
and terrors of mind, or of bodily pangs and strugglings with death, their
souls being bound within them as with bands, which death has much ado to
untie or break, so that they cannot depart, or at least are long held back, as
with bands, from dying; (but how this can agree with that following clause, but
their strength is firm, I cannot well see:) or 3. of their dying a natural
death, to wit, that they are never brought to die as malefactors, being bound
with bands, cords or chains; and that because the laws can take no hold of
them: whatever wickedness they commit, by reason of their riches and
greatness, they are sure to escape: or 4. of their dying in a good old age;
namely, that they are not violently dragged to an untimely death by any
sickness or dismal casualty, but having sweetly passed over the whole natural
course of their lives, they quietly give up the ghost. And their strength is
firm; that is, proportionably to their years, all their life long they are
strong and healthful, till at last, being spent by mere old age, their life is
expired, and they go down into the grave.

Verse. 6. Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain, etc.] That is,
Because of this their prosperous condition, they carry themselves proudly in
every regard, in their countenance, speech, gesture, etc. as some men will do
when they have gotten a chain of gold, they grow highly conceited of
themselves, being ready still to boast of and advance themselves, and to
despise others; or they please themselves and glory in their pride, as
esteeming it an ornament to them: violence covers them as a garment; as if he
should have said, And by reason of this their pride, they become bold, cruel
and violent oppressors of others; for this expression of violence covering them
as a garment, is to imply, that they do not only conceive it in their minds,
but also express it outwardly in their deeds, yea and glory in it, as men do
in some gorgeous attire, seeking to outstrip one another herein, as they seek
to outstrip one another in bravery, and perhaps wearing the trophies of their
oppressions in a way of boasting. And to this some add also, that oppression
is as constantly their practice, as it is for men every day to put on their
garments; and that hereby they seek to defend themselves, as men shelter
themselves from the cold by their raiment. But however the main drift in
alleging this is, to set forth how strange it might seem, that when men did
thus abuse the bounty and goodness of God, he should notwithstanding suffer
and prosper them still.

Verse. 7. Their eyes stand out with fatness, etc.] Because the fatness of the
face makes the eyes to be hidden rather then to stand out, some would have this
clause rendered thus, Their eyes go out with fatness, meaning, that they had
scarce any eyes to be seen: but now others say that fatness does often cause
the eyes of men to swell and stare out of their heads. However many learned men
take it to be only a figurative expression of the swelling of their minds,
manifested in their outward habit and gesture: as if he had said, Their minds
swell out with their prosperous estate, as men's eyes stand out with extreme
fatness of body; and see also the Note Job 15.27. They have more then heart
could wish; that is, more wealth. But yet it may be understood more generally,
to wit, that all things prosper with them, even in a manner above what
themselves or any other man could have expected or desired.

Verse. 8. They are corrupt, etc.] That is, stark rotten and naught, or,
dissolute and licentious, letting the reins loose to all manner of wickedness:
and speak wickedly concerning oppression; where that word wickedly is added,
either 1. only because oppression is a great wickedness; or 2. to imply that
herein lay their great wickedness, that they were so far from hiding their
oppression, that they were not ashamed openly to boast of it and glory in it;
or 3. because their speech herein was so exceedingly presumptuous and bold, as
if they were above all order and law, and might do with any man what they
pleased themselves: they speak loftily; to wit, as looking down with contempt
upon others.

Verse. 9. They set their mouth against the heavens, etc.] To wit, in that they
blaspheme God and his Saints; or in that they speak proudly, contemptuously and
wickedly of all divine things: and their tongue walks through the earth; that
is, they speak evil of all men, as any occasion is given, not sparing any; and
in doing this their tongues scarce ever lie still. But the sense of the whole
verse may be this, that they talk and brag, as if neither God nor man could
hinder them in any thing they have a mind to do.

Verse. 10. Therefore his people return hither, etc.] That is, The people of
God, who is employed in the foregoing verse in those words, They set their mouth
against the heavens; as if he had said, Because the wicked do thus prosper,
therefore the godly themselves, Gods own dear people, do often fall into these
thoughts and temptations, wherewith I was assaulted, and are wel-nigh overcome
by them, ready to fall from their steadfastness, and to betake themselves to
tread in the steps of such wicked men; or, they do often fall into these
thoughts, expressed in the following verse, How does God know, etc. And waters
of a full cup are wrung out to them; that is, God does wring out to them a cup
full of the waters of affliction, or sorrow, or tears, according to that Psalm.
80.5. Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink
in great measure: and these are said to be wrung out, by allusion to the
custom of wringing or squeezing the druggs which make a potion bitter or
distasteful, that it may thereby be made the more exceeding bitter. So that
this clause is here added, either to show the effect of these thoughts and
temptations, returning again and again upon them, namely that their souls are
thereby even overwhelmed and filled with bitter sorrows; or else to show the
time when the godly are assaulted with this temptation, namely, when themselves
were made to drink deep of the cup of affliction; or, which is much the same,
to show the cause why they stumble so at the prosperous estate of wicked men,
namely, because they themselves are in the mean time in a most afflicted sad
condition; but see the Note Psalm. 11.6. I know that some Expositours do
understand this not of the godly, but of carnal men amongst Gods people;
Therefore his people return hither, that is, multitudes, even of those that
profess themselves the people of God, do turn to these men, that thus prosper
in the world, and side with them, and applaud them, and do as they do: and
then the meaning of the second clause, and waters of a full cup are wrung out
to them, they will have to be, that hereupon they have their share in the
plenty of these wicked great ones. But the first exposition is far the best.

Verse. 11. And they say, etc.] Some conceive that here the Psalmist returns to
set forth the impious language of those profane wretches, of whom he had spoken
before verse. 9. But rather they are the words of the people of God, whereinto
they were ready to break forth, when they stumbled at the prosperity of this
ungodly crew, as is expressed in the foregoing Note. And they say, How does God
know? and is there knowledge in the most High? see the Notes also Job 22.12,
13, 14.

Verse. 12. Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world, etc.] This
may be also taken as a continuance of the foregoing speech of Gods people,
stumbling at the prosperity of the wicked; and the like may be said of the two
following verses. But rather it is the Psalmist that does here again set forth
how himself was assaulted with this temptation; and then does afterward show
in the remainder of the Psalm how he got the mastery of it.

Verse. 13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, etc.] That is, I have in
vain labored through thine assistance to cleanse it; for otherwise who can
say, I have made my heart clean? Prove. 20.9. see 1 John 3.3. and 5.18: and
washed my hands in innocence; see the Note Psalm. 26.6.

Verse. 14. For all the day long have I been plagued, etc.] That is,
continually; and chastened every morning, that is, without delay, or day after
day; as sure as the morning rises every day, some distress or other is sure
to befall me. But see the Note Job 7.18.

Verse. 15. If I say, I will speak thus, behold, I should offend against the
generation of thy children.] Having said verse. 12. Behold, these are the
ungodly who prosper in the world, etc. here he inserts another behold, as in
opposition to that; Nay, says he, If I say I will speak thus, behold, I should
offend against the generation of thy children: to wit, either because they have
always acknowledged this truth, that God does often prosper the wicked, and
sorely afflict his own dear children; or because seeing it has always been
the portion of Gods children to be often in an afflicted condition, if I should
say that they only are happy that are in a prosperous condition for outward
things, I should deny them in effect to have been thy children, and should
charge them with folly in flattering themselves with vain hopes of thy love and
favor, and in binding themselves to such strict rules of righteousness, when
it was not like to be any advantage to them.

Verse. 16. When I thought to know this, etc.] That is, when I purposed and
endeavored to search it out by mine own reason, how it could stand with Gods
justice and holiness in his government of the world, that the righteous should
be so greatly distressed, and the worst of the wicked should so exceedingly
flourish; it was too painful for me, that is, I did afflict and weary my self
to find it out, and all in vain.

Verse. 17. Until I went into the Sanctuary of God.] That is, say some
Expositours, until in my meditations I ascended into Gods holy dwelling place
in heaven, and considered that there he had prepared a place of eternal rest
and bliss for his righteous servants, from whence the wicked should be surely
excluded. But I rather understand it thus, Until I searched Gods holy Word,
resolving to judge herein according to what he had revealed there; or, Until I
went into Gods holy Tabernacle, and by prayer desired the Lord to inform me
herein, and was there instructed by the teaching of his word in the assemblies
of his people, or by divine oracles there given by his priests.

Verse. 18. Surely thou did set them in slippery places, etc.] To wit, either
because in prosperity men are prone to fall into all kind of wickedness and
profaneness; or rather, because wicked men seldom continue long in their
prosperous estate, but are suddenly brought down and are utterly ruined; and
seem therefore here to be compared to men standing aloft on some slippery
pinnacle, from whence falling they must needs be dashed in pieces, as the
following words imply, thou castedst them down into destruction.

Verse. 19. They are utterly consumed with terrors.] To wit, wherewith they are
stricken, either by God immediately, see the Note Psalm. 53.5; or by the
strange, sudden and unexpected judgments of God upon them; or by the lashes of
their own guilty and accusing consciences.

Verse. 20. As a dream when one awaketh, etc.] That is, so are they, or, so
vanishes their prosperity; see the Note Job 20.8. Or rather we may understand
it thus, with relation to the following clause, As men awakened from a dream
despise their most pleasing dreams, as knowing them to have been mere fancies,
see Isa. 29.7, 8; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, that is, when thou risest up
as one awakened from sleep, to execute judgment on these men, thou shall
despise their image, that is, by destroying them thou shall make it manifest
both to themselves and others, that they were but as a vision of a dream; and
that the high conceits they had of their bliss, were but only the imaginations
of men that were lulled asleep with the pleasures of this life, and not
awakened to judge rightly of things: see the Note also Psalm. 39.6.

Verse. 21. Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.] That is,
inwardly afflicted; see the Notes Job 16.13, and 19.27. and Psalm. 7.9, and
16.7. Some understand it of his grief, because he had been so foolish and
brutish, as to stumble at the dispensations of God before spoken of. But it is
rather meant of his former vexing and fretting, when he envied the prosperity
of the wicked.

Verse. 22. So foolish was I and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.] That
is, in thy judgment, or in comparison of thee; or, when I come to judge by
mine own reason of thy ways and works, how wise soever I may seem to be in
humane affairs, yet in this I am no more able to comprehend thy wisdom, then
a beast is to comprehend the ways of men. And all this he says, because in
this temptation he had only minded present things.

Verse. 23. Nevertheless, I am continually with thee, etc.] Some understand
this of the Psalmists constant cleaving to God, his serving him and trusting on
him, even when he was assaulted with strong temptations to the contrary. But I
rather understand it of Gods fatherly care over him; I am continually with
thee; that is, in my greatest distress thou do not cast me off, yea
notwithstanding those foolish and brutish thoughts which I sometimes give way
to: thou have holden me by my right hand; to wit, that I might not be overborn
by this or any such like temptations, see also the Note Psalm. 16.8.

Verse. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, etc.] See the Note Psalm.
21.3: and afterward receive me to glory, that is, thou will exalt me to a
prosperous condition here, (for this is also included) and wilt afterward
receive me into thy heavenly glory.

Verse. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee.] That is, I have no other God in heaven, to trust on or
call upon; nor is there any creature upon earth, on whom I set my heart: thou
art my only hope and confidence, my joy and comfort and love and delight, thou
art all in all to me.

Verse. 26. My flesh and my heart fails, etc.] That is, say some Expositours,
with earnest longing after God; and indeed so the same expression is used Psalm.
84.3. But I rather understand it thus, My flesh and my heart fails, that is,
Being left to my self, I may be, and am often in great streights and danger,
brought so low, that my strength and heart may be in a manner overwhelmed with
trouble and sorrow, and in the judgment of men I may seem past all hope of
recovery. But God is the strength of my heart, in the Hebrew the rock of my
heart, see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.4: my supporter and comforter; see the Notes Psalm.
27.1. and 43.2: and my portion for ever; see the Note Psalm. 16.5.

Verse. 27. They that are far from thee shall perish, etc.] These words far from
thee imply an absolute forsaking God, to cleave to the creatures. The best of
Gods servants may sometimes grow strange to God, and may turn away from God by
doubting of his providence, and by stepping awry into some sinful ways: but
then they recover themselves again. But now when men do wholly withdraw
themselves from their obedience to God, to walk after their own lusts, and do
trust in and love any creature more then God, these may be said truly to be far
from God, and to go a whoring from God, and therefore are sure to perish; as
it follows in the next clause, thou have destroyed all them that go a whoring
from thee.

Verse. 28. But it is good for me to draw near to God, etc.] As if he had said,
Be the prosperity of the wicked never so great, let others do what they will,
I see it is best to cleave only to God, and to rest wholly upon him. I have put
my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works; to wit, because God
never fails to give them that trust in him abundant cause of praising him.

PSALM LXXIV.
The Title. MAschil of Asaph.] See the Notes on the Titles of the 32. and 50.
Psalms. Because it is clear that this Psalm sets forth the sad condition Gods
people were in, either when Jerusalem was taken and the Temple was burnt by the
Chaldeans, (which the mention that is here made verse. 6, 7. of destroying and
burning the Temple seems to imply) or when the Temple was at least defaced and
pillaged and profaned by Antiochus, 1 Mac. 1.21, etc. (which to many seems most
probable, because then they had no prophet amongst them, as is said here verse.
9. whereas at the Babylonian captivity they had diverse prophets;) either we
must say, that it was composed by some of the posterity of Asaph, or by some
other holy man of God that lived in those times, and that it was committed to
them who were singers in the Temple, or that, if it were made by David, or
Asaph himself, it was written as a prophecy of the great miseries that were in
future times to come upon the people of God.

Verse. 1. Why does thine anger smoke, etc.] See the Note Deuteronomy. 29.20: against
the sheep of thy pasture; that is, thine own people, for whom thou have
undertaken to provide as a shepherd for his flock, and have accordingly
disposed of them in a rich and fruitful soil, the land of Canaan.

Verse. 2. Remember thy congregation which thou have purchased of old, etc.] To
wit, ever since thou made a Covenant with Abraham and his seed; or, ever
since thou did deliver them from their bondage in Egypt, when they were first
reduced by thee into the form of a commonwealth, and had laws and a form of
government prescribed them, whereby they were to live under thy obedience as
thine own peculiar people: the rod of thine inheritance which thou have
redeemed; that is, thy people who are thy peculiar portion, or the land which
thou have given thy people, for their portion; for in that expression, the rod
of thine inheritance, he alludes to the custom of measuring out portions of
land by a pole or rod, as elsewhere to measuring by a line or cord, see the
Note Deuteronomy. 32.9, and Psalm. 16.6. Yet if we read it (as it is in the margin of
our Bibles) the tribe of thine inheritance, then I conceive that thereby is
meant the tribe of Judah, amongst whom God chose to dwell in a special manner;
which appears more plainly by the following words, this mount Sion, wherein
thou have dwelt; wherein also the people of God express this to be their
greatest grief, that the worship of God should be suppressed by their enemies.

Verse. 3. Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations, etc.] That is, Come
in speedily, and with cheerfulness and courage, to see and revenge the
desolations which the enemy has made, and which are like to be perpetual,
unless thou, Lord, art pleased to interpose thy self; or, come in to trample
and tread down the enemy, that has made such desolations amongst us. It is in
effect the same with that Psalm. 68.1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be
scattered, etc. Even all that the enemy has done wickedly in the Sanctuary;
that is, the Temple: yet some extend this also to their synagogues. What the
Chaldeans did in this regard, see in 2 Kings 25.9, etc. and what Antiochus
Epiphanes did, see 1 Mac. 1.21, etc. and 2 Mac. 6.1, 2, etc.

Verse. 4. Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations.] To wit, in the
Temple; it may be extended to their synagogues also. It is meant of the
clamours of the enemy, when they destroyed Gods people and his holy place; of
which likewise there is a like complaint Lam. 2.7. they have made a noise in
the house of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn feast.

They set up their ensigns for signs.] To wit, of their victory; glorying, in a
manner, as if they had vanquished the Lord Jehovah, whose house they destroyed.
And it may be also that these signs, which they set up of their conquest, are
covertly opposed to the ceremonial signs, whereby formerly God had testified
his presence there; as if they had said, In stead of the sacred signs of Gods
dwelling there, the enemy set up their signs in token that they had now subdued
that place.

Verse. 5. A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick
trees.] Diverse Expositours understand these words thus, That the more active
and industrious any man was in cutting down the timber and other wooden work of
the Temple, the more famous and highly esteemed he was amongst their enemies.
But because of that which is by way of opposition added in the following verse,
But now they break down, etc. our Translation will not so well bear this
exposition: but rather the meaning seems to be this, A man was famous according
as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees; that is, formerly men were
famous for contributing their help in a laborious way to the building of the
Temple, by cutting down trees that stood thick together in the woods, or the
greatest and best timber trees, and by hewing and squaring them for the
building after they were cut down.

Verse. 6. But now they break down the carved work thereof at once.] That is,
all the carved work of the Temple, not sparing any part thereof; or, they all
at once strive who shall be forwardest in this sacrilegious work. And very
observable it is which is noted by a learned Interpreter, to wit, that the
words in the original rendered in our Translation with axes and hammers, are
not properly Hebrew but Syriack words, purposely to hint thereby the time when
and the persons by whom this was done.

Verse. 7. They have cast fire into thy Sanctuary.] How this was done by the
Chaldeans is evident 2 Kings 25.9: and concerning the times when Antiochus
Epiphanes tyrannized over the Jews it is expressly said, that the gates of the
Temple were burnt with fire, 1 Mac. 4.38.. So that I see not why from this
place any should confidently conclude, as yet some have done, that this Psalm
cannot be understood of the desolations that were made by Antiochus, but of the
destruction of the Temple by the Babylonians.

Verse. 8. They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together, etc.] That
is, all their holy places, wherein they use to meet to worship God, according
to that which follows, they have burnt up all the synagogues of God in the
land, or rather, all the people of Israel, not sparing any. This was inwardly
the desire and purpose of their hearts, when they were pouring forth their rage
upon the people of God.

Verse. 9. We see not our signs, etc.] That is, the signs of Gods favorable
presence amongst us, as his own peculiar people, which formerly we enjoyed:
whereby may be meant, 1. the miracles that he had frequently wrought in former
times for their deliverance, and for the destruction of their enemies; which
indeed are often called signs and tokens in the Scripture, as Psalm. 78.43. he
wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan; and so also
Psalm. 135.9: and 2, their sacred ceremonies, which were signs of Gods dwelling
amongst them, and of all the covenant blessings which they enjoyed above other
nations, as the Ark, the Urim and Thummim, their sacrifices and sacraments and
sabbaths, and all other legal rites, which were also signs and shadows of good
things to come: and 3. the signs whereby the prophets were wont to shadow forth
the things which they foretold were to come to pass. And this some conceive is
added, as in opposition to what they had said before of their enemies verse. 4.
they set up their ensigns for signs; as if they had said, Whilst we daily see
the signs of our enemies subduing us, our signs, of Gods favorable presence
amongst us, we see not. And then it follows, there is no more any prophet,
neither is there among us any that knows how long: where by their not having
any prophet may be meant, that they had no ordinary teacher, to instruct and
comfort them in their great afflictions; and by their not having any that
knows how long may be meant, that they had none endued with an extraordinary
spirit of prophecy, that could inform them how long their troubles would
continue; according to that Lam. 2.9. the law is no more, her prophets also
find no vision from the Lord. Or else both clauses may intend the same thing,
to wit, that they had not, as formerly, any prophet amongst them. Now however
it be clear that thus it was with the Jews under the tyranny of Antiochus
Epiphanes, for which see 1 Maccab. 4.46; yet I see not why it may not be also
meant of the Babylonian captivity. For though Ezekiel and Daniel were prophets
amongst the Jews in Babylon, yet because it is evident that Ezekiel began not
to prophecy till the fifth year of Jehoiachins captivity, Ezekiel. 1.2, and that
we read not of his prophesying any longer then till the 25. year of that
captivity, Ezekiel. 40.1. or at the most till the 27. year, Ezekiel. 29.17: and for
Daniel, we read not that he taught the people as a prophet, and when and how
long he prophesied is very uncertain; it may well be that for a time, either
before or after the prophesying of Ezekiel and Daniel, they were in Babylon
without any prophet at all amongst them.

Verse. 12. For God is my king of old, working salvation in the midst of the
earth.] That is, openly in the view of all men all the world over. And hereby
the Church encourages her self in that prayer in the foregoing verse, that God
would pluck his right hand out of his bosom to destroy her enemies; namely,
because God was her king (however now for a time he afflicted her, and seemed
to withdraw himself from her) and so had been of old (see the Note above verse.
2.) and because all the salvation, that had been ever wrought for any upon the
face of the earth, was his work; and the same therefore he could do for his
people again. See also the Note Psalm. 44.4.

Verse. 13. Thou did divide the sea by thy strength; thou brakest the heads of
the dragons in the waters.] That is, Thou have destroyed Pharaoh, his Nobles
and army: who are termed Sea-dragons or Crocodiles, in allusion either 1. to
the cruelty of the Egyptians in slaying the male-children of the Israelites; or
2. to their pursuing them through the red sea; or 3. to the situation of Egypt,
that lay close upon the sea, and was besides plentifully watered with that
great river Nilus, wherein there were many Crocodiles and Sea-dragons, as is
evident by a like expression which the prophet Ezekiel uses concerning
Pharaoh, Ezekiel. 29.3. Thus says the Lord God, Behold I am against thee, Pharaoh
king of Egypt, the great dragon that lies in the midst of his rivers.

Verse. 14. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, etc.] That is, of
Pharaoh; see Isa. 27.1, and 51.9. But why are there many heads here ascribed to
Leviathan? I answer, either 1. thereby the better to represent the
dreadfulnesse of this adversary of Gods people, by setting him forth not as an
ordinary whale, but as some many-headed monster, or as a Sea Monster, that had
a head as big as many heads, as the Elephant is for this cause called
Behemoth, that is, Beasts, see the Note Job 40.15; or, 2. to express hereby
the destruction of Pharaohs Princes and Captains together with himself, and
that either by tearming them the heads of Pharaoh, or by speaking of them as of
so many several Leviathans, Thou brakest the heads of the Leviathans, that is,
of every one of those Sea Monsters, Pharaoh and all his great ones with him.
And gave him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness; of which
expression there are several expositions given by Interpreters: as 1. that
being drowned in the red sea, and so made meat for the fish therein, they
hereby became meat also for the people inhabiting the adjacent wilderness,
that lived much upon the fish of that sea; or 2. that their dead carcases being
cast upon the shore, (as is expressed Exodus 14.30.) became meat for the birds
and beasts of prey that were in the forementioned wilderness, who are called
here the people inhabiting the wilderness, as elsewhere the ants are called a
people not strong, and the conies a feeble folk, Pro. 30.25, 26. and the
locusts a strong nation, Joel. 1.6. and indeed this exposition I conceive very
probable; or 3. that the Israelites being gotten safe over the red sea, or the
nations that dwelt in the wilderness there, did even glut and satiate
themselves with the spoil of their dead carcases, and did long after live upon
the wealth which they got by that means.

Verse. 15. Thou did cleave the fountain and the flood, etc.] Some understand
this of Gods causing fountains and rivers to break forth out of the earth in
several places, for the watering of the ground. But rather it is meant of Gods
miraculous cleaving the rocks in the wilderness, that springs and rivers of
water might thence break forth for the use of Gods people there, Exodus 17.6.
Numb. 20.11. And so likewise the following clause, thou driedst up mighty
rivers, some understand of the ordinary drying up of rivers, when God is so
pleased: but rather it is meant of Gods dividing Jordan before the Israelites;
wherein it is said that he dried up mighty rivers in the plural number, either
because many rivers did run into Jordan, or rather because Jordan had at that
time overflowed all her banks, and so became as it were many several rivers.

Verse. 19. The day is thine, the night also is thine, etc.] To wit, as being
created and governed by thee, and that for thine own service: thou have
prepared the light and the Sun; where by the light is meant either the light
wherewith the night is enlightened (which was last named in the foregoing
clause) to wit, the moon and stars; or else rather that light which God did
create the first day, Genesis 1.3. and which afterward he placed in the Sun,
verse. 13.

Verse. 17. Thou have set all the borders of the earth.] That is, Thou have
created and established the whole world, even to the utmost bounds thereof,
East, West, North and South; or, thou have appointed how far the earth should
extend, which is prepared for the habitation of man, the bounds whereof were so
estalished, that the raging seas could not break through them; or, by the
borders of the earth may be meant the bounds and borders that God has set
severally to divide one kingdom and country from another, and to allot each
nation the limits of their dominion and habitation. However that which the
Church would hereby imply, is, that if God were so careful for the world, they
hoped he would be much more careful for his own peculiar people, and would not
suffer strange nations to break through the borders of that land, which he had
allotted them for their dwelling.

Verse. 18. Remember this, etc.] As if they had said, Though thou passest by
other things, yet let not this be forgotten, to wit, this which follows in the
next words; that the enemy has reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish
people, that is, a base, worthless, wicked people, have blasphemed thy name.

Verse. 19. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the multitude of the
wicked.] That is, the life of thy Spouse, thy turtle-dove: for the Church is
here compared to a turtle (as elsewhere to a dove, see the Note Psalm. 55.6.)
because it is the least and the most mournful of all doves, and most constant
to her mate. And this (say some Expositours) suits better with the condition of
Gods people, when Antiochus made war against them, than when they were
captives in Babylon, because then they were already delivered up into the power
of their enemies.

Verse. 20. Have respect unto the Covenant, etc.] To wit, whereby thou have
engaged thy self that this land should be given to our fathers, and us their
posterity, that thou would protect us and bless us therein, and that if for
our sins we were driven from thence, thou would upon our repentance bring us
back again from the utmost coasts of the earth, Deuteronomy. 30.3, 4: for the dark
places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty; that is, in those
countries where the people enjoy not the light of thy word, and so live without
the knowledge of thee the true God, (such as Babylon was, wherein the Jews were
held in captivity) there reigns nothing but cruelty and oppression, every
house is a den as it were of beasts of prey, full of robbers and murderers,
and in every house they cruelly oppress thy poor people: Or else thus, In
those lands which lie under the darkness of such sore afflictions as ours does
now, being invaded by a barbarous people, and where God hides himself from his
people, and so their enemies apprehend that they may as in secret commit what
wickedness they please, all places are filled with the cruelty of bloody
enemies.

Verse. 22. Arise, O God, plead thine own cause.] The ground of this expression
is either, because in any wrong done to Gods people, God was chiefly injured,
especially when they were persecuted for Gods sake; or, because the enemy did
not only oppress them, but also blaspheme the name of God; or else because the
maintaining Gods worship amongst them was the chief thing they desired, and
that happily by bringing them again into their own land.

PSALM LXXV.
Verse. 1. UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks, etc.] Some conceive that this
Psalm was composed by David, either when the Jebusites were to be subdued that
held the fort of Sion, 2 Samuel 5.6. or when upon Joabs slaying Abner, that
design of Abners bringing in the tribes of Israel to submit to David was like
to be hindered, and the kingdom was in danger thereupon to be involved again
in a bloody war; and others conceive that it was composed by Asaph, or some
other holy man of God, in the time of the Babylonian captivity. And accordingly
these first words may be understood, either as the words of the people, or of
David and the people jointly together, wherein they resolve to praise God even
in the saddest times, as being assured of Gods readnesse to help them; which is
expressed in the next words, for that thy name is near, that is, that thou art
near at hand to help thy people, thy wondrous works declare; and this may be
meant, as we may differently conceive of the persons here speaking, either of
the works of God in general, whereby God had in all ages manifested his care
over his people; or more particularly of those wonderful works which God had
already wrought in bringing David to the Crown.

Verse. 2. When I shall receive the congregation, I will judge uprightly.] Many
learned Expositours hold, that in these words God answers his people, and that
the meaning thereof is as if he had said, When I shall gather my Church and
people together again, and shall again receive them into my favor and care,
whom for the present I have seemed to cast off, and to deliver them up to the
will and power of their enemies, I will then judge justly betwixt them and
their enemies, or I will then set all in order that is now out of frame. But
because the following part of the Psalm seems clearly to be the words of the
Psalmist, as is most evident verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, therefore I conceive so also of
this verse, namely that David here speaks, yet perhaps, as elsewhere, in the
person of Christ; When I shall receive the congregation, that is, say some,
When I shall have gotten mount Sion on of the hands of the Jebusites, which is
the place appointed of God for the solemn meetings of the congregation of his
people, and is therefore called Isa. 14.13. the mount of the congregation; or
rather, When the people shall submit themselves generally to me, then I shall
judge uprightly: as if he had said, Hitherto a great part of the tribes of
Israel have refused to submit to my government, and so the kingdom has been
wasted with civil wars; but when once the whole congregation of the twelve
tribes shall come in and submit to me, then I will govern them with all
possible justice: which also implies a prayer secretly made to God, that he
would bring in the people to stoop to his government. And if we take it, as
some do, as spoken in the person of Christ, then it must be understood of the
justice of his governing the Church gathered into him by the preaching of the
Gospel. And so likewise if we read the words according to the translation in
the margin, When I shall take a set time, I will judge uprightly, it may be
understood, either as spoken by God, or by Christ, to wit, that when the fit
season, already set and appointed by Gods decree, should come, he would then
take the opportunity to punish his peoples enemies; or else as spoken by David,
that when the time appointed of God should come for his being settled in the
throne, he would then govern them, as became a good king, with all justice and
equity.

Verse. 3. The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved; I bear up
the pillars of it, etc.] According to the different exposition of the former
verse, this also may be understood, either 1. as spoken by God to his people:
All things indeed are in a manner ruined and broken to pieces; but were the
whole frame of the world dissolved and melted, or put quite out of frame, I by
mine almighty power am able to repair it, and support it again. And herein
there seems to be an allusion to the Lords bearing up the earth in the place
wherein he has settled it from the first creation: to wit, that as now God
bears up the earth hanging in the midst of the air, and standing as it were in
the midst of the seas, as firmly as it it were born up by pillars, and does not
suffer it to molder away, though the very waters, that pass continually
through it, one would think in reason should be enough to dissolve it; so if
the whole world were shattered in sunder, God were able to renew it again and
bear it up; and accordingly, though his people were in never so broken a
condition, God was able to set all right again. Or 2. as spoken by David: The
earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved; as if he had said, By the
ill government of Saul, by reason of judgments that God has brought upon the
land, and by the civil wars that have been of late amongst us, the whole
kingdom and commonwealth of Israel is in a manner cracked in pieces, and in
danger to be utterly ruined: I bear up the pillars of it; that is, I endeavor
to support this poor land and people in this their tottering estate, to wit, by
settling good magistrates amongst them, by maintaining religion and justice,
which are the great supporters of every state, and by supporting the righteous,
for whose sake and by whose means, not only kingdoms and commonwealths, but
even the world it self is continued. And then again if we take the words as
spoken by David in the person of Christ, the drift of them then is, that though
by sin the whole world was ruined, yet by Christ all things were repaired and
recovered, and set in good order again.

Verse. 4. I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly, etc.] Almost all
Expositours ^gree that these are the words of the Psalmist, importing either
that upon consideration of that which is said of God in the foregoing verses,
concerning his judging the wicked, and defending his righteous servants, he had
always said within himself, as deriding the pride of such ungodly wretches,
that they were but fools to fight against God, as they did, and happily had
expressly said thus to them, as dissuading them from this folly; or else (if we
take David to be the penner of the Psalm) that as he promised to judge
uprightly for the time to come, being once settled in the throne, so he had
always already endeavored to suppress the insolences of foolish men against
God, and against his righteous servants, and had declared how foolish a thing
it would prove to oppose the government which God had settled in him: and to
the wicked, lift not up the horn; that is, carry not your selves proudly and
insolently in the confidence of your great power, persecuting and oppressing
Gods people.

Verse. 5. Speak not with a stiff neck.] That is, Talk not so proudly and
loftily and peremptorily as you do, as if you would wrestle and fight against
God, and as men do that can by no means be brought to yield and to give over
any resolution they have taken up. He alludes either to stubborn cattle, that
will not stoop to or draw in the yoke; or to the garb of proud persons, whose
necks will even swell with anger and wrath, and who are wont to go with stiff
erected necks.

Verse. 6. For promotion comes neither from the East, etc.] As if he had said,
This is a commodity that is to be procured from no country in the world. But
however the meaning is, that whereas for the helping and advancing of
themselves men are wont to look this way and that way, to their several allies
and friends, and the neighboring nations round about them, all this is to no
purpose; and that because it is God alone that raises up and casts down whom
he pleases, and there is none in the whole world that does it but he. And the
drift of these words may be to imply, either 1. that, seeing therefore it was
God that advanced him to the throne, it would be madness in his enemies to
resist him; or 2. that if God did set himself once to ruin the wicked, no
power on earth could support them; or 3. that since all promotion comes from
God, great ones ought not to use it to serve their lusts, but for Gods glory
and his Churches good.

Verse. 8. For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, etc.] Many Expositours
hold, that this is added by way of answering an objection that might be made
against that which is before said, concerning the righteousness of the Lord in
judging wicked men: for if it be so, might some say, how comes it then to
pass, that usually the righteous are so sorely afflicted? to which in this
verse it is answered; that though outward calamities here befall both good and
bad, yet the wrath that is reserved for the portion of the wicked is far more
terrible, then that which the righteous suffer: for in the hand of the Lord
there is a cup, etc. that is, God has judgments always ready at hand, which
he distributes, as he pleases, amongst the children of men, see the Notes
Psalm. 11.6. and 60.3. and Job 21.20. and the wine is red; and so strong and
heady. The ground of this expression is, because the wine of Judea was for the
most part red; and is therefore called Deuteronomy. 32.14. the pure blood of the
grape; and the redder their wines were, of the greater strength and the more
violent operation they were. But however the meaning is, that the judgments
which God has in a readiness are sore and heavy, and such as will soon
destroy men. And the same is also employed in the following words, it is full of
mixture: for though some take those words to be no other in sense then as if he
had said, the cup is full of wine made ready to drink, to wit, by mingling it
with water, according to that Prove. 9.5. Come, eat of my bread, and drink of
the wine which I have mingled; and indeed in reference to that custom of
allaying their wine with water, pure wrath is elsewhere termed wine without
mixture, Revel. 14.10; yet here, because it is joined with the redness of the
wine, I rather conceive the meaning to be, that the wine in the Lords cup was
mingled with spices, to make it the stronger, and the apter to intoxicate those
that drank it, (whence it is that we read of spiced wine Cant. 8.2, and Isa.
5.22. drunkards are termed men of strength to mingle strong drink,) yea
perhaps that it was mingled with gall, and poison, such things as might make it
bitter and deadly to those that should drink of it; and that this is added to
imply both the soreness and variety of judgments that God has always in a
readiness, and that when he begins to punish ungodly men, he does usually
bring many several judgments together upon them. And he pours out of the
same; but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out,
and drink them: that is, he makes all, both good and bad, to drink of this cup
of his indignation, though indeed to the good it is but as a physical potion;
yea and this cup comes soonest to them from the hand of the Lord, that are
nearest to him, judgment must begin at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4.17. he
afflicts all promiscuously: but then the wicked shall at last, will they, nil
they, drink the dregs even to the last drop, that is, the sorest judgments
shall be their portion, especially at the day of judgment, when they shall be
cast into hell, and punished there with insufferable torments unto all eternity.

Verse. 10. All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off, etc.] That is, I
will suppress them, or bereave them of their great power: but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted; see the Note 1 Samuel 2.1. And this the Psalmist
adds, in confidence that God would be aiding to his servants against their
wicked enemies, as he had always formerly been.

PSALM LXXVI.
Verse 1. IN Judah is God known, etc.] To wit, Not by his word only, but also
(which is chiefly here intended) by the miraculous works he has wrought
amongst them; whereby it was clearly manifested not to them only, but even to
all the world, that the God of Israel was the only true almighty God, as is
employed in the following words, his name is great in Israel; concerning which
see also the the Notes Psalm. 48.1, 2, 3, etc. a Psalm that is for the matter of
it much like to this.

Verse. 2. In Salem also is his tabernacle, etc.] See the Note Genesis 14.18: and
his dewlling place in Sion; as if he had said, and therefore no wonder though
he be better known there then elsewhere, and though he have shown great wonders
against his enemies there, that have sought to drive him out of that his
dewlling place.

Verse. 3. There brake he the arrows of the bow, etc.] That is, He took from the
enemy all power of using them against his people, and the meaning is, he
utterly destroyed them; see the Notes 1 Samuel 2.4. and Psalm. 46.9: the shield
and the sword and the battle; that is, and all other weapons and provisions of
war; or the battel-array, or army of soldiers. And because most Expositours
conceive that this Psalm was penned upon occasion of that miraculous
destruction of the Assyrians, that had besieged Jerusalem in Hezekiahs days,
therefore they conceive also that in these words there may be an allusion to
that which the prophet Isaiah then said, 2 Kings 19.32. He shall not come into
this city, nor shoot an arrow there, etc.

Verse. 4. Thou art more glorious and excellent, etc.] To wit, for power and
prowess, then the mountains of prey, that is, then the robbers in the
mountains; or, then the Assyrians, that coming to besiege Jerusalem did pitch
their tents upon the mountains round about her; or rather, then all the great
kingdoms of the world, which because they are usually gotten by violence, and
do exalt and enrich themselves by spoiling the neighboring nations round about
them, are therefore compared to mountains, that harbor ravening wild beasts,
that live wholly upon prey.

Verse. 5. The stout-hearted are spoiled, etc.] That is, say some, they are
bereaved of all wisdom and prowess; see the Note Job 12.17: they have slept
their sleep; that is, through astonishment and fear they were as men asleep,
not able to move a hand in their own defense; which is expressed more clearly
in the following words, and none of the men of might have found their hands.
But I rather understand it thus, that the proud enemies being slain, were
stripped and spoiled of all they had about them; and thence it is added, they
have slept their sleep, that is, the sleep of death, as it is called Psalm.
13.3. And because God smote the Assyrians by night, 2 Kin. 19.35. there may be
in these words an allusion thereto; as if it had been said, They were smitten
sleeping, and so that sleep of theirs proved an eternal sleep, according to
that Jer. 51.39. I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not awake: And none of the men of might have found their
hands; that is, they were as men without hands, their hands being of no use to
resist the stroke of an angel.

Verse. 8. Thou did cause judgment to be heard from heaven, etc.] To wit, say
some Expositours, by terrible tempests of thunder and lightening, etc. whereby
thou did execute judgment upon thine enemies: and accordingly they also
expound the following words, the earth feared, and was still; that is, the
earth was shaken with an earthquake, and all things were still, the wild beasts
betaking themselves straightway to their dens; or, the inhabitants of the earth
trembled, so that the boldest of the wicked durst not then stir or mutter
against God. But I rather conceive the meaning of the words to be this, that
the vengeance executed upon the enemies of God was such, (and we may
particularly apply it to that of the slaying the Assyrians) and withal so
dreadful and terrible, that it was as manifest that it was from the God of
heaven, as if God had by an audible voice from heaven, terrible as thunder,
given sentence of judgment against them, that such and such judgments should
be executed upon them; and that hereupon the earth feared, and was still, the
nations round about them were still, as men amazed, not daring to plot or act
any thing farther against the people of God.

Verse. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, etc.] To wit, because 1.
the greater their wrath against thy people is, and the farther they proceed,
and the more they prosper therein, the more shall thy wisdom and power be
magnified in destroying them, and delivering thy people, and in causing all
things to work together in the conclusion for their good: and 2. not only thy
people shall hereupon praise thee, but others likewise that shall observe this;
yea thine enemies themselves shall acknowledge, that they are vanquished and
broken by thine almighty power, and that thou art righteous in all thy
judgments upon them. The remainder of wrath shall thou restrain; that is,
those that are left alive of thy wrathful enemies will thou curb and restrain;
or rather thus, those that have still any malice against thy people, either
thou will not suffer their wrath to be so great as formerly, or if they go
about to recruit their forces, and to set again upon thy people, thou will set
such bounds to their wrath, that they shall not accomplish their desire, nor
shall proceed farther then shall be for thy glory and thy peoples good.

Verse. 11. Let all that be round about him bring presents to him that ought to
be feared.] Or, to fear, as it is in the original; for which see the Note Genesis
31.42. And by those that be round about him, he means, either 1. the Priests
and Levites; or 2. the people of God, who only enjoyed this privilege and
favor of drawing near unto him to worship him, and call upon him (and in this
expression he may seem to allude to the Israelites encamping round about the
tabernacle whilst they were in the wilderness;) or 3. the nations round about,
who being indeed convinced by this miraculous judgment of God upon the
Assyrians, did thereupon bring gifts unto the Lord to Jerusalem, and presents
to Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.23.

Verse. 12. He shall cut off the spirit of Princes.] That is, their lives, or
their understanding and courage.

PSALM LXXVII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician, to Ieduthun, etc.] See the Note on the Title
Psalm. 39. And because this clause shows, as is there noted, that this Psalm was
committed to the posterity of Jeduthun, to be sung by them, this makes it most
probable, that the following words in the original, that are in the Title of
many other Psalms* should rather be translated, as they are in our Bibles, A
Psalm of Asaph, then A Psalm for Asaph; because it is hard to conceive why it
should be said, that this Psalm was intended both for Jeduthuns Quire and
Asaphs too.

Verse. 1. I cried unto God with my voice, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 3.4; even
unto God with my voice, and he gave ear unto me. All which may be understood
either of that distress whereof the Psalmist speaks in the sequel of the
Psalm, the event whereof he shows here at first; to wit, that persevering in
prayer he at last got the day, that so others might learn to do the like in
the like conflicts: or else of Gods hearing him in former troubles; and so
hereby he seeks to strengthen his faith, that as God had heard him formerly, so
he would again.

Verse. 2. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, etc.] Here the Psalmist
shows the sad conflict he had within himself for a time, to wit, that at first
this course of praying to God seemed to do him no good at all: In the day of
my trouble I sought the Lord, that is, when I was in grievous distress, not
outward only, but inward too, my soul, because of my afflictions, apprehending
that Gods wrath did lie upon me, and that God had utterly forsaken me: my sore
ran in the night, and ceased not; that is, I could find no help nor ease of my
misery, my sorrow seemed incurable. The Hebrew words may be indeed interpreted,
as in the margin, my hand flowed, or was poured forth, and ceased not; which
may be a vehement figurative expression, like that Psalm. 62.8. of pouring forth
the heart before God, and may signify, either 1. that his strength did
continually wast away; or 2. that his hands did continually drop with tears,
which distilled down from his eyes upon his hands held up in prayer, or by
frequent wiping his eyes; or 3. that he continually stretched forth his hands
to God in prayer. But I rather conceive, that to express how hopeless and
helpless his condition was, he compares his misery or grief to a wound that
bleeds and cannot be staunched, or to a sore that runs continually and cannot
be healed; my sore ran in the night, and ceased not: my soul refused to be
comforted; that is, though I prayed unto the Lord, yet that yielded me no
comfort, because still my misery continued so grievous upon me; my soul was so
imbittered hereby, and I became so wayward and heartlesse, that nothing would
yield me any joy or comfort.

Verse. 3. I remembered God, and was troubled, etc.] That is, I thought of
seeking help from God, and so prayed unto him, and yet my trouble still
continued, or rather increased, as being thereby confirmed that God was angry
with me, because he regarded not my prayers; or thus, I sought to comfort my
self by thinking of God, his goodness and mercy, and faithfulness in making
good his promises, and the experience I formerly had of his gracious dealing
with me; but all this yielded me no ease, because my miseries still terrified
me with apprehensions of his wrath, and of his proceeding in a way of severe
justice against me. I complained, that is, I made my complaints to God; and my
spirit was overwhelmed.

Verse. 4. Thou hold mine eyes waking, etc.] To wit, by my continual
miseries and disquieting thoughts; or by thine immediate providence withholding
rest from me, which alone does usually ease a grieved mind: I am so troubled,
that I cannot speak; see the Notes Job 2.13, and 3.1.

Verse. 5. I have considered the days of old, etc.] That is, as hoping to
comfort and encourage my self thereby, I meditated on thy former mercies, both
to thy people in general, and to my self in particular. But yet because the
Psalmist is still relating his temptation, I conceive that his intention is to
imply, that even this tended to the increase of his sorrows, whilst he weighed
how far otherwise it was with him at present, then it had been in former times.

Verse. 6. I call to remembrance my song in the night, etc.] That is, In the
night, as I lie musing by my self, I call to mind thy former favors, for which
I have praised thee with a song; or, I call to remembrance thy former mercies,
whereby I was stirred up to sing praises to thee, not by day only, but even by
night also: see the Notes Job 35.10. and Psalm. 42.8. I commune with mine own
heart, and my spirit made diligent search, to wit, as enquiring what the cause
was why the Lord did so sorely afflict me, and what the issue thereof was like
to be; whether there would ever be an end of my troubles, and what means were
to be used to bring it to pass; or whether it were likely that God had cast me
off for ever, as he expresses his thoughts in the following verses.

Verse. 7. Will the Lord cast off for ever, etc.?] This the Psalmist speaks, as
struggling against his temptation; as if he had said, These things Satan and
mine own corrupt heart do suggest to me; but sure it cannot be so.

Verse. 10. And I said, This is mine infirmity, etc.] That is, it is but the
weakness of my faith, and the feebleness of my spirit, thus to doubt of Gods
goodness and faithfulness to his servants: but I will remember the years of
the right hand of the most High; that is, the great works which by his almighty
power he has in all ages wrought for the deliverance of his people. Though the
remembrance of these things has not hitherto prevailed over my doubts and
fears, yet doubtless when I have seriously laid them to heart, they will at
length prevail to strengthen my faith and hope in God.

Verse. 11. I will remember the works of the Lord, etc.] That is, Though at
first this does not appease my spirit, yet I will still and still meditate on
the great things God has done for his people, as being abundantly sufficient
to comfort me in my sorrows: surely I will remember thy wonders of old; see the
Note Psalm. 25.6. And hereby he intimates, that as we use not to question the
love of an old friend, that has been many years faithful to us; so it would
be very injurious to question Gods goodness and faithfulness to his servants,
which had been approved by experience of many generations, in that however he
has afflicted them for a time, yet at last he has always wrought wonderfully
for them.

Verse. 13. Thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary.] That is, in the Temple, or in
the Heaven. However the meaning is, that the works of God are hidden from the
eyes of the world, as the holy things of the Temple might not be seen by men;
or, which is all one in effect, that the works of God are above the reach of
humane reason, as those things in the heaven are only to be discovered by
faith, see the Note Psalm. 36.5. Yet some do otherwise understand this
expression, as namely that the proceedings of Gods providence amongst his
people might be known in the Sanctuary, according to that Psalm. 73.16, 17:
concerning which see the Note there.

Verse. 15. Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people, etc.] To wit, after
thou had suffered them to be in bondage in Egypt for many years together, as
if thou had meant to cast them off for ever; for this seems to be alleged to
discover his acknowledged weakness in those thoughts of his before mentioned
verse. 7, 8, 9: the sons of Jacob and Joseph; that is, all the tribes of Israel.
But though some conceive that all the tribes are here called the sons of
Joseph, because they were all nourished by Joseph as a father; yet I rather
conceive that by the sons of Joseph are only meant the tribes of Ephraim and
Manasseh: and that they are severally mentioned, either by way of honor to
Joseph, by whose means the whole posterity of Abraham was preserved; or out of
respect to the future numerousnesse and dignity of the tribe of Ephraim, by
whose name the whole kingdom of the ten tribes was afterward called; or
rather, because the sons of Joseph were born in Egypt, which the other sons of
Jacob were not, and yet their posterity, and that as two distinct tribes, were
delivered out of Egypt together with the rest.

Verse. 16. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee; they were afraid,
etc.] That is, At thy presence they flew back and were divided: the depths also
were troubled; that is, even the deep sea was divided to the very bottom.

Verse. 17. The clouds poured out water, etc.] See the Note Exodus 14.24: thine
arrows also went abroad; see the Note 2 Samuel 22.15.

Verse. 19. Thy way is in the sea, etc.] That is, Thou can make a way for thy
people through the greatest dangers, as appeared by thy leading the Israelites
through the red sea: and thy footsteps are not known; that is, thy ways in
the government of thy Church are not to be discovered by humane reason, as that
way through the red sea was a way which no man could have thought of or found
out: when God had carried his people that way, there was no following by the
track that they left behind them, in regard the waters presently returned, and
covered the ground again, so that when the Egyptians would have followed them,
they could not pass through.

Verse. 20. Thou leddest thy people like a flock, etc.] That is, with all
possible tenderness, love and unwearied providence. And by saying that God led
them like a flock, he implies also, that it was not by their own arms or
strength or wisdom that they were protected from dangers as they went, but
merely by the watchful care of God over them. By the hand of Moses and Aaron,
mean and obscure and contemptible men, no way likely by so high a hand to have
carried the people of God out of the dominions of such a potent prince as
Pharaoh was.

PSALM LXXVIII.
Verse. 1. GIve ear, O my people, to my law, etc.] That is, to my doctrine,
which from God I shall deliver to you, and which must therefore be as a law to
you for the ordering of your lives; see the Note Psalm. 1.2: and so the Apostle
calls the Gospel which he preached, his Gospel, Romans 2.16. As for those words,
O my people, if we look upon this Psalm as composed by David, it is no wonder
that he should call the Israelites his people, he being their king: and if
Asaph, or any other holy man of God, composed it, he might term them his
people, either as being his countrymen, as Jeremy does Jer. 9.2. or as being
called of God to be their teacher. What may be probably thought concerning the
time when this Psalm was composed, see in the folloing Notes, verse. 9.

Verse. 2. I will open my mouth in a parable; I will utter dark sayings of old.]
By the opening of the mouth in Scripture is usually meant a beginning to speak;
or else to speak after some deliberation, sincerely, and plainly, and freely.
And some conceive that the relating and applying of ancient histories is here
called parables and dark sayings, either because (as the Apostle says 1 Cor.
10.11.) all these things happened unto them for types, etc; or because there
are many holy instructions covertly couched under these examples; or because
the providence that are here related in Gods continued goodness to such a
stiff-necked people as Israel was, must needs be riddles to humane reason. But
for this see the Notes Numb. 23.7. and Psalm. 49.4. In Matthew. 13.35. we find
this place alleged by the Evangelist, who says, that Christ taught the people
in parables, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
saying, I will open my mouth in parables, etc. But the drift of those words was
not to signify, that the Psalmist did herein prophesy concerning the manner of
Christ's teaching; his meaning is only this, that in regard of Christ's teaching
by parables, that might be well said of Christ, which the Psalmist here speaks
of himself: only these words here, dark sayings of old, the Evangelist renders,
things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world, because
Christ indeed taught mysteries, which from the creation till then had not been
so distinctly revealed.

Verse. 5. For he established a Testimony in Jacob, etc.] This may be meant of
the law in general, both ceremonial and moral, together with the promises
annexed, which they were bound to teach their children, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and was
indeed a testimony of Gods delivering them out of Egypt, and the covenant which
thereupon he made with them as his peculiar people, see the Note Exodus 25.16;
and likewise more particularly of that particular charge, that they should
teach their children successively the great works that God had done for them,
Deuteronomy. 4.9.

Verse. 8. And might not be as their fathers, etc.] To wit, As men are naturally
prone to be; a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was
not steadfast with God: that is, that set not their hearts sincerely and
constantly to trust in God, and to do that which was right in his eyes.

Verse. 9. The children of Ephraim, being armed and carrying bows, turned back
in the day of battle.] That is, being a warlike people, and well provided for
arms, yet they fled before their enemies; which was an evident sign that Gods
hand was against them. Some understand this of that slaughter of the sons of
Ephraim 1 Chronicles. 7.21. whilst they were yet in Egypt. But because the Psalmists
intent is clearly, not to set forth the wickedness of one tribe only, but of
all the Israelites, therefore by Ephraim here, I conceive, is meant, either the
people of Israel in general, and that they are called Ephraim, because that
was the most numerous and potent of all the tribes of Israel; or the kingdom
of the ten tribes, which is usually in the prophets called Ephraim, both for
the reason before given, and also because the chief city of that kingdom was
in that tribe, and Jeroboam, that was the chief promoter of that great apostasy
from the house of David, was also of Ephraim. And accordingly if we understand
it of any one particular overthrow, either it must be meant of that great ruin
of the kingdom of the ten tribes by the Assyrians, 2 Kings 17.5, 6. (and then
indeed they might the rather here be called Ephraim, because that Idolatry
which Jeroboam brought in, and which made them unworthy of the name of Israel,
was a main cause of that destruction;) or else of that discomfiture of the
Israelites by the Philistines, when the Ark was taken, 1 Samuel 4.10. And this
indeed many learned Expositours do the rather think, 1. because Shiloh, where
this overthrow was given them, was in the tribe of Ephraim, and so probably the
army of Israel might chiefly be gathered out of that tribe; and 2. because it
seems by the later part of the Psalm, that the drift of the Psalmist herein is
to set forth how Shiloh was rejected, and Sion the city of David was chosen to
be Gods dewlling place in stead thereof: and so hence it is that first here he
shows how God was offended with the Israelites for their sins at that time,
when the Ark was taken from Ephraim; and then, to aggravate their sins, in that
the great works that God had formerly wrought for their fathers, were no better
remembered by them, and improved to make them careful to please God, he makes a
large recital of those wonders which God had done for them; and so in the
close of the Psalm he returns again to show, how God in his displeasure removed
the Ark from Ephraim, and in favor to David removed it to Sion in the tribe of
Judah.

Verse. 12. Mavelous things did he in the sight of their fathers, in the land
of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.] That is, in the country of Zoan, a chief city
in Egypt; see Numb. 13.22, and Isa. 30.2, 3, 4. the same that was also called
Tanais.

Verse. 14. In the daytime also he led them with a cloud.] See the Note Exodus
13.21. This figured Christ's guiding his Church, till he has brought them to
their heavenly inheritance; and thence it is that Paul makes this cloud a
representation of Baptism, 1 Cor. 10.2. and they were all baptized unto Moses
in the cloud and in the sea.

Verse. 15. He clave the rocks in the wilderness, etc.] The word rocks in the
plural number implies, that this was done twice; see the Notes Exodus 17.6, and
Numb. 20.11. As before he clave or divided the sea, so now with as much ease he
clave the rocks; and as before he made the waters to stand on heaps like rocks,
so now he made the rocks to dissolve as it were into water. And gave them drink
as out of the great depth; that is, in great plenty; see the Notes Exodus 17.6.

Verse. 17. And they sinned yet more against him, etc.] To wit, even after God
had wrought such wonders for them: by provoking the most High in the
wilderness; to wit, when their late deliverance out of Egypt was yet fresh in
memory, where they had many miraculous signs of Gods presence amongst them
continually in their eye, and where their daily dangers and wants might well
have made them afraid to provoke God.

Verse. 18. And they tempted God in their heart, etc.] See the Note Exodus 17.2:
by asking meat for their lust; see the Note Numb. 11.4. for of that murmuring
the Psalmist seems to speak here, their first crying for meat Exodus 16.3. being
before the first fetching water out of a rock, which this was not, as is clear
verse. 20. Behold, he smote the rock, etc.

Verse. 19. They said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?] That is, Can
he provide us meat, yea variety and delicacies, as we had in Egypt?

Verse. 20. Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, etc.] It is
not necessary we should conceive that the Israelites spoke these words; but
that the Psalmists drift is to imply, that their murmuring for flesh was all
one in effect, as if they had thus said. And that which is here charged upon
them may either be, that they questioned the will of God, Behold, he smote the
rock, etc. can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? as if
they had said, He that brought water out of the rock, might he not also, if he
would, if he loved us and took care of us, give us bread and flesh likewise to
eat? or else that they questioned the power of God, Behold, he smote the rock,
that the waters gushed out; as if they had said, This is not so great a matter,
since water does naturally in many places flow out of rocks: but can he give
bread also? that is, bread-corn (for at that time they had none but manna) or
meat; as the following words express it, Can he provide flesh for his people?

Verse. 21. So a fire was kindled against Jacob, etc.] That is, the wrath of
God, as it is explained in the next words, and anger also came up against
Israel. But yet see the Note Numb. 11.1.

Verse. 23. Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the gates
of heaven.] To wit, to give them manna in great plenty, as out of his
storehouses. And therefore having formerly done this for them, they had no
cause to murmr for flesh.

Verse. 24. And had rained down manna upon them.] This expression is used to
imply in what plenty the manna was given, and because it fell together with the
dew.

Verse. 25. Man did eat angels food.] So their manna was called, either 1.
because it was provided and sent by the ministry of angels; or 2. because it
seemed to come down from heaven, the dewlling place of the angels; or 3. to set
forth the excellency of this bread, that it was meat as one would say fit for
angels, if angels needed meat. And so indeed the exceeding glory of Stephens
countenance is set forth by this, that they saw his face, as if it had been the
face of an angel, Act. 6.15. and Paul calls an excellent tongue, the tongue of
angels, 1 Cor. 13.1. See also the Note Numb. 16.35.

Verse. 26. He caused an east wind to blow, etc.] See the Note Numb. 11.31.

Verse. 28. And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, etc.] That is, the
flesh mentioned in the foregoing verse; to wit, the quails, which being fat and
heavy fowls, and having their wings moistened with the South-east wind, fell
upon the earth, and so were gathered by the Israelites. See the Notes Numb.
11.31.

Verse. 30. They were not estranged from their lust, etc.] That is, Having the
quails continued to them, they still glutted themselves therewith, though they
had already eaten greedily on them; and then the wrath of God fell upon them.
See the Note Numb. 11.33.

Verse. 31. The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, etc.]
See the Notes Job 15.27, and Psalm. 22.29, and Numb. 11.33.

Verse. 32. For all this they sinned still, etc.] To wit, when they refused to
enter the land of Canaan: and believed not for his wondrous works; that is,
sincerely and constantly, though now and then for the present they seemed to be
strongly convinced by the mighty works of God, Exodus 14.31.

Verse. 33. Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, etc.] That is, say
some, they were presently consumed, as some vain thing that is gone on a
sudden. But I rather think it is meant of that sentence which God pronounced
against them, that they should all perish in the wilderness, that they spent
their whole life in fruitless labors, wandering up and down, and being still
traveling toward Canaan, but all in vain, in regard they never came to that
land, in hope whereof they were brought out of Egypt. And their years in
trouble; to wit, they lay still under Gods displeasure, and were still
afflicted with many and diverse troubles all the time of their being in the
wilderness.

Verse. 34. And they returned, and inquired early after God.] That is, They
presently seemed to repent and turn to God.

Verse. 38. But he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity.] In regard
of those that did but feignedly repent, there can be no more intended hereby,
but that the Lord did upon their seeming repentance withdraw his plagues and
judgments; yet withal we may be sure that God was truly reconciled to those
amongst them that did truly repent, and did indeed fully acquit them of all
their transgressions.

Verse. 39. For he remembered that they were but flesh, etc.] That is, 1.
corrupt, naturally prone to sin; and 2. weak and frail, unable to bear the full
wrath of the Lord, if it should be poured upon them, yea such as were subject
to many calamities, and sure ere long to die of themselves, and therefore a
fitter object of pity, then of continual displeasure. And that this last is
indeed chiefly intended, is the more probable, because of the following clause,
where he adds also, that they were a wind that passes away, and comes not
again; that is, such as would be soon irrecoverably gone.

Verse. 41. Yea, they turned back, etc.] That is, After some shows of
repentance, when the hand of God was upon them, they soon turned back to their
former evil ways: and tempted God; see the Notes Exodus 17.2. and Deuteronomy. 6.16:
and limited the holy one of Israel; to wit, by prescribing God what he must
do, or else they would not believe in him; or by conceiving of God after the
manner of men, that this he could do, and this he could not do, and so
robbing him of the glory of his omnipotency.

Verse. 45. He sent diverse sorts of flies among them, which devoured them, etc.]
To wit, by their extreme annoyance, and the mischief they many ways did them;
see the Notes Exodus 8, 21: and frogs which destroyed them; to wit, in that they
were also several ways very mischievous to them, and when they lay dead in
heaps, both air, earth and water were infected and corrupted therewith.

Verse. 47. He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycamore trees with
frost.] Or, with great hailstones. The meaning is, that the hail did not only
beat off the leaves and fruit of their vines and other trees, or otherwise
mar them, but that it did even kill the very roots of the trees, that they
never grew more; see the Note Exodus 9.23.

Ver. 49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath and indignation
and trouble, etc.] That is, many supernatural and dreadful plagues, that came
thick upon the^, and were clear evidences of Gods indignation against them: and
that by sending evil angels among them; that is, Angels by whose ministry these
plagues were inflicted on them: and therefore there is no necessity that this
should be meant of devils: the good angels may be called evil, with respect to
the sore evils they inflicted then upon the Egyptians. I know that some
Expositours hold that the Egyptian plagues were inflicted by devils; and they
ground their opinion wholly upon this passage of the Psalmist. But because (as
St. Augustine argues well) the devils sided with the Egyptian sorcerers against
Moses and Aaron, in working their magic miracles, it is no way probable that
they were employed on the other side too in plaguing the Egyptians. And
therefore either it was by the ministry of the holy angels, that all these
evils were brought upon Egypt; or else we must say that it is the judgments
themselves, or the inferior creatures by whom these judgments were inflicted,
that are here called figuratively, because they were sent of God, evil angels.

Verse. 50. He made a way to his anger, etc.] To wit, 1. by giving way to bring
greater judgments upon them then hitherto he had done, even to the taking away
of the life both of man and beast, from which hitherto his compassion had
restrained him, and providing that nothing should hinder the just execution of
his wrath herein; and thus I conceive the following words do explain this first
clause, showing how he gave way in his anger to the slaying of the firstborn
in Egypt: he spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to the
pestilence. Yet this last clause may be read, as in the margin of our Bibles,
but gave over their beasts to the murrain; which must then be understood of
that plague Exodus 9.3. for which see the Notes there.

Verse. 51. And smote all the firstborn in Egypt, the chief of their strength,
etc.] See the Note Genesis 49.3: in the tabernacles of Ham; that is, of the
Egyptians, for Egypt is in the Hebrew called Mizraim, of Mizraim the son of
Ham, Genesis 10.6. who first peopled that country.

Verse. 52. But made his own people to go forth like sheep, etc.] See the Note
Psalm. 77.20.

Verse. 53. And he led them on safely, so that they feared not.] That is, they
had no cause to fear, the Lord going along with them as their guardian. Or the
meaning may be, that though through weakness and infidelity they were sometimes
afraid, as we see Exodus 14.10: yet by the mighty works of God they were still
at last heartned and encouraged again.

Verse. 54. And he brought them to the border of his Sanctuary, etc,] That is,
to the land where he had determined to dwell amongst them in his Sanctuary:
even to this mountain which his right hand had purchased; to wit, mount Sion,
or the land of Canaan, a land of mountains and valleys, Deuteronomy. 11.11. See the
Note Exodus 15.17.

Verse. 56. Yet they tempted, etc.] To wit, by sinning against God; see the Note
Deuteronomy. 6.16: and provoked the most High God, and kept not his testimonies; to
wit, in that they kept not Gods command for destroying the Canaanites; see the
Note Psalm. 19.7.

Verse. 57. They were turned aside like a deceitful bow.] That is, like a bow
that shoots awry, and not whether the archer that uses it aims to shoot; to
wit, because whereas they- ought to have been guided by God, after all their
fair professions and promises of being faithful to God and their pious judges,
such as those to Joshua, Josh. 1.16, 17. All that thou command us we will
do, etc. they perfidiously fell off, and went awry, and did not order their
ways as God expected and required; and particularly whilst they pretended to
worship only the true God, they suddenly turned aside to the worship of idols.

Verse. 60. So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, etc.] To wit, In that
the Ark, the sign of his presence, was carried thence into captivity by the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.11. and the Tabernacle also was thence removed, see the
Note 1 Chronicles. 21.1. and neither of them were ever brought back thither again:
the tent which he placed among men; It is not among the Israelites, but among
men, to imply Gods abasing himself to dwell amongst such base and wretched
creatures as men are.

Verse. 61. And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the
enemies hand.] That is, the Ark; see the Notes 1 Chronicles. 16.11. 2 Chronicles. 6.41,
and 1 Samuel 4.21, 22. Yet some understand it of Gods giving up the strongest and
chiefest of the people to be slaves to the Philistines.

Verse. 63. The fire consumed their young men, etc.] That is, The force or heat
of the battle, or the fire of Gods wrath, mentioned in the foregoing verse, did
suddenly make an end of them: and their maidens were not given to marriage; to
wit, by reason there was such a scarcity of young men after that battle; or
because those that were betrothed to them were slain. It is in the original,
their maidens were not praised: but the meaning is, that they were not praised
with Epithalamiums or marriage-songs, as Brides at their weddings used to be.

Verse. 64. Their priests fell by the sword, and their widows made no
lamentation.] The meaning is, either 1. that being overwhelmed with sorrow they
could not weep; or 2. that being in captivity amongst the Philistines they were
not suffered to lament the death of their husbands; or 3. that dying with grief
they lived not to make any lamentations for them at their funerals; or 4. that
they were so taken up and oppressed with their own miseries, and especially
with the miseries of the Church and people of God in general, that they had
not leisure to bewail their husbands: of both which last we have a clear
instance in the wife of Phinehas in particular, 1 Samuel 4.19, 20. who dying made
no mention of her husband.

Verse. 65. Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, etc.] To wit, as one
fallen fast asleep after much wine drunk, as the following words do imply, and
like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. However the drift of this
expression is to imply, that as one that was looked upon to be in a dead sleep,
he did the more unexpectedly fall upon them, and as one that had forborne them a
while, he did with the more fury and severity break forth upon them.

Verse. 66. And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts; he put them to a
perpetual reproach.] This is meant of the Lords smiting the Philistines with
emerods, see the Note 1 Samuel 5.6. the shame whereof was made perpetual by
those golden images of their emerods, which they sent to the Israelites, see
the Note 1 Samuel 6.4. Yet some do also include herein the shame that was done
them in the Lords casting down their Idol Dagon, and breaking it in pieces upon
the threshold; the memory of which reproach became the more perpetual by that
superstitious practice, which upon that occasion they took up, of never
treading after that upon the threshold: see the Note 1 Samuel 5.5.

Verse. 67. Moreover he refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the
tribe of Ephraim.] To wit, 1. in that he would not let the Ark be any longer
there (for that this is chiefly meant here is evident by that which is added
verse. 69. concerning the building of the Temple) see the foregoing Notes verse.
9. and 60; and 2. that the supreme magistracy was not continued in that tribe,
though it began there, when Joshua, who was of that tribe, was made their Ruler.

Verse. 68. But chose the tribe of Judah, etc.] To wit, that the place of Gods
worship and the supreme magistracy should be settled in that tribe: the mount
Sion which he loved; that is, which he chose, not for any other cause, but of
his own free grace, because he was pleased to set his love upon it.

Verse. 69. And he built his Sanctuary like high palaces; like the earth which
he has established for ever.] That is, that it might be the settled place of
his worship, even unto the coming of the Messiah; who should then establish it
in the Church, the true Sion, unto the end of the world.

Verse. 71. He brought him to feed Jacob his people, etc.] To wit, David; see
the Note 2 Samuel 5.2: and Israel his inheritance; see the Note Deuteronomy. 4.20.

Verse. 72. So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, etc.] To
wit, as sincerely seeking the peoples good: and guided them by the skilfulnesse
of his hands; to wit, in that he did all things in the administration of his
kingdom, as became a wise and skillful governor. Yet in this expression there
seems to be an allusion to the hook which shepherds used to carry in their
hands, therewith to order their sheep.

PSALM LXXIX.
Verse. 1. O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance, etc.] See the
Note Exodus 15.17: thy holy temple have they defiled; to wit, by spoiling it, by
shedding blood in it, and by bringing profane and wicked persons and things
into it. Most Expositours say that this was spoken of the destruction of
Jerusalem, either by the Babylonians, or by Antiochus in the time of the
Maccabees. But the first is far most probable; because in relating the miseries
the Jews endured by the persecution of Antiochus 1 Maccab. 7.16, 17. the words
in the 2. and 3. verses of this Psalm are cited, which shows that this Psalm
was extant among the people long before those troubles.

Verse. 3. Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, etc.]
That is, 1. in great abundance; and 2. without pity; their enemies having no
more remorse for the shedding of their blood, then they would have had for the
pouring out of so much water, nor no more fearing to be called to an account
for the one then for the other: and there was none to bury them; to wit,
because the enemy would not, and their near friends were either all slain, or
durst not go out to do it.

Verse. 4. We are become a reproach to our neighbors, etc.] To wit, the
Babylonians and others amongst whom they lived; or rather the Edomites and
other bordering nations, as the following words do express it, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us.

Verse. 8. O remember not against us former iniquities, etc.] To wit, ours or
our fathers: let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us; that is, let them
prevent our utter ruin, by helping us speedily.

Verse. 9. Help us, O God of our salvation, etc.] That is, who have undertaken
to save us, who can only save us, and have often saved us: for the glory of
thy name; that is, that thy glorious attributes, thine infinite power and
goodness, etc. may be known, that thy people may praise thee for them, and
that the blaspheming mouths of thine enemies may be stopped: and deliver us,
and purge away our sins for thy names sake; see the Note Psalm. 23.3.

Verse. 11. Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, etc.] This may be
understood either of all the captives in general (for all such are in a kind
prisoners;) or of such particularly as were besides imprisoned: and so the
following clause, preserve thou those that are appointed to die, may be meant
of all in captivity, who were continually in danger of death; or else of those
whom they had intended to put to death.

Verse. 12. And render unto our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom, etc.]
That is, Repay them abundantly the reproach wherewith they reproached thee, O
Lord. There seems to be in this phrase an allusion to those, that in giving any
thing do pour it into the laps of those to whom they give it, and do not stand
to measure it. Yet it may well be also, that in this expression of rendering
into their bosom, he might also imply his desire that God would pay them home,
even to the vexing and terrifying of their consciences within them; or that he
would recompense them according to the evil purposes they had harbored in
their breasts against them.

PSALM LXXX.
Verse. 1. GIve ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a
flock, etc.] That is, that have undertaken as a shepherd to protect and guide
thy people, and have hitherto faithfully done it; see the Note Psalm. 23.1. and
77.20: thou that dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth; that is, manifest
thy presence, or the glory of thy power, or thy grace and favor to us,
chearing and reviving our hearts by delivering us out of our captivity. Many
Expositours conceive this is spoken of the Babylonian captivity. Indeed because
there is only mention made here of Israel and Joseph, (for which see the Note
Psalm. 77.15.) and in the following verse of Ephraim, Benjamin and Manasseh,
some do rather think that this Psalm was composed as a prayer for the use of
the ten tribes, when they were carried away captives by the Assyrians, amongst
whom their might be many that had not bowed their knees to Baal: and
accordingly they say also that the Psalmist uses that expression, thou that
dwell between the Cherubims, purposely to hint unto the Israelites, that if
they expected that God should hear their prayers, they must, in their desires
at least, embrace that only pure way of Gods worship, which God had established
in the Temple at Jerusalem. But this I conceive is no convincing argument, and
that because there was a remnant even of the tribes here mentioned, that had
joined themselves to Judah, that they might enjoy the pure ordinances of God in
the Temple, who accordingly returned with the Jews out of Babylon, as is
evident 1 Chronicles. 9.3: and therefore these may be here mentioned in stead of all
the rest of the tribes. And though the Temple was destroyed in the Babylonian
captivity, yet this expression of Gods dwelling between the Cherubims might be
used in reference to that way of worship which God had formerly established
amongst them.

Verse. 2. Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, stir up thy strength, etc.]
That is, Before all the tribes of Israel rouse up thy power, which has for a
time been laid asleep, against our potent enemies. Some conceive that in those
words, Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, there is an allusion to that
which is said Numb. 2.18. that these three tribes had their Tents on the west
of the Tabernacle, and so had the Ark, which was in the west end of the
tabernacle, continually before them; for which see the Note there. But though
this were so, yet it well may be, that under these three tribes here named all
the other may be comprehended.

Verse. 3. Turn us again, O God, etc.] That is, Bring us back out of our
captivity into our own country, and settle us there again in our former state
and condition; for so we see the like expression is used, Psalm. 126.1. When the
Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream. Yet
under this phrase there may be also included a request, that the Lord would
turn their hearts to him by unfeigned repentance, that so they might be fit for
deliverance. And cause thy face to shine; see the Notes Psalm. 4.7. and 67.1.

Verse. 4. How long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?] Thus
they complain, because even after their prayers things were worse with them
then they were before.

Verse. 5. Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, etc.] See the Note Psalm.
42.4.

Verse. 6. Thou make us a strife unto our neighbors.] That is, They are
continually striving with us and fighting against us, according to that of the
Prophet Jer. 15.10. woe is me, my mother, that thou have born me a man of
strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth: or, Being all our enemies,
they even strive amongst themselves, who should first invade us, prevail
against us, and make a prey of us.

Verse. 8. Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt, etc.] The Psalmist in these
words may seem to allude to the precious account which men make of vines that
are brought out of foreign countries.

Verse. 9. Thou preparedst room before it, etc.] To wit, by casting out the
heathen thence, (as he had said in the foregoing verse) even as men dig up
and cast out stones, and roots, and briers and thorns, and whatsoever may
hinder the prosperous growing of their vines: and did cause it to take deep
root; to wit, in that thou did firmly settle thy people in that land for many
years, that so they might flourish the more.

Verse. 10. The hills were covered with the shadow of it, etc.] That is, The
whole land was subdued and inhabited by them; not so much as the very hills but
were full of people. And besides hereby also may be employed, how exceeding
glorious this people should be for riches, power, and extent of their
dominions, that other kingdoms which are usually compared to hills in the
Scripture should be subdued by them, and that the glory of other kingdoms
should be obscured by their glory. And the like may be said of the following
clause, and the boughs thereof were like the goodly cedars. Yet this some
understand of those great and glorious men that should grow up in this nation,
such as David and Solomon, etc.

Verse. 11. She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the
river.] See the Note Psalm. 72.8.

Verse. 12. Why have thou then broken down her hedges?] To wit, by withdrawing
thy protection.

Verse. 13. The boar out of the wood does wast it, and the wild beast of the
field does devour it.] That is, the savage and unclean heathens, both princes
and people, to wit, the Assyrians or Babylonians.

Verse. 14. Look down from heaven, etc.] As if they should have said, Though we
enjoy not the Ark, the outward sign of thy presence, amongst us, yet from
heaven we know thou will hear our prayers, and there is help to be had, though
there be none upon earth; see also the Note Psalm. 76.8: and behold, and visit
this vine; that is, send help to thy people.

Verse. 15. And the vineyard which thy right hand has planted, etc.] Herein
there seems to be an allusion to the precious account men are wont to make of
those vines or trees which they have planted with their own hands: and the
branch which thou made strong for thy self; that is, the people whom thou
did establish, that they might be thine own peculiar people, and for thine
own honor and glory. And in this expression there seems also to be an allusion
to the custom of strengthening young vines, by driving stakes into the earth
whereon they might grow up.

Verse. 16. It is burnt with fire and cut down, etc.] To wit, the vineyard or
the branch mentioned in the foregoing verse: and the meaning is, that the
Israelites were destroyed with fire and sword.

Verse. 17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, and upon the son of
man whom thou made strong for thy self.] That is, By thy power protect that
people, that has been formerly dear to thee and carefully protected by thee,
see the Note Genesis 35.18. For those words, the man and the son of man, must be
understood, I conceive, collectively, as comprehending the whole body of the
people of Israel. Yet there are some that conceive, and that upon very probable
grounds, that this prayer is particularly made for the king and people of
Judah, whom God had hitherto defended and maintained, and that were at present
the only remainders of Isreal's desolations; see also the Note before verse. 15.

Verse. 18. So will not we go back from thee, etc.] That is, We will not any
more, as we have done, revolt from thy truth, worship and service; but will
trust in thee, and yield obedience to thee in all things: quicken us; that is,
cheer us up, by delivering us; see also the Note Psalm. 71.20: and we will call
upon thy name; that is, we will praise thee and worship thee continually.

PSALM LXXXI.
Verse. 3. BLow up the Trumpet in the New Mood, etc.] That is, the New Mood of
every month; for which see the Notes Numb. 10.10, and 28.11: in the time
appointed on our solemn feast day; that is, upon every one of our solemn
feast-daies, for the service whereof it seems this Psalm was composed: or both
clauses may be meant of one and the same time, to wit, the new mood of the
seventh month, which was indeed a solemn feast day, and called the feast of
trumpets; for which see the Note Lev. 23.24.

Verse. 5. This he ordained in Joseph, etc.] That is, in Israel; see the Note
Psalm. 77.15: for a testimony; that is, for a law, see the Note Psalm. 19.73 or
for a memorial of the mercy in the following words mentioned: when he went out
through the land of Egypt; to wit, when he led his people thence with an
outstretched arm; or, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, when he went out
against the land of Egypt, that is, when he went forth as a captain before his
angels, that were to execute his judgments upon the Egyptians. As for the
following clause, where I heard a language that I understood not, it is spoken,
I conceive, by the Psalmist in the name of the people of Israel. And though
some understand it thus, that when God had carried them out of Egypt, they did
hear a language which they had never been acquainted with, to wit, the voice of
God speaking from mount Sinai; yet I doubt not but the meaning is this, that in
Egypt they heard a language which they understood not, and that this is added
by way of aggravating the misery of their bondage there, from which God
delivered them, and that because for the same reason we see this very
particular alleged elsewhere, as Psalm. 114.1. when Israel went out of Egypt,
the house of Jacob from a people of strange language: see also the Notes Deuteronomy.
28.49.

Verse. 6. I removed his shoulder from the burden; his hands were delivered from
the pots.] That is, from making pots; or from filling and carrying pots laden
with water, straw, clay, bricks, mortar, etc. all which may be comprehended in
that general expression, Exodus 1.14. And they made their lives bitter with
hard bondage, in mortar and in brick, and in all manner of service in the
field. However, clear it is, that from hence to the end of the Psalm God is
brought in as expostulating with his people.

Verse. 7. Thou calledst in trouble, etc.] To wit, when after their deliverance
out of Egypt (of which he had spoken in the foregoing verse) Pharaoh had
pursued them to the red sea; see Exodus 14.10, 15: I answered thee in the secret
place of thunder; that is, out of the pillar of fire and of the cloud from
whence I thundered upon the Egyptians, see the Notes Exodus 14.24. Now this
might be termed an answering them in the secret place of thunder, 1. because
the thunder came out of the pillar of the cloud, which though it gave light on
one side to the Israelites, yet it was a cloud of darkness to the Egyptians,
Exodus 14.20: 2ly, and especially, because though God did not visibly then
appear to them, yet the thunder was a clear evidence of his hidden presence
there, and that however before he had seemed to hide himself from them for a
time, yet he was in a readiness to help and deliver them: and it may well be
that this is spoken in reference to that which is said Exodus 14.20. that the
Lord looked to the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the
cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians. And some understand it also of
Gods speaking to the people from mount Sinai by a voice like thunder, which
came from the thick cloud that was upon the mount. As for the following clause,
I proved thee at the waters of Meribah, to wit, by the thirst they endured
there, this is doubtless added to show, that it was of Gods free grace that he
did thus deliver them from the Egyptians, seeing so shortly after they did by
their murmuring at Meribah discover how unworthy they were of this mercy. See
also the Note Exodus 15.25.

Verse. 8. Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee, etc.] See the Note
Deuteronomy. 4.26. But this must be understood as spoken by God to the Israelites when
he had newly carried them out of Egypt, as is evident by that which follows
ver. 11. But my people would not hearken to my voice, etc. see the Notes also
Exodus 15.25.

Verse. 10. Open thy mouth wide, etc.] That is, Ask freely and largely, even
whatever you will, yea ask still greater and greater things, and that with full
assurance of faith, pressing your requests with fervency and importunity: and I
will fill it; that is, I will fulfill all your desires. But yet this last
clause some understand particularly of Gods supplying them liberally with food
and sustenance, whereto that may seem to agree which is added ver. 16. He
should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat, etc: and some, of Gods
filling their mouths with his praises, for which see the Note Psalm. 71.8. And
however in the expression here used there seems to be an allusion to the manner
of birds feeding their young ones.

Verse. 15. The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him,
etc.] Hereby is employed, that on the contrary, because of his peoples sins, he
had chosen to prosper those that hated him, rather then not punish his peoples
rebellion against him. See the Note also 2 Samuel 22.45.

PSALM LXXXII.
Verse. 1. GOd stands in the congregation of the mighty, etc.] That is, He is
present among the great judges and Potentates of the world, and president over
them, see the Notes 2 Chronicles. 19.6. and Deuteronomy. 1.17: he judges among the Gods;
see the Note Exodus 22.28. The meaning is, that they are but his vicegerents,
and that he will therefore judge them, according as they carry themselves in
judging others. And hence it is that in the following verses he expostulates
with them as his subjects and vassals, How long will ye judge unjustly? etc.

Verse. 5. They know not, etc.] As if he had said, But, alas, it is in vain to
speak to these men, They know not, that is, Being blinded with gifts, corrupt
affections, and their greatness in the world, they know nothing of this which
I have spoken to them of; they know not what is just and what is unjust, nor
what belongs to them to do: neither will they understand; that is, they are
wilfully ignorant, and will not be taught: they walk on in darkness, they
proceed on in their ways of ignorance, sin and folly. And then for the last
clause, all the foundations are out of course, in the original are moved,
either it does simply declare the evil that came by the injustice of these
judges, to wit, that for want of justice and judgment, which are the
foundations of kingdoms and commonwealths, all things were out of order and
went to wrack; or else it is added to imply the obstinate blindness of the
judges, who though they might see that all things were brought into confusion,
and were like to be utterly ruined by their unjust doings, yet they would not
be convinced of the evil of their ways. But see the Notes Psalm. 11.3, and 75.3.

Verse. 6. I have said, Ye are Gods, etc.] See the Note Exodus 22.28: and all of
you are children of the most High, to wit, because God had conferred part of
his sovereignty and judiciary power upon them, as Princes are wont to leave
theirs to their children; and because withal they should be, if they would
carry themselves as they ought to do, most dear to God, as children are to
their father.

Verse. 7. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.] That
is, ye shall be cast down from your places of dignity and power, (according to
that Luke 1.52, he has put down the mighty from their seats) like as other
Princes before you have been, or as it has been with the princes of other
nations; or, ye shall die by some violent death, as usually tyrants are wont to
do.

Verse. 8. Arise, O God, judge the earth, etc.] As if he had said, Seeing the
judges on earth are every where so unjust, do thou from heaven take this work
into thine own hands; do thou free the oppressed, and punish the oppressors,
with their unjust judges: for thou shall inherit all nations; that is, by this
means all nations shall submit themselves to thee, and shall worship and fear
thee; or, thou art and always shall be the supreme judge of all nations,
neither can any tyrants wrest this power out of thine hands. Yea some conceive
that this is spoken in reference to Christ.

PSALM LXXXIII.
The Title. A Song or Psalm of Asaph.] Most Expositours hold that this Psalm
was penned when Jehoshaphat was invaded by a mighty army, made up of many
several nations, 2 Chronicles. 20.1. which agrees with that which is here said,
verse. 6, 7, 8. and because it is said that the people of God sung as they were
going out against this army, 2 Chronicles. 20.21, 22. therefore some conceive that
this was the very Psalm which they then sung.

Verse. 1. Keep not thou silence, O God, etc.] To wit, whilst thine enemies make
such a noise, as it follows in the next verse. But see also the Note Psalm. 28.1.

Verse. 3. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted
against thy hidden ones.] That is, thy saints and servants, whom thou do hide
as a precious treasure from the rage of their enemies, and who are not known
nor owned to be such as they are by the men of this world, their life being hid
with Christ in God.

Verse. 5. For they have consulted together with one consent, etc.] And thus,
though these nations were usually at deadly enmity one against another, yet now
they could unanimously combine together against the people of God.

Verse. 6. The tabernacles of Edom and the Ishmaelites, of Moab and the
Hagarens.] See the Note 1 Chronicles. 15.10. It seems some of Ishmaels posterity
were from their father called Ishmaelites, and others of them from their
grandmother Hagar were called Hagarens; yet others conceive they were the
posterity of some other children, that Hagar had by some other husband after
Abraham had put her away.

Verse. 7. Gebal.] See the Note 1 Kings 5.18.

Verse. 8. Assure also is joined with them, etc.] That is, The Assyrians also,
though a people of a far country, were joined with them: they have helped the
children of Lot; to wit, the Moabites and Ammonites, who were, it seems, the
first and chief movers of this invasion of the land of Israel, whereof the
Psalmist speaks, and so they were in that invasion in Jehoshaphats days, 2 Chronicles. 20.1.

Verse. 9. Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Iabin,
etc.] That is, as to the army of Jabin: but see also Judge. 4.24.

Verse. 10. Which perished at Endor, etc.] For they were destroyed at Taanach by
the waters of Megiddo, Judge. 5.19. and Endor, Taanach, and Megiddo were
neighboring towns, Josh. 17.11: they became as dung for the earth; that is,
they were trodden under foot like dung, and their carkases lying unburied were
as dung to fatten the earth, according to that Jer. 16.4. they shall not be
lamented, neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon the face
of the earth.

Verse. 12. Who said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in
possession.] To wit, in that they sought to subdue the land of Canaan, which
was Gods inheritance, and to get possession of the cities and towns of Judea:
which might be called the houses of God, because there God dwelt amongst them,
and where the people of God are, there God is present with them; and withal
because God had given them this land for their inheritance; whence is that of
Jehoshaphat 2 Chronicles. 20.11. Behold how they reward us, to come to cast us out
of thy possession, which thou have given us to inherit.

Verse. 13. O my God, etc.] This may be taken as spoken by the Psalmist, either
in his own name, or in the name of the people of God as one man. Make them like
a wheel; that is, Let them, through the volubility and inconstancy of their
condition, be suddenly and violently carried down headlong from their lofty
estate, not finding any resting place, till they and their designs be utterly
ruined, even as when a wheel is turned about, the top of it is suddenly
underneath; or, Let them be continually driven about with diverse calamities,
and never be at rest in a settled condition; or, Let them be stricken with a
spirit of giddiness, unstable and inconstant in all their consultations and
imaginations, and so thereby unable to hurt thy people: as the stubble before
the wind; see the Notes Job 21.18, and Psalm. 35.5.

Verse. 14. As the fire burns the wood, and as the flame sets the mountains
on fire.] That is, the stubble, or rather the trees on the mountains, which
being set on fire, no skill or industry of men can yield any help for the
quenching of them.

Verse. 15. So persecute them with thy tempest, etc.] See the Notes Job 27.20,
21. and Psalm. 35.5, 6.

Verse. 16. Fill their faces with shame, etc.] To wit, for their great
disappointments in their hopes and attempts against thy people (see also the
Note Psalm. 44.15.) and the great contempt that is fallen upon them, who had
wont to hold their heads so high, and to be adored of all men: that they may
seek thy name; that is, that they may be forced, though feignedly, to cry unto
thee for help; see the following verses.

PSALM LXXXIIII.
Verse. 1. HOw amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!] That is, How
desirable and delightful a thing is it to enjoy thine Ordinances there in the
assemblyes of thy people! see also the Note Psalm. 43.3.

Verse. 2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord, etc.]
See the Notes Psalm. 42.1, 2. And he says the courts of the Lord, because none
but the Priests might go in any further then the courts. My heart and my flesh
cries out for the living God; see the Notes Psalm. 42.1, and 63.1.

Verse. 3. Yea, the sparrow has found an house, and the swallow a nest for her
self, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, etc.] That is, in and
about the Temple where thine altars are, to wit, the altars for incense and
burnt-offerings. But however this is clearly inserted with respect to his
desire of being where Gods altars were.

Verse. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, etc.] To wit, the Priests
and Levites; but see the Note Psalm. 23.6: they will be still praising thee; the
joy they take in being there yielding them matter of continual praise; and so
they shall be blessed both in that their holy and happy employment, and in the
benefits they shall reap by being there, which shall continually fill their
mouths with thy praises.

Verse. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, etc.] That is, say some
expositours, that by thy grace and providence receives that strength and
vigor, both of body and mind, that he can come from the place of his abode to
thy Temple to keep thy solemn feast there, or that relyes upon thee, that thou will strengthen him to go up to thy temple. But I rather conceive the meaning
to be this, that the man is blessed that does rely upon God for strength and
help in every thing whatsoever; that makes account that all his strength
depends merely upon God; and so thereupon (as is employed in the following
words) desires much to be in Gods Temple, to wit, that he may thereby
strengthen his faith, and may seek Gods face and favor, who is his strength.
In whose heart are the ways of them; to wit, the ways of them whose zeal in
going up to the house of God is described in the following verse; that is, who
does from his heart desire, and delight, and purpose and resolve to be going in
those ways that lead to thy house, that he may enjoy thy presence there, so
that the thoughts of his heart are continually upon that. Yet some understand
this last clause of those whose hearts are set to walk in the ways of Gods
commandments.

Verse. 6. Who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a well, etc.] That
is, who do cheerfully pass through any difficulties which they meet with in
the way, as they go up to Gods house. Some think that there was a valley,
through which some of the Israelites were to go as they went up to Zion, that
was called the valley of Baca. But because the word Baca may be rendered tears
or mulberry trees, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, the meaning of these
words seems to be this: who passing through the valley of tears, to wit, by
reason of the many troubles and difficulties they meet with in their way, or,
through the valley of mulberry trees, that is, through dry and sandy deserts,
because in such places mulbery trees are wont to grow; make it a well, that is,
forget their thirst, by reason of their eagerness to go up to Gods house; and
that dry valley is to them all one, as if it were a valley full of springs and
wells of water: or they make it a well, that is, rather then they will be
hindered from going up to Gods house, with much labor they dig wells and
springs of water all the way as they go, for the refreshing of themselves, and
the encouragement of others that are to go that way; and where the ground will
not yield any springs, they dig pits, or make cisterns, for the receiving and
keeping of rainwater, so that all the way along it seems to be as a well. It
may also be rendered, who passing through the valley of mulberry trees, make
him a well; and then the meaning must be, that the remembrance of God, to whom
they are going, is to them as a well of living waters to refresh their spirits;
it makes them not mind their thirst, but go cheerfully on through all
difficulties. The rain also fills the pools; that is, through Gods grace and
favor to them, the pits and cisterns they have dug and made are filled with
rain; or, by their longing desire and hope of meeting with their God in Zion,
they are refreshed, as with showrs of rain.

Verse. 7. They go from strength to strength, etc.] That is, In stead of being
wearied with their journey, they shall rather gather strength as they go, and
grow stronger and stronger; so eager they shall be in going up to Gods house.
It may also be rendered, they go from company to company; and then the meaning
is, that they go up by troops or companies; or that as they go along, one
troop does ever and anon overtake another; or that out of the great alacrity of
their spirits as they go along, sometimes they join themselves to one company,
sometimes to another, that they may hear Gods praises, and talk together of
Gods mercies, till they all meet together at last in Zion.

Verse. 8. O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer, etc.] To wit, for bringing me
again to enjoy thy presence in thy Sanctuary. And because he calls God here the
Lord God of hosts, some hereby are induced to think that David composed this
Psalm, when by following his wars abroad he was hindered from resorting to Gods
house, as at other times he was wont to do.

Verse. 9. Look upon the face of thine anointed.] That is, Look favorably upon
me, whom thou have anointed to be king. Yet because David was a type of Christ,
there may be also a request included in these words, that God would be
favorable to him in and through the mediation of that his promised Messiah.

Verse. 10. I had rather be a dore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell
in the tents of wickedness.] That is, I had rather be in the meanest condition
where I might daily worship God, then to be in the highest place of honor and
power, or in the stateliest habitations of the great ones of the world, or any
other, where wickedness reigns. Yet some also think, that the word tents is
used to imply their unstable and flitting condition. However it may well be,
which some say, that this is the rather added for the encouragement of the sons
of Korah, to whom this Psalm was committed, as appears in the Title, who were
porters or door-keepers in the house of God, as is clear 1 Chronicles. 9.19, and
26.1.

Verse. 11. For the Lord God is a Sun.] To wit, in that he does enlighten and
enliven his Church, when as all the world besides lie under darkness and the
shadow of death, and in that he does cheer and warm and comfort the hearts of
his people by his lightsome countenance, and is the fountain from whence all
blessings and comforts are derived to them.

The Lord will give grace and glory.] That is, saving grace here, and the glory
of heaven hereafter: or, he will receive them into his grace and favor, and
afterward raise them to great dignity and honor.

Verse. 12. Blessed is the man that trusts in thee.] To wit, though he be for
a time deprived of thy presence in the Sanctuary.

PSALM LXXXV.
Verse. 1. LOrd, thou have been favorable unto thy land, etc.] That is, Thou
have formerly of thine own free grace showed mercy to thy people, whom thou
did plant in the land of Canaan, and amongst whom thou were pleased to dwell
there: thou have brought back the captivity of Jacob; that is, thou have
formerly delivered thy people out of bondage. And it may be meant either of
their deliverance out of Egypt (if this Psalm were composed for the use of the
faithful, when they were under the Babylonian captivity;) or else of their
deliverance out of Babylon, (if it were composed after that when they were
under the tyranny of Antiochus;) or else in general of all former
deliverances, when their enemies about them had brought them into bondage. See
also the Note Psalm. 14.7.

Verse. 4. Turn us, O God of our salvation.] See the Note Psalm. 80.3.

Verse. 6. Will thou not revive us again? etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 71.20, and
80.18.

Verse. 7. Show us thy mercy, O Lord.] As if they had said, Be merciful to us;
for on thy mercy alone we depend, and yet hereof for the present there is not
the least appearance. But see the Notes Psalm. 4.6. and 50.23.

Verse. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, etc.] This may be taken,
either as spoken by the Psalmist in his own name, or in the name of all the
faithful jointly together, as if they were one person. And it is added by way
of correcting that which went before, as if he had said, What do I mean thus to
complain? I will rather patiently with still silence wait upon God, and
carefully observe what God will now do for us by way of answering our prayers,
according to the promises which he has made to us in his word. For he will
speak peace to his people and to his Saints; that is, doubtless he will hear
their prayers, and by doing them good will give an answer of peace: but let
them not return again to folly; to wit, as being warned by their former
sufferings.

Verse. 9. Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him, etc.] That is, God
will soon and speedily save those that fear him: that glory may dwell in our
land; that is, that whereas for a long time together we have been in a very low
and dishonorable condition, our land has lain untilled, our towns and cities
have been desolate and ruined, our religion, laws and government have been
overturned, and our people have been held under bondage, despised and derided,
and looked upon as a people abhorred of God; now we may in all these things
recover our former glory, especially that the worship and service of God may be
again set up amongst us in the purity of all his Ordinances, that so we may
glory in the glorious presence of God amongst us, and all men may extol our
happiness in these regards, as in former times. This is I conceive the full
drift of these words. But yet many Expositours refer them to the time of
Christ's coming into the world, to accomplish the work of man's salvation; Surely
his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land,
that is, that Christ may dwell in our land, whose glory was as of the
only-begotten of the Father, Joh. 1.14. and who was indeed the glory of his
people Israel, Luke 2.32.: not only because he descended from their stock, and
because the Gospel went forth from them into all the world; but especially
because through faith in him they had cause of glorying in his righteousness,
according to that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.31. He that glories, let him glory
in the Lord; and because by the word and spirit of Christ, that glorious image
of God whereof they were deprived by sin, Romans 3.23. was renewed in them from
glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.

Verse. 10. Mercy and truth are met together, etc.] Here the Psalmist sets forth
how it shall be with the people of God, when God shall have wrought salvation
for them, and restored them to their former glory, as is expressed in the
foregoing verse. And almost all Expositours refer this to the time of Christ's
kingdom. Mercy and truth are met together; that is, They shall then be both
merciful and true and faithful: righteousness and peace have kissed each
other; that is, they shall also be both just in all their dealings, and of a
peaceable disposition one toward another. And these phrases, of meeting
together and kissing each other, are used to imply, that these graces shall
every where abound, and be found jointly together amongst the people of God,
and that one of them cannot be without the other; as we see by experience, that
without justice there can be no peace, etc. Or else the meaning may be this,
that as God shall show mercy to men, so men shall be true and sincere in their
carriage of themselves toward God; and as God shall be righteous in performing
all that he has promised to his people, so his people shall enjoy secret peace
of conscience in regard of God: and so these several expressions may tend to
set forth the perfect reconciliation that shall be wrought betwixt God and his
people. And then again they may be understood of the work of men's redemption by
Christ. For therein it may be said 1. that mercy and truth met together, both
because the truth of God in his threatenings against man for sin was made good
in the sufferings of Christ, and yet with all mercy was showed to the sinner,
in that satisfaction was not required of him in his own person; and also
because in this great act of mercy which was wrought for poor man, there was a
declaration of Gods truth in the full performance of all the promises, which
concerning this he had made to the fathers, see Romans 3.25, 26. and Luke 1.72,
73: and 2ly, that righteousness and peace have kissed each other; both because
by Christ peace was wrought betwixt God and the poor sinner, and yet withal
Gods righteousness in the punishment of sin was fully satisfied, and likewise
because by the merits of Christ all believers do obtain righteousness for
their justification, and peace of conscience, which must needs follow thereupon.

Verse. 11. Truth shall spring out of the earth, etc.] Some Expositours do
understand this also of the person of Christ: Truth, that is, Christ, who is
the truth Joh. 14.6. shall spring out of the earth; that is, shall be born upon
earth; or shall be conceived and born of a woman: and righteousness shall look
down from heaven; that is, Christ, who is the righteousness of God, and the
Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. shall come down unto us out of heaven from
his Father. But I take it rather to be a prophecy, either 1. of the
accomplishment of Gods promises concerning our redemption by Christ: Truth
shall spring out of the earth; that is the truth of God in his promises
concerning the Messiah, which for a long time seemed to be as seed that is
buried under ground, shall at last spring up and appear upon earth, that being
there done which God had promised: and righteousness shall look down from
heaven; that is, the righteousness of God in making good that promise
concerning Christ, which was long withheld, shall at length appear; or the
righteousness which God has appointed for the justification of sinners shall
at length be discovered to men from heaven; or 2. rather of the happy condition
of Gods people, when God should deliver them from their enemies, but especially
under the kingdom of Christ, to wit, that truth, which seemed formerly to be
extinct, should then spring up again; and that righteousness should, through
the grace of God, be again found amongst men: yea that these graces of truth
and righteousness should so abound amongst men, as if the earth brought forth
nothing but truth, and the heavens rained down nothing but righteousness; so
that the Church hereby shall be in as flourishing and joyful a condition, as
the earth seems to be, when being blessed from heaven it is filled with a rich
and a plentiful increase. But yet some do understand the first clause of the
truth that is in man, and the second of the righteousness of God. Truth shall
spring out of the earth, that is, men shall become eminently true and
faithful, both in word and deed: and righteousness shall look down from
heaven; that is, the Lord discerning this shall righteously make good his
promises to them, and command a blessing upon them from heaven.

Verse. 12. Yea the Lord shall give that which is good, etc.] That is, Together
with these spiritual gifts he shall also give them every outward blessing that
may be good for them. Yet some restrain this to that particular good of the
earths increase, which is expressed in the following clause, and our land shall
yield her increase.

Verse. 13. Righteousness shall go before him, etc.] That is, Righteousness
shall then flourish, and have a free course and passage in every place. For as
the Prophet sets forth the corruption of those times wherein he lived by this,
that there was no place for justice, Isa. 59.14. judgment is turned away
backward, and justice stands afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and
equity cannot enter: so here the Psalmist sets forth the prevailing of
righteousness in those times, when God should return in mercy to his people,
by this, that righteousness should have a free course amongst men, so that
they should generally walk in the ways of righteousness, and do that which is
just and right in Gods eyes. Only we must know, that by this phrase of
righteousness going before him, is employed, that this change God would make,
when he came to visit his people, and when Christ came with his Gospel to set
up his kingdom amongst men; or that by his righteousness wrought in them the
hearts of men should be prepared for God to dwell there. Yet some understand it
of the righteousness of Christ's government, that look as the glory of Princes
is manifested by the pomp of those that go before them to make way for them, so
Christ's glory should be manifested by the righteousness of his government. But
the first exposition I take to be the best, as by the following words we may
gather, Righteousness shall go before him, and shall set us in the way of his
steps; that is, shall cause us to walk in his ways. But see also Psalm. 89.14.
and Isa. 58.8. where the like expressions are used.

PSALM LXXXVI.
Verse. 1. HEar me, for I am poor and needy.] See the Note Psalm. 40.17.

Verse. 2. Preserve my soul, for I am holy.] That is, Thou have sanctified me in
some measure by thy spirit, I have consecrated my self wholly to thy service,
and do endeavor to walk in all holiness before thee: neither am I therefore
such a one as mine enemies would make me to be, nor have I by any injury done
to them deserved to be used by them as I am.

Verse. 9. All nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before thee,
etc.] This may be meant, either of the forced acknowledgement of the greatness
of the God of Israel, whereto all nations should be brought by observing his
mighty works; or rather of the conversion of the Gentiles: and it may well be
that David might hence encourage himself, that if God would show mercy to them,
much more to him, who was one of his own peculiar people. As for that clause,
which thou have made, either it is added the more fully to express that all
nations, none excepted, should come and worship before him, there being no
nation under heaven that received not their being from God; or else rather to
imply a reason, why it might well be thought that God would in time to come
call in all nations to fear and praise him, namely, because they were the work
of Gods hands as well as the Jews, and therefore it was fit that they also
should know and worship their Creator.

Verse. 11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 25.4: unite my
heart to fear thy name; that is, unite my heart to thee, cause me in sincere
and fervent love to cleave unto thee, make me with a full resolution to set my
heart to fear and serve thee only, that my heart may not be drawn away to do
any thing but what is according to thy will; or, which is indeed all one in
effect, Cause my heart to be united within it self, that it may not be divided
and distracted with diverse corrupt affections, that I may not be carried this
way and that, as double-minded men are wont to be, that so I may fear and serve
thee with my whole heart; and that because such only as are thus affected thou
art wont to help.

Verse. 13. Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell.] or, the lowest
grave. That is, from the most desperate dangers of death, wherein my condition
seemed as hopeless, as is the condition of one that is buried deep under
ground; or, By pardoning my sins, thou have delivered me from that desperation
I lay under, the terrors of Satan, and the tortures of an evil conscience, yea
even from the very pit of hell. And indeed because the remembrance of his sins
might well bring these terrors upon David when he was in such dangers, it is
most probable that this was chiefly intended in that which he says of his
souls deliverance from the lowest hell.

Verse. 16. Give thy strength unto thy servant, etc.] That is, By thy strength
do thou help and support me, both that I may prevail over my strong
adversaries, and that I may not sink under the terrors that lie upon my
spirit: and save the son of thine handmaid; that is, me, who have been even
from my mothers womb thy household servant, as being born in thy family, of thy
servant, born of faithful parents, and so by birth-priviledge under the
Covenant, and consequently under thy care and tuition.

Verse. 17. Show me a token for good.] That is, By some notable and wonderful
sign wrought for my preservation and deliverance, make it evident both to my
self and others that thou art tenderly careful of my good and welfare, however
for the present thou art pleased to hide thy self from me.

PSALM LXXXVII.
Verse. 1. HIs foundation is in the holy mountains.] It seems probable by the
manner of the Psalmists expressing himself here, that having been long
meditating with himself of the happiness of Zion, in that it was the city of
God, hereupon he breaks forth abruptly thus, His foundation is in the holy
mountains; that is, The foundation of the temple or city Jerusalem, which he
has chosen and built for his own settled dewlling place, he has laid in the
holy mountains: whereby may be meant, either particularly the hills of Sion and
Moriah, whereon the Temple and city of David were built; or generally the
mountains in and about Jerusalem, according to that Psalm. 125.2. the mountains
are round about Jerusalem: which he calls holy mountains, because they were
sanctified and set apart to be the lace of Gods spiritual presence and
worship. And doubtless this which is here said of the situation of Zion in the
mountains, is to imply the strength and stability thereof. It is the judgment
of diverse learned Expositours, that this Psalm was composed for the
encouragement of Gods people, when after their return out of Babylon they had
been many years opposed and hindered in rebuilding the city and temple, and
were at last stirred up by the prophets Haggai and Zachary again to set upon
the work: Though they were poor and but few in number, and had many mighty
adversaries, and though the foundation that was laid for the Temple gave not
the least hopes that ever it would equal the glory of the former Temple, Ezr.
3.12; yet the Psalmist wills them to consider, that it was God that had laid
the foundation, both of the Temple and city, as the prophet Isaiah says also
Isa. 14.32. the Lord has founded Zion, and that too in the place which himself
had chosen for his holy habitation, and for the habitation of his people; and
therefore they need not fear but he would prosper their work, and that he would
strengthen and establish it for ever. But however it is evident in the Psalm,
that the chief drift of it is to set forth the strength and glory of the Church
of Christ, that spiritual Sion: and this therefore is here principally
intended, that this holy Jerusalem, which God built and not man, had her
foundation in the holy mountain, not only because it must needs be invincibly
strong, as being founded upon Christ, so that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it Matthew. 16.18; but also because it was out of Zion that the
Gospel and Church of Christ did first come forth, and spread it self over all
the world.

Verse. 2. The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of
Jacob.] That is, say some Expositours, more then all the synagogues in the land
or more then all the places wherein God had formerly dwelt in tabernacles among
his people. But I rather take it thus, that God loved Sion more then all the
towns and cities, which God had given the seed of Jacob in the land of Canaan
for their habitation, and that because he had chosen that for his settled
dewlling place.

Verse. 3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God.] As if the prophet
had said, (speaking in reference to the sad estate of Gods people and the city
Jerusalem, after their return from the Babylonian captivity,) O thou city of
God, Though thou art now in a poor and low and despised condition, and there
may seem to be little or no hope for the present that ever it will be better
with thee; yet certainly in the writings of the prophets, and by the prophets
too that are now living, glorious things are spoken, that is, foretold
concerning thee, that shall in time to come befall thee. Yet some, I know, do
understand it thus, glorious things are spoken of thee, that is, are every
where reported of thee.

Verse. 4. I will make mention of Rahab, etc.] That is, of Egypt; for Egypt is
usually called Rahab in the Scripture, as Psalm. 89.10. and Isa. 51.9* and that
either from her strength and pride (which the word Rahab signifies) by reason
of her exceeding great riches and power, or because of some chief city in Egypt
that was so called. Some Expositours conceive, that in this and the following
verse Zion is preferred before all the nations here mentioned, for the many
famous men that should spring up there; and accordingly they understand the
words thus, I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me;
behold Philistia and Tire with Ethiopia; this man was born there, as if he had
said, I will to my country men and friends, with whom I confer, talk of the
glory of Egypt and Babylon, and likewise of Philistia and Tire and Ethiopia;
and so perhaps in talking of them, some one man in these nations may be found,
of whom it may be said, by way of extolling him for his eminency, This man was
born there: but now in Sion, as it follows in the next verse, many such men of
renown shall be found, of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in
her. But doubtless these words contain a prophecy of the bringing in of all
nations to be joined to the Church and people of God; these being here
expressed by name in stead of all, either because these were best known to the
Jews, or because these were the greatest and richest of nations in those times,
or the most notorious for superstition and all other wickedness whatsoever,
and usually the greatest enemies to the people of God, and therefore most
unlikely to be joined to her; this being much for the honor of Zion, that
those that formerly fought her ruin, should now count it their greatest glory
to be numbered amongst her children. Accordingly therefore these words must be
understood, and that either as the words of the Psalmist, or as spoken in the
name of the Church, glorying as it were in her great enlargements: I will make
mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me; that is, to those that are
already knit to me, to those that are my familiar friends, or that are already
citizens of Sion, I will speak of the Egyptians and Babylonians upon occasion
of their coming in to join themselves to us. I will make honorable mention of
them and of their piety and worthy deeds; or, In speaking to those that are
fellow-citizens of Sion, I will take in and make mention of, not the Jews only,
but even the Gentiles also: and the meaning is, that their conversion should be
famously known and spoken of. Behold Philistia and Tire with Ethiopia; as if it
had been said, I will also make mention of these nations, or these also shall
be numbered amongst the citizens of Zion: of them it shall be said, this man was
born there, that is, these beforementioned were born there, for the Scriptures
do usually speak of whole nations as of one man, as in Psalm. 25.22. Redeem
Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. However the meaning is this, that
diverse of these nations should join themselves to the Church, being there
begotten again by the immortal seed of the Word, and so should renounce their
former countries, counting it their greatest honor to be newborn citizens of
Gods spiritual Zion; or that those that shall be thus converted from
heathenisme and joined to the Church, should be in all respects as those that
are born there.

Verse. 5. And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her.]
That is, whereas now the inhabitants of Zion are very few, then many and many
of diverse nations and countries and conditions shall day after day be added to
the Church, and it shall be counted an honor to be numbered amongst the
citizens of Zion. The like expressions we have elsewhere in the prophets
concerning the calling of the Gentiles, as Isa. 44.5. One shall say I am the
Lords; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel: and so likewise Isa. 54.1. See also the foregoing Note.

Verse. 6. The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, that this man was
born there.] That is, The Lord himself, the king of Zion, yea the king of the
whole world, shall to their great honor, when he takes notice of all the
inhabitants of the world, own them as true members of his Church, and enroll
them in the Register of the citizens of Zion, as those whose names were from
all eternity written also in the book of life. The Psalmist alludes to the
custom of king, that are wont to take the number and to keep a register of the
names of their subjects: and the drift of the words is to imply, that God, to
whom all nations are exactly known, and at whose disposing they are, shall
every where bring into his Church those he desires to honor, and shall readily
own them for his people.

Verse. 7. As well the singers, as the players on instruments shall be there,
etc.] That is, So great shall the bliss of Sion be, that it shall be a place
of continual joy, the inhabitants still seeking to praise God for his
goodness, and to extol the happiness of his city and people. All my springs
are in thee, that is, all from whence any good or comfort comes flowing into my
soul is in thee, O city of God; from the presence of God and his holy
Ordinances there, all saving knowledge, grace and comfort, those living waters
that can only refresh my soul, come flowing in to me, see the Note Psalm. 68.26;
or, all my springs are in thee, that is, whatever is within me, that can
contribute any thing to the setting forth of thy praise, O Zion, shall be spent
upon thee; all the thoughts and affections of my heart, all my skill in music,
and the vein that I have for poetry, shall be poured forth in thy praises, and
shall continually send forth new and fresh praises of thee. Either of these
ways this last clause may be most probably understood. Yet some take it thus,
All my springs are in thee, that is, all my delights are set upon thee, all my
affection is to thee, O Zion; or, as if it were spoken to God, All my thoughts
are on thee, O God, all my delight and hope is in thee, and all my affection is
to thee.

PSALM LXXXVIII.
The Title. TO the chief Musician, upon Mahalath Leannoth, etc.] See the Note
on the Title Psalm. 53. of which what is there said may be also said here:
Maschil; see the Note on the Title Psalm. 32. of Heman the Ezrahite. There was
one Heman, that was one of the three chief Singers, and who was likewise David's
Seer, as is before noted 1 Chronicles. 25.1.5, and therefore some conceive that he
was the author of this Psalm, and his brother Ethan the author of the
following Psalm. But why these should be called Ezrahites, I find no clear
reason given. And therefore others do rather conceive, that these were those
Heman and Ethan of the tribe of Judah mentioned 1 Chronicles. 2.6. and 1 Kings 4.31.
for which see the Notes there.

Verse. 5. Free among the dead, etc.] That is, I am as one amongst the dead,
free of that company, or free from all the cares and affairs of this life; as
if he should have said, I am in a manner dead to the world: like the slain that
lie in the grave; that is, and I have been brought into this condition by a
violent hand, as those that are slain in war; or, I am no more regarded, then
those that are slain in the war, that are presently tumbled into a pit, no
man pitying them or being sollicitous for them: whom thou remembrest no more;
that is, of whom thou take no more care, to wit, for the things of this life:
and they are cut off from thine hand; that is, from thy providence; thou do
no more govern and protect them, nor dispose of them, or provide for them, as
thou do for living men. Yet some conceive that these words are uttered by the
Psalmist out of a distempered spirit, as one transported by passion through the
extreme troubles and miseries he was in. And some read the last clause, as it
is in the margin, and they are cut off by thine hand; and so conceive that
hereby the Psalmist would imply, that he was as one that was cut off by a hand
of divine justice.

Verse. 6. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, etc.] That is, in the grave; see
the Note Psalm. 86.13. and the same may be intended also in the following words,
in darkness, in the deeps. Yet some conceive that here he compares himself,
and that with respect to his desperate condition, and the many terrors that
lay upon him, to a man that is cast into a deep dungeon.

Verse. 8. Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me, etc.] See the Notes
Job 19.13. and Psalm. 31.11: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth; that is,
there is no hope of freeing my self from the troubles I am in, see the Note Job
19.8. Yet some understand this literally of the Psalmists imprisonment or
banishment; or of his shutting up himself close at home, as being overpressed
with sorrow and shame, to see how all men abhorred his company.

Verse. 9. I have stretched out my hands unto thee.] See the Note Job 11.13.

Verse. 10. Will thou show wonders to the dead? etc.] As if he should have said,
Unless help come presently, I shall be past hope of praising thee: see the
Notes Job 7.8, 9. Psalm. 6.5, and 30.9.

Verse. 11. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? etc.] See the
Notes Job 26.6. and 28.22.

Verse. 12. Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in
the land of forgetfulness?] That is, in the grave, where the dead forget the
living, the body lying there without all sense or remembrance of any thing, see
the Note Job 14.21. and where being laid they are in a manner quite forgotten
by others, see the Notes Job 24.20. and Psalm. 31.12.

Verse. 13. In the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.] That is, I will
betimes seek unto thee, before extreme necessity constrains me thereto; or,
early, even before thou causest the morning light to shine upon me.

Verse. 18. Lover and friend have thou put far from me, etc.] See the Note above
verse. 8: and mine acquaintance into darkness; that is, they hide themselves
from me; or, if they come where I am, they will not know me.

PSALM LXXXIX.
The Title. MAschil of Ethan the Ezrahite.] See the Note on the Title Psalm. 88.
Considering the sad complaints that are made in the later part of this Psalm
verse. 38, etc. concerning the doleful condition whereinto the seed of David
and the kingdom of Judah were fallen, it may seem very questionable whether
that Ethan, the brother of Heman, mentioned 1 Kings 4.31. and 1 Chronicles. 2.6.
could be the author of this Psalm. And indeed if we understand those
complaints of the times of the Babylonian captivity, when Jehoiachin was there
cast into prison, or of the declining times of Judahs kingdom a little before
the captivity, all that can be said is, that Ethan might by the spirit of
prophesy thus foretell the desolations that were to come upon the kingdom of
Judah. But I rather incline to think, that the following relation in this Psalm
of the doleful condition of Judahs kingdom is meant of Rehoboams days: for
though many expressions therein seem to imply a greater desolation, which that
kingdom was brought into, then that was in Rehoboams time; yet if we consider
what an astonishment it must needs be to the faithful in the land, to see that
kingdom, which God had promised should continue in the seed of David to the
end of the world, so presently torn in pieces, by the revolting of ten of the
twelve tribes from David's family to Jeroboam, and by the civil wars which
followed thereupon, and how thereupon the land was invaded and spoiled by
Shishak king of Egypt 1 Kings 14.25. and 2 Chronicles. 12.2. (all which Ethan
surviving Solomon might live to see) it cannot seem strange that Ethan should
with respect to those times so bemoan the kingdom of Judah, as in a manner
lost and ruined in the eye of reason.

Verse. 1. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever, etc.] That is, say
some Expositours, I will sing of the mercies of God, which continue for ever,
which are therefore called the sure mercies of David Isa. 55.3: with my mouth
will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations; that is, thy
faithfulness which continues to all generations. But I rather conceive that
this is spoken in the name of the Church, who undertake that they will for ever
extol the mercies and faithfulness of God; or, by the Psalmist in his own
name thus, I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever, that is, as long as
I live; or by this Psalm, which shall be continued in the Church for ever, I
will convey the praise of thy mercy to all generations. However the drift of
the Psalmist in these words is, to imply his confidence that God would not cast
off his people for ever.

Verse. 2. For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever, etc.] That is, I
have concluded on this within my self, that however things go, and though it
may seem otherwise to the eye of reason for the present, yet Gods mercy to the
seed of David and to his people Israel shall never fail, but shall continue and
be carried on to all generations, till it be perfected at last in eternal
glory: thy faithfulness shall thou establish in the very heavens; that is,
though thy promises may seem to fail, yet from the heavens thou will make good
thy faithfulness and perform all thy promises; or, thy faithfulness shall be
established, as surely as the heavens are established, and shall be perfected
in the glory of thy Saints in heaven.

Verse. 3. I have made a covenant with my chosen, etc.] We must understand this,
a^ if it had been expressed thus, And the ground of this my confidence is, that
thou have said, I have made a covenant with my chosen, etc. for here the
Psalmist brings in the Lord asserting the covenant he had made with David,
because this was that whereon he grounded his confidence mentioned in the
foregoing verse; I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David
my servant, that is, I have made a sure and irrevocable covenant with him, to
wit, concerning the stability of his seed and throne; for which see the Note 2 Samuel 23.5. and likewise 2 Samuel 7.12, 13.

Verse. 5. And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord, etc.] That is, The
angels, seeing the wonderful works thou do for thy Church shall praise thee
for them: thy faithfulness also in the congregation of thy Saints; that is,
they shall also, in the assembly of those holy spirits, praise thy
faithfulness in making good thy promises to thy people, see the Note Job
15.15; or the second clause may be understood of the angels publishing the
faithfulness of God to his saints and servants upon earth. But now some by the
heavens do understand, not the angels only, but also the holy servants of God
in this world, men of heavenly minds and conversations, who shall praise God
upon earth, as the angels do in heaven. And some also understand the whole
verse of the visible heavens, as a place parallel with that Psalm. 19.1. (for
which see the Note there) adding this, that the heavens may be said to praise
Gods faithfulness in the congregation of the Saints, because they are
isntrumental in conferring those blessings which God has promised to the
righteous, as rain and fruitful seasons, etc. which only the Saints do
acknowledge to be from God. But the first exposition, I conceive, is the best.
However, the drift of this, and diverse of the following verses, is to show how
safely we may rest upon Gods faithfulness in performing what he has promised
to his people, and that in regard of his power to do whatever he pleases.

Verse. 6. For who in the heaven can he compared unto the Lord? etc.] To wit,
among the angels and blessed spirits there? who among the sons of the mighty
can be likened unto the Lord? that is, among the mighty ones of the earth? see
the Note Psalm. 29.1. Yet this last clause may be also understood of the angels,
who may be called the sons of the mighty, as elsewhere they are termed the sons
of God, Job 1.6.

Verse. 7. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, etc.] That
is, as almost all Expositours understand it, in the assembly of the angels;
even those glorious spirits, whose power is so terrible to men, do themselves
tremble and fear before God, and as dreading his Majesty, are always
obsequiously ready to do whatever he enjoins them: and to be had in reverence
of all them that are about him; to wit, the angels, that are continually about
him, as soldiers about their general, and servants about their master, whom
therefore they have all cause to reverence, as infinitely excelling them in
glory. Yet I see not, but this may be most probably understood of the Saints on
earth, to wit, that God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of his people,
in regard of his protecting them, and the dreadful judgments he executes upon
their enemies in their defense; and to be had in reverence of all them that are
about him, that is, of all his people; or, as some say, of all the heathen
round about; see the Note Psalm. 76.11.

Verse. 8. Who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round
about thee?] That is, Who amongst all those that are round about thee are like
to thee for faithfulness? or rather, Who is like unto thee, who art faithful
to all that are round about thee, or who art every way faithful, who
discoverest thy faithfulness in all things round about thee, or who art
clothed with faithfulness round about thee, as with a garment?

Verse. 9. Thou rulest the raging of the sea, etc.] To wit, by keeping it within
its bounds, and making it calm at thy pleasure; see the Notes Job 9.8, and
26.12, and 38.8, etc: or, thou quellest the pride of tyrants and nations, that
are like the raging sea. But that in these words the Psalmist does particularly
intend Gods dividing the red sea before the Israelites, is evident by that
which follows verse. 10.

Verse. 10. Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, etc.] That is, Egypt; see the Note
Psalm. 87.4: as one that is slain; that is, thou have broken the Egyptians with
a deadly blow, destroying them with the waves of the sea, as when a man is
slain with a sword, and with as much ease as a man is slain.

Verse. 12. The North and the South thou have created them, Tabor and Hermon
shall rejoice in thy name.] As if he had said, All parts of the world, East,
West, North and South, were created by thee, and do cheerfully serve and praise
thee their creator: for Tabor, a mountain in the West of Canaan, and Hermon in
the East, are here put for the East and West.

Verse. 14. Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne, etc.] That
is, Thy throne is seated in the midst of justice and judgment; thou do order
all things with most exact justice, both by way of protecting and blessing thy
people, and by way of punishing thine and their enemies. Or, if we read it, as
it is in the margin, Justice and judgment are the establishment of thy throne,
then the meaning is, that Gods kingdom on earth is upheld and magnified, and
made conspicuous in the world, by his justice and judgment. Mercy and truth
shall go before thy face; that is, they shall be continually with thee and in
thy presence: see the Note Psalm. 85.13.

Verse. 15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound, etc.] That is,
who though they be in never so great distress and danger, yet they can rejoice
in that God is graciously present amongst them, as their God and king, and so
can quietly rest on his favor and protection: for in this expression the
Psalmist alludes to the sounding of trumpets, that was used amongst the
Israelites upon diverse occasions in the time of the Law, and that still as a
sign of Gods favorable presence amongst them, which who so understood, they
could not but exceedingly rejoice therein; for which see the Notes Numb. 10.2,
9, 10, and 23.21. Yet withal consequently hereby must needs be employed the
happiness of those that enjoyed the holy and solemn assemblies of Gods people,
and that understanding the meaning of those sacred signs there used, were
refreshed with those spiritual joys that were signified thereby. They shall
walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance; that is, they shall rejoice in
thy favor, see the Notes Psalm. 4.7. and Numb. 6.25, 26. and through thy favor
they shall go on prosperously in all their ways.

Verse. 16. In thy Name shall they rejoice all the day, etc.] That is, They
shall continually rejoice in thee, or in thy favor, and the daily effects
thereof; or in that they are thy people called by thy name: and in thy
righteousness shall they be exalted; that is, through thy faithfulness, or in
the confidence of thy faithfulness to them, their spirits shall be lifted up
with joy, or they shall be encouraged against all adversities and enemies; or,
through thy faithfulness they shall prosper and flourish, and become eminently
great above others. Some also understand this of the imputed righteousness of
Christ, to wit, that thereby they shall be spiritually and eternally exalted.

Verse. 17. For thou art the glory of their strength, etc.] That is, Thou give
them that strength, whereby they glory and triumph over their enemies, or
whereby they become glorious; or, thou do make thy self glorious in their
strength; or, the glory of their strength consists in this, that thou art their
strength: and in thy favor our horn shall be exalted; see the Notes 1 Samuel 2.1.

Verse. 18. For the Lord is our defense, etc.] Or, as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, our shield, that is, our king (see the Note Psa. 47.9.) is of the Lord;
that is, the Lord made him king, he did not exalt himself to that dignity:
which is more plainly expressed in the next words, and our king is of the holy
one of Israel; see the Note Psalm. 71.22. And all this is meant of David, but
principally of Christ: see the Notes 1 Samuel 16.1.

Verse. 19. Then, etc.] That is, When thou had appointed David to be king (as
was touched in the foregoing verse) for the good of thy people: thou spakest in
vision to thy holy one; to wit, Gad or Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.4, 5, etc. or rather to
Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.1: and saidest, I have laid help upon one that is mighty;
that is, I have set apart one to be king for the help of my people, whom I have
furnished with eminent gifts and graces of my spirit, and so have made him a
mighty man of valor and wisdom, and every way exceeding able for that
government and service: I have exalted one chosen out of the people; that is,
out of the common sort of people. But all this, with that which follows, is
chiefly meant of Christ: see the Notes 1 Samuel 16.1. and Deuteronomy. 17.15.

Verse. 20. I have found David my servant, etc.] And so Christ, who is also
called David, Ezekiel. 34.23. is termed Gods chosen servant Isa. 42.1: with my
holy oil have I anointed him; see the Notes 1 Samuel 16.1. and Psalm. 45.7.

Verse. 21. With whom mine hand shall be established, etc.] That is, I will be
so with him, that I will never forsake him: mine arm also shall strengthen him;
that is, my full power, not mine hand only, but mine arm also, shall be put
forth for his help.

Verse. 22. The enemy shall not exact upon him, etc.] To wit, by forcing taxes
or tributes from him, or otherwise oppressing him in his estate: nor the son of
wickedness afflict him; that is, they shall not prevail over him, how bold and
desperate soever they be. But now as we refer this promise to Christ, it must
be understood of his triumphing over all the enemies he grappled with: see the
Note 2 Samuel 7.10.

Verse. 24. But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him, etc.] That is,
He shall be faithful and merciful, which shall be the chief ornaments of his
kingdom; or rather, I will make good my promises to him notwithstanding his
infirmities, wherein mercy shall be showed him: and in my name shall his horn
be exalted; that is, in the confidence of my help and favor he shall lift up
his head with courage; or rather, by me, or to the end my name may be
glorified, shall his kingdom be advanced; and chiefly was this accomplished in
the transcendent glory of Christ's kingdom: but see also the Notes Psalm. 20.1.
and 1 Samuel 2.1.

Verse. 25. I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the
rivers.] That is, so far shall he extend his dominions by his sword: which in
David was accomplished, when he vanquished the Philistines that inhabited by
the sea, and the Syrians unto the river Euphrates, see 2 Samuel 8. And indeed we
must understand this promise much as that concerning Solomon Psalm. 72.8. for
which see the Note there.

Verse. 26. He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father.] That is, 1, He shall be
my son in a special manner, as being a figure of Christ, for which see the
Notes 2 Samuel 7.14. and Psalm. 2.7. 2ly, He shall receive the kingdom, not by
succession from his earthly parents, but as by adoption from me. 3. He shall
call upon me and depend on me, and shall every way carry himself as a son to me.

Verse. 27. Also I will make him my firstborn, etc.] As this is meant of David
it implies, 1. that God should highly esteem of him: 2. that he would honor
him above all his people (though he were the youngest amongst his fathers sons)
by conferring the kingdom upon him: yea and 3. that he should be exalted in
dignity above all the kings of the earth, to wit, in that he was set apart to
be a type of the Messiah: see also the Note upon a like expression Exodus 4.22.
But now in Christ this was most clearly accomplished, in regard of the dignity
of his person and office, being King of kings and Lord of lords, and therefore
called the first-begotten Heb. 1.6. the firstborn amongst many brethren Romans
8.29. and the firstborn of every creature Col. 1.15.

Verse. 28. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, etc.] To wit, that mercy
promised concerning the perpetuity of David's seed and kingdom: see the Note 2 Samuel 7.15.

Verse. 29. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, etc.] That is, the
posterity of David, see the Note 2 Samuel 7.16: which is clear by the following
clause, and his throne as the days of heaven; that is, as long as the world
shall last, see the Note Deuteronomy. 11.21; or as long as the heavens shall last: for
though the heavens shall be changed, Psalm. 103.26. as a vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed; yet they shall not utterly be
destroyed, but being renewed shall continue for ever, 2 Pet. 3.13. But yet by
his seed in the first clause, we may also understand the seed of Christ, to
wit, true believers, who are as it were born again to God, by the sorrows of
Christ upon the Cross, which were as the pains of a woman in travel; see the
Note 2 Samuel 22.51.

Verse. 30. If his children forsake my law, etc.] For this and the two following
verses see the Note 2 Samuel 7.14.

Verse. 34. My covenant will I not break, etc.] As if he should have said,
Though they break my statutes, yet will not I break my covenant: for this seems
to have reference to that before verse. 31. If they break my statutes, etc.

Verse. 35. Once have I sworn by my holiness.] That is, By my self, who am holy
and cannot lie, and of whose holiness the Sanctuary, where I dwell amongst
them, is an evident sign. As for that expression, once have I sworn, it is as
if he had said, And that is enough: for such an expression we frequently use,
to imply the certainty of what we say, Once for all I tell you, that so and so
it is.

Verse. 36. His seed shall endure for ever, etc.] See the Note above verse. 29:
and his throne as the Sun before me; that is, to the end of the world, see the
Note Psalm. 72.5. for to these heavenly bodies he compares the kingdom of David
and Christ, 1. because they are more stable, and less subject to change, then
the things here below; 2. to give a hint of the splendor and glory of this
kingdom; and 3. to imply that we must look up to heaven for the accomplishment
of what is promised concerning this kingdom, and not expect it upon earth.

Verse. 37. It shall be established for ever as the moon, etc.] That is, As the
moon, though it sometimes waxes, and sometimes waneth, and sometimes seems
to be quite gone, yet it always continues settled in the heavens, so shall it
be with David's kingdom, and with the Church and kingdom of Christ, though it
be subject to variety of changes, yet it shall certainly continue for ever. And
then for the following clause, and as a faithful witness in heaven, though
some understand it of the rainbow, thus, that as the rainbow is a faithful
witness concerning Gods promise, that he will never drown the world any more,
so it shall be also as a faithful witness in heaven concerning the perpetuity
of David's kingdom; yet because the rainbow does seldom appear, and when it
does appear, it soon vanishes again, and the Psalmist seems to speak here of
that which might constantly be a visible witness of the perpetuity of David's
kingdom, therefore the most of Expositours do understand it of the moon, thus,
It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in
heaven, that is, The kingdom of David shall as surely be established upon
earth, as the moon is settled and established in heaven, which as it is a
witness of times and seasons, so it shall for ever be a witness in heaven of
the stability of this my promise; according to that Jer. 33.20, 21. Thus says
the Lord, If you can break my covenant of the day and my covenant of the night,
and that there should not be day and night in their season, then may also my
covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not have a son to
reign upon his throne: or, of the stars, and other the lights of heaven in
general, It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful
witness in heaven, that is, and as any other of the faithful witnesses in
heaven, to wit, the stars, which are established as witnesses in the heavens,
faithfully to distinguish between times and seasons, Genesis 1.14.

Verse. 38. But thou have cast off and abhorred, thou have been with thine
anointed.] Because it is not clear at what time this Psalm was penned (for
which see the Note before on the Title of this Psalm) we cannot expressly say,
whether this be meant of Gods being wroth with Jehoiachin, or Zedekiah, who
were carried captives into Babylon; or with Rehoboam, in whose time the
kingdom of Israel was first broken in pieces; or of his being wroth with David
in his successors in general. However, clear it is that the drift of the
Psalmist is to show, that Gods dealing with them seemed, in outward appearance,
to cross all the several branches of the promises before recited: for as this
which he says here of Gods casting off and abhorring, and being wroth with his
anointed (and consequently with his people too) is opposed to that promise
verse. 21, with him mine hand shall be established, etc. so is it likewise in
all the following branches of his complaint. Yet his meaning was not to charge
God with breach of promise, but only to bemoan himself to God, by showing how
contrary all things seemed to be for the present to that which God had promised
to David.

Verse. 39. Thou have made void the covenant of thy servant, etc.] See above
verse. 34: thou have profaned his crown by casting it to the ground; that is,
thou have utterly brought down the glory of his kingdom, and exposed it to
contempt and derifion, as if he had not been the Lords anointed: see 2 Samuel
1.21.

Verse. 40. Thou have broken down all his hedges, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, his walls and strong holds. But see the Note Psalm. 80.12.

Verse. 41. He is a reproach to his neighbors.] That is, they reproach and
flout at him, Is this that glorious king, whose kingdom was to continue as
long as the sun and moon endured? see also the Note Psalm. 79.4.

Verse. 45. The days of his youth have thou shortened, etc.] Some understand
this of the destruction that was made amongst the people; as if it had been
said, Thou have cut off the young men amongst his people in the slower of their
age: others understand it of the king himself; The days of his youth have thou
shortened, that is, Through much misery and sorrow he is become old in the
prime of his youth; or, thou have betimes cut off the days of his reign, even
in his very youth. And indeed of Jehoiachin this might well be said, who at
eighteen years old began to reign, and when he had reigned in all but three
months and odd days, was taken by Nebuchadnezzar and carried captive into
Babylon, 2 King. 24.8, 10. But I conceive it may best of all be understood of
the kingdom it self figuratively; The days of his youth have thou shortened,
that is, That eternal kingdom, which thou did promise to the seed of David,
is waxen old, decayed and broken in its very youth, so soon as it began to
flourish, before it was come to its full ripeness; for thus the prophet Hosea
speaks likewise of the decaies of Isreal's kingdom, Hos. 7.9. gray hairs are
here and there upon him, yet he knows it not. As for the next clause, thou
have covered him with shame, either it is meant of his and his peoples being
carried into captivity; or of the failing of their hopes, in that the kingdom,
which they expected should have continued for ever, was so quickly broken and
ruined.

Verse. 47. Remember how short my time is, etc.] As if he had said, Therefore
come in to the help of me and other thy servants, before it be too late; or,
Make not our lives shorter by cutting us off in thy displeasure; or, Do not
make that little while we have to live, so continually and extremely miserable,
see the Notes Job 10.9, and 14.5. and Psalm. 39.4, 5. Wherefore have thou made
all men in vain? as if he had said, Surely thou did not make so glorious a
creature as man is in vain, but with a purpose to make them taste thy goodness
and loving kindness, and that hereby they might be stirred up to serve and
praise thee; thou did not make them merely that when thou had made them
thou might destroy them again, for then thou might seem to have made them
in vain, yea it had been better for them, if they had never been made: and
therefore why do thou not manifest thy love to us thy people? were it not
better to let us live that we might praise thy name, then to cut us off, as if
we (and consequently all mankind, if it be so with thine own people) were only
made that we might be again destroyed?

Verse. 49. Lord, where are thy former loving-kindnesses, which thou swarest
unto David in thy truth?] As if he had said, Thou have formerly shown thy self
gracious to thy servants, according to thy promises made to David; oh, let it
be so again.

Verse. 50. Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants, etc.] To wit, because
in their reproach thou also art reproached: how I do bear in my bosom the
reproach of all the mighty people; to wit, in that either 1. I take the
reproaches of thy servants and thine anointed, as if they reproached me in mine
own particular; or 2. in that they lie so heavy upon my heart; or 3. in that I
am resolved quietly to endure them, and to swallow them down in silence, as not
being indeed able to shake them off; because in the eye of reason our condition
is at present so contrary to what we waited for; or 4. in that their reproaches
came not to his ear by hearsay only, but were openly to his face cast as it
were into his bosom.

Verse. 51. Wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.] See
the Note Psalm. 56.6. They may be said to have reproached the footsteps of Gods
anointed; either 1. because they scoffed at the delay of the coming of their
promised Messiah, Where, say they, is your long-expected Redeemer? whence is it
that he is so long a coming? and indeed elsewhere by the footsteps or feet of
men is meant their coming, as Isa, 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains are
the feet of him that brings good tidings? etc. that is, How acceptable and
welcome is the coming of those that are sent to preach the Gospel? or 2.
because they derided the holiness of the conversation of him that was then
their king; or his counsels and actions; or the very sad condition whereinto he
was fallen: or 3. because they made a mock of all the monuments and memorials
of the former glory of their kingdom: or 4. because they derided the peoples
endeavoring to tread in the steps of David, and comforting themselves in the
promise that God had made to him and to his seed But the two first reasons seem
to me the most probable.

Verse. 52. Blessed be the Lord for evermore: Amen and Amen.] See the Note Psalm.
41.13. Thus the Psalmist closes this Psalm as he began it, to wit, with an
expression which implies, that he knew God would in the conclusion cause all
things, to work together for the glory of his name, and for the good of his
people. See the Note above verse. 1.

PSALM XC.
The Title. A Prayer of Moses the man of God.] See the Note Deuteronomy. 33.1. Many
Expositours hold that this Psalm was not composed by Moses, but by David. But
there being no great strength in the reason they chiefly build upon, namely,
that it is not probable that Moses, who lived himself 120 years, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
should reckon threescore and ten, or at the most fourscore years, to be the
utmost extent of man's life, as it is here v.10. expressed (for this might be
the common age that men lived to in those times, though Moses and some others
had their days lengthened out to a far longer period;) therefore I see no
reason why we should not understand this Title, as the words do plainly hold
forth, to wit, that this Psalm is a prayer composed by Moses, that man of God.
Yea and very probable I judge it to be, which many say, that it was composed by
Moses for the use and comfort of the Israelites, after God had pronounced that
sentence against them, that they should all die in the wilderness, that were
twenty years old and upward when they came out of Egypt, save only Joshua and
Caleb, Numb. 14.29. and when, according to that sentence, he found the people
for many years together mouldering away: in regard whereof he might well
bewail, as here he does, the mortality of man, and pray to God, as it is verse.
15. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil.

Verse. 1. Lord, thou have been our dewlling place in all generations.] As if he
had said, Though as strangers we travel from one place to another, and have
yet no settled dewlling place; yet to our fathers in this very condition thou
have been in all generations a dewlling place, a house of refuge, yea so thou
have hitherto been to us; thou have always provided for them and us a place of
shelter, where we might repose our selves, and be provided for; thou have been
as a little Sanctuary to us, Ezekiel. 11.16. and therefore be so still.

Verse. 2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God.] This is here inserted,
either 1. to show that it was no wonder that God should be a refuge to them in
all generations, as he said verse. 1. seeing he was God from all eternity before
ever the world was; or 2. because the consideration of Gods eternity does make
us the more sensible of man's frail and transitory condition, of which he
intended now to treat; or 3. because the eternity of God does imply that all
things had their being from God, and both have been always and are still
governed by God, so that he is the supreme cause of all the changes that are in
the creatures, himself in the mean season being subject to no change, as all
things here below are; and therefore to whom should men flee for help, but to
God?

Verse. 3. Thou turnest man to destruction, etc.] That is, to death, which is
the dissolution of soul and body; or to the grave, see the Notes Job 26.6, and
28.22. It is as if he had said, Whilst thou continuest eternally the same, thou
do suddenly bring man back to the earth, from whence he was taken, according
to that sentence which thou did pass against all mankind in Adam, Genesis 3.19.
dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return. And to the same purpose is that
which follows, and say, Return ye children of men; that is, By a word of thy
mouth, when thou please, thou call men back, to wit, their bodies to the
earth, and their spirits to God that gave them, Eccles. 12.7: and to whom
therefore should we seek for preservation but to thee? I know many do otherwise
understand this last clause, to wit, that having turned men to the very brink
of the grave, God often calls them back, as it were, to continue longer in the
world. But the first exposition is doubtless the best.

Verse. 4. For a thousand years, etc.] As if he should have said, I may well say
that man is suddenly turned to destruction; for suppose a man should live a
thousand years, (which yet no man ever did, see Genesis 5.27.) alas, a thousand
years in thy sight, that is, before thee, or in comparison of thine eternity,
or with thee, as Saint Peter alleges it 2 Pet. 3.8. are but as yesterday when
it is past (which then is nothing; and besides man judges better of the
shortness of time when it is past, then when it is passing) and as a watch in
the night, that is, the space of three hours: for by that Matthew. 14.25. And in
the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them, it appears that of old they
divided the night, consisting of twelve hours, into four watches, which seem to
be intended by those four distinct terms Mark 13.35. at even, or at midnight,
or at cock-crowing, or in the morning. And it may be also that he the rather
mentions a watch in the night, either because time seems to slip fastest away
when men lie slumbering, scarce knowing whether they be asleep or awake; or
else because he would also thereby covertly give a hint how full of darkness
the life of man is, by reason of his ignorance and manifold miseries. However,
that which Moses intends here is the same that David says Psalm. 39.15. mine
age is as nothing before thee. For so Peter alleges this, to prove that Gods
staying long before he came to judgment was no delay with God, seeing a day
and a thousand years were all one with God, 2 Pet. 3.8. But beloved, be not
ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day.

Verse. 5. Thou carriest them away as with a flood, etc.] That is, so that there
is no memorial left of them, no more then there is of a flood, which
overfloweth all for a time, but suddenly glideth away, and it is quite gone;
or, they are suddenly swept away by a violent death, see the Note Job 22.16;
besides that every man's life does soon pass away, (as is expressed in the
foregoing verses) men are often cut off by sudden casualties and judgments: they
are as a sleep; to wit, that suddenly passes away; or, as a sleep, that is, as
a dream when one sleeps, see the Notes Job 20.8. and Psalm. 73.20. As for the
following clause, In the morning, that is, in their flourishing age, their
childhood or youth, they are like grass which grows up, if we read it, as it
is in the margin of our Bibles, they are like grass which is changed, it may
be understood of that change that is in grass, when being sprouted out of the
earth, it becomes more and more fresh and flourishing, and shoots up with a
flour; and then it intends the same with that translation which is in our
Bibles, to wit, that men in the morning of their years do usually flourish like
grass, that has not yet felt the heat of the sun. But commonly they that thus
translate the words, do understand it of the change that is wrought in grass
when it withers; in the morning they are like grass which is changed, that
is, they are like grass, which though it be fresh in the morning, yet
presently by the heat of the sun it begins to flag, to change and wither.

Verse. 7. For we are consumed by thine anger, etc.] Diverse things might by the
Psalmist be intended in these words: as 1. that it was Gods just anger against
the sin of Adam and Eve, that did first bring us to be subject to death; 2.
that it was the same anger of God against the sins of men, that caused him so
exceedingly to shorten men's days, in comparison of what they were before the
flood; and 3. that this was likewise the cause why the Israelites were daily
consumed in the wilderness, see the Note Psalm. 78.33, and that they must needs
perish, when poor creatures, so frail by nature, had also the wrath of God
lying so heavy upon them. And the same is also repeated again in the next
clause, and by thy wrath are we troubled. Yet some would have this understood
of their being troubled with being continually in fear of death; or of the
minds terrors through the fear of eternal torments after death.

Verse. 8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, etc.] That is, Thou do
not only know all our transgressions, but thou do also take notice of them,
to punish us for them. For thence is this phrase of Gods setting their
iniquities before him, to wit, as men set up marks to shoot at; or as men are
careful to set those things which they would not fail to remember, where they
may be sure to have them always in their eye; or rather as judges are wont to
set offenders before them, and to cause their offenses to be openly laid forth
and declared before they pronounce sentence against them. Our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance; that is, those sins which we hide from others, or
which we our selves are ignorant of, are clearly discovered before thy
lightsome countenance, where the hidden things of darkness are as visible, as
those things that are done in the sight of the Sun. And indeed this, when God
begins to punish men for these sins, they are wont to see and acknowledge,
though they would not before.

Verse. 9. For all our days are passed away in thy wrath, etc.] That is, Thy
wrath lies heavy upon us all our life long: we spend our years as a tale that
is told; that is, they pass away in an instant; even as when a man speaks, his
words continue no longer then they are speaking, but as fast as they are
uttered they pass away with a breath, and vanish into the air, and can by no
means be recalled again; yea as when men tell some foolish tale, which is not
worth the remembering, and which men forget as fast as it is told.

Verse. 10. The days of our years are threescore years and ten, etc.] See the
Note upon the Title of this Psalm. It is as if he had said, If to lengthen out
the time of our lives, we reckon them by the days we live, which will soon
indeed amount to many thousands, alas, all this will make but threescore and
ten years; that is the usual time of men's lives now, whereas before the flood
we see the Patriarks lived many hundred years. And if by reason of strength
they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow; that is, if
some, by reason of more then ordinary strength of their constitution, do live
to fourscore years, yet notwithstanding this their strength, or even when they
are in their greatest strength, their lives are usually full of toil and
trouble, and manifold miseries and sorrows: for it is soon cut off, and we fly
away; that is, the strength of men is soon decayed, and then we are gone in an
instant.

Verse. 11. Who knows the power of thine anger? etc.] This may be understood
as spoken, either 1. by way of bewailing the sad discovery of Gods anger
against the Israelites in the wilderness, as if he had said, Who is able to
conceive or express how heavy the wrath of God lies now upon us? Or 2. by way
of admiring the infinite and incomprehensible power of God, manifested
generally in the judgments wherewith he contends in his wrath against those
that sin against him; or rather the wonderful power that is in the wrath of
God to awaken and terrify the children of men; Who knows the power of thine
anger? that is, Who is able to express or think how terrible thy wrath is to
such poor creatures as men are, when once thou make it manifest that thou art
offended with them? As long as thou hidest thy displeasure, they are fearlesse,
and proudly exalt themselves against thee: but when thou make them see thou
art angry with them, then they tremble, and their spirits fail them. Or else 3.
by way of exclaiming against the stupidity of men; Who knows the power of
thine anger? as if he had said, Alas, How few are there that know or consider,
or seriously lay to heart the power of thine anger! nothing will make men fear
thy wrath; but even when thy wrath is discovered against them, yet they rush
headlong upon the pikes of thy displeasure. And accordingly we must also
understand the following clause, even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath,
one of these two ways: to wit, either 1. that there is as much danger and
terror in Gods wrath, as men can possibly fear: or 2. that according as men
fear God, so they are sensible of his displeasure: they that fear not God, care
not for any discoveries of his anger against them; but they that fear God, are
tenderly fearful of every token of his displeasure, and very ready to humble
themselves under his hand.

Verse. 12. So teach us to number our days, etc.] See the Note Psalm 39.4.

Verse. 13. Return, (O Lord) how long? etc.] This doubtless is spoken with
respect to the wandering of the Israelites so many years in the wilderness; (if
not also to their long bondage in Egypt) as appears by the following words, and
let it repent thee concerning thy servants: see also verse. 15.

Verse. 14. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, etc.] That is, By showing us
mercy speedily, satisfy our souls with the assurance that thou have pardoned
our sins, and do love us and own us as thy people: see the Note Deuteronomy. 33.23.

Verse. 16. Let thy work appear unto thy servants, etc.] That is, Make it appear
by thy working for us, that thou art pacifyed toward us; or rather, Let that
which thou will do for thy servants, or which thou have promised our
forefathers that thou will do for us, appear and be made manifest before our
eyes; let us see it done. And most probable it is, that this is particularly
meant of that great work which God had promised to do for them, to wit, that
he would give them the land of Canaan for a possession: so that it is in effect
as if he had said, Let it appear that thou have not brought us out of Egypt in
vain; perfect the work begun by bringing us into the promised land. Yet by
these words thy work may be meant any special work of mercy; because that is
Gods chief work, yea his proper work, in regard of his Church. When the Lord
hides himself from his people, and punishes them, he appears then as an enemy,
rather then a father; and so that may be called his strange work, as it is Isa.
28.21: but when he does them good, that is his own proper work: and hence, say
some, is this expression, Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory
unto their children; that is, Glorify thy self by the greatness of thy mercy
to them, and the great and glorious works thou shall do for them. And this
also may be meant particularly of his carrying them into the land of Canaan.

Verse. 17. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, etc.] That is,
his grace and savor; which is called here the beauty of the Lord, either because
the special grace which God affords his people, in protecting and blessing
them, etc. renders him beautiful and amiable in their eyes, yea causes his
glory to shine forth in the eyes of all men, making it manifest that he is the
only true almighty God; (and so did particularly his carrying the Israelites
into the land of Canaan, which seems to be here desired by Moses;) or else
because Gods favor to his Church and people is their beauty and glory, it
makes them to be admired and highly esteemed by those that take notice of it;
whereas if God withdraws himself, and shines not favorably upon them, they
become an obscure and base despised people. And establish thou the work of our
hands upon us; that is, direct and make good, and prosper in us and to us what
we shall undertake; by thy spirit direct us to yield obedience in all things,
and then let thy blessing be upon our endeavors: yea, the work of our hands
establish thou it; that is, let thy continued aid and blessing carry on what we
undertake, even unto the end.

PSALM XCI.
Verse. 1. HE that dwells in the secret place of the most High, etc.] That is,
He that lies hid under the protection of the most high God; or, He that puts
his whole confidence in God alone, and makes him his only refuge: shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty; that is, he shall dwell quietly in a sure and
safe place, and needs not fear any danger whatsoever. By the secret place of
the most High is meant Gods secret preservation, which is not discerned by a
natural man; and it may allude to a man's being kept close, as it were, in Gods
bosom: but see the Note Psalm. 27.5. And by the shadow of the Almighty is
employed not only safety, but also that sweet refreshing of mind they find, that
can repose themselves upon Gods protection, such as men meet with when they
come into some shadowy place, to cover themselves from the scorching heat of
the sun. But see also the Notes Ruth 2.12. Judge. 14.9. Psalm. 17.8, and 57.1.
Now this Psalm is probably thought to have been composed by David upon occasion
of that pestilence, which destroyed such multitudes in the space of three
days, 2 Kings 24. see verse. 3. and 6. of this Psalm.

Verse. 2. I will say of the Lord, etc.] To wit, at all times, and in all
distresses whatsoever: He is my refuge, etc. that is, my sure protector. Now
this we may conceive to be spoken in the person of any righteous man, so
safe-guarded as is above said, under the shadow of the Almighty. But yet I
rather conceive, that this the Psalmist inserts concerning himself, that by his
own example he might encourage others to trust thus in God.

Verse. 3. Surely he shall deliver thee, etc.] This may also be taken, either as
spoken by the Psalmist to every righteous man, that wholly depends upon Gods
protection, or else as spoken to himself; which I the rather approve, both
because of the dependence of this upon the foregoing verse, and because that
which follows verse. 9. cannot well be otherwise understood. Surely he shall
deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence;
that is, from the secret contrivances of all enemies, bodily or spiritual,
lying in wait to destroy, and from the noisome, hurtful, destroying
pestilence. And so under these two particulars there may be also a promise
employed of deliverance from all dangers and evils whatsoever, whether they come
from men or from God, from all the devices of men, and from all desperate
sicknesses and sudden destruction. But then again many learned Expositours do
understand both clauses of the pestilence; holding that by the fowler David
meant that destroying angel 2 Samuel 24.16. and that the pestilence may well be
compared to the snare of the fowler, because men are suddenly taken with it,
when they never think on any such thing, as the bird is catched whilst it is
skipping about and singing, and never thinks of any danger.

Verse. 4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, etc.] See the Note above verse.
1: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler; that is, his faithfulness, or
his promises, when thou applyest them to thy self for thy comfort.

Verse. 5. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, etc.] That is, of
no affrightments that use to terrify men and women in the night; and then we
are subject to most dangers, and our terrors are always greatest: nor for the
arrow that flies by day; nor for any sudden and unexpected dangers. The
meaning is, that he that trusts in God shall be secure from all dangers, by
night and by day, from all open and secret dangers; not only from all evil that
open adversaries can bring upon us, but also from the stroke of invisible
spirits, which cannot be avoided. But now many Expositours do understand both
these clauses of the pestilence; holding that it is called the terror by
night, because it is a disease so full of terror, especially in the night, and
the arrow that flies by day, because the infection will suddenly spread so far
off, especially in the heat of the day. And so likewise they understand that
which is added in the next verse.

Verse. 6. Nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the
destruction that wastes at noonday.] The plague is here called the pestilence
that walks in darkness, because even in the dead of the night it spreads
and passes from house to house, when all people are at rest, and stir not
abroad, and that with great force and strength to destroy; yea and some say
too, because it proceeds from secret unknown causes, and so is the more hardly
suppressed or cured: and it is called also the destruction that wastes at
noonday, because it destroys such multitudes of all sorts of people, and
rages most when the sun is hottest.

Verse. 8. Only with thine eyes shall thou behold and see the reward of the
wicked.] That is, Thou shall see this done, and thine eyes shall be pleased
with the sight; or, This shall be done, thou doing nothing therein, but only
looking on.

Verse. 9. Because thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most
High, thy habitation.] See the Note Psalm. 90, 1. This may be taken as spoken to
the man that trusts in God, whoever he be. But those words, which is my
refuge, do rather induce me to think, (as is before noted verse. 3.) that the
Psalmist here speaks to his own soul.

Verse. 11. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, etc.] Why the devil
urged this as a promise made particularly to Christ Matthew. 4.6. we may see by
that which is noted Genesis 28.12.

Verse. 13. Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder, etc.] That is, they shall
be as so many worms under thy feet. But I take it to be a general promise made
to those that shall trust in God, as is before expressed, to wit, that no
adverse power of any creature whatsoever, whether of beasts, men or devils,
shall be able to hurt them; that God would deliver them from their most
desperate dangers, and dreadful enemies, whether by open violence or secret
policies seeking their hurt; yea that they should not only be delivered from
them, but should also vanquish them, and subdue them, and trample them under
their feet.

Verse. 14. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him,
etc.] This is spoken in reference to that which went before; as if the Lord had
said, Because by his trusting in me he has thus manifested that he truly loves
me and knows me, therefore I will not fail to deliver him. For it is clear that
here the Lord is brought in engaging himself by promise to him that trusts in
him. And some conceive that this is added, as Gods charge given to his angels,
whereof mention is made before verse. 11.

Verse. 16. With long life will I satisfy him, etc.] To wit, not in this world
only, see the Note Genesis 25.8. but especially also in the world to come, see the
Note Psalm. 21.4. And some conceive that this is particularly promised in
reference to the foregoing promises of preservation from the pestilence. And
show him my salvation; see the Note Psalm. 50.23.

PSALM XCII.
The Title. A Psalm or Song for the sabbath day.] See the Note on the Title
Psalm. 30.

Verse. 1. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, etc.] To wit,
especially on the sabbath, this being one of the chief holy services of that
day.

Verse. 2. To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy
faithfulness every night.] That is, To praise thee night and day, even
continually without ceasing. Yet these words may also have respect to the set
times that were appointed in those days for the service of God.

Verse. 3. Upon the harp with a solemn sound.] It is in the Hebrew, Higgaion:
for which see the Note Psalm. 9.16.

Verse. 4. For thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy work, etc.] To wit, in
that by thy works thou do clearly discover all thy glorious excellencies, and
especially thy fatherly providence over thy poor children. And this may be
meant, both of the work of creation, (for the remembrance whereof the sabbath
was instituted, when on the seventh day God rested from all the work that he
had made, Genesis 2.2.) and likewise of Gods works of providence toward his
Church and people.

Verse. 5. O Lord, how great are thy works! etc.] That is, how wonderful and
unsearchable! It may be meant of Gods works, both of creation and providence,
in general. But I conceive that this is prefixed particularly with respect to
that which follows, concerning the flourishing of the wicked for a time, that
they may be destroyed for ever, and the misery of the righteous for a while
followed with great prosperity and glory. And thy thoughts are very deep; that
is, incomprehensible: see the Note Psalm. 36.6.

Verse. 6. A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this.] To
wit, this which was said before, concerning the greatness and
unsearchablenesse of Gods works and counsels, and of the delight which may be
taken therein, verse. 4; or else rather this which follows verse. 7.

Verse. 7. When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of
iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.] That is, As
the grass, the faster it grows and the more it flourishes, the sooner it is
cut down; so the more the wicked prosper, the nearer they are to their ruin.
But then in this their condition is worse, because they shall never spring
again, as the grass does, but shall be destroyed for ever. See also the Note
Psalm. 37.2.

Verse. 8. But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore.] This is added to imply
that though wicked men might flourish for a time, and seem to carry all before
them; yet these things came not by chance, but were ordered justly and wisely,
though in ways which are far above our reach: for all this may be clearly
inferred from this, that the Lord is most high for evermore; and that because
being such, he sees all and orders all that is done in the world, and being the
supreme judge and not subject to change, as all things here below are, he must
needs be constantly always alike an enemy to the wicked, and sure therefore to
repay them according to their ways: neither is it any wonder, though he
deferres a while the punishment of the wicked here in this world, seeing he
has eternity before him wherein to do it hereafter; nor that we cannot
understand how all things tend to these holy ends, seeing his ways are far
above our ways, yea far above our understanding.

Verse. 9. For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for lo, thine enemies shall perish,
etc.] The Psalmist repeats this again and again, to imply that so it shall
certainly be; and for the greater assurance of this, he also speaks of it, as
of a thing which men might behold even done already.

Verse. 10. But my horn shall thou exalt like the horn of an Unicorn, etc.] A
beast which cannot be subdued and taken, see Job 39.9, 10. And therefore most
Expositours conceive that this was spoken of the great glory and invincible
power of David's kingdom, see the Note Deuteronomy. 33.17. 1 Samuel 2.1, 10. Numb.
23.22. and Psalm. 75.10: I shall be anointed with fresh oil; that is, I shall be
cheared with Gods favor, endued with the graces of Gods spirit, and shall
abound with all outward blessings: see the Notes Psalm. 23.5, and 45.7. And it
is like it was spoken with reference to David's being anointed king.

Verse. 11. Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, etc.] As if he
should have said, They shall be certainly and soon destroyed. But see also the
Notes Job 22.19. Psalm. 22.17, and 37.34, and 91.8.

Verse. 12. The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree, etc.] To wit,
whereas the wicked shall be as the grass, as was said before v. 7. And I
conceive that the righteous are compared to this tree, because it is always
green and flourishing, and lives very long; as for the same reasons they are
also compared to cedars in the following clause, he shall grow like a cedar in
Lebanon, see the Notes Numb. 24.6. and Psalm. 1.3. Yet some conceive that they
are compared to the palm tree likewise, because this tree yields most sweet
fruit, and though it have never so great weight laid upon it, yet it will
thrive and prosper, and as it were raise up it self the higher (whence it was
that the branches of this tree used to be worn in garlands, and carried in men's
hands, as signs of victory, see Rev. 7.9.) and so the righteous prosper under
afflictions and oppressions; and that they are compared to cedars, because the
wood of these trees is of a sweet favor, and not subject to rot or decay with
age, and used much in the building and adorning of princes palaces. However,
doubtless the chief drift of the words is, to signify that though the
righteous may be brought very low, yet they shall rise and grow up and flourish
again exceedingly.

Verse. 13. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in
the courts of our God.] The reason is here given, why the righteous are sure
thus to flourish; to wit, because they not only live in the Church, where they
enjoy the means of grace, but also are by a lively faith rooted in Christ, of
whom the Temple was a type: see the Notes Numb. 24.6. and Psalm. 1.3. Why the
courts of Gods house are expressly here mentioned, see in the Note Psalm. 84.2.

Verse. 14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age, etc.] To wit, the
fruit of holiness and righteousness; and so likewise they shall be blessed of
God, and shall be as a flourishing tree that decays not with age: yea old age
shall be to them but a renewing of their vigor, in that they shall live for
ever in Gods house in heaven, even in his kingdom of glory; see Isa. 65.20.

Verse. 15. To show that the Lord is upright, etc.] As if he had said, And thus,
by destroying the wicked in the conclusion, and blessing the righteous, he
shows forth clearly, that he is just and faithful in all that he does,
whatever men may think to the contrary, because they see that it is but for a
time that God prospers the wicked, and afflicts the righteous; or, this shall
be the fruit mentioned in the foregoing verse, which the righteous shall bring
forth in their old age, to wit, that they shall declare and set forth that the
Lord is just and upright, and that there is no iniquity in him.

PSALM XCIII.
Verse. 1. THe Lord reigns, etc.] As if he had said, In the midst of all those
confusions and hurly-burlies that are in the world, which seem to threaten the
utter ruin of the Church, the Lord, who is the God and king of Israel,
governs the whole world, and so is the sure defense of his people: he is
clothed with majesty; the Lord is clothed with strength, wherewith he has
girded himself; that is, he has by his works manifested himself to be glorious
in majesty and power, as a king clothed with his royal robes, and is always
as one that is ready prepared for battle: the world also is established, that
it cannot be moved; as if he had said, And hence also it comes to pass, that
the whole world and all things therein are established, that it cannot be
moved: that is, that the world by the supporting providence of God is firmly
settled, according as it was at first established by the law of creation; and
consequently also, that the Church throughout the world is firmly settled and
preserved, that it should not be rooted up. But now many understand this Psalm
throughout of Christ's exercising his kingly power Matthew. 28.18. for which see
the Note Psalm. 22.28.

Verse. 2. Thy throne is established of old, etc.] It is in the Hebrew from
then, and so the meaning may be, that even from the first creation and settling
of the world, of which he had spoken in the foregoing words, God had
established the heaven for his throne, as it is elsewhere called Psalm. 11.4.
And it is very probable, that having spoken before of Gods establishing the
earth, so here he should also speak of his establishing the heaven. But yet the
words may be understood thus, Thy throne is established of old, that is, Thy
kingdom and government has been from the beginning, yea from all eternity, as
thy self art, according to that which follows, thou art from everlasting.

Verse. 3. The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their
voice, etc.] That is, they rage and make a mighty tumult. But, alas, God does
at his pleasure overrule and awe them, as it follows in the next verse, The
Lord on high is mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the mighty
waves of the sea: for which see the Note Psalm. 89.9. For this may be understood
literally of the swelling waves of rivers and seas, see the Note Psalm. 65.7; or
of the rage of the enemies of Gods people, see the Note Psalm. 46.3.

Verse. 5. Thy testimonies are very sure, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 19.7. Having
in the former verses spoken of Gods governing the world in general; here he
adds that special mercy, that God had given them his Word, which was sure and
faithful; and then also that he had taken them to be a holy people unto
himself, establishing a covenant of life eternal with them, which was their
excellency and their glory above all other nations: all which many learned
Expositours conceive is employed in that next clause, holiness becomes thine
house, O Lord, for ever. But then again we may probably conceive otherwise of
the inference of these words upon that which went before, to wit, that herein
the Psalmist shows, that by the Lords quelling those proud waves which had
beaten so furiously upon his Church, whereof he had spoken in the two foregoing
verses, he had approved the faithfulness of his promises; and that because
these his testimonies were so very sure, therefore it could not be, but that
the Church must be preserved against the rage of all her enemies: And then for
that last clause, holiness becomes thine house for ever, either the meaning
must be, that Gods approving his holiness and faithfulness, by the defense of
those that fled to his house for shelter, did well become his house for ever;
or that God, to make good his faithfulness, was engaged to preserve his Temple
and Church from being polluted and profaned by her enemies; or that because of
Gods faithfulness, it became Gods people to carry themselves always before God
in a holy manner, but especially in the holy assemblies. As for those that
understand this Psalm of Christ, they take this as spoken in reference to Gods
faithfulness in performing all his promises concerning the Messiah, and
particularly in preserving his Church from being polluted.

PSALM XCIV.
Verse. 1. O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, etc.] See Deuter. 32.35: O
God, to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self; that is, appear in this which
belongs to thee, by executing vengeance on those that oppress thy people. It
is in the Hebrew, shine forth, for which see the Note Psalm. 80.2.

Verse. 2. Lift up thy self, thou judge of the earth, etc.] See the Note Psalm.
7.7.

Verse. 4. How long shall they utter and speak hard things? etc.] That is,
grievous things, as the word is translated Psalm. 31.18. for which see the Note
there. He means proud and insolent speeches, and cruel threatenings against
men, and blasphemies against God, hard and terrible to be heard, but much more
to be endured.

Verse. 6. They slay the widow and the stranger, etc.] And so likewise all other
that are destitute of humane help. Neither is this only meant of direct
murdering them, but likewise of slaying them by bereaving them of their outward
means and livelihood, through extortion and oppression.

Verse. 7. Yet they say, The Lord shall not see, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 14.1.

Verse. 8. Understand, ye brutish among the people, etc.] That is, all you that
are thus brutish; or, you that are the ringleaders amongst the people in this
impiety; or, you that profess your selves to be Gods people, and yet are thus
brutish. Yea, because it is most probable, that they are the great oppressors
of the poor people that he here speaks to, these words among the people were
happily added, either by way of vilifying them, as being no whit better in Gods
eye, then any other of the people; or else to imply, that all their eminency
above others was, that they were more brutish then the rest of the people.

Verse. 9. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? etc.] The force of this
argument lies in this, that in Gods giving to man the sense of hearing, and his
planting the ears of man so fitly and admirably, as the instruments of hearing,
(and so likewise in the framing of man's eye) there is such a clear discovery of
Gods infinite wisdom, that it were absurd to think that he should not both
hear and see what is done by his creatures: whatever excellency is in his work,
must needs be far more eminently in him that made it: the fire that gives heat
to other things must needs have much more heat in it self, etc.

Verse. 10. He that chastises the heathen, shall not he correct? etc.] That is,
Seeing we see by continual experience, that he punishes the heathens in all
nations, for the wickedness which he sees in them, can you think that he will
not much more punish you, that profess your selves to be his own peculiar
people? Yet some give the meaning of the words to be this; Seeing God often
punishes whole nations together, think you that he will let a few such
insolent wretches as you are to escape? He that teaches man knowledge, to wit,
by the light of nature, which he has implanted in men's minds, or by the
teaching of his spirit; shall not he know? to wit, what is done in the world by
the children of men.

Verse. 11. The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.] As if
he had said, Though the Lord may forbear to punish wicked men for a time; yet
he knows, not their words and deeds only, but their very thoughts also, and the
vanity of them. Now this may have respect to the wickedness and vanity both of
those thoughts whereby they plotted mischief against the righteous, which God
could easily frustrate, and also of those thoughts whereby they chuckered
themselves, as if God did neither know nor mind what they did. And thus he
derides the vanity of those men, that applauded themselves in the wisdom of
these conceits, whereby they sought as it were to mock God, and to hide
themselves from his all-seeing eye: whence it is that the Apostle citing this
place, expresses it thus, The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they
are vain, 1. Cor. 3.20.

Verse. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him
out of thy law.] Here the Psalmist passes from expostulating with the wicked
oppressors of Gods people, to the comforting of the faithful servants of God,
that are thus oppressed by them, pronouncing them blessed, when God does
withal teach them by his Word and spirit: because then they shall know that
which by their own reason they would never apprehend, to wit, that the wicked
are but the rods whereby God does chastise them, and that in love, and for
their eternal good. And thus the wisdom which the righteous attain by the
law of God, is opposed to the vanity of the carnal man's thoughts and reason,
mentioned in the foregoing verse.

Verse. 13. That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until
the pit be dug for the wicked.] This is the benefit which redounds to the
man that is chastised by the Lord, and withal taught out of the law; and it
may be understood two several ways: to wit, either 1. that hereby he is so
far purged and every way bettered in his spiritual estate, that he shall not
only escape the condemnation of the wicked, when they shall be thrown into the
pit of hell, which is already beforehand preparing for them, but shall also be
delivered from his present distresses, and shall at last be received into Gods
eternal rest; or 2. that hereby he is enabled quietly and patiently to bear
what he suffers, in that he is encouraged to wait upon God, as being assured
that there is a pit dug for the wicked, whereinto they shall fall, and so he
shall be delivered.

Verse. 15. But judgment shall return unto righteousness, etc.] That is, say
some Expositours, The times shall change, and judges shall execute righteous
judgment again, which now they do not: and the upright in heart shall follow
it; that is, all good men shall promote and practice it; or, whereas now
judgment is usually perverted, at the last day all unjust sentences shall be
repealed and made void, and righteous judgment shall be pronounced by him in
every cause, and the upright in heart shall follow it, that is, all the Saints
shall approve of it. But I rather, with the most and best Expositours,
understand it thus; But judgment shall return unto righteousness, that is,
whereas in the outward administration of things, there may seem to be for a
time neither judgment nor justice observed, but both may seem to be banished
from the earth, in that neither the wicked are judged and punished as they
ought to be, nor yet are the righteous rewarded and prospered, as justice
required, these should be restored again according to the exact rule of
justice, and so should meet together; judgment being executed upon the wicked,
and the righteous exalted. Or rather thus, whereas Gods judgments may not seem
to be just, justice may seem to be separated from his judgments, in that
wicked men prosper, trample upon and afflict the righteous, God will at length
reduce things into a right order again, pouring forth his wrath upon the
wicked, and abundantly blessing his righteous servants: which may be meant
either of this life, or of that which is to come. And then for the next clause,
and all the upright in heart shall follow it; if we refer the former clause to
the judgment of the last day, then the meaning of it must be, that all the
upright shall earnestly long for this, and follow after it in their desires, or
shall cleave to it, and approve of it; or if we refer it to that which God
will do here in this world, then the meaning must be, that when the righteous
shall see judgment thus executed upon wicked men, they shall the more
cheerfully follow after Gods favor in a way of righteousness, though for a
time they suffer therein, as seeing that in the conclusion God will not fail
both to reward the righteous, and punish the wicked.

Verse. 16. Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? etc.] To wit, to
help me? It is as if he had said, No man will, none but God, as it follows in
the next verse, Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence. And thus the Psalmist proves here by his own example what he had said
before verse. 13. that God would not utterly forsake his people.

Verse. 18. When I said, My foot slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.] That
is, When I apprehended my self in some danger; or, when I gave my self for
lost, at least my carnal heart began to conclude within me, Well, I am now
gone, there is no hope of escape. He compares himself to a man standing on the
very brink of some deep precipice, or to a man flying before his enemies, where
the very slipping of the foot is enough to cause his utter ruin. See also the
Notes Psalm. 38.17. and 56.13.

Verse. 19. In the multitudes of my thoughts within me, etc.] That is, In the
midst of those many and manifold griefs and cares and fears that perplex my
spirit, whilst I silently within my self think of many things, concerning mine
own innocence and miseries and dangers, the prosperity and wickedness of mine
enemies, and thy displeasure against me; thy comforts delight my soul, that is,
the comforts which I take in thee, or which thou have given me in thy Word, and
do work in me by thy spirit, do cheer me up even in the midst of these
perplexities. And one of these comforts may be that which follows in the next
verse.

Verse. 20. Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which
frames mischief by a law?] That is, say some Expositours, Do thou judge as
wicked tyrants do? are thy proceedings in judgment any way like to theirs,
that oppress men under a pretense of law and justice? Doubtless that cannot
be: and therefore it cannot be that thou should forsake or oppress thy
people. But I rather take it thus, Though oppressors in the throne sit in thy
seat and represent thy person, yet when they abuse the law to injure men, can
thou favor such men, or approve such ways? Doubtless thou do abhor them
the more because they sit in the throne, see Psalm. 5.5.

Verse. 23. And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, etc.] That is, the
evil which they have unjustly sought to bring upon others; which is farther
expressed in the next clause, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness:
see also the Note Psalm. 7.16.

PSALM XCV.
Verse. 1. O Come let us sing unto the Lord, etc.] That this Psalm was penned by
David, though it be not here expressed, is evident by that of the Apostle, Heb.
4.7.

Verse. 2. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving.] To wit, in the
Tabernacle, the place of Gods spiritual presence. It is in the Original, let
us prevent his face; which may also imply, a making have to get thither, every
one striving who should be there first; or a going thither to praise God freely
and of their own accord, before God did any way exact it of them, or force them
to it.

Verse. 3. For the Lord is a great God, and a great king above all Gods.] See
the Note Deuteronomy. 10.17.

Verse. 4. In his hand are the deep places of the earth, the strength of the
hills is his also.] Or, the heights of the hills are his also. The meaning is,
that the whole earth, even from the center and the lowest foundation thereof to
the tops of the highest mountains, is born up, ordered and governed, by his
power and providence, and consequently all things high and low, hidden and
apparent, as being all the work of his own hands.

Verse. 6. Let us kneel before the Lord our maker.] To wit, not only in respect
of our natural being, as we are his creatures; but also in respect of our
spiritual being, as he has made us his adopted children, and regenerated us
by his spirit, and made us new creatures, as we are his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus to good works Ephesians. 2.10. For that this last is included, the
following verse may probably induce us to think. See also the Note Deuteronomy. 32.6.

Verse. 7. For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture and the sheep
of his hand, etc.] That is, his peculiar people, whom he has engaged himself
in a special manner to feed, guide, govern and protect, as a shepherd does
his flock; yea and that not merely by the hand of a servant, but by his own
immediate power and providence: whence is that of our Savior Joh. 10.27, 28.
my sheep hear my voice, etc. neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand:
see also the Notes Psalm. 77.20, and 23.1, 2, 3, 4. And indeed it is probable
that the Psalmist did purposely thus express himself; not we are the sheep of
his pasture, and the people of his hand, which might seem most proper, but we
are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand; to imply 1. that Gods
people were indeed as unable to help and provide for themselves, as sheep were
without a shepherd: and 2. that though they were Gods flock, yet they were a
rational flock, and ought therefore to take notice of the care of their
shepherd, and to praise him for it. As for the last clause, To day if ye will
hear his voice, that must be joined to that which follows in the next verse, To
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, etc. yet withal it
seems to be added with reference to that which went before, to wit, to imply 1.
that the special interest they had in God, and the special care he took of
them, was evident, in that the voice of his Word and law, instructing them in
the way of life, was daily heard amongst them; and 2. that therefore by hearing
this his voice, they were to approve themselves to be truly his sheep. Yea and
some learned Expositours do, because of these words, To day if ye will hear his
voice, hold it the more probable, that this Psalm was composed for the sabbath
day, when the Jews used to meet together to hear Gods word; and that the
Apostle does the rather from these words of the Psalmist draw that inference
Heb. 4.9. There remains therefore a rest, (or, a keeping of a sabbath) to the
people of God.

Verse. 8. Harden not your heart, as in the provocation (or in the contention)
and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.] This may be meant of the
whole time of their provoking and tempting God whilst they were in the
wilderness, see Psalm. 78.17, 18. Yet doubtless in the expressions here used,
the Psalmist has special relation to those particular murmurings of the
Israelites, by occasion whereof the places where they so murmured were called
Massah, that is, tentation, and Meribah, that is, chiding or contention; see
Exodus 17.7. and Numb. 20.13. and Deuter. 16.16.

Verse. 9. When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.] That is,
When they would needs try and prove whether I could do what they desired
should be done, notwithstanding they had seen so many wonderful works that I
had wrought amongst them, that were clear evidences of mine almighty power. Yet
others, I know, do otherwise understand those last words, proved me, and saw my
work; to wit, that when they so tempted him, they found by proof in the works
that he wrought how infinite his power was, yea and that they found it to their
cost in the punishments he brought upon them. What is meant by tempting God,
see in the Notes Exodus 17.2. and Deuteronomy. 6.16.

Verse. 10. It is a people that do err in their heart, etc.] That is, a sottish
and brutish people, void of all reason, and that have not the understanding of
men in them, see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.28; or, a perverse, stubborn people, whose
heart is not upright toward me their God, see the Note Psalm. 78.8: and they
have not known my ways; that is, they have not learnt and loved and observed
my laws and instructions, and they have not seriously observed and understood
the wonderful works I have wrought amongst them, they have not observed the
justice, mercy and faithfulness that has been in all my ways toward them,
that so they might trust in me; they have not understood the way of my
government, and so they have disliked and despised it, because it was not
agreeable to their desires.

Verse. 11. Unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my
rest.] So was the land of Canaan called Deuteronomy. 12.9. ye are not yet come to the
rest, and to the inheritance which the Lord your God gives you, and 1 Chronicles.
23.25. David said, The Lord God of Israel has given rest unto his people, that
they may dwell in Jerusalem for ever; and that because after the uncertain
peregrination of the Patriarchs there, the exile and bondage of the Israelites
in Egypt, and their many years wearisome travels through the wilderness, God
did at last by Joshua give them a settled resting place in this land, as in
their inheritance; yea and himself in the Ark did there take up his own settled
habitation amongst them: see the Note 2 Chronicles. 6.41. And of this doubtless
David speaks here. But now the Apostle, in the epistle to the Hebrews chap. 3,
and 4. taking it for granted 1. that David speaks those words, To day if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your heart, etc. not only to the people then
living, but also to the people of God in all succeeding generations, especially
in the days of the Gospel, when God by his son does more fully and clearly
reveal his will to us; and 2. that David's urging this oath, which God swear
concerning the Israelites in the wilderness, that they should not enter into
his rest, upon the people of God, both in his own days, and in all succeeding
times, does clearly imply a threatening of the like punishment upon them, and
consequently also a promise that they should enter into Gods rest, if they did
hearken to his voice: hence he concludes, that there is a rest still remaining
to the people of God, which he makes to be their spiritual resting from sin,
which is begun here, but especially that eternal sabbath of rest, whereinto
they shall be received in the kingdom of heaven.

PSALM XCVI.
Verse. 1. O Sing unto the Lord a new song, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 33.3. This
Psalm is a part of that Psalm which was sung by David and the people, when they
carried the Ark from the house of Obed-Edom to the house which David had
prepared for it in Jerusalem: for which therefore see the Notes 1 Chronicles. 16.23,
etc.

Verse. 7. Give unto the Lord, (O ye kindreds of the people) give unto the Lord
glory and strength, etc.] For this and the three following verses, see the
Notes also Psalm. 29.1, 2.

Verse. 10. Say among the heathen, that the Lord reigns, etc.] This is a
prophesy of the setting up of Christ's kingdom amongst the Gentiles by the
preaching of the Gospel: the world also shall be established that it shall not
be moved; to wit, say some Expositours, by bringing men to be of one mind and
of one will; but see also the Note Psalm. 93.1: he shall judge the people
righteously; see the Note Psalm. 45.6, 7.

Verse. 11. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, etc.] Some
understand this of the joy of the creatures for their being delivered from the
bondage of corruption, Romans 8.21. But see the Notes 1 Chronicles. 16.

PSALM XCVII.
Verse. 1. THe Lord reigns, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 93.1, and 22.28, and
96.10. But because the Apostle alleges the last clause of the 7. verse of
this Psalm, as spoken of Christ Heb. 1.6. it is evident that this also is to be
understood of Christ's taking upon him the exercise of his regal power, after
he had vanquished and subdued his spiritual enemies; there being an allusion
therein to the acclamations that are made to kings at their inaugurations and
coronations: and therefore as foretelling that the heathens should submit to
Christ, and partake of the joy of his kingdom, he adds, let the earth rejoice;
that is, all the inhabitants of the earth: let the multitude of isles be glad
thereof; that is, the Gentiles, even in the remotest islands; for thus also
that which is Isa. 42.4. and the isles shall wait for his law, is rendered by
the Evangelist Matthew. 12.21. and in his name shall the Gentiles trust. Yet
withal it may well be, which some Expositours think, to wit, that some
glorious victory of David over his enemies, wherein he was a type of Christ,
was an occasion of his penning this Psalm.

Verse. 2. Clouds and darkness are round about him, etc.] As if he should have
said, This great Lord and king of the Church is exceeding terrible to those
that will not submit to his government: for here he sets forth Christ, as it
were appearing from heaven to pour forth his wrath upon his enemies in the
black darkness of some stormy cloud; much according to that description which
we have of Gods proceeding in judgment against men, 2 Samuel 22.8. for which see
the Notes there. And the drift of this is, partly to make his people the more
fearful of disobeying his commands, and partly to let them see how able he is
to confound at his pleasure both his and their enemies. I know some do
understand this of Christ's coming in the clouds with power and great glory to
judge the world, Matthew. 24.30. but I see no reason why we should restrain the
words to that. As for the next clause, righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of his throne; the meaning may be, that the Lord Christ will make
men holy, just and righteous, yea by the imputation of his righteousness,
perfectly such, and that by his Word and spirit he will cause them to do that
which is just and right in all their ways. But see also the Note Psalm. 89.14.

Verse. 3. A fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies round about.]
That is, His judgments, like a consuming fire, shall destroy all his enemies:
see again the Notes 2 Samuel 22.8, 13, 15. Psalm. 50.3.

Verse. 4. The earth saw and trembled.] This may be meant either of the earth it
self, or of the inhabitants of the earth, who shall, will they, nill they, see
the unresistable power and wrath of the Lord Christ, and tremble at it. See the
Notes 2 Samuel 22.8. Psalm. 46.6, and 60.2, and 76.8.

Verse. 5. The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord.] To wit, by
the fire and lightnings mentioned in the foregoing verses. And this also may be
meant, either of the hills literally, to wit, that the Lord in his wrath can
quickly consume them; or else of the great ones of the world, or those whose
hearts do most swell and rise against God, that they shall faint and fade away,
when the Lord breaks forth in his wrath against them. See the Note Psalm. 22.14.

Verse. 6. The heavens declare his righteousness, etc.] That is, the angels; or
the judgments of God manifested from heaven, whether by tempestuous storms,
thunder and lightening, or otherwise; see the Note Psalm. 50.6: the people see
his glory; to wit, as it is manifested in his righteousness and judgments.
And this implies the calling of the Gentiles.

Verse. 7. Confounded be all they that serve graven images, etc.] Upon the
consideration of the glory and divine majesty of Christ, the king of the
Church, the Psalmist breaks forth into this expression of his detestation of
all idol-worship, and his desire of the enlargement of Christ's kingdom: and it
is as if he had said, Let the glory of this king make all idolaters ashamed and
even confounded for their former brutish folly, and so come in and submit to
him; or else let them be confounded and destroyed. And herein there is also a
prophesy employed, that when Christ's kingdom was erected by the preaching of
the Gospel, this should be done. As for the last clause, worship him all ye
gods, the Apostle does expressly understand it of the holy angels, Heb. 1.6.
where to prove that Christ was preferred above the angels, he cites this place,
And again, when he brings in the first-begotten into the world, he says, And
let the angels of God worship him. But though the angels are included, (and
thence the place is so cited by the Apostle) yet it may be also extended to all
that are called gods, see the Note Exodus 22.28. yea to the heathens idol-gods,
worship him all ye gods; as if he had said, Let every thing that is falsely
esteemed and worshipped as God, yield and submit it self to this true God and
king of his Church.

Verse. 8. Sion heard, and was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced,
because of thy judgments.] That is, they heard, by the preaching of the
Gospel, of Christ's coming into the world to erect his kingdom in his Church,
after he had vanquished all his and their spiritual enemies, and of his
governing his Church with all exact righteousness, and particularly of the
confusion and ruin of idolaters, and the spreading of his kingdom throughout
the world; and this was matter of great joy to them. Now though this may be
truly said of the whole Church, yet this joy is here particularly ascribed to
the Jews, both because they were to have the first fruits of this joy, and
likewise because the Gospel of the kingdom was to go out from them into all
the world. And then also it is said, Sion heard, rather then Sion saw; both
because they were to rejoice in the hope hereof, before it was accomplished, in
that it was revealed to them beforehand by the predictions of the Prophets;
and also because the kingdom of Christ was to spread it self so into the
farthest parts of the world, that they should rather hear the report of it,
then see it. But see also the Note Psalm. 48.11.

Verse. 9. For thou, Lord, art high above all the earth, etc.] To wit, as having
all things throughout the whole earth in subjection under thee: thou art
exalted far above all gods; that is, far above all principality and might and
power and dominion, etc. Ephesians. 1.21. See also the Note Deuteronomy. 10.17.

Verse. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, etc.] Upon the promise made in the
foregoing verse, he preserves the souls of his saints, etc. because it might
be objected, that they are often in a very afflicted condition, by way of
preventing this objection, the Psalmist adds these words; Light, that is, joy,
see the Note Esth. 8.16. is sown for the righteous, that is, it is promised to,
and in and through Christ it is prepared for the righteous, and in good time
they shall be sure of it: though for a time no such thing may be seen, as it is
with seed when it lies covered under ground, according to that Col. 3.3. ye are
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, and that 1 John 3.2. it does not
yet appear what we shall be; yet at last it shall spring up, and shall by
degrees, as the corn does, grow and increase, and as the light that shines
more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. till at last they shall reap a
full harvest of joy in heaven.

Verse. 12. Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 32.11:
and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness; that is, give praise to
his holy name, acknowledge that all the good you enjoy comes from him. But see
the Note Ps. 30.4.

PSALM XCVIII.
Verse. 1. O Sing unto the Lord a new song, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 33.3: for
he has done mavelous things. This may be understood both of some wonderful
victory that God gave David over his enemies, which might be the occasion of
composing this Psalm; and likewise chiefly of the mavelous things which were
done in and by Christ, in the work of our redemption; as his Incarnation, that
new thing the Lord created in the earth, Jer. 31.22. and his miracles, but
especially his victory over Satan, sin, death and hell, whereof David's were
types. His right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory; that is,
merely by his own immediate almighty power, in the Lord Christ he has
prevailed over his and his Churches enemies, whose cause indeed is his own. And
most probable it is, that this word (holy) his holy arm has gotten him the
victory, is purposely added, because it was by reason of his holiness that he
prevailed over these his enemies; according to that Joh. 14.30. the prince of
this world comes, and has nothing in me: see also Heb. 7.26, 27.

Verse. 2. The lord has made known his salvation, etc.] According to the
exposition of the foregoing verse, this also may be meant of some glorious
deliverance which God had given his people, the fame whereof was spread amongst
the nations a far off; but chiefly it is meant of the Lords making known the
way of eternal life and salvation, by the preaching of the Gospel, amongst the
heathen: to which purpose also is the following clause, his righteousness has
he openly showed in the sight of the heathen; see the Note Psalm. 22.31.

Verse. 4. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all the earth, etc.] See the Note
Psalm. 66.1.

Verse. 7. Let the sea roar, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 96.11. and 1 Chronicles. 16.31.

PSALM XCIX.
Verse. 1. THe Lord reigns, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 93.1. as likewise Psalm.
97.1. where the same expression is used concerning Christ, as some also
conceive it is here: let the people tremble; that is, all that are enemies to
Gods people: he sits between the Cherubims; that is, he is, as their king,
present amongst his people: let the earth be moved; that is, let all the
inhabitants of the earth quake for fear: see the Note Psalm. 60.2.

Verse. 2. The Lord is great in Zion, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 48.1: and he is
high above all people; see the Note Psalm. 97.9.

Verse. 3. Let them praise thy great and terrible name, for it is holy.] That
is, Let thy subjects praise thee, O king, even when their enemies rage most
against them, as knowing that thou will approve thy self a great God, terrible
to thine and their enemies, and holy in making good all thy promises unto thy
people. Yet some take this as spoken of all people mentioned in the foregoing
verse, and as expressing the Psalmists desire, that all nations might come in
and submit to this king, and so might extol his great and glorious name.

Verse. 4. The kings strength also loves judgment, etc.] Some Expositours
conceive that this is prefixed as a general sentence, and is as if he had said,
The strength of a king consists in executing justice, and that then in the next
words this is applied to God, thou do establish equity. But generally these
first words are understood as spoken of God, the king of his Church; only they
may be understood three several ways: as 1. that the Lord in undertaking to
be the strength of his people, does also love to have his people walk in all
righteousness and judgment before him, and that he undertakes to be their
strong defense only upon that condition, that they shall be righteous and just
in all their ways; and then the following clause must be understood
accordingly, thou do establish equity, to wit, in thy law, wherein thou have
settled an equal form of government amongst thy people, and have strictly
enjoined them to observe equity and judgment in all their dealings: 2. that
though the Lord be of unresistable strength, yet he withal loves justice and
judgment, and does not abuse his power to oppression, as other kings do; nor
will do whatever he can do, but only what is just to be done: or 3. that God
loves to employ his strength in executing justice and judgment, both by
defending his people, and by cutting off those that rebel against him, and
that are enemies to him and to his people; which may be also intended in the
next words, thou do establish equity, that is, thou do all things equally
and justly, thou have determined that all things shall be managed in the
government of thy Church with most exact equity and judgment. And this last I
take to be the best exposition, both because it best agrees with the general
scope of the Psalm, which is to encourage Gods people, by putting them in mind
that the Lord is their king and protector; and especially because this is so
clearly here expressed in the last clause, thou executest judgment and
righteousness in Jacob.

Verse. 5. Worship at his footstool, etc.] That is, by bowing down to the very
ground; for there may be an allusion in these words to the custom of men's
presenting themselves before kings, which they were wont to do with bowing
their faces down to their very footstools: or, Worship in or toward his
temple, or with your faces bowed down to the very pavement of the temple: or,
Worship toward the Ark, which is often in Scripture called Gods footstool, for
which see the Note 1 Chronicles. 28.2; for we must not think that they were enjoined
to worship the Ark, but only to worship God with their faces toward the Ark.
And therefore if we read the following clause, not as it is in our Translation,
for he is holy, but as it is in the margin of our Bibles, for it is holy; we
must know that the holiness of the altar is only alleged, to show why they
should resort thither to worship God, to wit, because that was the sacred sign
of Gods presence amongst them.

Verse. 6. Moses and Aaron among his priests, etc.] The meaning of this, I
conceive, is the same with that which follows, and Samuel among them that call
upon his name, to wit, that these were chief amongst those that were appointed
of God to be mediators, as it were, and intercessours for the people, and that
did accordingly upon all occasions solemnly call upon God in their name, and on
their behalf, and found therein great acceptance with God. For though other
reasons may be given why Moses is here numbered amongst the Priests; as 1.
because he did once execute the Priests office, for which see the Note Exodus
29.11; or 2. because Moses was of the tribe of Levi, as Samuel also was, and
the office of the Levites was to attend upon the sacrifices; yet the true
reason why he is here mentioned among the Priests is, because he, together with
Aaron and Samuel, as mediators between God and the people, blessed the people
in Gods name, and by their prayers did appease Gods displeasure when he was
offended with them, and so did as it were uphold and preserve the covenant
betwixt God and them: whence it is that Moses and Samuel are joined together,
as Gods chief favorites in this regard, Jer. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel
stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people. But however this
is here alleged to stir up the people, both to worship God, as he had exhorted
them to do in the foregoing verse, and also to trust in him as their Lord and
king, namely, from the example of these holy men of God in former times, that
were eminent for their piety in calling upon God, and from the manifestation of
Gods love to his people, both in raising up such men to intercede for them, and
in his readiness to hear them when they prayed to him; as it is expressed in
the following words, they called upon the Lord, and he answered them. Yet some
also add to this, that the Psalmist intended herein to imply, that if God
showed so much favor to his people upon the intercession of Moses and the
Leviticall priesthood, much more ought Christ to be extolled, by whose eternal
priesthood men are perfectly reconciled unto God.

Verse. 7. He spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar.] To wit, which was upon the
Tabernacle. See for Gods speaking to Moses and Aaron there, Exodus 33.9, 10, 11.
and the Notes Numb. 12.5, and 16.19.

Verse. 8. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God, etc.] To wit, Moses and Aaron,
to whom the Lord returned a gracious answer, when they interceded for the
people: yea and Samuel may be here included also, though that which is said in
the foregoing verse, of Gods speaking to them in the cloudy pillar, were meant
only of Moses and Aaron. As for that which follows, thou wast a God that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions, I conceive
it is spoken of the whole body of the people, and that the meaning is, that
when God had threatened, or was many a time ready utterly to destroy the whole
people for their rebellions, yet upon the intercession of Moses and Aaron and
Samuel, he yielded to spare them for their sakes, and so forgave them, and
still preserved the body of the people; though withal he did often take
vengeance on many particular persons, when they committed idolatry, or
otherwise followed their own hearts lusts, though therein they did manifestly
transgress the commandments of God. For I see no reason why we should limit
this which is said here of their inventions, as some do, to their plots and
conspiracies, which they devised against Moses and Aaron and Samuel. Nor does
that exposition seem so probable which some Expositours give of these words,
thou wast a God that forgavest them, to wit, Moses and Aaron, though thou
tookest vengeance of their inventions, that is, though thou did punish them
for their sins, by not suffering them to go into the land of Canaan.

PSALM C.
Verse. 1. MAke a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands.] This implies a
prophesy of the calling of the Gentiles. But see the Note Psalm. 66.3.

Verse. 3. It is he that has made us, and not we our selves: we are his people,
and the sheep of his pasture.] See the Notes Psalm. 95.6, 7.

Verse. 4. Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise.] See the Note Psalm. 84.2.

PSALM CI.
Verse 1. I Will sing of mercy and judgment, etc.] Two several ways this
promise of David is expounded by Interpreters, and both seem very probable: to
wit, 1. that David does here promise to praise God for his goodness and mercy
to his penitent servants, and for his judgments executed upon the obstinate
and rebellious; or more particularly for the judgment which God had executed
upon Saul, (for some conceive that this Psalm was composed when Saul was newly
cut off by the Philistines) or which he knew God would execute upon him, and
the mercy which he had shown to himself, in preserving him from the rage of
Saul, and happily for opening such a fair way for the settling of him in the
throne of Israel; or at least the mercy which he knew God would show him, in
bringing him to the kingdom long since promised him: and then the following
clause is clear; unto thee, O Lord, will I sing, that is, I will speak of these
things to thy praise and glory: Or 2. that David does here undertake, that he
would in this Psalm, as it were by way of a vow to God, and a solemn
protestation before all the Church, declare with what clemency and justice he
meant to govern the kingdom, when he should be settled in the throne; how
gentle and good every way he would be to the good, and how zealous to punish
the wicked. And if we take it thus, which seems most agreeable to the sequel
of the Psalm, then the meaning of the following clause seems to be this; unto
thee, O Lord, will I sing, that is, I will in my song thus engage my self, out
of a desire thereby to glorify thee, by whom only I was appointed to so great
honor, and by whose grace only I hope to be enabled thus to govern the
kingdom.

Verse. 2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, etc.] To wit, by
avoiding what ever is evil with all possible circumspection. And indeed this is
expressly affirmed of David in his private life, 1 Samuel 18.14. And David behaved
himself wisely in all his ways.

O when will thou come unto me?] To wit, to assist me with thy grace herein; or
rather, to settle me in the kingdom promised me, that I may then make good
what I now promise. As for the following clause, I will walk within mine house
with a perfect heart, that which is intended thereby seems to be this, that he
would walk holily and righteously, not in public only, but even within his own
walls, his court or his private house, so that even those of his own family
should not be able to lay any evil to his charge; yea and that he would be
watchful to keep his own household too from every scandalous way.

Verse. 3. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes.] That is, say some, I
will not make any evil course of other men a pattern for me to follow. But
rather I take it thus, I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes, to wit,
neither by desire, nor purpose, no, nor by suffering it, so near as I can, to
come into my thoughts.

Verse. 4. A froward heart shall depart from me, etc.] The meaning of this may
be, that he would not allow in himself that perverse, rebellious spirit,
whereto naturally he was inclined; or else, that he would not converse with
those that were of a froward spirit; which indeed agrees best with the
following clause (according to our translation) I will not know a wicked
person, that is, I will not own any such, nor show them the least respect or
favor.

Verse. 5. Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off, etc.] To
wit, by casting them out of his house, or out of his court, yea and in some
cases by putting them to death, according as was by Gods law appointed, Deuteronomy.
19.16, 21. And though David speaks here only of some particular vices, which he
would not endure in those that were about him; (and he instanceth in those that
are most pernicious in such persons as are about kings) yet under these all
other wicked men are comprehended.

Verse. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may
dwell with me, etc.] That is, say some Expositours, I will be watchful over
such for their defense, that they may dwell safely with me in my kingdom. But
rather the meaning of these words is, that he would be very circumspect not to
take any, but such as were known faithful men, to be his familiar friends, his
counselors, officers of state, or houshold-servants: not resting merely in the
choice of these upon the report of others, but diligently observing himself who
were such; and then taking them, of what parentage and condition soever they
were, to be employed by him, both in his public and domestic affairs. For
hereto agrees the following clause, he that walks in a perfect way, he shall
serve me.

Verse. 7. He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house, etc.] That
is, Though such may get into my court or private family, yet being discovered
they shall not stay there.

Verse. 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, etc.] To wit, all
such malefactors as commit wickedness worthy of death; I will not only banish
such out of my court, but will utterly destroy them: that I may cut off all
wicked doers from the city of the Lord; that is, from the Church of God; or, if
we understand it of Jerusalem, then doubtless the drift of these words is to
imply, that his chief end in resolving to cut them off was, that such vile
wretches might not pollute Gods dewlling place, when all Israel was to resort
thither from all places of the land, and so bring a reproach upon the Name of
God, his truth and people. And indeed some think that expression, I will early
destroy all the wicked of the land, is used in allusion to the custom of
women's sweeping their houses every morning, or to that of magistrates sitting
in the judgment seat betimes in the morning, of which some understand that
place Jer. 21.12. O house of David, says the Lord, execute judgment in the
morning, etc.

PSALM CII.
The Title. A Prayer of the afflicted, etc.] Or, for the afflicted. And indeed
most probable it is, which most Expositours hold, that this Psalm was composed
by Daniel, or some other prophet of those times, for the use of Gods afflicted
and oppressed people, a little before the seventy years of the Babylonian
captivity were expired, teaching them how to pour out their complaints before
God, and to seek to him for the reedifying of the city and temple of Jerusalem;
as it may be gathered from that verse. 13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon
Zion, for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come; and many other
passages in this Psalm. As for the following words, when he is overwhelmed, see
the Note Psalm. 61.2: and pours out his complaint before the Lord; see the
Note 1 Samuel 1.15.

Verse. 3. For my days are consumed like smoke, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 37.20.
and Job 30.30.

Verse. 4. My heart is smitten and withered like grass, etc.] To wit, like
grass that is smitten with the heat of the sun, or like grass that is mowen
down, and then withers: so that I forget to eat my bread; to wit, as being so
overwhelmed with sorrow, that I mind not mine ordinary food.

Verse. 5. By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin.]
That is, By reason of my long-continued miseries, which cause me to spend my
days in continual groaning, I am become nothing but skin and bones. See the
Note Job 30.29.

Verse. 6. I am like a pelican of the wilderness; I am like an owl of the
desert.] By comparing himself to these dismal birds, that abide usually in
desolate places, as he would imply his restless condition, and his continual
doleful cries and lamentations, so also especially his solitariness, not only
in that he was forsaken of all, but also in that through bitterness of spirit
he declined the society of men, and the very light of the day was irksome to
him. But see the Note Job 30.29.

Verse. 7. I watch, etc.] That is, Through my continual miseries and cares and
sorrows, I am still kept waking and cannot take any rest: and am as a sparrow
alone upon the house top; that is, sad and solitary, as a sparrow that sits
solitary and mourning upon the house top, being cast out of her nest, or that
is deprived of her young ones or her mate. But now again some understand this
verse thus: I watch, that is, I wait for deliverance; but, alas, all in vain,
continuing still in a sad desolate condition: and am as a sparrow, etc.

Verse. 9. For I have eaten ashes like bread, etc.] Having said in the foregoing
verse, mine enemies reproach me all the day, here he shows the extreme misery
he was in, which gave his enemies occasion to insult over him and reproach him;
for I have eaten ashes like bread, that is, I find no more savor in my food,
then if I fed upon ashes; as indeed extreme grief will cause men even to loath
their food, so that they shall find no relish in any thing they eat. Or else
the meaning may be only, that he lay grovelling in ashes with his face upon the
ground, as if he had been feeding upon ashes, which agrees with that phrase of
licking the dust, for which see the Note Psalm. 72.9; or, that whilst he lay
upon the ground covered with sackcloth and ashes, being regardlesse what he fed
on, as he lay in that condition, what he did eat was mingled with ashes: which
some Expositours do the rather approve, because it seems to agree with the
following clause, and mingled my drink with weeping, for which see the Note
Psa. 42.3. The expression here used seems to be taken from the custom of men's
mingling their wine with water.

Verse. 10. Because of thine indignation and thy wrath, etc.] The meaning of
these words may be, either that Gods indignation was the cause of his misery;
or, that his sorrow was not so much for the distress he was in, as from this
apprehension, that God in his wrath had brought these miseries upon him: for
thou have lifted me up, and cast me down; that is, thou have dashed me in
pieces with all thy might, as when one lifts up any thing on high, that he may
throw it down upon the ground with the greater force and violence; or, having
formerly exalted me to a great height of prosperity, thou have now cast me down
to a great depth of misery, which makes my present misery far the more
grievous. And doubtless this is spoken with reference to that glorious estate,
whereto God had raised the Israelites in the days of David and Solomon,
compared with the sad condition they were then in, being captives in Babylon,
according to that Lam. 1.1. How does the city sit solitary, that was full of
people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among the nations, and
princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary! But see also the
Note Job 30.22.

Verse. 11. My days are like a shadow that declineth.] That is, They pass
apace away, and are almost at an end; it fares with me as with the shadows when
the sun is going downward, and ready to set, which do then decline apace, and
are stretched forth longer and longer, so that every moment there may be a
change discerned in them, which cannot be at noonday. Now this he speaks in
regard, not of old age, but of the miseries the people endured in their bondage
in Babylon, which brought many of the strongest of them to their end; so that
as the evening shadows are then nearest to an end when they are longest, so
were many of Gods people nearest to their end, when in the eye of reason they
seemed likeliest to live long. And this the Psalmist speaks as in the name of
all Gods people in Babylon.

Verse. 12. But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever, etc.] To wit, without any
change; and consequently, thou art the same still in power, and therefore
always able to help thy people; and thou art steadfast and unchangeable in thy
goodness and mercy and truth, and wilt not therefore fail to perform the
covenant and promise whereby thou have engaged thy self to them, as that thou will be their God, and dwell amongst them for ever, etc: and thy remembrance
unto all generations; that is, thy Name, according to that Hos. 12.5. the Lord
is his memorial, and that Exodus 3.15. the God of Abraham, etc. this is my Name
for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations; or thy fame and renown
by reason of thy great works shall be for ever; or thy word, thy promises, thy
covenant, and whatsoever thou have reve^led to thy Church concerning thy self,
whereby they know thee, and are still kept in remembrance of thee, shall
continue to them unto all generations; thou have covenanted with them that thou will for ever dwell amongst them, and this thou, that art a faithful and
unchangeable God, wilt surely make good unto them.

Verse. 13. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion, etc.] See the Note Psalm.
68.^^: for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come; that is, the time
when thou have expressly promised to bring back thy people out of Babylon, to
wit, after seventy years of their captivity here, is now nigh at hand, yea it
is in a manner come already: see the Note 2 Chronicles. 36.21.

Verse. 14. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust
thereof.] That is, Thy faithful people do still love and delight in thy Zion,
though now it be nothing but heaps of stones and rubbish, more then they do in
all the stately palaces of Babylon: and that both as remembering what it has
been, and not doubting but that God according to his promise will build it up
again: it pities them to see her lie in the dust, and they long to see her
reared up again.

Verse. 15. So the heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and all the kings of
the earth thy glory.] That is, When the heathen, and their kings, shall see how
miraculously thou have delivered thy people out of Babylon, and have carried on
the building again of thy Zion, they shall fear and serve thee; at least they
shall tremble at this discovery of thy might and majesty: which agrees with
that Psalm. 126.2. Then said they among the heathen, The Lord has done great
things for them; and was partly accomplished in the confessions which Cyrus and
Darius made of the true God. But yet because this redemption and reedification
of Sion was not perfected till Christ's coming, therefore these words may be
also understood of the calling of the Gentiles, which followed thereupon, and
so may likewise the following verses.

Verse. 17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute.] That is, the poor
captives in Babylon.

Verse. 18. This shall be written for the generation to come, etc.] That is, for
all succeeding generations, both before and after Christ: and the people which
shall be created shall praise the Lord; that is, the people which shall
hereafter be born. Yet this may be meant particularly, either 1. of the Jews
that were delivered out of Babylon, whose restitution to their own land might
well be termed a new creation, because being scattered as they were amongst
the heathens, they were as dead men there, in regard of any hope of being
brought back to their own kingdom, see Isa. 26.19; or 2. of the Gentiles,
which should be effectually called by the preaching of the Gospel, whose
conversion might well be looked upon as a new creation; see Ephesians. 2.10.

Verse. 19. For he has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, etc.] That
is, from his high and holy place; as heaven is called Isa. 57.15.

Verse. 20. To hear the groaning of the prisoner, etc.] This may be meant, both
of those that are set free by Christ from their spiritual bondage, and of the
captives in Babylon: for which see the Note Psalm. 79.11.

Verse. 22. When the people are gathered together, etc.] That is, When the
nations are gathered together into one Church with the Jews, under their head
the promised Messiah, see Genesis 49.10; or, When the people shall meet together
to worship God, as it is expressed in the next clause, and the kingdoms to
serve the Lord.

Verse. 23. He weakened my strength in the way, he shortened my days.] I see not
but that this may be the same complaint here again repeated, which we had
before ver. 11. (for which see the Note there) to wit, that God had wondrously
weakened them in the course of their lives (so this word way is taken, for the
way of man's life, Psalm. 2.12.) by reason of their hard bondage in the land of
Babylon, and so had by that means cut short many of their days. But yet indeed
the best Expositours do for the most part understand this of Gods weakening them
and cutting them off in the way of their expectation, either of their promised
deliverance out of Babylon, o^ of that great work of their redemption by the
promised Messiah. So that the meaning of their complaint must be taken as if
they had said thus; Lord, thou have promised to bring us back into our own
land: how is it that many of us are cut short in the way from enjoying the
benefit of this our return? Or, (with reference to the promised Messiah) thus;
Lord, thou have promised that thy people of Israel shall continue till thou
have sent them a Messiah, by whom the glory of this thy kingdom shall be
wondrously advanced; and hitherto thy people have walked on in the way of the
expectation of this our promised redemption, earnestly expecting and desiring
the end of this course in the accomplishment of this promise; and why then have
thou brought us into this low and weak condition, as if thou meantst to cut us
off, and would not bring us to that glorious condition thou have promised?
or, Oh that we might see thy Christ in the flesh, and behold the glory of his
promised kingdom! There are some besides that understand these words, He
weakened my strength in the way, etc. of God, or the enemies, weakening their
strength in the way, as they went into Babylon, or in the way as they returned
home into their own country again. But the former expositions are far more
probable.

Verse. 24. I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days, etc.]
That is before I have accomplished little more then half the years which men
usually live; see the Note Psalm. 55.23: or rather, according to the exposition
of the foregoing Note, Cut not off thy people before thou have made good thy
promise, of bringing them back with joy into their own country; or, before
that glorious work of our redemption by the promised Messiah be accomplished.
And indeed, because the Church was not come to the ripeness of her age till
the coming of the Messiah, had she been cut off before that, it might have been
said that she was taken away in the half of her days. Thy years are throughout
all generations; that is, thou art an eternal and unchangeable God. And this
is here alleged for the same end as before verse. 12. for which see the Note
there. The most Expositours take it thus, that because God was eternal,
therefore he would unto all eternity preserve his Church, yea every particular
member thereof; according to that Matthew. 22.32. God is not the God of the dead,
but of the living.

Verse. 25. Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth, etc.] This which
here and in the two following verses is spoken to God, is by the Apostle Heb.
1.10, 11. applied to Christ, to prove his Godhead. And indeed by that which is
said before verse. 13, 14, 15. that God should arise and have mercy upon Zion,
and so that the heathen should fear the Name of the Lord, and all the kings of
the earth his glory, and again verse. 22. that the people should be gathered
together, and the kingdoms to serve the Lord, it is evident that the Psalmist
speaks of the kingdom of Christ; and therefore what is here spoken to God,
must be understood as spoken to God in Christ, and to him therefore these words
of the Psalm are by the Apostle there fitly applied.

Verse. 26. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, etc.] See the Note Job
14.12* yea all of them, that is, the heavens and the earth, and all things
therein, shall wax old like a garment, that is, shall decay by degrees, or
rather, shall at last come to an end: as a vesture shall thou change them; that
is, say some Expositours, as one lays by an old worn garment, that is no
longer fit for use, and changes it for another; or rather, as one alters an
old tattered garment, and does so furbish it, and make it up in another
fashion, that it seems to be a new garment; so (and as easily too as one
changes a garment) shall God change the heavens and the earth: though they
shall not cease to be, and their substance shall be the same, yet in regard of
their qualities they shall be quite changed, of corruptible they shall be made
incorruptible, etc. so that they shall be new heavens and new earth, Isa.
66.22. The new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain
before me, says the Lord. It is Heb. 1.12. as a vesture shall thou fold them
up, and they shall be changed: but that is the same in effect; only it implies
either the suddenness of the change, that it shall be done with as much
facility as one folds up a garment; or else that they shall no longer serve for
the same use as formerly; whence this change is also compared to the folding up
of a book or scroll, Isa. 34.4. the heavens shall be rolled together as a
scroll, that is, the use of them shall cease, as when one shuts up a book and
lays it by, which he means to use no longer. As a vesture shall thou change
them, and they shall be changed; that is, they shall be certainly changed. And
now the drift of all this is, 1. to imply the perishing condition of Gods
people, as considered in themselves, poor frail creatures, continually hasting
to their end, thereby to move the Lord to take pity of them; if the heavens,
that have lasted so many years without any apparent decay, shall yet at last
perish, much more must weak frail men perish: and 2. to show, that yet
notwithstanding the children of God shall not perish, and that because God is
eternal and unchangeable, and he has chosen them to be his for ever; so that
being begotten again by the seed of Gods word, which must needs be immortal
and incorruptible, as God is, it is not possible but that they must continue,
though the heavens shall perish; which is the conclusion he makes from hence
verse. 28.

Verse. 28. The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established before thee.] That is, through thy favor and in thy presence, both
here, and eternally in heaven. See the Notes Psalm. 41.12, and 69.35, 36.

PSALM CIII.
Verse. 1. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy
Name.] That is, my whole inward man, my mind, will, affections, thoughts, with
all the inward powers and faculties of my soul: yea it may be extended to the
inward parts of his body; according to that Psa. 35.10. All my bones shall say,
Lord, who is like unto thee? for which see the Note there; as likewise Psalm.
20.1.

Verse. 3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.] To
wit, thy sins, by pardoning them (and if we so understand these words, they are
no more but a repeating again of what was said before in the first clause;) or,
thy lusts and corruptions, by mortifying them. Some also extend this to Gods
delivering him from bodily infirmities, and all outward evils: see the Note
Psalm. 41.6. But of his bodily health he speaks afterward verse. 5.

Verse. 4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction, etc.] That is, Who
preserves and delivers thee from destroying dangers; or rather, who
redeemeth and delivers thee by the promised Messiah from death and hell; see
the Notes Job 26.6, and 28.22, and 33.22: who crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies; that is, who compasses thee round about with
manifold and precious blessings, which are also a glory and an honor to thee;
see the Note Psalm. 65.11.

Verse. 5. Who satisfyeth thy mouth with good things, etc.] That is, Who
supplyeth thee with plenty and variety of good, yea and many times of the
choicest dainties, for the nourishment of thy body; or, more generally, Who
gives thee abundantly of all his good blessings, even to the full satisfying of
thy desires, according to that Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will
fill it; for which see the Note there. So that thy youth is renewed like the
eagles; that is, thou continuest still fresh and lively and strong, even when
thou have past the years of thy youth, as if thy youth were daily renewed upon
thee. And this he compares to the eagles renewing her youth, either 1. because
the eagle does yearly cast her feathers (as it is said that all birds of prey
especially do) and so having new feathers grow up in the room thereof, she
looks as young and fresh again, and flies as high and swift as ever, according
to that Isa. 40.31. they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings as eagles; or 2. because, as several writers
report, the eagle retains her vigor unto extreme old age, and neither is
weakened with any sickness, nor decays with years, but continues still as fresh
and lively, as when she was young, till at last, by the overgrowing of her
upper crooked beak, her mouth is so shut up that she cannot eat; and so she
dies, not through age so much, as want of feeding. Now though this cannot be
said of every one of Gods faithful servants in regard of their bodily health
and strength (and indeed some think that the Psalmist wrote this with respect
to the renewing of his strength after some sit of sickness) yet it may in
regard of the inward refreshing of their minds, in the manifestation of Gods
love to them; because though their outward man does perish, yet the inward man
is renewed day by day, 2. Cor. 4.16.

Verse. 6. The Lord executes righteousness and judgment for all that are
oppressed.] Though this be expressed as a general truth, yet by the following
verse it seems probable that it is inserted here with particular reference to
the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt.

Verse. 7. He made known his ways unto Moses, etc.] That is, the ways which he
prescribed his people in the Law which he gave unto Moses; or his ways of
providence toward his people, the manner of his dealing with them, how tenderly
careful he is over them, how he governs* them by his word and spirit, and
takes them at last to live for ever with him in heaven: and so the next clause
may be added to explain this, his acts unto the children of Israel; or else
that is meant of those miraculous acts, whereby the doctrine of Moses was
sealed and confirmed that it was of God, as the plagues of Egypt, the dividing
of the red sea, etc.

Verse. 8. The Lord is merciful and gracious, etc.] This seems to be here
inserted in reference to that glorious description of himself, which God gave
unto Moses, Exodus 34.6.

Verse. 11. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him.] That is, it is exceeding great, see the Note Psalm.
36.5; or, it exceeds their sins, as far as the heaven is above the earth.

Verse. 12. As far as the East is from the west, so far has he removed our
transgressions from us.] That is, he has absolutely pardoned them; as
perfectly acquitting us from being punished for them, as if they no way
concerned us: yet with respect to the filthiness of sin, it may be also said,
he has removed our transgressions from us, to wit, as one would put away some
noisome thing, where neither the sight nor smell of it might any way annoy us.

Verse. 14. For he knows our frame, etc.] That is, our natural pronenesse to
sin; or, of what a mean and brittle mould he has made us, as it seems to be
explained in the following clause, he remembers that we are dust: see also the
Note Psalm. 78.39.

Verse. 15. As a flower of the field, so he flourishes.] To wit, which lies
open to sharp piercing winds, storms and tempests, and has no covert nor
shelter, as flowers in gardens have.

Verse. 16. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, etc.] That is, it is
suddenly blown away, or blasted with some blasting wind, see the Note Psalm.
78.39: and the place there of shall know it no more; see the Note Job 7.10.

Verse. 17. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, etc.]
See the Notes Psalm. 102.12, 24, 26.

Verse. 19. The Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens, etc.] That is, He
is the most high God, that has not only the angels in heaven, but all the
kingdoms and creatures in the world, under his command, as is expressed in the
next words, and his kingdom rules over all. And this may be added also to
imply, how infinitely able God is to do for his people that which is said in
the two foregoing verses.

Verse. 20. Bless the Lord, ye his angels, etc.] By calling upon the angels to
bless God, the Psalmist does imply, 1. his desire that God might be advanced
by those that could do it better then poor men could do; and 2. how just it
was that he and others the people of God should readily join in this duty of
blessing God, seeing this was an employment sit for angels, and that the angels
did chiefly bless God for the great mercy he had showed to men, which men
therefore above all should with thankfulness acknowledge: and to this end also
he adds that description which follows, of their exceeding great power, and
readiness to serve God, that excel in strength, that do his commandments,
harkening unto the voice of his words; as if he should have said, being
attentive to know, and most ready to do the will of God in all things
whatsoever: for if those glorious spirits must thus stoop before God, and count
it an honor to serve him, should not men much more do so?

Verse. 21. Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts, etc.] This may be meant of all
the creatures, as being isntrumental to God in doing his will, for which see
the Note Genesis 2.1; or else rather of the holy angels, because the following
words, ye ministers of his that do his pleasure, seem to be meant properly of
the obedience that is yielded by reasonable creatures, see the Notes 1 Kings
22.19. And then the same is repeated here that was said before in the foregoing
verse; only by tearming them his hosts, their exceeding multitude is employed,
see Psalm. 68.17, and what use he makes of them in fighting against his enemies.

PSALM CIV.
Verse 1. O Lord my God, thou art very great, thou art clothed with honor and
majesty.] See the Note Psalm. 93.1.

Verse. 2. Who coverest thy self with light as with a garment, etc.] That is,
Who do discover thy glory, which is invisible in it self, by the light which
thou have created, even as a king appears to men gloriously adorned with his
robes of royalty. And this the Psalmist, recounting the works of God, mentions
in the first place, because in the worlds creation, it was the work of the
first day. And it may the rather be compared to a garment, wherewith God does
as it were cover himself, because the heaven, where God is in a special manner
present, is all over covered, as it were, with light. Who stretchest out the
heavens like a curtain; that is, as easily as one may draw a curtain, to wit,
the curtains of a tent, under which God is pleased to withdraw himself, as it
were, from the sight of his creatures: see the Notes Genesis 1.6. and 2 Samuel
22.12. And this, with that which follows in the two next verses, he adds
next, because these were the works of the second day.

Verse. 3. Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, etc.] That is,
Who by his watery clouds has divided the region of the air, as it were, into
several chambers, from whence, when he pleases, he does marvellously many
ways show forth his glory; see the Note Genesis 1.6: who makes the clouds his
chariot, who walks upon the wings of the wind; that is, who guides and
governs the clouds, and the swift flying winds, as he pleases; see the Note 2 Samuel 22.11, 12.

Verse. 4. Who makes his angels spirits, etc.] Because the Apostle does plainly
apply this to the angels, Heb. 1.7. And of the angels he says, Who makes his
angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire; therefore many of our best
Expositours hold, that the Psalmist does indeed speak here concerning the
angels: Having say they, spoken in the foregoing verses concerning the heavens,
before he comes, in the following verses, to speak of the earth and the things
therein, he does here insert this passage concerning the angels, because they
do as it were communicate both with heaven and earth, as having their constant
habitation in heaven, yet so that they are ordinarily sent forth into the
earth, and employed there in the service of God for the good of men. Now they
that are of this opinion, as it is clear our Translatours were, do thus
understand the words; to wit, either that God made his angels of a spiritual,
incorporeal substance, and withal lightsome, bright and glorious creatures,
like a flame of fire; or else, that he made his angels spirits, or winds, that
is, active and swift in the services enjoined them, flying as speedily as the
winds, to do whatever he gives them in charge: and a flaming fire; that is,
pure and simple, active and fervent, strong and vigorous, and of a kind of
fiery efficacy, suddenly piercing things, carrying all before them, and
consuming Gods enemies with unresistable violence, and in all these things like
unto the fire: whence it is, they say, that some of the angels are called
Seraphims, that is, burning; and frequently the angels have appeared like fire,
as to Elijah, 2 Kings 2.11. and to Elish^, 2 Kings 6.17. But now on the
contrary, other learned men, and of the best Expositours, do hold that the
Psalmist does here speak of the winds and fiery meteors; and accordingly they
take the meaning of the words to be this, that God makes the spirits, or
winds, to be his angels or messengers, and a flaming fire, that is, the thunder
and lightning and other fiery meteors, to be his ministers, according to that
Psalm. 148.8. fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind fulfilling his word.
And indeed, because the Psalmist speaks in such order here of the works of
creation, according to the days wherein they were created, I cannot but think
that he speaks in these words concerning the winds and fiery meteors in the
air. But why then does the Apostle apply this to the angels? I answer, 1. that
some think the Apostles purpose was only to show, that what is here said
concerning the winds and meteors, may be also analogically said concerning the
angels; as God uses the winds and meteors, as his messengers and ministers,
ordering them and employing them as seems good in his own eyes, so does he also
make use of the ministry of angels: 2. that even the Psalmist in saying, that
God uses the winds as his angels, does also clearly thereby imply, that even
the angels are but Gods servants, creatures made for and employed in his
service, as he is pleased to order them, and therefore not equal to him, who
is the Son of God and Lord of all things; which is all the Apostle there
contends for: and 3. that the Psalmist speaks here of the winds and meteors, as
they are under God ordered and governed by the angels, (see the Note 2 Samuel
22.11.) and that consequently he speaks therefore of the angels, as they are in
the winds and meteors, moving them, and clothed, as it were, with them; and
that therefore the Apostle might well say, that the Psalmist speaks here of the
angels: and this last is, I conceive, the most satisfactory answer.

Verse. 5. Who laid the foundations of the earth, etc.] See the Notes Job 26.7.
and Psalm. 24.2. Here begins the relation of Gods work of creation on the third
day, when he established the earth in its place, and made a separation betwixt
the earth and the waters, and caused trees and plants and herbs to grow up
therein; as is expressed in the following verses.

Verse. 6. Thou coveredst it with the deep, as with a garment; the waters stood
above the mountains.] Some understand this of the earths being wrapped about
with the sea, as with a garment; and some of Noah's sloud. But it is clearly
meant of the earths being at first covered round about under a deep of water,
Genesis 1.2, 9. before the waters were separated from it; which is related in the
following verses.

Verse. 7. At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted
away.] That is, at thy thundering command, at thy mighty dreadful] command,
which every creature must needs hear, and which no creature hearing it dares
disobey: see the Note Genesis 1.9.

Verse. 8. They go up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys, etc.] That
is, in going to the place appointed for them, nothing can stop their course,
but by the mighty power of God they run up the mountains, and so down the
valleys. These words may be read, as they are rendered in the margin, the
mountains ascend, the valleys descend; and then the meaning thereof must be,
that the waters being separated from the earth, God did at the same time bring
the earth into that fashion and form that now it has, being distinguished here
and there with mountains and valleys; or that upon the removal of the waters,
the rising mountains and the low-laid valleys did then appear.

Verse. 9. Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over, etc.] See the
Notes Job 38.8, 9, 10.

Verse. 13. He waters the hills from his chambers, etc.] See the Note above
verse. 3. That which is here noted as remarkable is, that even the mountains,
where there are no springs and brooks of water, are yet watered with the dew
and rain that fall from the clouds: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of
thy works; that is, with the rain, which is thy work, causing the clouds to be
filled therewith, and causing it to be showred down when thou please upon the
earth; or, with the rain, which proceeds from the clouds; or, with the fruits,
which thou causest the earth by this means to bring forth.

Verse. 14. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the
service of man, etc.] That is, and all kind of herbs which are for the use of
man, whether for food or physic; that he (that is, that God) may bring forth
food out of the earth. This, I conceive, is the meaning of these words. Yet
some Expositours understand them otherwise, to wit, that God causes not the
grass only, but the herb, to grow for the cattle, for the service of man, that
is, that the cattle being nourished thereby may be serviceable to man. That he
may bring forth fruit out of the earth; that is, that man, by his labor in
tilling the earth, may eat of the fruit thereof.

Verse. 15. And wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face
to shine, etc.] To wit, when it is used by men in their anointing of themselves
with precious ointments; for which see the Note Psalm. 23.5. Yet some understand
it of the virtue that there is in oil, when it is eaten, to cheer the hearts of
men, and so to make them look with a cheerful and lightsome countenance,
according to that Prove. 15.13. A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance.
However, by joining that which follows, concerning the support of man's life by
bread, and bread which strengthens man's heart, there is this covertly
commended to our observation, That God has provided not only for man's
necessity, but also for his delight.

Verse. 16. The trees of the Lord, etc.] That is, high and lofty trees, (as the
cedars are called cedars of God Psalm. 80.10. though it be rendered in our
translation the goodly cedars) are full of sap; whereas one might wonder how
the earth should yield sap enough for trees of so mighty a height and so huge a
bulk. Or by the trees of the Lord may be meant such trees as grow of themselves
by the sole providence of God, and are not set or planted by man, as the
following clause seems to explain it, the cedars of Lebanon, which he has
planted.

Verse. 19. He appoints the moon for seasons, etc.] See the Notes Genesis 1.14:
the sun knows his going down; see the Note Job 38.12. And here begins the
relation of the works God created the fourth day.

Verse. 21. The young lions roar after their prey, etc.] That which the prophet
says Amos 3.4. Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? will a
young lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing? may seem to imply,
that lions use not to roar till they have taken their prey; whereas the
Psalmist here seems to say, that they roar after their prey, and do hereby as
it were seek their prey of God. But herein we shall find no contradiction, if
we consider, 1. that a lion may be said to have a prey, or to have taken his
prey, as the Prophet speaks, because it is surely his, when he has once
discovered it, though he have not yet gotten it into his paws; and 2. that it
may well be that the lion is wont to wander up and down silently, for fear of
frighting away the beasts he seeks after, till he has espied a prey; and then
he may be said to roar both for his prey, and because he has gotten a prey.
And indeed Naturalists report, that by the lions roaring even those creatures
that are swifter of foot then he are so astonished, that they fall down, and
are easily taken by him.

Verse. 25. So is this great and wide sea, etc.] Having said in the foregoing
verse, the earth is full of thy riches, he adds, so is this great and wide sea,
wherein are things creeping innumerable; to wit, things that creep along upon
the ground, or that glide in the waters. And thus the Psalmist enters here upon
the works created on the fifth day; see Genesis 1.20: only he mentions not the
fowls, which were created also on that day, because of them he had occasionally
spoken before, in speaking of the trees wherein they make their nests; as for
the same reason he omits also to speak of the beasts and cattle created on the
sixth day, because of them he had also occasionally spoken before.

Verse. 26. There is that Leviathan, etc.] See the Notes Job 41.1, etc: whom
thou have made to play therein. This is said, either 1. because these huge
whales do by swimming and tumbling up and down in the sea, and clapping their
sins and tails, seem to sport themselves, as other lesser fishes are wont to
do; or 2. because by reason of their great strength, their overturning of boats
or ships, and hunting and devouring all other creatures that live in the
waters, is but a sport to them; or 3. because they securely lord it in the sea,
not fearing man, or any other creature whatsoever: as upon the same account it
is said of the Babylonians, Habak. 1.10. they shall scoff at the kings, and the
princes shall be a scorn unto them; they shall deride every strong hold, etc.

Verse. 27. These wait all upon thee, etc.] As if he had said, Though there be
such an infinite number of birds, beasts and fishes, yet thou providest for
them all. And in that expression of the creatures waiting upon God, the
Psalmist seems to allude to that which may be ordinarily seen in farms and
countrey-houses, to wit, how the cattle and fowl will look and follow after
those that at certain set times are wont to give them their meat: and so
likewise in the following clause, that thou may give them their meat in duo
season; where by their meat he intends the several sorts of meat which he
provides for the several creatures, according to their kinds; and by those
words in due season, is hinted to us that provident care of God over them, in
that 1. he provides for them so liberally in the summer, that there is a supply
for them all the year after; and 2. that he provides for some of them several
sorts of food, some at one time and some at another.

Verse. 28. That thou give them they gather, etc.] Here again he alludes to
the feeding of fowls about a house by throwing of handfulls of corn to them:
thou openest thine hand; that is, thou give them food liberally: and they are
filled; that is, fully satisfied.

Verse. 29. Thou hidest thy face, etc.] That is, Thou forbearest to show thy
self any longer favorable to them, to wit, by withholding food from them, and
by refusing to uphold them in their being as formerly: they are troubled; that
is, sorely distressed; or, they waste away, see the Note Psalm. 30.7: thou
take away their breath, they die and return to their dust; that is, to the
dust of which they were created, see the Note Genesis 1.20.

Verse. 30. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created; and thou renewest
the face of the earth.] That is, Though trees, plants and herbs, yea and all
living creatures die continually, yet others, by that vigor and vital spirit
which God gives them, do as continually spring up in their room; and so the
face of the earth by a fresh succession of creatures is constantly renewed, one
generation passes away, and another generation comes, Eccles. 1.4. So that by
those words thy spirit here may be meant, either that principle of life which
God gives unto all things that live, and whereby the unreasonable creatures do
both live and breath, which Solomon calls Eccles. 3.21. the spirit of the beast
that (when they die) goes down to the earth; or else, that almighty quickening
power, whereby this life is wrought in the creatures, and whereby therefore all
things are preserved in their being: and therefore some conceive it is said
that God sends forth his spirit, and they are created, because this is the
proper effect of the holy spirit of God.

Ver. 31. The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever; the Lord shall rejoice
in his works.] That is, The Lord shall preserve and uphold his creatures, that
he may still delight himself in them. Yet most Expositours conceive, that in
these words the Psalmist does at least imply his desire, that men might so
acknowledge Gods bounty and goodness in the creatures, and so use them to his
glory, that God might not repent that he had made them, but that he might still
rejoice in them, and so still preserve them.

Verse. 32. He looks on the earth, and it trembles; he touches the hills,
and they smoke.] Either to imply, that it is indeed the mercy of God that he
continues his creatures, or to imply how careful men had need to be, to give
God cause to rejoice in his works, he shows here, that by experience we may
see how easily he could destroy the whole world, in that an angry look from God
will make the earth to tremble, and the least touch of his displeasure will
burn up the mountains; which is evident in the earthquakes, the thunder and
lightnings, that do often discover the mighty power of God, but was most
terribly discovered at mount Sinai, when the Law was given, whereto happily he
does here allude.

Verse. 34. My meditation of him shall be sweet, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, shall be pleasing to God. But rather the Psalmist means, that his
meditating on the goodness of God in his wonderful works should delight and
refresh his heart, and so make him praise God with much cheerfulness; as is
expressed in the next words, I will be glad in the Lord.

Verse. 35. Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, etc.] To wit, because
they give not God the glory due to him as the Creator and governor of the
whole world, but by polluting and abusing his creatures through sin, do keep
the Lord from rejoicing in his works; see verse. 31.

PSALM CV.
Verse. 1. O Give thanks unto the Lord, etc.] The first fifteen verses of this
Psalm are a part of that Psalm, which David composed to be sung at the removing
of the Ark from the house of Obed* Edom to the city of David; and it was the
first Psalm that was put into the hands of the Levites to be sung by them: for
so much therefore of this Psalm see the Notes 1 Chronicles. 16.7, 22.

Verse. 16. He called for a famine upon the land, etc.] See 2 Kings 8.1: he
brake the whole staff of bread; see the Note Levit. 26.26.

Verse. 19. Until the time that his word came, etc.] That is, Joseph was laid
in iron, as it is said in the foregoing verse, until that came to pass which
he had foretold, when he interpreted the dreams of Pharaohs chief butler and
baker, that had been prisoners with him, until it came to be known to Pharaoh
what a man he was, to wit, that he had the gift of interpreting dreams: and
then the word of the Lord tried him; that is, that gift given him of God to
interpret dreams, or his interpreting of Pharaohs dreams, which was given him
of God, made known what he was, a man truly endued with a spirit of prophesy,
and thereupon Pharaoh did highly esteem him. Thus many Expositours do
understand these words. But I rather conceive, that the 1st clause, until the
time that his word came, has relation, not to that which went before, concerni^g
Joseph's imprisonment, but to the following clause, the word of the Lord tried
him; and that accordingly the words are to be thus understood, that until the
time that his word came, that is, until that came to pass which God had revealed
to Joseph in his dreams, concerning the great honor whereto he should be
exalted, or, until that came to pass which God had spoken, that is, which God
had decreed concerning Joseph, or, until Joseph's word came, that is, till the
condition which God had decreed concerning Joseph came to be discovered, which
was formerly unknown, the word of the Lord tried him, that is, so long the
decree of God thus revealed to him in a dream, being so long deferred before it
was accomplished, did try his faith and patience and constancy in his bondage
and imprisonment: Or it may be said that the word of the Lord tried him,
because that word which God revealed to him in a dream, being told his
brethren, was the occasion of all his sufferings, wherewith he was tried, even
as gold is tried in the fire.

Verse. 22. To bind his princes at his pleasure, etc.] That is, Pharaoh gave
Joseph such absolute rule over his whole kingdom, that it was in his power, if
he saw cause, even to punish and imprison his princes: and teach his senators
wisdom; to wit, by punishing them if they did any thing amiss; or by the
example of his wisdom in governing the people, and that especially in that
particular policy of his in ordering the corn that the land of Egypt yielded in
the seven plenteous years; implying, that the wisest of the Egyptians, such as
were Pharaohs senators, that were made such for their eminent wisdom, might
learn wisdom of Joseph. I know the first clause some understand only of
Pharaohs princes being so obliged to Joseph, and in such subjection to him,
that they were ready to do whatever he would have them. And for the second
clause, some conceive that the wisdom which Joseph was to teach them may
include, not only the wisdom of political government, but also all other
kind of learning, yea even the knowledge of the true religion. But the first
exposition is far the clearest.

Verse. 23. Israel also came into Egypt, etc.] To wit, with his children and
family: and Jacob, which may be meant both of him and his posterity, sojourned
in the land of Ham; see the Note Psalm. 78.51.

Verse. 24. And he increased his people greatly, and made them stronger then
their enemies.] To wit, in their enemies apprehension and fears; see the Note
Exodus 1.9.

Verse. 25. He turned their heart to hate his people, etc.] The same may be said
of this expression that is said of Gods hardening Pharaohs heart; see Exodus
7.13: to deal subtly with his servants; as by seeking 1. to wear them out
with cruel oppressions and hard labor, and 2. to prevent their increase, by
enjoining their midwives to destroy all their male children: see the Notes
Exodus 1.11, 15.

Verse. 28. He sent darkness, and made it dark, etc.] Here the Psalmist begins
to mention the Egyptian plagues, yet not in the order wherein they were
inflicted, this being the ninth plague which he mentions first; and only the
plagues of the murrain of the beasts, and that of the boils and blains are here
omitted. As for the next clause, and they rebelled not against his word, though
some understand it of the plagues themselves mentioned in the foregoing verse,
They showed his signs, etc. to wit, that upon Gods command by Moses and Aaron
they presently came, and did not disobey his command, as it is said verse. 31.
He spoke, and there came diverse sorts of flies; yet I conceive it is clearly
meant of Moses and Aaron, to wit, that they rebelled not against Gods command,
but did both denounce against the Egyptians, and bring upon them, the several
plagues that God enjoined them to denounce, though so to do could not but be
very dangerous to them.

Verse. 30. The land brought forth frogs in abundance in the chambers of their
kings.] That is, say some, in the chambers of those stately houses and palaces,
which had been built by the kings of Egypt in their several ages. But rather
by their kings is meant Pharaoh and his Nobles; perhaps the Princes that were
of the blood Royal, or those that were Presidents, and, as it were, Viceroyes
under Pharaoh in the several principalities that were in Egypt, which seem to
be those that are called kingdoms Isa. 19.2. And I will set the Egyptians
against the Egyptians, and they shall fight every one against his brother, and
every one against his neighbor, city against city, and kingdom against
kingdom.

Verse. 37. And there was not one feeble person among their tribes.] Which as it
was strange and miraculous, that amongst six hundred thousand Israelites there
should not be one that should not be able to go along on foot with them, as it
is noted they did Exodus 12.37; when there had been so much sickness and death
amongst the Egyptians; so it was also a great mercy, because the weak and sick
amongst them would have been a great hinderance and trouble to them in their
travels.

Verse. 38. Egypt was glad when they departed, etc.] Insomuch that they minded
not the gold and silver, which they had lent them: for the fear of them fell
upon them; that is, the Egyptians were terrified for fear of being destroyed by
means of the Israelites: yet some would have this to be understood thus, that
the Egyptians were now as much afraid of the Israelites, as the Israelites had
formerly been afraid of the Egyptians.

Verse. 40. The people asked, and he brought quails.] Though they desired flesh
in a way of murmuring, yet God was so gracious as to satisfy their desires. In
Psalm. 78.18, etc. Gods giving them quails is mentioned as a judgment, but here
the Psalmist speaks of it as a singular mercy: and therefore I conceive the
Psalmist speaks there of the quails given them in the wilderness of Paran,
Numb. 11.31. which was followed with a great judgment; but here of those that
were given them in the wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16.13. which God did in much
goodness, and out of his indulgence toward them.

Verse. 43. And he brought forth his people with joy, etc.] Whilst at the same
time every house of the Egyptians was filled with howling and lamentation, by
reason of the heavy hand of God that had been upon them.

PSALM CVI.
Verse. 1. PRaise ye the Lord, etc.] The Psalmist speaks herein the name of Gods
people, being in captivity or under some sad dispersion, as appears clearly by
those words verse. 47. Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the
heathen, etc. Yet we cannot hence conclude that it was composed upon the
occasion of the Babylonian captivity, or that dispersion of the people in the
days of Antiochus Epiphanes. But because of those words before cited, and
because we find those that follow here in this first verse, O give thanks unto
the Lord, etc, in that Psalm which was sung by the Levites, when David removed
the Ark into the city of Zion, as we may see 1 Chronicles. 16.34, 35. we may rather
conclude from thence, that it was made by David, as a form of prayer to be used
by Gods people upon occasion of any such like calamity. However, the drift of
this and the following exhortation to praise God, O give thanks unto the Lord,
for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever, is to imply, that though they
were at present in a very sad condition, 1. yet it was a mercy, which they had
cause with thankfulness to acknowledge, that they were hitherto preserved, and
were not utterly destroyed; and 2. by speaking of Gods never-failing goodness
to his people in all ages, they might upon just grounds encourage themselves
still to trust in Gods goodness, and to wait for reconciliation with God, and
mercy from God in the worst times.

Verse. 3. Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that does righteousness
at all times.] Some conceive, that having said in the foregoing verse, Who can
utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can show forth all his praise? these
words are added as in answer thereto, implying that none were so fit to show
forth the praise of God, as those that were just and holy and righteous in
their lives; for which see also the Note Psalm. 33.1. But I rather think that
the drift of these words is, to set forth, that God is always good and
gracious to his people, by admiring the blessedness of those that are his
people, and that do carry themselves as becomes his people: Blessed are they
that keep judgment; that is, that keep constantly a sincere desire in their
hearts to do that only which is just and right: and he that does
righteousness at all times; that is, and he that accordingly lives
righteously, and that both in prosperity and adversity; implying, that they
that do thus constantly fear and serve God, shall find God good and gracious to
them, though they may be in much distress for a time.

Verse. 4. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy
people, etc.] That is, Whereas of late thou have seemed not to mind us, do us
good again, and deliver us and bless us, according to what thou have been wont
to do for thy people: see the Note Psalm. 25.6. O visit me with thy salvation;
that is, save us, as thou have formerly done, out of our troubles: see Psalm.
85.1, 2, etc.

Verse. 5. That I may see the good of thy chosen, etc.] That is, That I may
enjoy the good which thou art wont to afford thy chosen people; see the Notes
Job 7.7. and Psalm. 21.4: that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation,
that I may glory with thine inheritance; that is, that I may triumph with
others for thy wonderful deliverances and mercies to thy people. But yet under
these outward mercies, spiritual and eternal blessings are likewise
comprehended.

Verse. 6. We have sinned with our fathers: we have committed iniquity, we have
done wickedly.] Some conceive that this Psalm being composed in Babylon, these
words were by the Psalmist taken from Daniels prayer Deuteronomy. 9.5. where the very
same expressions are used. But however the drift of these words is, doubtless,
not only by an humble acknowledgement of their sins to make way for Gods mercy,
but also especially to imply, that seeing God had showed great mercy to their
fathers, notwithstanding they had provoked him greatly by their sins, therefore
they hoped that God would after the like manner deal with them.

Verse. 7. Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, etc.] That is, say
some Expositours, Though they saw the miracles which Moses wrought before them,
yet they laid them not so much to heart, but that when Pharaoh, upon the
message of Moses to him, did oppress them worse then before, they did then
greatly murmr against Moses and Aaron Exodus 5.21. But rather I conceive that
the Psalmist prefixeth this as the aggravation of their murmuring at the red
sea, whereof he speaks in the following words, that notwithstanding the
wonderful works he had wrought in Egypt, yet presently at the red sea, when
they were scarce gotten out of Egypt, they provoked God by murmuring against
him; they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the
sea, even at the red sea.

Verse. 9. He led them through the depths, as through the wilderness.] That is,
He led them through those heaps of waters, which stood up as a wall on each
side of them, (see the Notes Exodus 14.22.) and that on as dry ground, as if
they had gone through a dry sandy wilderness.

Verse. 12. Then believed they his words, etc.] So it is said Exodus 14.31. But
this is here added as an aggravation of their wickedness, that being thus
convinced within themselves, they should yet so soon again murmr against the
Lord.

Verse. 13. They soon forgot his works, etc.] For three days after their
removing from the red sea they murmured again, because of the bitterness of
the waters at Marah, Exodus 15.22, 23: they waited not for his counsel; that
is, they would not wait to see what God had determined concerning them, or what
God would enjoin them to do; they would not patiently wait upon Gods
providence, as believing that he would provide for them, and as considering
that it was Gods way to exercise his people with trials for a time, but would
prescribe both what he should do, and when he should do it: yet this may be
referred to the following story.

Verse. 14. But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, etc.] To wit, for flesh,
whereas in the wilderness it was a great mercy to have necessary food. See the
Notes Number. 11.4. and Psalm. 78.18: and tempted God in the desert; see the Note
Exodus 17.2.

Verse. 15. And he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul.]
That is, upon their persons; see the Note Psalm. 16.10. The meaning is, that the
dainties that God gave them with a curse, instead of feeding them, brought a
deadly consumption upon them: see the Note Numb. 11.33.

Verse. 16. They envied Moses also in the camp, etc.] See the Notes Numb. 16.1,
3: and Aaron the saint of the Lord; that is, whom the Lord had set apart to
that holy office of being the high Priest; so that their insurrection was by
consequence against the Lord, Numb. 16.11.

Verse. 24. Yea, they despised the pleasant land.] To wit, by refusing to enter
into it, and by speaking of it with contempt, Numb. 14.3. wherefore has the
Lord brought us into this land? etc. And he calls it the pleasant land, not
only because it was such a rich, fruitful, sweet and delightful land, the
glory of all lands, as it is called Eze. 20.6; but also because God had chosen
it to be the peculiar seat of his word and worship, and a sacramental pledge to
them of his kingdom of glory, their heavenly inheritance.

Verse. 26. Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in
the wilderness.] That is, He threatened, and was ready to strike, and that with
great violence; or rather, he swore that he would destroy them, Numb. 14.21,
28. for which see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.40.

Verse. 27. To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter them
in the lands.] Because, though we find not this branch of Gods oath in express
terms, where Moses relates this story of Gods anger against the Israelites,
for their refusing to enter into the land of Canaan, yet we find the very same
in a manner again affirmed, (only indeed there is no mention of their seed)
Ezekiel. 20.23. I lifted up mine hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I
would scatter them among the heathen, and disperse them through the countries,
therefore some conceive that this was thus denounced at that time, though it
were not expressed by Moses; and that it was fulfilled, when upon the
Israelites presumptuous attempting to enter the land, after God had enjoined
them to return back into the wilderness, the Amalekites and the Canaanites
smote them and discomfited them, even unto Hormah, Numb. 14.45, and again after
when Arad the Canaanite fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners,
Numb. 21.1. And others hold that this is said, only because under that
threatening expressed by Moses, the like was also covertly employed concerning
their posterity, in case they, should rebel against God as their fathers had
done. But I rather think that the true reason of this which is here said
concerning the overthrowing of their seed is, because at first God did indeed
threaten to destroy the whole people of Israel, and so to scatter them, that
they should never be a people or commonwealth by themselves, but that he would
make a nation of Moses, Numb. 14.12, 15; though afterward, upon the
intercession of Moses, he determined to destroy those only that had then
murmured, and to bring their children into the promised land.

Verse. 28. They joined themselves also unto Baal-Peor, etc.] That is, Forsaking
the Lord, their true husband, they did adulterously prostitute themselves to
Baal-Peor, as if he had been their husband; as indeed Baal signifies a Lord,
or husband. Yet happily the rather is this expression here used, because they did
also commit fornication with the daughters of the Idolaters. But see the Notes
also Numb. 25.1, 2, 3. And ate the sacrifices of the dead; that is, the
sacrifices that were offered to dead stocks and stones, instead of the living
God; or to Idols, that were memorials of some that had been famous men amongst
them, long since dead and gone.

Verse. 31. And that was counted unto him for righteousness, etc.] The meaning
is, that God did approve of this fact of Phinehas, though it was done without
the warrant of any ordinary authority, and that of his free grace he was
pleased with it. And accordingly the drift of the following words, unto all
generations for evermore, is, to show that Gods acceptance of this noble act of
his was testified unto all generations, by conferring the high priesthood upon
him and his posterity for ever: see the Notes Numb. 25.12, 13.

Verse. 37. Yea they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.] See
the Notes Lev. 17.7, and 18.21, and 2 Kings 16.3.

Verse. 39. Thus were they defiled with their own works, etc.] To wit, as a
whore is defiled with her whoredoms, as the following words expound it, and
went a whoring with their own inventions; for which see the Note Judge. 2.17.

Verse. 47. Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, etc.]
As if he had said, Seeing thou have thus in all ages been gracious to thy
people, notwithstanding their many provocations, afford us, we beseech thee,
the like favor in our captivity and dispersion. But see also the Notes above
verse. 1. and 6. and 1 Chronicles. 16.35.

Verse. 48. Blessed be the Lord, etc.] See the Note above verse. 1: and let all
the people say, Amen, praise ye the Lord; see the Note Psalm. 41.13.

PSALM CVII.
Verse. 2. LEt the redeemed of the Lord say so, etc.] The drift of this Psalm
is, to set forth Gods praise, in regard of his wonderful providence toward
all mankind; and first, by showing how miraculously he preserves them in the
several streights whereinto they often fall. And accordingly the Psalmist does
in the first place relate, how miraculously the Lord does often deliver poor
pilgrims and travelers, when loosing their way, or wandering up and down in
strange countries, and in desert places, they fall into great dangers. For that
these are the redeemed of the Lord, whom here he invites to praise the Lord, is
evident in the following description of their miseries verse. 4, 5. where he
speaks of their wandering up and down in wildernesses, hungry and thirsty, etc.
to wit, such as traveling into foreign parts for merchandise, or any other
occasions, or being banished, or otherwise driven by force out of their own
countries, do loose themselves in desolate wildernesses, and so are in danger
to fall, or do fall into the hands of robbers, or other enemies that surprise
them, and make slaves of them, and yet are afterward by the mighty power of
God delivered from all these miseries: for with reference to their falling into
the hands of such enemies is the last clause added, Let the redeemed of the
Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy.

Verse. 3. And gathered them out of the lands, from the East, and from the west,
from the North, and from the South.] In the Hebrew it is, and from the sea:
whereby though usually in the Scripture the west is intended, and that because
the mediterranean sea lay on the west of Judea; yet here by the sea the South
is meant, and that because both the red sea and the great Ocean lay Southward
of Judea. But that which is chiefly observable for the understanding of these
words is, 1. that the Lord is said to have gathered these lost pilgrims or
travelers, that are here stirred up to praise his name, because he fetches
them in from their banishment, their wanderings or captivity, to their own
country, or some place of abode, or some place where they may be furnished
with things necessary for them: and 2. that it is said that he gathered them
out of the lands, from the East, and from the west, etc. to imply, that God
does this in all quarters of the world: that we might not think that he speaks
only of the deserts of Judea, he shows, that by the special providence of God,
men are delivered often out of these streights all the world over.

Verse. 4. They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way, etc.] That is,
having lost their way (which they might easily do in those sandy deserts,
where the winds do usually blow the sands over the ways where men have gone)
they wandered up and down, not knowing which way to go: they found no city to
dwell in; that is, no place where they might make their abode; or no place
inhabited by men, amongst whom they might find any direction or refreshing.

Verse. 5. Hungry and thirsty, etc.] To wit, because, having spent their
provision, by reason of their long wandering up and down after they had lost
their way, no new supply in those solitary deserts was to be had, no not so
much as of water to quench their thirst, which in those hot places must needs
be great: their soul fainted in them; that is, they were continually ready to
faint, not only through weakness and weariness, but also through grief and
anguish of spirit.

Verse. 6. Then they cried unto the Lord, etc.] This is meant not only of the
faithful people of God, (for the Psalmist speaks here of the providence of
God toward all mankind) but of all men in general, who being in great
streights, are wont by the very instinct of nature to cry unto God for help:
yea and God often hears the cries of such men, both for the clearer discovery
of his own goodness, and the fuller conviction of their spirits.

Verse. 9. For he satisfyeth the longing soul, etc.] That is, he satisfyeth the
thirsty with drink, which they longed for: and fills the hungry soul with
goodness; that is, with good food, see the Note Psalm. 103.5. And thus these
two clauses have clear reference to that verse. 5. hungry and thirsty, etc.

Verse. 10. Such as sit in darkness, etc.] This is the second instance which
the Psalmist gives of Gods wonderful deliverances, namely, of his delivering
those that are in prison and bondage. Such as sit in darkness, etc; that is,
in dark prisons and dungeons; see the Note Psalm. 88.7: being bound in
affliction and iron; that is, with iron fetters or chains, which did sorely
afflict them, Psalm. 105.18; or, being bound not only with iron chains, but also
with the cords of penury, and all manner of afflictions, out of which they can
no more free themselves, then they can shake off their fetters; see Job 36.8.

Verse. 11. Because they rebelled against the words of the Lord, and contemned
the counsel of the most High.] That is, either the word written, or at least
the law of nature written in all men's hearts: see the Note above verse. 6.

Verse. 12. Therefore he brought down their heart with labor, etc.] That is, he
humbled their proud hearts with sore afflictions and hard bondage; see the Note
Psalm. 90.10: they fell down; that is, before their enemies, and so became
captives; or they fell into thraldom, or lay in great distress; or, they were
dejected in spirit: and there was none to help; that is, to comfort or deliver
them.

Verse. 17. Fools, because of their transgression, and because of their
iniquities, are afflicted.] To wit, with sickness, as is clear in the
following verses. And this is the third instance here given of Gods miraculous
deliverances of men.

Verse. 23. They that go down to the sea in ships, etc.] The ground of this
expression is, either because the banks of the sea are higher then the waters
that beat upon them; or because of the low land which is by the sea side,
whether men must go down from the higher parts of the land, when they intend
to go to sea: that do business in great waters; to wit, either merchants that
trade by sea, Rev. 18.17; or rather mariners and fishermen. And this is the
fourth and last instance of Gods miraculous deliverances of men.

Verse. 24. These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.]
Though the sea be full of wonders, yet this is doubtless principally meant of
those wonders related in the following verse, to wit, how suddenly God raises
tempests of incredible violence, what mighty mountains of waters there will be
then raised in the sea, and how calm the Lord makes all as suddenly again.

Verse. 27. They reel to and fro, etc.] To wit, through the swimming of their
heads, which is indeed usual with men that are sea-sick in a storm; or rather
the rolling of the ships this way and that, and their being driven about
sometimes one way and sometimes another, according as the winds blow, the
seamen having no power to order their ships: and are at their wits end; that
is, their art and skill fails them, and they know not what course to take.

Verse. 32. Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and
praise him in the assembly of the elders.] That is, in the most public
assemblies, as those usually are where the magistrates meet. But withal the
elders may be particularly mentioned, not only because such wise men were best
able to judge of these wonderful works of God; but also because there was most
need, that the rulers of the people should learn to stand in awe of the mighty
power of God.

Verse. 33. He turns rivers into a wilderness, etc.] In the following verses
the Psalmist sets forth the providence of God, by showing the strange and
unexpected changes which he often makes in the world; as first here his making
fruitful places barren, and barren places exceeding fruitful.

Verse. 34. A fruitful land into barrenness, etc.] In the Hebrew it is, into
saltness, for which see the Notes Deuteronomy. 29.23. and Judge. 9.45.

Verse. 36. And there he makes the hungry to dwell, etc.] To wit, either
because those that were very poorly provided for there before, and in a manner
famished, do after this live there very comfortably, and in great abundance; or
else because poor people, being forced from their native countries by war,
oppression or penury, do remove thither, invited by the fruitfulness of the
place, that they may prepare a city for habitation.

Verse. 38. He blesses them also, so that they are multiplied greatly, etc.]
This is the second great change here mentioned, which God often makes in the
world, to wit, that he mightily increases and advances the inhabitants of
cities and kingdoms, and then diminishes and brings them low again. As for
the next clause, and suffers not their cattle to decrease, the contrary is
thereby implied, to wit, that he does exceedingly increase them.

Verse. 40. He pours contempt upon princes, and causes them to wander in the
wilderness, etc.] See the Notes Job 12.21, 24. And this is the third great
change which God often makes in the world, to wit, that he pulls down those
that are on high, and raises those that are in a low condition.

Verse. 41. Yet sets he the poor on high from affliction, and makes him
families like a flock.] That is, exceeding numerous. It may also imply, that
God would guide and protect them, as a shepherd does his flock, as in
opposition to that which was before said of princes, that he causes them to
wander in the wilderness, etc.

Verse. 42. The righteous shall see it, and rejoice, etc.] As seeing hereby that
it shall be well with them; see the Note Job 22.19: and all iniquity shall stop
her mouth; see the Notes Job 5.16. and Psalm. 63.11.

PSALM CVIII.
Verse. 1. O God, my heart is fixed, etc.] The seven first verses of this Psalm
we had before almost word for word Psalm 57.7, etc. and the rest of this Psalm
we had before Psalm. 60.5. for which therefore see the Notes in both those
Psalms.

PSALM CIX.
Verse. 1. HOld not thy peace, O God of my praise.] Many of our best Expositours
take the word praise actively, as if he had said, O God whom I desire always
to praise, or, O God, who have always given me occasion to praise thy name,
appear in my defense, and be the same to me still, that thou have always
hitherto been, that I may praise thy name. But others take it passively, as if
he had said, O Lord, thou art he in whom only I glory, accounting it my
greatest praise that I am thy servant, and have an interest in thee, and in
whom alone all my praise does consist, because thou upholdest me in my just
cause; whilst others cry out against me, as a perfidious wicked man, I beseech
thee appear still in my defense. And indeed this last I conceive the most
probable; and that because this seems to be prefixed, as by way of opposition
to that which follows in the next verse, for the mouth of the wicked and the
mouth of the deceitful are opened against me: as if he had said, Because
wicked men do slander me, I appeal to thee for my justification, as the
witness and patron of mine innocence; and therefore whilst they cry out
against me with full mouth, as a pestilent enemy to the state, be not thou
silent, on whom I wholly depend for the clearing and avenging of mine
integrity: and though all the world condemn me, yet as long as thou do
approve me, that is a sufficient praise to me. But however, because it is
generally thought that it was Doeg, (or, as some think, Saul) against whom
particularly David prays in this Psalm, as ver. 6, etc. set thou a wicked man
over him, etc. it is most probable that this Psalm was composed in the time of
David's troubles under Saul: and withal, because one clause of this Psalm verse.
8. let another take his office or charge, is by the Apostle Peter applied to
Judas Act. 1.20. therefore it is also clear, that David speaks here of himself
in the person of Christ, as foretelling by the spirit of prophesy, that it
would hereafter fare with Christ, as it then fared with him: and so in
reference to Christ, the drift of these words may be the same with that branch
of Christ's prayers Joh. 17.1. Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify
thee, etc.

Verse. 2. For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are
opened against me, etc.] See the foregoing Note, as also the Notes 1 Samuel 24.9.
and Psalm. 43.1. In reference to Christ, this may be meant of those clamours of
the Jews, Crucify him, crucify him, as likewise of the flatteries of Judas
and others, when they meant to betray him: and so likewise the following words,
they have spoken against me with a lying tongue, may be meant of the many
horrible slanders which they cast upon Christ.

Verse. 3. They compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against
me without a cause.] See Joh. 15.24, 25.

Verse. 4. For my love, they are my adversaries; but I gave my self to prayer.]
That is, I think not of requiting evil for evil, but flying to God by prayer is
my only defense and refuge; see the Note Psalm. 35.13. and 69.13. How this was
accomplished in Christ, and particularly in his praying for those that
crucified him, Luke 23.34. we may easily conceive.

Verse. 6. Set thou a wicked man over him, etc.] This may be taken as spoken
indefinitely of every one of his enemies beforementioned (and some conceive it
was accomplished, when the Romans came to tyrannize with such horrible cruelty
over the Jews;) or of some one that was the chief and the most mischievous
amongst them, the head and the ringleader of all the rest. And therefore
taking the words as spoken by David with reference to himself, the most
Expositours hold that this is meant of Doeg; who did not only incense Saul
against him more then any of his enemies besides, but also caused a whole city
and family of the priests to be cruelly slaughtered for his sake. But taking
them as spoken with reference to Christ, it is clearly meant of Judas, who was
guide to them that took Jesus, Act. 1.16. and to whom Peter does expressly apply
one branch of these curses, Act, 1.20. As for this first imprecation, it is
meant of appointing some wicked cruel tyrant to exercise dominion over him at
his will and pleasure. And the very same in effect may be intended also in the
next clause, if we read it, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, and let an
adversary stand at his right hand; that is, let him have some powerful and
bitter enemy continually with him, that may diligently watch and vex and pursue
him, and that may continually oppose and hinder him in all that he undertakes:
for standing may imply all assiduity and diligence in doing these things; and
the standing of an enemy at the right hand of a man, gives him an advantage to
hinder such a one in any thing he would do. Yet I know there are some
Expositours that understand both clauses in a more restrained sense: Set thou a
wicked man over him, to wit, to be his judge; and let an adversary stand at his
right hand, to wit, to accuse him. But now reading the second clause, as it is
in our Bibles, and let Satan stand at his right hand, that which is hereby
desired must needs be, that the devil might be still powerful with him to lead
him into any wickedness, and afterward to accuse him, and to terrify him, and
at last to drag him to eternal perdition: and indeed of Judas it is expressly
noted what power the devil had over him; as that it was the devil that put it
into his heart to betray Christ, Joh. 13.2, and verse. 27. that after the sop
Satan entered into him. And just indeed it was that he should be subject to the
devil, that would not be subject to Christ. As concerning the lawfulness of
these curses, see the Note Psalm. 28.4.

Verse. 7. When he shall be judged, let him be condemned, let his prayer become
sin.] That is, If he begs for mercy, instead of finding mercy thereby, let his
entreaties enrage the judge the more, and provoke him to greater wrath against
him. But this may be also understood with reference to Gods tribunal, When he
shall be judgeed, let him be condemned, etc. that is. When he shall at his
going out of this world be judged by the Lord, let him be condemned without
mercy; and though he shall then pray to God for the pardon of his sins, yet let
them not be pardoned, but let his prayer add to the number of his sins.

Verse. 8. Let his days be few, etc.] That is, Let him live but a while after
his sin; or rather, Let him be cut off by an untimely death: which how it was
accomplished in Judas, we see Matthew. 27.5. and with reference to this place
Christ spoke that of Judas Joh. 17.12. those that thou gave me I have kept,
and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled: and so likewise the Apostle Peter expressly said, Act. 1.20. that the
next clause, and let another take his office, was to be accomplished by choosing
another Apostle into the room of Judas; yet it may be meant of Doeg, with
reference to that office which he held under Saul, 1 Samuel 21.17. and which
doubtless puffed him up, and made him the more insolently cruel to David and
others.

Verse. 10. Let his children be continual vagabonds and beg: let them seek
their bread also out of their desolate places.] That is, Let them come out of
their plundered houses to beg bread of those that pass by; or, being driven
out of their dwellings, where they were spoiled of all they had, let them go
about from one place to another begging for bread.

Verse. 11. Let the extortioner catch all he has, etc.] To wit, by intangling
him with bonds, and other fraudulent oppressive courses, as with so many pits
and snares, and thereby stripping him by degrees of all that he has: and let
the stranger spoil his labor; that is, let him strip him of those things he
has gotten by much labor. And by the stranger may be meant, either any that
having no interest in what he has, do only surprise them by fraud or violence;
or else spoilers of some foreign nation, who when they come to pillage men,
are wont to make clean work, and to show no pity.

Verse. 14. Let the iniquity of his father be remembered with the Lord, etc.]
That is, Let him be punished not only for his own sins, but also for the sins
of his progenitors.

Verse. 15. Let them be before the Lord continually, etc.] That is, Let their
sins never be forgiven; or, Let the Lord be continually punishing the sins of
his parents in him and his posterity, till they be no more remembered amongst
men.

Verse. 16. Because that he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor
and needy man, etc.] That is, me and others, that are distressed and afflicted,
see the Notes Psalm. 40.17, and 69.29: that he might even slay the broken in
heart; that is, the man that was sorely afflicted in spirit, because of his
distresses: and indeed of Christ it is noted, that he was a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, Isa. 53.3. and that he was broken in heart for our sins,
My soul, says he, is exceeding sorrowful even unto death* As for that
expression, Because that he remembered not to show mercy, it implies, either 1.
that the kindness that his enemy had formerly received from him might have put
him in mind to have showed mercy to him; or 2. that the extremity of misery he
was in might have stirred up in his enemy thoughts of pity toward him, as
naturally men are wont to take compassion of those that are in a very sad
condition; and that because he did not this, therefore it was just that God
should not show the least mercy to him or his. And how truly this might be said
concerning the merciless dealing both of Judas and the Jews with Christ, we
may easily conceive.

Verse. 17. As he loved cursing, etc.] To wit, say some Expositours, 1. in that
he delighted to denounce curses and imprecations against men; or 2. in that he
did wittingly and wilfully run on in those ways of wickedness, which must
needs bring Gods curse upon him, (which was as if he had desired Gods curse)
and would not walk in those ways wherein he might have been certainly blessed
(as it was with Judas, that for a little money betrayed his Savior, and with
the Jews in general, that despised and crucified him, in whom all the nations
of the earth were to be blessed; crying out, His blood be upon us and upon our
children;) or 3. which I like the best, in that he delighted to do all the
mischief he could to the godly, and took no delight at all in doing them good:
so let it come to him; that is, let that be done to him, which he has done to
others.

Verse. 18. As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, etc.]
To wit, in that he practiced it as constantly, as men wear their garments; or,
in that he loved it, and delighted and gloried in it, as some men do in their
costly apparel; see the Note Psalm. 73.6: so let it come into his bowels like
water; that is, as water does when a man drinks, or when a man is sunk under
water, and then it runs into his body: and like oil into his bones; that is, as
oil which is of that efficacy, that it will pierce to the very bones and
marrow. And the meaning of this is, that he desires, either that the curse of
God might fall upon him in great measure, as men pour down water when they are
thirsty, or as men, when they have aches in their bones, or upon other
occasions, use much ointments; or that it might seize upon him not only
outwardly in outward calamities, but also inwardly in his soul, his mind and
conscience, as by continued horrid terrors, and by being delivered up to a
reprobate sense, etc.

Verse. 19. Let it be unto him as the garment which covers him, etc.] See the
Note Job 8.22: and for a girdle wherewith he is girded continually; that is,
let the curse of God lie close upon him, and cleave fast unto him.

Verse. 20. Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord, and of
them that speak evil against my soul.] That is, against me; or rather, that by
their slanders seek to take away my life.

Verse. 21. But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy names sake, etc.] See
the Notes 1 Samuel 12.22. and Psalm. 25.11: because thy mercy is good; see the
Note Psalm. 69.16.

Verse. 22. For I am poor and needy, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 40.17. and Psalm.
69.29: and my heart is wounded within me; that is, I am in a manner a dead man;
or rather, my heart is broken with sorrow: which how it was verified in Christ,
we see, Matthew. 26.38. and Luke 22.44.

Verse. 23. I am gone like the shadow, when it declineth, etc.] That is, swiftly
and suddenly; for no sooner is the sun covered with a cloud, but presently the
shadow is gone: but see the Note also Psalm. 102.11. I am tossed up and down as
the locust: to wit, because as locusts are continually leaping up and down, yea
and are often carried away by the winds, Exodus 10.19. and driven away by men,
as being mischievous, hurtful creatures; so was David persecuted from one
place to another, and so was Christ hurried up and down from one tribunal to
another; both being looked upon as mischievous persons, not to be endured in
the places where they lived. Yet because locusts have dry and thin bodies, some
think that in this comparison the Psalmist does also allude to that leanness
of body, whereof he speaks in the next verse.

Verse. 24. My knees are weak through fasting, etc.] To wit, for want of m^at;
or through grief and anguish of mind, which makes men oftentimes even to loath
their food, Psalm. 102.4.

Verse. 27. That they may know, etc.] Having in the foregoing verse prayed for
deliverance, Help me, O Lord my God, etc. he adds, That they may know that this
is thy hand: as if he had said, Let my deliverance be such, that mine enemies
themselves may see, that there is a divine hand in it; or, By my deliverance
let mine enemies come to know, that this which I now suffer is of thee, by
thine appointment and by thy disposing providence; and that thou did but make
use of them as thine instruments for my correction: which fully agrees with
that which is said of Christ Isa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he
has put him to grief.

Verse. 31. For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, etc.] To wit, even
then when he may seem to have cast him off; which David speaks with reference
to himself; but see also the Note Psalm. 16.8: to save him from those that
condemn his soul; that is, that unjustly censure and slander him; or, that seek
to take away his life by judging him to be a malefactor, not worthy to live,
and so proceeding against him in a judiciary way: which we know was the
condition both of David and Christ.

PSALM CX.
Verse. 1. THe Lord said unto my Lord, etc.] Though this might be taken as
spoken by the people of Israel concerning David, who was indeed a glorious type
of Christ, and did by the mighty help of God subdue all his enemies round about
him, see the Note Psalm. 89.27; yet I rather take it to be only a prophesy
concerning Christ: and that 1. because there are some passages in this Psalm,
which cannot with any show of probability be applied to David, as that verse. 4.
for how can it be said that David was a priest, much less a priest for ever?
or that there was a priesthood after another order, the order of Melchizedek,
erected by God at that time, when the priesthood after the order of Aaron was
still settled in the Church? 2. Because our Savior himself alleged this very
Text to the Pharisees, Matthew. 22.43, as a passage commonly acknowledged to be
meant concerning the promised Messiah, and that to prove that he was to be more
then mere man: for when the Pharisees had acknowledged, that Christ when he
came was to be the son of David, our Savior objected this very place to them,
How then, says he, does David in spirit, (that is, by the spirit of prophesy)
call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
till I make thy enemies thy footstool? If David then call him Lord, how is he
his son? and the Evangelist adds there immediately verse. 46. that no man was
able to answer him a word; which was a clear proof, that in those times this
was generally acknowledged to be a prophesy concerning Christ, or else the
Pharisees would soon have objected that. 3. Because the Apostle Heb. 1.13. does
in effect say, that no angel, and therefore much more no mere man, could be
capable of that honor which is promised in these words; To which of the angels
said he at any time, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy
footstool? and 4. Because the Apostle Peter does expressly say Act. 2.34, 35,
that it is not the people that speak here of David their Lord, but that it is
David himself that speaks these words, The Lord said unto my Lord; and that
those words, Sit thou on my right hand, etc. could not be meant of David,
because David was not taken up into heaven as Christ was, For David, says he,
is not ascended into the heavens; but he says himself, The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool. These
words therefore, The Lord said unto my Lord, etc. are doubtless a prophesy
concerning the kingdom of Christ: for the fuller understanding whereof we must
know, 1. that David calls Christ here his Lord, both as he was God, and as he
was his King and Redeemer; 2. that by the Lords saying that which is here
mentioned to Christ, David's Lord, is meant, that God the Father had from all
eternity decreed this concerning Christ his Son, and did in time make known
this his decree and promise, both to Christ and to his Church; 3. that by
Christ's sitting at the right hand of God the Father is meant, the advancement
of Christ, as he was both God and man in one person, to the supremest place of
power and authority, of honor and heavenly glory, under God the Father: for
this word sitting implies reigning with continuance, after he had finished the
work of man's redemption, even as a prince that sits in his throne of glory; and
Gods right hand notes the next place of power and glory under God, or, as some
express it, a place of equal power and authority with God, even that he
should be advanced far above all principality and power and might and dominion,
Ephesians. 1.21. and should from the highest place of heavenly glory, as Mediator,
and his Fathers Deputy, reign over the whole world, which is therefore called
the right hand of the majesty, Heb. 1.3. and the right hand of the power of
God, Luke 22.69: and 4. that in those words, until I make thine enemies thy
footstool, though the act of subduing Christ's enemies be ascribed to God the
Father, yet we cannot thence infer that Christ does not himself subdue his
enemies; for what things soever he, that is, the Father does, these also does
the Son likewise; only acts of power are usually ascribed to God the Father,
not only because Christ, as the Mediator, is assisted by the Father in all
that he does, but also because whatsoever the Son does, he does it by that
power which he has from the Father by his eternal generation. And as for this
word until, though it does not always imply a certain prefixed time, unto
which that which is affirmed shall be, and no longer, as Genesis 28.15. and Psalm.
112.8. may seem rather to imply a certain determinate time: for though there is
no question, but that Christ shall reign with God the Father unto all eternity,
see the Note Psalm. 45.6; yet because it is as certain, that when death, the
last enemy of Christ, is once wholly subdued, he shall no longer reign as he
does now, to wit, as a Mediator, and as his Fathers Deputy, gathering and
defending his Church against her enemies, and interceding with his Father in
her behalf as formerly; but as one true God, of the same essence with the
Father, he shall reign without any external means or instruments, without word
or Sacraments, without enemies or hindrances, etc. therefore here, I say, this
word until may imply, that Christ's kingdom as Mediator should continue till
all his enemies were subdued, and that then he should voluntarily resign it
into the hands of the Father, which is that the Apostle says 1 Cor. 15.24, 28.

Verse. 2. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, etc.] That
is, thy mighty and powerful kingdom, (the scepter, the sign, being put for
the thing signified;) or, thy strong scepter, the scepter whereby thou do
show forth thy power; that is, the preaching of the Gospel, accompanied with
the mighty working of the spirit of Christ, for this is the scepter whereby
Christ does mightily subdue and govern his people: and therefore is the Gospel
called the word of the kingdom, Matthew. 13.19. and the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. And accordingly the sum of
that which is here said is, that though the Gospel should be first published,
and the spirit should be first poured forth upon the Apostles in Jerusalem,
Act. 2.4. yet from thence it was to be spread abroad all the world over; and
so, though the foundations of his kingdom should be laid in Zion, yet it
should be extended afterward unto the farthest parts of the earth: see the
Notes Psalm. 2.6, 8. As for the following clause, rule thou in the midst of
thine enemies, the meaning is, that Christ should rule as King, even where the
power of his enemies was greatest, and maugre all their malice and rage against
him; and that not only by subduing and destroying his enemies at his pleasure,
but also by gathering a people to himself, and governing them by his word and
spirit: which is more clearly expressed in the following verses.

Verse. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, etc.] That is,
when thou shall go forth as a mighty king to conquer and subdue the world, and
shall make thy Gospel to work mightily upon the consciences of those that hear
it, then shall thine elect people with all readiness and willingness submit
to thee, follow and obey thee. As for the following words, in the beauties of
holiness from the womb of the morning; thou have the dew of thy youth (which
is acknowledged by all Expositours to be one of the hardest passages in all the
Psalms) for the understanding thereof we must know, First, that by the beauties
of holiness may be meant, 1. Gods holy Temple, or (in allusion thereto) the
holy assemblies of Gods people, for which see the Notes 1 Chronicles. 16.29. Psalm.
27.4. and 29.2; and then the meaning is this, that in the day of Christ's power
his people should willingly gather themselves together, to worship him in his
Temple, or in the place of the holy assemblies: or 2. the amiablenesse that is
in the holy ways of Christianity; and then this may be added, as the cause of
the peoples coming in so willingly to the service of Christ: or 3. which I like
the best, that glorious holiness wherewith all true Christians are adorned;
and then this clause is added to set forth the glory of that people, that
should so willingly come in and submit themselves to Christ, namely, that they
should come in to him in the beauties of holiness, that is, adorned with all
the holy graces of Gods spirit; as soldiers, that for the honor of their
General, do go forth to serve him in their bravest attire, or as the Priests
in the Law did wait upon God in their holy garments, beautiful and glorious;
the holiness of the Church being that which indeed makes her beautiful as
Tirzah, and comely as Jerusalem, Cant. 6.4. Secondly, those words from the womb
of the morning, may be read, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, more then
the womb of the morning; and then they must needs be referred to the foregoing
words, as making known that the beauties of holiness, wherewith the people of
Christ should be adorned, should be more then are the beauties of the morning,
where it first breaks forth. But now if we read this clause, as it is in our
Bibles, from the womb of the morning, then may these words be referred either
to the foregoing words, in the beauties of holiness; and so that which is
hereby intended is this, that from the first shining forth of Christ upon his
people in the preaching of the Gospel, (and Christ is indeed called the bright
morning star, Revel. 22.16. and the dayspring from on high, Luke 2.78.) or,
from the first forming of Christ in their hearts, they should with much
willingness present themselves before Christ in his service, being adorned
gloriously with the graces of his spirit, as with clothing of wrought gold and
raiment of needle work: or else it may rather be referred to the following
words, from the womb of the morning; thou have the dew of thy youth; (for many
learned men conceive that the Colon, or middle point that is in our Bibles
betwixt these two clauses, is only a distinction for convenient reading, not a
disjunction of the sense;) and then the meaning of the words is clearly this,
that look as the dew is born out of the womb of the cool morning-aire, and so
distilleth down insensibly with innumerable drops upon the earth, (and indeed
the like figurative expressions we find elsewhere, as Job 38.28, 29. Has the
rain a father? or, who has begotten the drops of the dew? out of whose womb
came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who has gendered it?) so from the
first breaking forth of the sun of righteousness in the morning-light of the
Gospel, an heavenly offspring shall be suddenly born unto Christ, begotten by
the word and spirit, in innumerable multitudes, as are the crystal drops of
the dew which in a morning cover the earth. They are the children that are
begotten unto Christ that are here called his youth, because they are made new
creatures, and are as newborn babes, 1 Pet. 2.2: and they are compared to the
dew, thou have the dew of thy youth, that is, thy young and newborn people are
as the dew, because there should be an innumerable company of them, and because
they should be suddenly brought forth, by a heavenly calling, upon the first
preaching of the Gospel, as the dew that distills down from heaven upon earth.
And indeed this explication is very suitable to other places of Scripture where
the like expressions are used: as Isa. 54.1, and 66.8, 9; but especially that
Mich. 5.7. And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a
dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man,
nor waits for the sons of men.

Verse. 4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever,
after the order of Melchizedek.] The chief thing intended in these words is,
that whereas there should certainly be an end of Aarons priesthood, as if the
Lord had repented of the honor he had conferred upon that family, it should
not be so with Christ; for his priesthood should be an eternal and
unchangeable priesthood. But see also the Notes Genesis 14.18.

Verse. 5. The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of
his wrath.] Here the Psalmist sets forth the victories of Christ, as in
reference to that which was said before verse. 1. to wit, that God would make
his enemies his footstool. The Lord at thy right hand (see the Note Psalm.
16.8.) shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath; that is, though he
may forbear them a while, yet there will a day come, when his wrath will break
forth against his mightiest enemies, and he will utterly destroy them. And
indeed, though some under this word kings include Christ's spiritual enemies,
as Satan, the Prince of this world, Joh. 16.11. and sin, which reigns as a
king over carnal men, Romans 6.12. and death, which is called the king of
terrors, Job 18.14; yet it is chiefly meant of the mighty men of this world.
The greatest question is, of whom and to whom those words are spoken, The Lord
at thy right hand, etc. And for this we must know, that they may be understood,
1. as spoken to God the Father concerning Christ; as if it had been said, O God
the Father of all power and majesty, the Lord, thy Benjamin, the son at thy
right hand, (as was said of Christ verse. 1.) shall strike through kings, etc:
or 2. as spoken to Christ concerning God the Father; O Christ, the Lord thy
father shall stand by thee at thy right hand, to aid thee, and to destroy all
thine enemies for thee: or 3. as spoken to the people of God concerning Christ;
as if he had said, Be not dismayed, O ye servants of Christ; for as the Lord
your Savior sits at the right hand of his Father in glory and majesty, so he
will also be at your right hand, to assist and prosper you, and to execute
judgment on all your enemies.

Verse. 6. He shall judge among the heathen, etc.] That is, He shall rule as
king amongst the heathen; or rather, he shall punish and destroy his enemies of
all nations, not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also: which is clear by the
following words, he shall fill the places with dead bodies, that is, with dead
bodies lying unburied; which also may imply the multitude of the slain, in that
they that were left alive should not be able to bury their dead: he shall wound
the heads over many countries; that is, he shall destroy the mightiest of
princes that oppose him.

Verse. 7. He shall drink of the brook in the way, etc.] Some conceive that
hereby the havoc that Christ should make amongst his enemies is farther set
forth; for they make the meaning of the words to be this, that Christ should
make such a slaughter amongst them, that as a conqueror he might drink the
blood of his enemies, which should run down as a brook or stream, according to
that expression Numb. 23.24. Behold, the people shall rise up as a great lion,
and lift up himself as a young lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the
prey, and drink the blood of the slain: and hereby, they say, is signified
Christ's satiating, refreshing and delighting himself in the destruction of his
enemies. But there are two other expositions that are far more probable: and
indeed of these it is hard to say which is the best. The first is, that hereby
the Psalmist sets forth the alacrity, heat and fervency of Christ in pursuing
his enemies: He shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall he lift up
the head; that is, being in the pursuit of his enemies, he shall no where stay
to rest and refresh himself, but quenching his thirst a little out of any brook
that he meets with in the way, he shall presently lift up his head again, and
shall again follow his enemies close at the heels. And this exposition some
learned Expositours do the rather approve, because by the coherence of these
words with the two foregoing verses, it may seem, that the Psalmist does still
prosecute his prophesies concerning the victories of Christ. But then the
second is, that these words are meant, the first branch of his humiliation or
passion, and the second of his resurrection and exaltation. For by those words,
He shall drink of the brook in the way, they say is meant, either 1. the poor
and mean condition, wherein Christ lived as a pilgrim and stranger here in this
world, like that of those, that have no other drink, but the water that runs in
brooks and rivers, to quench their thirst, (wherein they say also that David,
whilst he lived obscurely in desolate places for fear of Saul, was a type of
Christ;) and then by the lifting up of his head must be meant, the glory
whereto afterward Christ was exalted: or 2. the death and passion of Christ.
As waters in the Scripture do usually signify afflictions and sorrows, see the
Notes 2 Samuel 22.5. and Psalm. 42.7; so drinking of these waters may signify,
either that a man is drowned and overwhelmed in these floods of afflictions,
because when a man is drowned, the water will run into his bowels, as we may
see in that Psalm. 69.1, 2. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my
soul, etc. for which see the Notes there; or else, a voluntary submission to
the afflictions which a man undergoes, according to that of our Savior, Joh.
18.11. the cup which my father gives me, shall I not drink it? But now, as
drinking of a cup may signify the undergoing of a certain portion of
afflictions and miseries; so on the other side, drinking of the brook may
signify an undergoing of the highest degrees of all miseries and sorrows,
because a brook of waters may signify a confluence of all kind of miseries. So
that when it is said here of Christ, He shall drink of the brook in the way,
the meaning is, that all the miseries due to men for sin should, as a torrent,
come pouring in upon him. Having spoken so much in the foregoing verses
concerning the victories of Christ, under those metaphorical expressions of
striking through kings, of filling the places with dead bodies, etc. lest we
should hence think that his kingdom should be an outward worldly kingdom, the
Psalmist does therefore add this, concerning his suffering, and so entering
into glory: He shall drink of the brook in the way; that is, as he passes
through this world, or, whilst he is in the way of accomplishing the will of
God for the salvation of men, passing through this vail of tears, he shall
drink of the troubled brook of many bitter sufferings, he shall undergo all
the wrath that was due to man for sin: therefore shall he lift up the head;
that is, he shall rise victoriously out of the grave, he shall triumphantly
ascend up into heaven, and shall there sit down at the right hand of his
Father. See also the Note for this phrase of lifting up the head, Psalm. 3.3.

PSALM CXI.
Verse. 1. PRaise ye the Lord, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 25.1. This is the first
of the Alphabeticall Psalms, wherein we have all the Hebrew letters perfectly
according to their order without omission of any: and they are in the beginning
of every clause of the Psalm, the first eight verses being divided into two
clauses, and the two last into three. And just so it is again in the following
Psalm.

Verse. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein.] As if he had said, Though profane ungodly men discern not
the transcendent excellency that is in Gods works, and that because they regard
them not, and therefore search not into them; yet they that take delight in
searching into them, they discover, and in a good measure understand, the
exquisite excellency that is therein.

Verse. 3. His work is honorable and glorious, etc.] Some understand this
peculiarly of the glorious work of Gods delivering the Israelites out of Egypt,
because they conceive the Psalmist speaks of this in the following verses. But
I rather take it as spoken generally, that whatever God does is full of
majesty and glory. And (which the Psalmist here adds, because therein consists
the chief glory of his works) his righteousness endures for ever; that is,
whatever God does, he does it in faithfulness and righteousness unto his
people; yea even then when he may seem to do that which is contrary to what he
has promised them.

Verse. 4. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered.] To wit, by his
word given them, wherein those wonderful works of his are recorded; or by
those memorials of his glorious works, which he ordained to be kept amongst
them, such as were the pot of mannah, the rod of Aaron, and the festivals which
they were appointed to observe, as the Passover, the Pentecost, the feast of
Tabernacles, etc; or because the works that God wrought for the Israelites were
so exceeding wonderful, that they were not only worthy for ever to be
remembered, but such indeed as that it wat not possible they should ever be
forgotten.

Verse. 5. He has given meat unto them that fear him, etc.] That is, to his
people Israel; and he uses this expression, unto them that fear him, either
because they were then the only people that worshipped God in a right manner;
or because what he did for them, was done for their sakes amongst them that did
truly fear him. As for the mercy here spoken of, He has given meat unto them,
either it may be meant in general, of Gods providing food convenient for them
that have feared him in all ages, as he did for Elijah, and others; or rather
more particularly, of Gods feeding the Israelites in the wilderness with manna
from heaven. And the reason of this is given in the next words, he will ever be
mindful of his covenant; because of the covenant he had made with them God did
this, though they were a murmuring and rebellious people.

Verse. 7. The works of his hands are verity and judgment, etc.] That is, All
that God does in the government of his Church is full of truth and
faithfulness, exactly according to what he has promised, and full of
judgment, being exactly just in every regard. And this some conceive may be
added in particular reference to that work of God mentioned in the foregoing
verse, in giving the Israelites the heritage of the heathen; wherein God
approved his truth, in performing the promise he had made to his people, and
his justice, in rooting out those wicked nations. As for the next clause, all
his commandments are sure, (for which see the Note Psalm. 19.7.) I conceive
that under this word his commandments, both the promises and threatenings
annexed to his commandments must necessarily be comprehended: and so they may
be said to be sure, both because they do surely reveal the will of God to us;
and because what is promised and threatened therein shall certainly come to
pass. However, this clause seems to be added to that which went before
concerning Gods works, purposely to show what a clear agreement there is
betwixt his works and his word; his works continually making good the sure
truth of all that he has revealed in his word and commandments.

Verse. 8. They stand fast for ever and ever, etc.] That is, God has
established his commandments that they shall never be changed, but they shall
be found perpetually true, together with all the promises and threatenings
annexed thereto, whatever carnal reason may in the hour of temptation judge to
the contrary: and are done in truth and uprightness; that is, they are
composed and ordained according to the exact rule of truth and righteousness,
so that they cannot be charged with the least falsehood or unrighteousness.

Verse. 9. He sent redemption unto his people, etc.] Many understand this
particularly of the Lords delivering the Israelites out of Egypt by the hand of
Moses, whom he sent unto them, and that because in the next words, he has
commanded his covenant for ever, he seems to speak of the covenant which God
made with them at the giving of the Law, which was presently upon their
deliverance out of Egypt. But yet it may be meant more generally, of all the
deliverances of the like nature which God had afforded his people, and that as
they were shadows of their Redemption by Christ; whence it is that the Psalmist
speaks in the next words of the covenant which God made with them for life
eternal, which was grounded on that great work of Christ's Redemption, and
whereto they were strongly obliged, because he had so redeemed them. As for the
expression here used, he has commanded his covenant for ever, see the Notes 1 Chronicles. 16.15: and for the following clause, holy and reverend is his Name, that
is added, as an argument to stir up men to be careful of keeping covenant with
God.

Verse. 10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, etc.] Having said
in the foregoing verse, that Gods name was holy and reverend, hence the
Psalmist takes occasion to press upon men the fear of God, The fear of the
Lord is the beginning, that is, the foundation, of wisdom; there is never any
true wisdom in men till they begin to fear God: a good understanding have all
they that do his commandments; the wisdom of others deserves not
comparatively the name of understanding: his praise endures for ever; that is,
the praise, the approbation, and the glorious reward, which such a man receives
from God; or rather, the praise of God.

PSALM CXII.
Verse. 2. BLessed is the man that fears the Lord.] By describing the bliss
of those that fear God, the Psalmist seems to make good what was said in the
close of the foregoing Psalm, that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom.

Verse. 2. His seed shall be mighty upon earth, etc.] That is, exceeding
numerous, and of great power in every regard: the generation of the upright
shall be blessed; see the Note Psalm. 37.26.

Verse. 3. Wealth and riches shall be in his house; and his righteousness
endures for ever.] Several ways is this last clause understood by
Expositours. For 1. some take it to be added in the praise of the man that
fears God; to wit, that notwithstanding he abounds in wealth, yet he is not
corrupted thereby, as many are, but still holds fast his righteousness: 2.
others understand it of his renown amongst men; to wit, that though men may
seek to overcloud his righteousness with false accusations, yet it shall still
shine forth gloriously, and be for ever renowned amongst men: 3. others
conceive it is added, as the cause why there is still wealth and riches in the
house of the man that fears God; to wit, because whilst the iniquity of the
wicked, both in getting and using their riches, does soon wast their great
estates, his is preserved by his constant righteousness: and 4. others
understand it of his perseverance in the ways of righteousness, and the
never-failing reward thereof.

Verse. 4. Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness, etc.] And that
several ways: as 1. when they are for a time under great distress and
heaviness, and yet then God brings them into a prosperous condition again, or
gives them much joy after their heaviness; 2. when God keeps them free, in
times of some common calamity; and 3. when they are inwardly cheared with the
consolations of Gods spirit, even in their greatest afflictions. Wicked men
even in the sunshine of their greatest prosperity, not having any assurance of
Gods favor, are indeed under darkness, and in their distresses they are quite
overwhelmed with sorrow; but then the man that fears God is full of joy,
through the light of Gods countenance shining into his heart, even under the
darkness of his saddest calamities: see the Note Esth. 8.16. As for the
following words, he is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous, though
many Expositours hold that they are spoken of God, and that herein a reason is
given, why unto the upright there arises light in darkness, namely, because
God is gracious, etc; yet methinks, the dependence of this clause upon the
foregoing words shows clearly that it is spoken of the upright man there
mentioned, this being the reason given why light arises to the upright in
darkness, namely, because the upright man is gracious, etc.

Verse. 5. A good man shows favor, and lends; he will guide his affairs
with discretion.] It is in the Hebrew, with judgment, that is, justly and
judiciously: see the Note Psalm. 25.9. But in our Bibles it is rendered, with
discretion, which consists in many things: as in ordering his affairs and
estate with such frugality and wisdom, that he may still have to give to the
poor; in considering when and where it is fit to give, and when and where to
lend; in not being too prodigal, nor too penurious; in proportioning his
charity according to the persons to whom he affords it; and many other
particulars of the like nature.

Verse. 6. Surely he shall not be moved for ever.] See the Notes Psalm. 15.5, and
16.8, and 55.22.

Verse. 9. He has dispersed, etc.] To wit, by distributing his alms amongst
many, and that with a full hand and cheerfully, as the husbandman scatters his
seed when he sows his land. And so though his alms be given away, yet his
righteousness remains, as it follows in the next words, he has given to the
poor; his righteousness endures for ever: for which see the Note above verse.
3. His horn shall be exalted with honor: see the Notes 1 Samuel 2.1. and 2 Samuel
22.3.

Verse. 10. The desire of the wicked shall perish.] This may be understood
generally, of Gods frustrating all the carnal desires of wicked men: yet
because in the foregoing words the Psalmist speaks of their fretting at the
prosperity of the righteous, The wicked shall see it, and be grieved, etc. it
is most probable, that these words are also more particularly meant of the
disappointment of all the plots and devices, which the wicked desired to have
effected for the ruin of the righteous.

PSALM CXIII.
Verse. 1. PRaise, O ye servants of the Lord.] The Levites may hereby be more
peculiarly intended, whose special office it was continually to sing forth the
praises of God; but all the faithful servants of God may be comprehended.

Verse. 3. From the rising of the sun, unto the going down of the same, the
Lords Name is to be praised.] That is, all the world over; to wit, because the
glory of God is manifestly discovered in his works all the world over. Yet
herein may also be employed, that all nations were to have the glory of God in
the work of man's Redemption discovered unto them by the preaching of the Gospel.

Verse. 4. The Lord is high above all nations, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 97.9. A
chief thing intended is, that God far excels in his majesty and glory all the
great ones that are in the world. And his glory above the heavens: see the Note
Psalm. 8.1.

Who is like unto the Lord? etc.] See the Note Exodus 15.11.

Verse. 6. Who humbles himself to behold, etc.] That is, to undertake the care
and government of the things that are in heaven; so that, as glorious creatures
as the angels are, it is an abasement to the most high God to mind or regard
them: and in the earth; yea the meanest of them, as is expressed in the
following verse, He raises up the poor out of the dust, etc.

Verse. 8. That he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his
people.] Where it is a greater honor to be a prince, then to be a prince
elsewhere, and a greater advantage in other regards; because of Gods special
favor to them above other princes, and the great things that God usually does
for his people above other nations.

Verse. 9. He makes the barren woman to keep house, etc.] To wit, by giving her
many children, thereby to make up a full family: see the Note Psalm. 68.6.

PSALM CXIV.
Verse. 1. WHen Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of a
strange language.] See the Note Psalm. 81.5.

Verse. 2. Judah was his Sanctuary, etc.] That is, The children of Israel (the
chief of the tribes being here put for the whole body of the people) became a
holy people unto the Lord, being sanctified and set apart from all other
nations to be a peculiar people unto himself, in whom he would be glorified,
amongst whom he would make himself known, be worshipped and served, as in his
temple and Sanctuary; according to that 2 Cor. 6.16. ye are the temple of the
living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them and walk in them, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my people: and Israel his dominion; that is,
they became a people subject unto his dominion, over whom he would rule as
their king by his word and spirit. And this is said to have been done, when God
brought the Israelites out of Egypt, because then, by the many miracles which
God wrought for them, he made it manifest that he had taken them to be a
peculiar people unto himself, and because by that great work of their
Redemption he had indeed purchased them to be his people.

Verse. 4. The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs,]
That is, At the giving of the Law, the mountainous tops of Sinai and Horeb, and
the little rising hills therein, or the mountain of Sinai, and other adjacent
mountains and hills, did move and shake as apparently, as when the rams and
lambs in a flock do leap and skip; and therefore it is said Exodus 19.18. that
the whole mount quaked greatly: see also the Note Psalm. 29.6.

Verse. 7. Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of
the God of Jacob.] Having demanded in the foregoing verse, why the mountains
skipped like rams, etc. here the Psalmist, as by way of answering that
question, adds these words, Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord,
etc. as if he had said, Surely it was because they were afraid of the presence
of the mighty God of Jacob: thus it was then, and thus indeed it ought always
to be; Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, etc.

PSALM CXV.
Verse. 1. NOt unto us, O Lord, etc.] This is expressed as a prayer of Gods
people when they were in great danger of their idolatrous enemies, Not unto us,
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory: as if they had said, We
desire, Lord, that thou would deliver us from the tyranny of the heathen;
but not that any glory may thereby redound unto us, either for our valor in
vanquishing them, or for our righteousness, as if we thereby had deserved any
such thing at thy hands, but only that thy Name may be glorified: for thy mercy
and for thy truths sake; that is, that hereby it may be manifested how
merciful thou art to thy people, and how faithful in making good all thy
promises to them.

Verse. 3. But our God is in the heavens, etc.] This is added by way of
disdaining that scorn of the heathen mentioned in the foregoing verse, Where is
now their God? Our God, say they, is in the heavens, and is therefore a God of
infinite majesty and power, having all the creatures in heaven and earth under
his command: he has done whatsoever he pleased; so that all that has been
done in the world, has been done, because it was his will and pleasure it
should so be. And hence they would imply, that as their enemies could not have
prevailed over them, but that their God was pleased it should so be; to when he
pleased, he could easily restore them to a better condition again.

Verse. 7. Neither speak they through their throat.] It was said before verse. 5.
They have mouths, but they speak not; and therefore that which is added here,
seems to be meant of somewhat more, to wit, that they could not do what the
brute creatures did, they could not make the least noise to come out of their
throats.

Verse. 8. They that make them are like unto them, so is every one that trusts
in them.] That is, they are as stupid and blind, as very stocks and blocks, as
their idols are; no more able to oppose the will and power of God, and to hurt
his people, then their dead idols were.

Verse. 9. O Israel, trust thou in the Lord, etc.] As if he had said, Though the
heathen say your trust is in vain, yet be not discouraged; let them trust in
such helpless things as their idols are, do you still trust in the Lord: he is
their help and their shield; to wit, that trust in him.

Verse. 10. O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord.] These are particularly
expressed, because by their place they were bound to be patterns and examples
herein unto others.

Verse. 11. Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord.] Some understand this of
those that did fear the Lord of other nations, whether they were proselytes
that had joined themselves to the Church of the Jews, or others; yea some look
upon it as a prophesy of the calling of the Gentiles. But rather I conceive the
drift of these words is, to show how we are to understand the two foregoing
verses, to wit, that it was only those of Israel, and of the house of Aaron,
that did truly fear the Lord, that should find him their help and their shield.

Verse. 12. The Lord has been mindful of us, he will bless us, etc.] As if
they should have said, Though God has afflicted us, yet he has not cast us
off, nor forgotten us; all this while he has been mindful of us: God has
formerly remembered us in mercy, and therefore doubtless he will bless us
still.

Verse. 14. The Lord shall increase you more and more, etc.] To wit, in number;
or, he will give you daily a supply of new benefits, both temporal and
spiritual.

Verse. 16. The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords, etc.] That is, they are
his by creation; or he has taken them to be the place of his habitation, and
from thence he orders and disposes all things, as he pleases, that are here
below. And the drift of these words is, either to assure Gods people how safely
they might trust in God, who had all things under his power and command, and
could therefore make them isntrumental for their good; or else to illustrate
that which is said in the following words concerning Gods love to mankind, but
the earth has he given to the children of men: as if they should have said,
The Lord enjoyes an alsufficiency in himself in the heavens, which he has
provided for the throne of his glory, neither needs he any of these things that
are here below; and therefore it is clear that all these things he has made
merely for man's use and service: wherein is employed 1. that this discovery of
Gods love and goodness and bounty to mankind might let his people see, how
confidently they much more might assure themselves, that God would not fail to
bless them; and 2. what just cause there was, that this bountiful provision
God had made for man should stir them up to praise God for it; whence it is
that those words are added in the following verse concerning their praising God.

Verse. 17. The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into
silence.] That is, into the grave; where there can be nothing but silence, and
therefore no possibility of praising God. But that which they would imply
hereby is, that if the Lord should suffer his people to be cut off by their
enemies, there would be none left to praise his Name, whereas this was the very
end why God gave the earth to the children of men. See the Notes Psalm. 6.5, and
30.9.

Verse. 18. But we will bless the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.]
As if they had said, Thou Lord, preserving us, we thy people shall still in all
succeeding ages praise thy Name: and therefore save us for thy Names sake.

PSALM CXVI.
Verse. 1. I Love the Lord, etc.] By the words in the last verses of this Psalm,
I will pay my vows in the courts of the Lords house, in the midst of thee, O
Jerusalem, it appears that it was composed after the Ark was removed to
Jerusalem. And because those expressions verse. 3. The sorrows of death
compassed me, and the pains of hell got hold upon me, etc. are much the same
with those which David used Psalm. 18.6. it seems most probable that this Psalm
was also composed by him, and both (it may be) upon the same occasion, which
was his deliverance out of the hands of Saul.

Verse. 3. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold
upon me.] So he calls his sorrows and pains, not only because he was in
apparent danger of death, for which see the Note 2 Samuel 22.6; but also because
he was tempted to fear, that the evils that befell him proceeded from the wrath
and displeasure of the Lord against him.

Verse. 6. The Lord preserves the simple, etc.] That is, say some Expositours,
those that are plain-hearted, and do sincerely and simply mean what they
profess: and this indeed David might well speak with reference to himself, who
plainly meant what he professed, and did not cunningly intend any hurt unto
Saul, whilst he professed all fidelity to him. But rather I conceive that by
the simple here are meant those that lie open to injuries, and are easily
circumvented, and that when they are in danger and trouble, are not cunning to
work out their deliverance, as many worldly men are, but are wont only with a
simple, quiet mind, to commit their cause to the Lord, and to seek and wait for
help from him, as children that being helpless in themselves, do wholly rest
upon their parents for help. And this he speaks as from his own experience; I
was, says he, brought low, not knowing which way to help my self, and be
helped me.

Verse. 7. Return unto thy rest, O my soul.] That is, Be no longer disquieted,
but rest thy self quietly, as thou have formerly done, upon Gods promises and
fatherly providence, and that upon the experience thou have now had of Gods
goodness to thee; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. They that
conceive this Psalm to have been composed after David was delivered from the
insurrection of his son Absalom, do otherwise understand this clause; to wit,
that now he might expect to rest quietly in his throne again, and peaceably to
enjoy the liberty of Gods Sanctuary, as he had formerly done. But the first
exposition is clearly the best.

Verse. 8. For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling.] See the Note Psalm. 56.13.

Verse. 9. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.] That is, say
some Expositours, I will daily serve the Lord in his Tabernacle, as long as I
live here in this world: see the Note Psalm. 27.13. But what is rather meant by
walking before the Lord, see again in the Note Psalm. 56.13.

Verse. 10. I believed, etc.] To wit, that God would make good his promise to
me; or particularly, that God would deliver me out of those streights I was in:
therefore have I spoken, to wit, that which he had said before verse. 4. O Lord,
I beseech thee, deliver my soul; or, therefore have I spoken, that is,
therefore have I so often spoken of the promises that God had made to me, and
made open profession of my confidence therein; or it may be spoken with
reference to that which he had said before in this Psalm, concerning Gods
goodness and faithfulness to his poor servants, verse. 5, 6: I believed; that
is, when I saw how miraculously God had delivered me, my faith was strengthened
thereby, and hence has proceeded this confession which I have here made of my
confidence in God. And indeed in the 2 Cor. 4.13. where the Apostle cites these
words, he seems rather to apply them to speaking by way of confession, then by
way of invocation; We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is
written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and
therefore speak, etc. As for the following words, I was greatly afflicted, they
are added to show that he was in great distress even at that time, when he did
thus call upon God, or encourage himself in his promises.

Verse. 11. I said in my haste, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 31.22: All men are
liars; that is, prone to lie, and to deceive those that rely upon their words:
and this it is thought David spoke in reference to the prophets, Samuel
especially, who had anointed him and promised him the kingdom; and that he
does here acknowledge it, purposely to show how unworthy he was of the mercy
which God had afforded him, and that by this discovery of his own wickedness
he might the more magnify Gods goodness.

Verse. 13. I will take the cup of salvation, etc.] That is, I will offer unto
the Lord a peace offering of praise; or, I will praise the Lord in a solemn and
joyful manner: for the ground of this expression, I will take the cup of
salvation, was, either because in those peace offerings they were always wont
to pour out a drink offering unto the Lord; or because when the sacrificer came
to feast with his family and friends on his peace offerings, the custom was
that he took a cup in his hand, and having used a certain form of blessing God
for that mercy or deliverance, which God had afforded him, he drank, and then
caused the cup to pass round to all the rest; and upon this ground it seems
they called this cup the cup of salvation, or the cup of blessing. And indeed
even to this custom Christ may seem to have had some respect in the
institution of his last supper, the cup whereof therefore is called by the
Apostle the cup of blessing, 1 Cor. 10.16.

Verse. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.] This
is added as a reason why he would praise the Lord, namely, because by the
experience of the Lords preserving him, he had found what precious account God
makes of the lives of his faithful servants: Precious in the sight of the Lord
is the death of his Saints; that is, he does not make light of their deaths,
but their lives are very precious in his sight, even after their death he
esteems them as his jewels. But see the Note Psalm. 72.14.

Verse. 16. I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid, etc.] See the Note
Psalm. 86.16: thou have broken my bonds; that is, thou have delivered me out of
all my streights and dangers, or from the thraldom whereinto mine enemies
would have brought me.

PSALM CXVII.
Verse. 1. O Praise the Lord, all ye nations, etc.] That the Psalmist speaks
this, as foreseeing and foretelling that all nations should by Christ be joined
to the Jews, and become his people, is evident, because the Apostle Romans 15.11.
does expressly allege this place to prove the calling of the Gentiles.

PSALM CXVIII.
Verse. 1. O Give thanks unto the Lord, etc.] It is evident by many passages in
this Psalm, especially by those expressions verse. 22, 23, and 24. The stone
which the builders refused is become the head stone in the corner, etc. that it
was composed to be sung in some solemn and festival assembly of the people,
and that when David was newly settled on the throne of Israel. And therefore it
is by almost all Expositours judged most probable, that it was penned when
after the death of Ishbosheth all the tribes of Israel had anointed him to be
their king, and he had vanquished the Philistines that at the same time had
invaded the land, and thereupon he gathered the chief of the people together,
that he might give thanks unto the Lord, and withal that they might remove the
Ark to Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 6.1. But yet withal by that passage verse. 22. The
stone which the builders refused is become the head stone in the corner, which
is in so many places of the New Testament applied to Christ, and that verse. 25,
26, Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord, etc. Blessed be he that comes in the
Name of the Lord, which the inhabitants of Jerusalem applied to Christ, as the
promised Messiah, Matthew. 21.9. it is as evident, that whilst David speaks in
this Psalm of himself, and those things which had befallen him, his principal
aim was hereby prophetically to foretell those things that concerned Christ,
that was to spring out of his loins. And as for this exhortation, O give thanks
unto the Lord, etc. it may be taken as spoken by David, or by the people of
God, and that principally with respect to that great mercy in exalting David to
be their king, or rather in giving Christ to be their king and Savior.

Verse. 3. Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endures for ever.]
For this and the following verse, see the Notes Psalm. 115.10, 11.

Verse. 7. The Lord takes my part with them that help me, etc.] See the Note
Psalm. 54.4: therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me; see the
Note Psalm. 91.8.

Verse. 10. All nations compassed me about.] Though of Christ it may be
literally and truly said, of whom David was a type, that all nations do set
themselves against him; yet understanding the words of David himself, it cannot
be otherwise meant then of the neighboring nations; unless we take it as a
figurative expression, All nations compassed me about, as if he had said, All
the world is set against me, I can no where be safe or quiet.

Verse. 12. They compassed me about like bees, etc.] Though it is not without
some contempt that he compares his enemies to bees, yet withal he seeks hereby
to imply how he was continually stung and vexed by them, not knowing how by any
means to avoid them. And see also the Note Deuteronomy. 1.44. As for the following
words, he does thereby show farther how easily they were ruined: they are
quenched as the fire of thorns; which though they be soon set on fire, and make
a mighty crackling noise, and yield for a time a more terrible blaze then
greater wood will do; yet alas, they are soon consumed in their own flame, and
so the fire will be presently out, and they will ^arce leave ^o much as any
ashes behind them.

Verse. 13. Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall.] To wit, Thou, O
Saul; or indefinitely, Thou, O mine enemy.

Verse. 15. The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the
righteous, etc.] This may be here laid down as a general truth; for indeed all
Gods righteous servants are sure to see the salvation of God, and they only can
and will truly rejoice in Gods salvation. But here doubtless it is added in
reference to that particular mercy, for which this Psalm was composed. And the
meaning is, that all the faithful throughout the land should, every one even
in their own private dwellings, rejoice for that salvation which God had
wrought for David, being glad to see the day whereon so great a change was
wrought, and that especially because they knew that his exaltation to the
throne tended to the great good of the whole kingdom. And so the following
words, the right hand of the Lord does valiantly, may be added as that
triumphant song, which should be sung in the tabernacles of the righteous.

Verse. 17. I shall not die, etc.] To wit, by the hand of mine enemies. It is as
if he had said, Mine enemies have long thirsted and sought after my death; and
indeed for many years together I have been, as it were, continually in the very
jaws of death, and I have been looked upon no otherwise then as a lost dead
man: but I see God has determined otherwise of me, he has reserved me for his
praise; I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. How this
may be applied to Christ, whom the pains of death could not hold, we may easily
conceive.

Verse. 19. Open to me the gates of righteousness, etc.] That is, the gates of
Gods Sanctuary: which are called the gates of righteousness, 1. because there
the most righteous God had chosen the Sanctuary for his habitation; 2. because
there the word of God was taught, the only rule of true righteousness; 3.
because there the people of God were cleansed from their sins by the sacrifices
that they offered up unto God, and so were presented righteous in Gods sight;
4. because there they worshipped and praised God, which was a chief part of
their righteousness; and 5. and especially, because God required that they
should be a righteous people, that presented themselves there in his presence,
and did therefore enjoin, that none that were unclean should be admitted to be
there. And indeed this reason seems to be employed in the following verse, This
gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter. Now this David speaks
to the Priests and Levites, that had the charge of the doors of the Sanctuary,
in reference to that festivity for which this Psalm was composed, whereon he
had gathered the people together, that they might praise God for his mercy to
them: see the Note above verse. 1. And it is expressed in a poetical manner,
with a kind of triumphant joy, Open to me the gates of righteousness; as if he
should have said, Those gates from which I was so long banished, and which I
did so long and so earnestly desire to see, Let them be now opened to me, and
my company, I will go into them, and I will praise the Lord.

Verse. 20. This gate of the Lord, etc.] That is, of the Lords house, into which
the righteous shall enter, according to that Isa. 26.2. Open ye the gates, that
the righteous nation which keeps truth may enter in. Now some learned
Expositours conceive that in these words David does covertly intimate, what a
change there should be in matters of religion, now God had exalted him to the
throne, to wit, that whereas in Saul's time the worship of God had been
neglected, or at least polluted by profane ungodly wretches; now, by the
encouragement that should be given to religion, the house of God should be more
carefully frequented, and that by such as did truly fear his Name.

Verse. 22. The stone which the builders refused is become the head-stone of the
corner.] That is, the chief foundation cornerstone. This with the three
following verses seem to be the words of the people, congratulating the
inauguration of their new king; as those expressions therein may well induce us
to think, it is mavelous in our eyes, and we will rejoice and be glad. But
however for the meaning of the words, First, doubtless they are meant of
David. As builders are wont to cast away some stones, as not fit to be laid in
the building, so was David despised and rejected: his own father looked upon
him, as not worthy to be presented before Samuel, when he came to anoint one of
his sons to be king, 1 Samuel 16.11; his brethren scorned and despised him, 1 Samuel 17.28; and as for Saul, his princes and courtiers, who were as the
master builders in Israel, upon whom the care chiefly lay of raising and
advancing the glory and welfare of the Church and commonwealth of Israel, in
stead of owning David to be the man ordained of God to be king after Saul, they
persecuted him, as a perfidious ungodly wretch, not worthy to be numbered
amongst Gods people; they have driven me out this day (says he) from abiding
in the inheritance of the Lord, 1 Samuel 26.19. yea and after Saul's death all the
tribes of Israel, but Judah only, sided with Ishbosheth, and would not endure
to have David their king. And yet at last in despite of all this opposition,
God brought it so about, that he was established king, and so became the
foundation cornerstone in that Church and state, whose peace and glory he was
a means under God to uphold and raise, and united together those that had been
sadly divided and distracted amongst themselves. And this is thus recorded,
that by considering what a miracle it was, that he should be thus exalted to
the throne, men might plainly see, that it was not by any ambitious policy and
power of his, that he came to be king, but merely by the decree and mighty hand
of God, as is more fully expressed in the following verse, This is the Lords
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes; and consequently, how notoriously
false all those slanders were, that had been formerly raised of him. But then
2. this is principally meant of Christ, that stone cut out of the mountain
without hands, Dan. 2.45. who though he was despised and rejected of men Isa.
53.3. especially by the Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees, the elders and
rulers of the people, that by their place ought to have built up the Church of
God, who would not endure that he should be counted the promised Messiah, but
on the contrary persecuted him, as a notorious wicked wretch, not worthy to
live amongst Gods people, and never left till they had put him to a shameful
death; yet being raised from the dead, he is now ascended into heaven, is now
become the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. the King and Head of the Church, Ephesians.
1.22. the chief cornerstone, who has joined together the Jews and Gentiles in
one body, in one Church, as the corner-stones in a building do join two walls
together, and in whom all the building fitly framed together grows unto an
holy temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.20, 21. And indeed so clear a testimony this is
of Christ's being the promised Messiah, that to prove this no place in the Old
Testament is cited so often by Christ and his Apostles, as this is: see Matthew.
21.42. Mark 12.10. Act. 4.11. Romans 9.32. 1 Pet. 2.4.

Verse. 23. This is the Lords doing; it is mavelous in our eyes.] To wit, This
bringing of a poor, despised, banished man to sit on the throne of Israel; and
this bringing of a poor crucified man to be the sole Savior and Monarch of the
world.

Verse. 24. This is the day which the Lord has made.] As if they had said, It
is the Lord only that has given us occasion of keeping this solemn day of
rejoicing, and praising his Name together; to wit, by bringing David so
miraculously to the throne of Israel: see the Note above verse. 1. And as this
is spoken in reference to Christ, it may be meant of the day of our redemption,
the day of the Gospel, or the day of the Resurrection of Christ.

Verse. 25. Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord, etc.] Having given us such a king,
we beseech thee save him from all evil. It is an acclamation which they were
wont to make to their new kings, and so was now used by the people when David
came to the Sanctuary to give thanks for the kingdom received. In the Hebrew
it is Hoschiahna, but in the Greek it is expressed by that word Hosanna, as we
may see Mat. 21.9. where the people used this acclamation to Christ when he
rode into Jerusalem, as being an acknowledged prophesy concerning the promised
Messiah; Hosanna to the son of David, that is, save now, I beseech thee, the
son of David; let him be victorious over all his enemies, and let him be
preserved in his members unto the end of the world. And the same is employed in
the following words, O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity, to wit, to
our king and people.

Verse. 26. Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord, etc.] That is,
Let our king, who comes by authority and commission from God, that he may
represent Gods person, and seek his glory, and may in his stead govern and save
his people, let him be praised and extolled of all men; or rather, Let him be
blessed of God with all blessings requisite to make his government happy, and a
blessing to the people, and that both in his own person and in the success of
all his enterprises. And this was also applied to Christ by the people when he
rode into Jerusalem, Matthew. 21.9. Hosanna to the son of David, blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord; professing thereby their faith, that he
was that blessed seed, that was sent of God to be a blessing to his people, and
that the work of the Lord would surely prosper in his hands. Some take these
words to be a part of the acclamation of the people to David when he came to
the Sanctuary. But rather they are the words of the priests welcoming David to
the tabernacle; for clearly the following words are the priests words to the
people, we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord; that is, We, whose
office it is to wait upon Gods service in his tabernacle, and to bless his
people in his Name, see Numb. 6.23. we desire the Lord to bless thee, David,
and thy followers, yea we assure you that you shall be blessed, and that in
this your king. And indeed if we take the words as spoken in reference to
Christ, when Gods ministers do preach the Gospel, what do they but pronounce
the people blessed in their Lord and Savior Christ?

Verse. 27. God is the Lord, etc.] That is, God is the Lord of heaven and earth,
faithful in performing all his promises; or, the Lord Jehovah, the God whom we
serve, and who has revealed himself to us in his word, is the true almighty
God: which has showed us light; that is, he has manifested himself to be
such, in that he, and he alone, has brought us into a joyful prosperous
condition, who lay before, in the time of Saul's reign, under the darkness of
great sorrows and afflictions. But especially may it be said that God showed
his people light in giving them Christ, who is the light of the world, Joh.
8.12. and by his word and spirit does enlighten all his people. Bind the
sacrifice with cords even unto the horns of the altar: see the Note Exodus 27.2.

PSALM CXIX.
Verse. 1. BLessed are the undefiled in the way, etc.] This is another of the
Alphabeticall Psalms: see the Note Psalm. 25.1. But here, the Psalm being
divided into 22. sections, according to the number of the Hebrew letters, and
each section consisting of eight verses, all the verses in the first section
begin with the first letter in the Hebrew Alphabet, all in the second with the
second letter, and so it is in all the sections on to the end of the Psalm. And
as for the matter of the Psalm, it seems to be a collection, which David made
of the several meditations that he had had concerning the Word of God, upon
his experience of the great benefit he had found thereby in all the various
changes of condition that had befallen him. And hence it is that there is not
above two verses at the most, wherein there is not some mention made of the
word of God, though it be under different terms; as namely the 90. and 122.
verses.

Verse. 3. They also do no iniquity, etc.] That is, They do not wittingly allow
themselves to live in any sinful way.

Verse. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
commandments.] That is, When not regarding what mine own reason, or other men
shall suggest, I shall only mind what thy word enjoyneth, resolving in all
things to follow the direction thereof; then shall I not be ashamed: to wit, of
any thing I have done, (which is indeed the sure effect of sin, What fruit had
ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed?) but being free from an
evil conscience, I shall be able with comfort to look God and man in the face,
yea though I meet with many crosses and afflictions; and (for this also may be
included) I shall not at the day of judgment be of the number of those, who
having flattered themselves with vain hopes of salvation, shall be cast off
with eternal shame and confusion, Dan. 12.2.

Verse. 7. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
learned thy righteous judgments.] To wit, so as to practice them, according to
that Joh. 6.45. Every man that has heard and has learned of the Father,
comes unto me: and indeed there is no true praising of God, unless men praise
him by the righteousness of their lives, as well as by their words. As for
those words, righteous judgments, see the Note Psalm. 19.9.

Verse. 8. I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.] To wit, neither
1. by withdrawing thy grace utterly from me, though to try me thou shall see
fit to leave me for a time to my self; nor 2. by hiding thy self overlong from
me in any time of trouble, lest I should be overcome by so sore a temptation.

Verse. 9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word.] The Psalmist does particularly here instance in young
men, 1. because youth is the time when men do usually make choice what course
of life they will take, whether to live piously or profanely; and therefore it
is fit that they should especially consider of this, that if they will address
themselves to live holily and righteously, the only way to do this is in all
things to take direction from the word of God: and 2. because young men,
through their folly and weakness, and want of experience, and through the
violent impetuousnesse of their lusts, are hardliest restrained from their
sinful courses; so that if the word may be effectual to cleanse them from
sin, then much more others.

Verse. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, etc.] Which is done by getting the
knowledge of it, by committing it to mind and memory, by thinking seriously of
it upon all occasions, by having always a full purpose of heart to keep close
thereto, as the only rule of man's life; and by doing all this out of a high
esteem of it, and dear affection to it, as to some precious treasure.

Verse. 12. Blessed art thou, O Lord; teach me thy statutes.] Either by blessed
here is meant, that God is praised and blessed of all his creatures, to wit,
for his goodness and mercy to them, and because he fills all things with his
blessings; and then the argument that David uses here is, that since God was
so good and gracious, and ready to give all his creatures occasion to bless
him, therefore he would also deal so with him, by teaching him his statutes: or
else that God is absolutely blessed and happy in and of himself, and
consequently the fountain from whence all bliss is derived unto the creatures;
and so upon this account he desires God to teach him his statutes, that thereby
he might become a sharer of his blessedness.

Verse. 17. Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live and keep thy
word.] Two things therefore David here desires of God: 1. that God would
preserve his life, which seemed to be in extreme danger; and 2. that being so
preserved he might consecrate his life wholly to God service, not desiring to
live for any other cause, but that he might keep his word. And to this some
add, that under these words, that I may live, he desires of God the spiritual
life of grace; or that he might live cheerfully and comfortably, as being
assured of Gods favor, which is indeed only worthy the name of living.

Verse. 18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
Law.] This may be meant of the wonderful wisdom, holiness, righteousness
and equity, etc. which do shine forth in Gods law; of the wonderful rewards
there promised to the righteous, and the punishments denounced against the
wicked; the wonderful works of God recorded in his word; but especially of the
wonderful and incomprehensible mysteries of the Gospel; for the discovery
whereof David had the more cause to desire the illumination of Gods spirit,
because they were only made known by dark types and shadows in those times of
the Law.

Verse. 19. I am a stranger in the earth, etc.] See the Note Genesis 47.9. This is
laid down as the ground of the following petition, hide not thy commandments
from me; that is, suffer not thy commandments, for want of the illumination of
thy spirit, to be hidden from me: and that 1. because being but a stranger upon
earth, and having but a while to continue here, it was fit that his chief care
should be for heaven, the land of rest where he was to dwell for ever and ever;
and 2. because being therefore here always traveling toward heaven, he had
need of continual direction from the word of God, to guide him in the way
thither, and that the rather, because naturally he knew no more of the way that
leads to heaven, then men do know the way that leads from one place to another,
when they are in a strange country: see also the Note Psalm. 39.12.

Verse. 20. My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at
all times.] That is, My spirit fails or faints within me; or, my soul, in her
eager desires after thy judgments, is as the broken and chawned earth when it
gapes after the rain; or, I do so earnestly long after thy judgments, that my
heart does even break through grief when I cannot come to enjoy them.

Verse. 21. Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed, etc.] That is, Thou
have destroyed the proud contemners of thee and of thy laws: (for the word
rebuked see the Note Psalm. 6.1.) which do err from thy commandments; that is,
that out of pride and stubbornness refuse to walk in the ways that God has
enjoined them. Now the drift of the Psalmist in alleging this was, to imply,
that even by the judgments of God upon those that despised his laws, he might
well be quickened in a holy endeavor carefully to observe them.

Verse. 22. Remove from me reproach and contempt, etc.] That is, Free me from
that reproach and contempt which wicked men have cast upon me; for I have kept
thy testimonies, and therefore have I no way deserved those foul aspersions;
but indeed it is for my keeping so close to thy testimonies, that they have
reproached me: or, for I have kept thy testimonies, that is, I have not been
ashamed of thee and thy service, I have not abandoned thy truth, and thy ways,
because of their reproaches; and therefore I hope thou will clear mine
innocence against the^ that falsely accuse me.

Verse: 23. Princes also, etc.] As if he had said, Not only the meaner sort of
people, but even Princes did sit and speak against me; to wit, not only as they
casually met together in private, but especially when they sat in counsel
together, yea when they sat in the seat of judgment, (for so much those words
did sit and speak against me seem to imply:) but thy servant did meditate in
thy statutes; to wit, thereby to comfort my self, to strengthen my faith, and
to learn how to carry my self in such a condition. And hereby he would imply
also, that their speaking against him did no way beat him off from the ways of
piety, but rather encouraged him in them.

Verse. 24. Thy testimonies also are my delight, and my counselors.] David
seems to speak here as a prince, that does nothing without the advice of his
privy counsel. And this he opposes to that in the foregoing verse, as if he
had said, Whilst princes sat together, and took counsel against me, I betook
my self to thy testimonies, and they were the men of my counsel, as it is in
the Original.

Verse. 25. My soul cleaves unto the dust, etc.] To wit, through extreme
distress and danger, or through grief and terrors of conscience: but see the
Note Psalm. 44.25. quicken thou me according to thy word; see the Notes Psalm.
71.20, and 80.18.

Verse. 26. I have declared my ways, etc.] That is, all my streights and
sorrows, temptations and sins, every state and condition wherein I was, all my
businesses and undertakings, I have still made them known to thee: and thou
heardest me; to wit, in doing for me what withal I then desired of thee: teach
me thy statutes; as if he had said, hear me therefore in this, as thou have
done formerly for other things.

Verse. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts; so shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.] That is, the wonderful works that thou shall work in
doing this for my poor soul, how herein thy power has been magnified in my
weakness; or, the wonderful works recorded in the word, for which see the
Note above verse. 18. And the drift of this is, to set forth, either 1. that if
God would teach him, then he would be ready upon all occasions to teach others;
or 2. how it would cheer him in his afflictions, making him with great joy to
talk of the wonders of Gods word, if the Lord would effectually teach him the
way of his precepts. And indeed unless men understand Gods word, it is not
possible they should take any delight in talking of it.

Verse. 28. My soul melts (or, as it is in the Hebrew, droppeth) for
heaviness.] The meaning is, either that his soul did melt away, as it were,
into tears, drop by drop; or that his strength did by little and little wast
and pass away like water.

Verse. 29. Remove from me the way of lying, etc.] This may be meant either of
the way of error in doctrine, or of the way of sin, which may be called the
way of lying, because it deceives those that walk in it, and men are usually
drawn thereinto by the false impostures of the world and the devil. And this he
desires may be removed from him, because he knew that his own corrupt nature
was inclinable thereto, though for the present he walked in the way of truth,
as he professes in the next verse. And accordingly we must understand the
following clause, and grant me thy law graciously; that is, let me have that
still to be the rule of my life, imprint it in my heart, that I may live
according to the directions thereof.

Verse. 31. I have stuck unto thy testimonies; O Lord, put me not to shame.]
That is, say some Expositours, Suffer me not to fall into any such sinful
course, as may expose me to shame amongst men, and likewise fill mine own
conscience inwardly with confusion. But rather his desire is, that God would
not by denying his requests, or hiding himself from him in his troubles,
frustrate the hopes that he had in him, and so overwhelm his spirit with shame
and confusion, and give occasion to wicked men to insult over him; but rather
that he would give him cause still to persevere in the ways of his
commandments, with full assurance of his love and favor. Or else his request
in these words may be only this, that God would not suffer wicked men to
reproach him for his care and endeavor to keep his commandments.

Verse. 32. I will run the way of thy commandments, etc.] That is, I will
cheerfully and zealously observe thy commandments: when thou shall enlarge my
heart; which is meant of working in him 1. a greater measure of knowledge; for
so in regard of his great knowledge it is said of Solomon 1 Kings 4.29. that
God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of
heart, etc. see the Note there; 2. more strong degrees of love to God and to
his word, etc. as Paul expresses his ardent love to the Corinthians 2 Cor.
6.11. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged; and
3. and especially, an increase of comfort and joy through the assurance of Gods
love and favor in Jesus Christ; for thus also the joy of the Church is set
forth upon the conversion of the Gentiles Isa. 60.5. thine heart shall fear, to
wit, with admiration, and be enlarged, to wit, with joy, because the abundance
of the sea shall be converted unto thee, etc. And indeed, as sorrow
streighteneth the heart, so joy does dilate and enlarge it: and this spiritual
joy is the true wellspring of all free, forward and cheerful obedience.

Verse. 36. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness.]
And so consequently not unto any other sinful lusts. Only covetousness is
particularly expressed, because that does in a special manner take men off
from the love and study of Gods law, and is the root of all evil: and hereby
also is employed, that Gods testimonies are better then all riches.

Verse. 37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, etc.] That is, from
looking so after vain things, as for them to neglect thy law, from beholding
them so, as thereby to be brought inordinately to affect them, and to be
entangled in any sinful practice: and quicken thou me in thy way; that is,
direct me so in thy way, that I may live thereby; or, cause me to live
according to thy laws; or (which I like the best) cause me to walk on with all
liveliness and cheerfulness and zeal in the way of thy commandments.

Verse. 38. Stablish thy word unto thy servant, etc.] That is, By thy spirit
assure me that thy promises shall be made good to me; or, Perform what thou
have promised to thy servant: who is devoted to thy fear; that is, who am only
desirous and careful, that I may continually persevere in thy fear, and who am
therefore one of those to whom those promises are made.

Verse. 39. Turn away my reproach, which I fear, etc.] I conceive that this is
much the same with that which he had said before verse. 31. O Lord, put me not
to shame; for which see the Note there. Yet some Expositours do limit this to
the reproach of loosing the kingdom promised, or the reproaches which he
feared would befall him for the sin which he had committed in the matter of
Uriah: and again others, with more probability, because of those words, which I
fear, do understand it of the reproach which shall be the portion of the wicked
at the day of judgment; as if he had said, The reproaches of men I fear not,
but that which I fear is, lest I should be cast off with shame before thy
tribunal; let not that, I beseech thee, Lord, be my portion: or else, of his
fear lest the word and truth of God should suffer reproach by his means, as if
he had in vain made his boast of them. And accordingly we must understand the
following clause, for thy judgments are good, that is, they are holy and just,
righteous and faithful, profitable and delightful to those that observe them:
as if he should have said, Therefore let them be so to me, let me not be
ashamed of the hope I have placed in them; or, Therefore cause me still to
cleave close to them, and not to bring reproach upon my self by any sinful
swerving from them; or, Therefore it is not sit that I should be erproached by
men as an evil doer, as long as I observe these good judgments, and make them
my rule in all things whatsoever.

Verse. 40. Behold, I have longed after thy precepts; quicken me in thy
righteousness.] That is, quicken me in thy law, which is exactly righteous,
and the only rule of true righteousness; see the Note above verse. 37: or,
quicken me according as thou art a righteous God; see the Note Psalm. 5.8: and
what is meant by quickening, see in the Note above verse. 25.

Verse. 42. So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me, etc.]
That is, to confute and stop the mouths of them that reproach me, for being so
strict in my ways, and for trusting in thy word; namely, by showing how God
has made good his promises to me: for I trust in thy word; it is as if he had
said, and therefore let me have wherewith to answer those that reproach me for
my confidence therein.

Verse. 43. And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth, etc.] As if
he had said, Whereas I have hitherto made profession of thy truth, and gloried
of thy promises, bring me not now into such a condition, either by withholding
thy grace, or by not affording the help thou have promised me in my trouble,
that I should now be afraid to profess thy truth, or to glory of thy promises,
as I have done; at least though thou may, to try me, leave me in such a
condition for a time, yet let it be but for a time, take not the word of truth
utterly, that is, for ever, out of my mouth: for, says he, I have hoped in thy
judgments, that is, thy word and promises; or the judgments thou have
threatened against wicked men, and which thou have said thou will execute on the
behalf of thy faithful servants.

Verse. 45. And I will walk at liberty.] That is, cheerfully, willingly,
securely, as being delivered from the bondage of sin, and freed from those
doubts and fears and terrors, wherewith wicked men are perplexed. It is in the
Hebrew, I will walk at large, for which see the Notes Psalm. 4.1.

Verse. 48. My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, etc.] That is,
I will with all earnestness endeavor to do what is therein enjoined: or, I
will with all eagerness embrace and study them; as men reach forth their hands
to those things they do most earnestly desire. Yet some conceive that in these
words the Psalmist alludes to the lifting up of the hands in swearing or
prayer, and that he desired to imply thereby, that he would bind himself by an
oath to the observation of Gods laws, or that he would address himself to the
study of them, with prayer to God for assistance therein.

Verse. 51. The proud have had me greatly in derision, etc.] That is, They have
derided me with all possible bitterness, and that continually day by day: And
who he means by the proud, see in the Note above verse. 21. Yet have I not
declined from thy law; that is, from the study of thy law, from the ways of
piety therein prescribed, or to seek redress or comfort in my troubles any
other way then from thy word.

Verse. 52. I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord, and have comforted my
self.] Some by Gods judgments here understand the laws of God, which were
written in men's hearts from the first creation. But though these may be
included, yet it is clear that the righteous acts of the Lord, recorded in the
Scriptures, which God as a just judge had executed in all ages, according to
the threatenings annexed to his laws, both in the punishments of the wicked, and
the deliverances of his righteous servants, are the judgments wherewith David
is said here to have comforted himself.

Verse. 53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake
thy law.] That is, it causes a grievous terror and trembling to seize upon
me; to wit, out of zeal for Gods glory, and indignation against such wicked
wretches, for their presumptuous and grievous sins; and partly also out of
grief for the sore punishments which he knew their wickedness would bring upon
them, and happily the common calamities they might also bring upon others. And
some add also that their wickedness made him afraid of his own falling into
the like enormities.

Verse. 54. Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.] That
is, in the days of my pilgrimage here in my earthly tabernacle; see the Note
Genesis 47.9: or, whilst I lived in exile, wandering up and down from one place to
another. And by saying that Gods statutes were his songs he means, either that
he made or sung Psalms and songs concerning Gods statutes; or else that the
remembrance and meditation of Gods statutes was as delightful to him as songs,
and that in his exile: though he were then subject to many miseries, griefs and
fears, and were deprived of the comfort of Gods Ordinances, and of serving God
in his Sanctuary; yet then the meditation of Gods statutes yielded him much
refreshing comfort: as travelers use to delight themselves, and to take away
the wearisomenesse of their journey, by singing songs together as they go
along; so did he delight himself in the time of his exile, by thinking on Gods
statutes.

Verse. 55. I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, in the night, etc.] To wit, when
others slept, and when men do usually take greatest liberty to sin against
thee; or, when sorrow does ordinarily lie heaviest upon men, then did I
remember thee, to wit, with joy, see the Note Job 35.10. And then those words
are added, and have kept thy law, because indeed they that do often and
seriously keep God in their thoughts, they must needs be rendered careful to
observe his commandments.

Verse. 56. This I had, because I kept thy precepts.] To wit, all these benefits
before mentioned; or more particularly with reference to what he had said in
the two foregoing verses, this, that I have been thus comforted in my greatest
afflictions, that Gods statutes were my songs in my pilgrimage, etc. Yea some
refer this both to his comforts and to his afflictions; This I had, that is,
thus I was persecuted, and thus I was comforted, because I kept thy precepts.

Verse. 57. Thou art my portion, O Lord, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 16.5: I have
said, that I would keep thy words; to wit, that I may be sure to keep mine
interest in thee, which I have chosen as the only happiness I desire.

Verse. 59. I thought on my ways, etc.] That is, the ways wherein I was to
walk; before I did any thing, I considered seriously with my self whether it
were warrantable or no: and turned my feet unto thy testimonies; that is, I was
careful to do that only which was agreeable to thy word. Or thus rather, I
thought on my ways; that is, on my former course of life: and turned my feet
unto thy testimonies; that is, where I found that I had gone awry, I reformed
my life according to thy testimonies.

Verse. 62. At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee, etc.] Where I can
have no respect to the applause of men, but only to approve my self unto thee,
who see in secret; but see also the Note above verse. 55: because of thy
righteous judgments; see the Note above verse. 43, and Psalm. 19.9.

Verse. 66. Teach me good judgment and knowledge, etc.] To wit, that I may not
only know thy law, but also may be able thereby to judge rightly of things that
differ, and may not mistake error for truth, and evil for good: for I have
believed thy commandments; that is, I have been fully persuaded that they were
thine, and have accordingly embraced them as worthy to be obeyed: as if he
should have said, Teach me therefore to understand them more fully, that I may
more fully believe, embrace and obey them.

Verse. 69. The proud, etc.] See the Note above verse. 21: have forged a lie
against me; see the Note Job 13.4: but I will keep thy precepts with my whole
heart; as if he should have said, their lies shall not beat me off from the
obedience of thy laws; or, thereby I shall be best able to stop their mouths,
or at least I shall be sure that their lies and plots against me shall never
do me any hurt.

Verse. 70. Their heart is as fat as grease.] That is, it is gross and carnal,
and through outward pomp and plenty puffed up with pride and arrogance, sottish
and stupid and unteachable (as indeed when men's hearts are overgrown and
oppressed with fat, such men are usually noted to be dull and foolish,)
senseless and void of feeling, (see the Note Job 15.27.) stiff and hard and
obstinate, according to that Isa. 6.10. make the heart of this people fat,
which is expressed by the Evangelist Joh. 12.40. in these words, He has
blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart.

Verse. 73. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me, etc.] See the Note Job
10.8. Some conceive that the first words, Thy hands have made me, are
particularly meant of the creation of his soul, and the next, and fashioned me,
of the forming his body. However the ground whereon he infers the following
request, give me understanding, that I may keep thy commandments, may be
twofold: 1. because being Gods creature, he was thereby obliged to serve him,
and therefore desires herein assistance from God; and 2. because God is indeed
the readier to do good unto man, because he is the work of his hands.

Verse. 74. They that fear thee will be glad when they see me, etc.] That is,
when they shall see that thou have instructed me in the knowledge of thy law,
and that hereby I am brought to keep thy commandments, and (we may add too)
when they shall see that all thy promises are in the conclusion made good to
me, they shall rejoice not only on my behalf, but also on their own; see the
Note Psalm. 34.2: because I have hoped in thy word; that is, considering that
this befell me because I hoped in thy promises, this shall encourage them to
expect the same grace.

Verse. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, etc.] That is, all
those judgments wherewith thou do either punish the wicked, or correct thy
righteous servants; as is evident by the following clause, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me. Yet if by judgments here be meant Gods
precepts, then we must understand this place thus; as if he had said, Though
thou have sorely afflicted me, yet I know that every passage of thy word is
just and right, and that it is in faithfulness that thou have afflicted me.

Verse. 76. Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort.] That
is, Though thou do afflict me, yet by teaching me, and causing me to believe
thy merciful kindness revealed in thy word, support, I beseech thee, and
comfort me in mine afflictions: or rather, Let thy merciful kindness be for
my comfort, to wit, by giving me grace to keep thy precepts; or, by delivering
me out of my distresses and troubles.

Verse. 77. Let thy tender mercies come unto me, etc.] See the Note above verse.
41: that I may live; to wit, cheerfully and comfortably in the assurance of thy
love; without which indeed men are but as dead men, even whilst they live.

Verse. 78. Let the proud, etc.] See the Note above verse. 21. be ashamed, see
the Note Psalm. 6.10: for they dealt perversely with me without a cause; that
is, unjustly, and wickedly, out of mere malice and perverseness of spirit: but
I will meditate in thy precepts; see the Note above verse. 23.

Verse. 79. Let those that fear thee turn unto me, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, Let such as these be mine acquaintance: I care not for the society
of wicked men. But there are two other expositions that are more probable: to
wit, 1. that David desires that such godly men as had forsaken him or been
estranged from him, being misled by delusions and false reports, or beaten off
by the troubles and low condition whereinto he was fallen, might again be
brought to join themselves with him in a way of amity and friendship, and take
his part, and (some add too) embrace him as their king, being convinced of the
equity of his cause, by the judgments of God upon his enemies; or rather, 2.
that he desires the godly would turn to him, that is, look toward him, that
beholding in him an example of Gods faithfulness to his righteous servants,
they might be strengthened and comforted concerning themselves. See the Note
above verse. 74.

Verse. 82. Mine eyes fail for thy word, etc.] That is, with waiting for that
salvation and mercy which thou have promised in thy word; see the Notes Deuteronomy.
28.32. and Job 11.20: saying, When will thou comfort me? to wit, by affording
me the deliverance and mercies I have long waited for.

Verse. 83. For I am become like a bottle in the smoke.] That is, my body is
scorched and black with extreme misery, see the Note Job 30.30; or, my skin
through my leanness is withered, wrinkled, and shrunk up, and so it is every
day more and more with me, as it is with a skin bottle or bladder hung up in
the smoke; yea I am no more esteemed and regarded amongst men, then such a
bottle would be.

Verse. 84. How many are the days of thy servant? etc.] That is, the days
allotted to me, wherein I must continue under this oppression and misery? or,
the days of my life? as if he should have said, They are but few, I have not
long to live; therefore let me not spend those few days I have to live,
without seeing thy promise made good to me. When will thou execute judgment on
them that persecute me? But see the Note Psalm. 89.47.

Verse. 85. The proud have dug pits for me, which are not after thy law.]
Some conceive that there is an allusion in these words to that law Exodus 21.33,
34. concerning digging of pits, and that hereby he seeks to aggravate the
wickedness of his enemies, that whereas Gods law provided for the security of
beasts, that no pits should be dug and left uncovered to the endangering of
them, their wickedness must needs be very great, that did secretly dig pits
purposely that men might fall into them. But whether it be so or no, doubtless
the drift of this clause was to represent his enemies to the Lord, as worthy
for their wickedness to be destroyed; The proud have dug pits for me, which
are not after thy law: which is as if he had said, They regard not thy law, but
what they please they will do, though it be never so contrary to thy commands.

Verse. 86. All thy commandments are faithful, etc.] That is, All thy laws,
together with all thy promises and threatenings annexed, are most true and
faithful: and whereas therefore they favor innocence and righteousness, and
are against all injustice and wrong, they that depend on the salvation promised
therein to those that observe them, shall doubtless never be deceived. And
hereupon he infers, they persecute me wrongfully, help me: as if he had said,
they therefore that persecute me for keeping these thy righteous laws must
needs do it wrongfully; and therefore thou that art a faithful God help me
against mine unjust oppressors.

Verse. 87. They had almost consumed me upon earth, etc.] By adding those words
( upon earth) he implies, that however they had dealt with him here, he had
hope of a better life in heaven, whereof he was sure they could never deprive
him.

Verse. 88. Quicken me after thy loving kindness.] See the Note above verse. 25.

Verse. 89. For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven, etc.] That is, thy
promises stand firm for ever with thee in heaven, though they may seem to fail
upon earth, when things come to pass, which seem to be contrary to what thou
in thy word have said shall be. Or else the meaning may be, that the eternal
certainty and efficacy of Gods word is clearly to be seen in the permanency of
the heavens: for why do the heavenly lights, and orbs, and all things therein
continue in their beings and motions from their first creation, but because God
has said that it shall so be? from whence the Psalmist would imply, that
accordingly also the promises that God has made to his people in the written
word must needs be of the same eternal efficacy and certainty, and sure to be
accomplished in their seasons, notwithstanding all the strange alterations and
confusion that seem to be in the things that are here below. And this
exposition may seem the more probable, because in the following verses he
alleges likewise the stability of the earth by the same word of God verse. 90.
Thy faithfulness is unto all generations; thou have established the earth and
it abides, and the continuance of all the creatures both in heaven and earth
in their several stations and operations, as from the beginning God did
appoint, verse. 91. They continue this day according to thy ordinances etc. and
all this to prove, that therefore he might safely build upon the sure
accomplishment of Gods promises, which he expresses verse. 92. Except thy law
had been my delight, I should then have perished in mine afflictions.

Verse. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection, etc.] That is, I have found by
clear reason, and partly by mine own experience, that the most excellent of all
the creatures, and the greatest perfection that is in them, are but finite:
namely in that 1. they are subject to fail and vanish, and come to an end; and
2. all the good that is in them may be comprehended within certain limits; they
are not able to give full contentment to a man's mind, or support to his heart,
at least in all conditions and afflictions. But thy commandment is exceeding
broad; to wit, in that 1. it comprehends infinite and incomprehensible
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; nothing pertaining to holiness or
happiness is wanting in it, nothing requisite for the direction of all men in
all conditions; neither is it possible to express the innumerable benefits
which it yields to those that enjoy it: and 2. it is to be an eternal rule of
truth and righteousness unto the Church, according to that Matthew. 24.35.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away; and when
all earthly things shall fail men, the word shall still be a sure counselor
and comforter to them: it shall support them in all afflictions, even unto
death, and the comforts thereof shall abide with them for ever.

Verse. 98. Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies,
etc.] To wit, not only because thereby he became wise unto salvation, which is
the only true wisdom, far above the worldly wisdom of his enemies; but also
because this wisdom of walking in Gods ways was more prevalent to preserve
him, then the craft and policy of his enemies was to ensnare and destroy him.
And observable it is, that the great politicians in Saul's Court, that were
advanced to high places for their great wisdom and subtilty, were of the
chief of those enemies of whom David here professes, that he excelled them in
wisdom. For they are ever with me; that is, thy commandments are rooted in
my heart; I do always think and meditate on them, and make them my Rule in all
things.

Verse. 99. I have more understanding then all my teachers.] Through Gods
abundant grace, the faithful do many times outstrip their godly teachers in
knowledge and piety. Yet because David spoke not this by way of boasting, but
to set forth the great benefit of being taught out of Gods word, it is not
improbably thought by some Expositours, either that David spoke this of those
that had instructed him in humane learning, meaning that from the word of God
he had learnt wisdom far excelling that which they had taught him; or else
of those that were public teachers in the Church, but yet were in those
corrupt days of Saul carried away, as well as others, with the common iniquity
of the times, and happily in their very teaching complied with the humors of
Saul, his princes and courtiers.

Verse. 104. I hate every false way.] That is, every way of error and sin; for
these are called false ways, both because they are not agreeable to the word
of truth, and likewise because they will surely deceive those that expect any
good from them.

Verse. 108. Accept, I beseech thee, the free-will-offerings of my mouth, etc.]
That is, say some Expositours, the vows and promises before mentioned, that he
would keep Gods laws, such as that verse. 106. I have sworn, and I will perform
it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. But it is rather meant of his
prayers and praises, the Psalms which he composed and sung to the praise of
God, which are termed the calves of our lips Hos. 14.2. see the Notes also
Psalm. 50.14, 15. And it may well be that in this request he had respect unto
his exile, desiring, that seeing in that regard he could not offer any other
sacrifices, God would therefore accept of these free-will-offerings of his
mouth.

Verse. 109. My soul is continually in my hand.] That is, My life is continually
in danger. The expression seems to be taken from the condition of soldiers in
battle, who may well be said to have their soul in their hands, because they
are in such continual danger, that unless they secure themselves by a strong
hand, they are but dead men. But see the Notes Judge. 12.3, and Job 13.14.

Verse. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever.] To wit, as
choosing and esteeming them above all things whatsoever. See the Note Deuteronomy. 33.4.

Verse. 113. I hate vain thoughts, etc.] That is, I hate not only the doing, but
even the very thinking of evil; though I cannot wholly keep such thoughts out of
my mind, yet I hate and resist them. But because the following clause, but thy
law do I love, is added as in opposition to this, therefore the most of
Expositours do particularly understand this of all humane inventions, wherewith
men merely out of their own carnal reason might think to serve and please God,
or might flatter themselves in any way not truly agreeable to Gods word; and
that these they are which David here professes were hateful to him, and that
because he only made the law of God the rule of his life.

Verse. 116. Uphold me according to thy word, that I may live, etc.) That is,
Uphold and preserve me alive, maugre the rage of mine enemies; or uphold me in
faith, and piety, and comfort, that so my soul may still be quickened with the
grace, and cheared with the comforts of thy spirit. And to the same purpose is
the following verse, Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe, etc.

Verse. 118. Thou have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes, etc.]
To wit, though they were never so high, and did never so proudly exalt
themselves against thee: for their deceit is falsehood; that is, either 1. the
shows of piety, wherewith such men deceived the world, are false and
counterfeit; or rather 2. there is nothing but falsehood in their fraudulent
practices, wherewith they seek to ruin Gods faithful servants, which must
needs therefore make them hateful to God, who is a God of truth; (and herein
David might have respect to the false slanders which his enemies raised against
him) or 3. all the subtle devices, wherewith they seek to prevail against the
faithful, do usually fail them, and come to nothing, themselves being often
taken in the snares which they laid for others; or 4. (which most Interpreters
do pitch upon) the imaginations and carnal confidences, wherewith they flatter
themselves to the deceiving of their own souls, either concerning any good they
expect in their ways of wickedness, or concerning their hopes of securing
themselves, and escaping the judgments of God, prove always in the conclusion
lying vanities. However the Psalmists drift here, in adding this concerning the
dreadful end of wicked men, is to imply, that for this partly he was the more
careful not to do as they did, but to study Gods law, that he might walk in
his ways and trust in his goodness, as is more evident in the following verse.

Verse. 119. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross, etc.]
That is, Though wicked men live a while mingled amongst thy faithful people,
as dross is with gold and silver, yet at last thou art wont to take them away,
even the greatest as well as the meanest, as drossy, worthless things, that so
thy Church may be the purer: through thy fiery indignation they suddenly vanish
away like smoke, even as dross consumes away in the fining of metals.
Therefore I love thy testimonies; to wit, because I am thereby taught so to
live, that I may not thus perish with the wicked; and because this severity of
thine against the wicked makes me the more highly to prize that word, wherein
thou have made known the riches of thy grace toward thy chosen people.

Verse. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments.] To wit, as being terrified with the judgments which God executed
upon wicked men; of which he had spoken in the two foregoing verses. See also
the Note Psalm. 42.6.

Verse. 121. I have done judgment and justice, etc.] As if he should have said,
And it is therefore without cause that mine enemies persecute me; and hereupon
he infers, leave me not to mine oppressors.

Verse. 122. Be surety for thy servant for good, etc] That is, Interpose thy
self betwixt me and mine enemies, and rescue me from their tyranny and
oppression, (as sureties do poor debtours out of the hands of their cruel
creditours) and that by undertaking to plead my cause, and to assert mine
innocence.

Verse. 126. It is time for thee, Lord, to work, etc.] To wit, to do that which
is thy proper work, as thou art the just judge of the whole world; that is, to
punish and suppress the wicked, and to make good thy promises by helping thy
poor servants out of their hands: as if he had said, Whatever becomes of me, it
is time for thee, Lord, to work, for the vindicating of thine own glory. For
they have made void thy law; to wit, in that they had no respect to it, but did
merely what they pleased themselves, as if there had been no law, to which they
were bound to submit themselves; yea in that they forced others to disobey it,
and persecuted those that would have made it their rule; and especially too in
that by their false glosses, and perverting of Gods laws, they made them of
none effect. However it was not the purpose of the prophet hereby to prescribe
God a time; only he seeks to God for deliverance, by pleading how seasonable it
was to take vengeance on the wicked, when they were so ripe for judgment.

Verse. 127. Therefore I love thy commandments above gold, etc.] That is,
Because I saw that wicked men did so generally slight and make void thy law,
therefore admiring their blindness and madness herein, out of a holy
indignation against them and that thy service might not wholly fall to the
ground, my love to thy law became the more fervent; or, Because I was persuaded
that God would undertake the defense of the righteous, and would not let the
wickedness of the wicked go always unpunished, therefore I did the more
affectionately love thy law. And to the same purpose is that which follows in
the next verse.

Verse. 128. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be
right, etc.] That is, For the same reasons, (to wit, those mentioned in the
foregoing Note) I am the more assuredly persuaded of the righteousness of thy
whole law, and do the more heartily embrace it: and I hate every false way; see
the Note above verse. 104.

Verse. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful, etc.] See the Note above verse. 18:
therefore does my soul keep them; that is, even out of that reverence which in
this regard I bear to them, I do willingly and heartily observe them.

Verse. 130. The entrance of thy words gives light, etc.] That is, When thy
words enter a man's heart, and make a sanctifying impression therein, then they
enlighten his soul; or rather thus, When men do first enter upon the study of
thy word, they shall presently find their understandings enlightened thereby: it
gives understanding to the simple; see the Note Psalm. 19.7.

Verse. 132. Look thou upon me, etc.] This David might say, either with respect
to the false slanders that were raised against him by his enemies, from which
to clear himself, he desires that God would look upon him, and take notice of
his innocence; or with respect to his apprehension that God had for a time
seemed to turn his back upon him, which makes him therefore desire that God
would again look favorably upon him; and, says he, be merciful unto me, as
thou usest to do unto those that love thy name; which is as if he had said,
Though in this great misery I am in thou seem to hide thy self from me, yet
knowing that all thy faithful servants have in all ages found thee merciful
to them, this emboldens me to beg of thee, that thou would deal with me,
as thou art wont to deal with those that sincerely love thee.

Verse. 139. My zeal has consumed me.] See the Note Psalm. 69.9.

Verse. 140. Thy word is very pure.] It is in the Hebrew tried or refined; for
which see the Notes 2 Samuel 22.31. and Psalm. 12.6.

Verse. 142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, etc.] To wit,
the righteousness of God revealed in his word, as it contains both an eternal
rule of righteousness for men, and also promises and threatenings, that shall
be always found righteous and faithful; which is evident by the following
clause, and thy word is truth: see also the Notes Psalm. 111.7, 8.

Verse. 143. Thy commandments are my delight.] He means the commandments with
the promises annexed, or the whole doctrine of life and salvation revealed in
the word.

Verse. 148. Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy
word.] Because in the night there were several watches, (see the Note Judge.
7.19.) therefore the meaning may be, either that he was more careful and ready
to awake at several times in the night, to meditate on Gods word, then those
that were appointed to watch were to do their duty therein (and yet we know
the care of such men is usually very great, both to keep their times for
watching, and to see that sleep does not overtake them) for which see also the
Note Psalm. 63.6; or else, that he did usually awake to meditate on Gods word at
several times in the night, before the watchmen did call upon him, who were
wont, it seems, to call upon men to tell them the seasons of the night. But I
rather think that by the night watches here are meant the last watch in every
night, which is elsewhere called the morning watch, Exodus 14.24; and so that he
says here is the same with that which he had said in the foregoing verse, I
prevented the dawning of the morning.

Verse. 149. O Lord, quicken me according to thy judgment.] That is, according
to thy word; see the Note verse. 25. The same is meant after verse. 154, 156, 159.

Verse. 150. They draw nigh that follow after mischief, etc.] That is, They draw
nigh to me to do me mischief: they are far from thy law; that is, they mind
not thy law, and therefore no marvel though they care not what mischief they
do me.

Verse. 151. Thou art near, O Lord, etc.] That is, As mine enemies are near to
mischief me, so thou art near to help me, and to destroy mine enemies: and all
thy commandments are truth; to wit, the commandments, together with the
promises and threatenings annexed; as if he should have said, and therefore I
know thou art near unto me.

Verse. 152. Concerning thy testimonies I have known of old, etc.] That is, from
my tender years, or from the first time that I began to study them; or, I have
known by experience of old, even in all foregoing ages: that thou have founded
them for ever; that is, that thou have ordained them to stand firm for ever:
see the Notes Psalm. 111.7, 8.

Verse. 155. Salvation is far from the wicked; for they seek not thy precepts.]
That is, so far they are from keeping them, that they do not so much as desire
to know them, nor endeavor to keep them: therefore I know that thou will not
take part with my wicked enemies against me, but wilt protect me from their
rage: or, seeing salvation is far from them that seek not thy precepts,
therefore teach me thy law, that I may not be in this danger.

Verse. 159. Consider how I love thy precepts.] This may have particular
reference to those words in the foregoing verse, I beheld the transgressors
and was grieved, because they kept not thy word; as if from hence he would
desire God to take notice how unfeignedly he loved Gods precepts.

Verse. 160. Thy word is true from the beginning, etc.] That is, from the
beginning of the world, or, ever since thou did make known thy word to thy
people, it always was unquestionably true. And then that it should always
continue so to be, is affirmed in the next clause, and every one of thy
righteous judgments endures for ever; for which see the Notes above, verse.
89. and 142. and Psalm. 111.7, 8.

Verse. 161. Princes have persecuted me without a cause, etc.] To wit, such as
by their power were able to crush him, and therefore are usually most feared;
and such as by their place should have been rather a refuge to him: and to be
injured by such, men can least endure: but my heart stands in awe of thy
word; to wit, in that I am afraid to do any thing contrary to thy law for fear
of these my persecutours, and in that I dare not take liberty to do evil to
them, as they do to me.

Verse. 162. I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds great spoil.] The ground
of this expression is, because the joy of such men is indeed always exceeding
great, that having been a while before in danger of losing their own lives, are
suddenly not only advanced in their spirits with the honor of a glorious
victory, but also greatly enriched with the spoils of their enemies. And the
sitter this expression was for David, because he had been a great warrior, and
because besides he had found the word very advantageous to him in his
spiritual warfare.

Verse. 163. I hate and abhor lying, etc.] That is, all false speaking and
hypocrisy, yea every false way contrary to the word of God; see the Note above
verse. 29: and hence is the next clause opposed thereto, but thy law do I love.

Verse. 165. Great peace have they which love thy law, etc.] That is, All things
shall go prosperously with them: and nothing shall offend them; that is,
nothing shall hurt them. Or thus, Great peace have they which love thy law;
that is, they shall enjoy great quiet of mind and peace of conscience, as
knowing the filial affection which they bear to thy word, and being thereby
assured of thy love and favor to them: and nothing shall offend them; that is,
nothing shall trouble or disquiet them. This last clause is in the Original,
they shall have no stumbling blocks; and so the meaning may be, that those
things which prove stumbling blocks to others to make them fall into sin, shall
not, by reason of the great respect which they bear to Gods law, prove so unto
them. But then this must be understood of such a stumbling and falling, as ends
in a final apostasy; for otherwise the best may fall into sin.

Verse. 168. I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies; for all my ways are
before thee.] This he adds, either 1. by way of calling God to witness
concerning the truth of that which he had said; or 2. as a reason why he was so
careful to keep Gods precepts; or 3. to set forth his sincerity in keeping
Gods commandments, to wit, that he did it, not that he might approve himself
to the eye of man, but that he might approve himself to God.

Verse. 172. My tongue shall speak of thy word, etc.] That is, I shall not only
sing forth thy praise, but I shall also speak of thy word to the edification of
others: for all thy commandments are righteousness; that is, they are most
righteous, even the only perfect rule of righteousness, and consequently fit
to be observed of all men, and the only means of reforming the unrighteousness
of men; and from hence also he would imply, that therefore he would teach
others therein, or that therefore he would extol them, and declare to others
how righteous they were: or, they are exceeding faithful; and therefore I will
declare the faithfulness of thy word, and teach others to trust in it.

Verse. 173. Let thine hand help me, etc.] To wit, in my seeking to know and
keep thy precepts; or by delivering me out of my dangers and miseries, or out
of the hands of my enemies.

Verse. 175. Let my soul live, etc.] See the Note above ver. 116: and it shall
praise thee; to wit, all my days: and let thy judgments help me; that is, by
thy judgments executed upon mine enemies, help me out of my troubles and
dangers. But because in this Psalm by Gods judgments Gods laws are usually
meant, the meaning of this clause may be this, Let thy judgments help me, that
is, Let thy promises made to me in thy word be accomplished for my help; or,
Let my integrity and sincere endeavor to keep thy judgments be for my help;
or lastly, Let thy word help me in the praising of thy great name: for that
indeed went immediately before this clause, Let my soul live, and it shall
praise thee; and let thy judgments help me.

Verse. 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep, etc.] To wit, in regard of
his wandering up and down from one place to another in the time of his exile,
when he was shut out, as it were, from the Church, the sheepfold of Gods
people; or in regard of his going astray through infirmity from the ways of
Gods commandments, whereupon he desires the Lord, his shepherd, to seek him
out, and bring him home again into the right way, whenever he should thus go
astray, seek thy servant: and the reason he gives in the next words, for I do
not forget thy commandments; that is, though I may sin through frailty, yet my
constant desire is that I may keep thy commandments.

PSALM CXX.
The Title. A Song of Degrees.] There are here fifteen Psalms together that
have all this Title. Some say, because they were culled out by the Jews to be
sung at their several stages or stations, as they went up from Babylon to
return back to the land of Canaan: and others, because they were sung by the
Levites on their solemn festival days, or else at the dedication of Solomon's
Temple upon the fifteen steps or stairs, whereby they went up by degrees to the
house of the Lord. And indeed we read of certain stairs that were in Solomon's
Temple 2 Chronicles. 9.11. And the king made of the algume trees terrises (or, as it
is in the margin, stairs) to the house of the Lord; which some conceive to be
the same that are called Neh. 9.4. the stairs of the Levites, and to which the
prophet Ezekiel may seem to allude Eze. 40.6. But the most probable reasons
that are given why these Psalms were called songs of degrees I conceive to be
these. 1. Because they raised up their voices to a very high strain in singing
these Psalms, or happily sung them in tunes, wherein they raised their voices by
degrees still higher and higher; as it is said 2 Chronicles. 20.19. that the Levites
stood up to praise the Lord God of Israel with a loud voice on high: or 2.
because they were sung by the Levites standing in some high place, from whence
the people might the better hear them: or 3. because they are Psalms of
choicest use and greatest excellency, even as a man of eminency above others is
1 Chronicles. 17.17. termed a man of high degree.

Verse. 3. What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue?] As if he had said, Thou look for some great reward and
preferment from men; but, alas, what is the recompense that shall be given
thee? to wit, from the Lord. To which an answer is given in the next verse,
Sharp arrows of the mighty, etc. But now it may be read, as it is in the
margin, what shall the deceitful tongue give unto thee, or what shall it
profit thee? and then it is all one as if he had said, Alas, thou will gain
nothing by it: meaning thereby, first, that no profit would thereby redound to
him; others he might bring into great danger and distress, but he the whilst
should get nothing by it; and none but men desperately wicked would hurt others
without hope of any advantage to themselves: and 2. that all their slanders and
fraudulent dealing would come to nothing, because God would vindicate the
innocence of his servants, and retort the evil intended against them upon the
heads of those that sought to mischief them.

Verse. 4. Sharp arrows of the mighty, etc.] That is, the mighty God of heaven
and earth shall suddenly bring upon thee (see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.23.) plagues
and sorrows and terrors, that shall pierce as deeply, and give thee as sore
deadly wounds, as do the sharpest arrows shot by a mighty man, and wherewith
thou shall be long tortured, according to the torments of him that should be
burnt with coals of juniper; which is said, because, as they say, juniper wood,
being of a saltish and fat and gummy substance, does make a very scorching
fire, and the coals thereof do burn exceedingly. And some there are that
conceive, that by these arrows of the mighty are meant those terrors of
conscience, which should stick like poisoned arrows in their bosoms, and that
by the coals of juniper are meant the everlasting torments of hell. But now if
we read the words as they are in the margin of our Bibles, It is as the sharp
arrows of the mighty man with coals of juniper, then as in reference to the
other translation of the foregoing verse, What shall the deceitful tongue give
unto thee? or what shall it profit thee? the drift of the Psalmist herein is to
show what a mischievous thing a false slanderous tongue is: as if he had said,
whilst it yields no benefit to the slanderer, it is extremely mischievous to
them that are slandered by him, It is as the sharp arrows of the mighty with
coals of juniper; that is, they wound as deeply and deadly, as do such arrows
(see the Note Psalm. 57.4.) and that unawares when men are absent* and think not
of the danger they are in: and the torment thereof is as the burning of juniper
coals. For as juniper wood (according to the report of those that write of the
nature of it) is 1. soon set on fire; 2. the fire in it spreads with much
violent rage, and makes a mighty crackling noise; 3. the coals thereof scorch
and burn exceedingly; and 4. they retain fire very long whilst they are covered
over with ashes: so 1. the slanderous tongues of wicked men do soon raise up
false reports of the righteous; 2. these false reports will spread apace with
great clamours and noise; 3. they bring upon men much bitter sorrow; and 4.
they are not easily suppressed when they are once raised, but even when they
seem extinct, some jealousies thereof will be still nourished in men's breasts.
And to this some add, that as juniper coals burn sorely, whilst they yield a
very sweet smell; so the tongue of the slanderer does often sorely mischief a
man, under a show of speaking fairly and friendly of him.

Verse. 5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, etc.] A people that were
descended from Meshech, one of the sons of Japhet, Genesis 10.2. often mentioned
in the prophesy of Ezechiel, as chap. 27.13. and elsewhere. Many there are that
think they are the same people, that were afterward called Scythians, and at
this day Muscovites; and that the rather, because these nations were of old
famous archers, men of great might for drawing the bow; and Mesech may fairly
be derived of an Hebrew word that signifies to draw: that I dwell in the tents
of Kedar; that is, amongst the posterity of Kedar, the son of Ishmael, Genesis
25.13. that dwelt in tents; and these are those that were called Arabians, a
savage nation, that had no settled dewlling place, but in their tents were
still wandering up and down like beasts for their prey. And indeed both these
nations were people fierce and barbarous, great robbers, and such as made
nothing of taking away the lives of any that came in their way. Yet it was not
because David ever dwelt amongst these nations, that he thus bewails himself
here, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, etc. but he speaks it either of the
Philistines (as some conceive) amongst whom David was sometimes forced to hide
himself, or rather of his own contrymen, and that to set forth their
barbarous cruelty and inhumanity, and that especially in their seeking to take
away his life by their false slanders; as if a man should say in these days,
living amongst those that professed themselves Christians, who yet
notwithstanding should deal with him more like savages then Christians, Woe is
me that I sojourn amongst Turks and Pagans. And withal we may note that David
might the more fitly use this word sojourn, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech,
etc. because in his exile he had indeed no settled habitation, but was
continually forced to flee from one place to another.

PSALM CXXI.
Verse. 1. I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help.]
That is, say some Expositours, I will look to the sanctuary or Temple, whose
foundation was in the holy mountains Psalm. 87.1. to wit, the hills of Zion and
Moria; as knowing that my help must come from the Lord only, who has chosen
that for his dwelling place. But I rather conceive, with others, that the
Psalmist speaks here, as one that were debating the matter with himself, from
whence he should expect help in the danger he was in; and that accordingly he
first sets down how he was inwardly moved and tempted to place his hope in
outward helps, I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, etc. but then corrects
himself in the following verse, My help comes from the Lord, which made heaven
and earth; as if he had said, Let me cast mine eyes whether I will, if I look
not to him, I shall look and wait in vain. Accordingly therefore by the hills
here is meant whatever is most eminent and glorious in the world, whatever may
seem most firm and strong and invincible; and so the prophets aim must be to
show, that if he should expect help where it was most likely to be had in
earthly things, such hopes would deceive him. Or else in saying I will lift up
mine eyes unto the hills, his meaning might be, either that he would look to
them as places of refuge and defense against their enemies; or else that he
would look about on every side for help: for because Canaan was a hilly
mountainous country, see Exodus 15.17. and Deuteronomy. 11.11. or because there were
mountains round about Jerusalem Psalm. 125.2. therefore to say that he would
lift up his eyes to the hills, was all one in effect as if he had said, that he
would look about on every side, to see if from any place help would come in to
him. And indeed if David composed this Psalm, as some think, for the
encouragement of himself and his soldiers, when he was to lead forth an army
out of Jerusalem, (which may seem the more probable, because some expressions
therein are so suitable to the condition of soldiers, as that verse. 6. the sun
shall not burn thee by day, nor the moon by night) then by his lifting up his
eyes to the hills he might mean, that at first he was sollicitous what
auxiliary forces would come in to him from the several tribes of Israel;
though at last he corrected himself, and concluded that it was God only upon
whom his hope of help depended, as he says in the next verse. But however,
reading the words as they are translated in the margin of our Bibles, this is
then clearly the drift of the place, Shall I lift up mine eyes to the hills?
from whence should my help come? that is, how should I hence expect any help?

Verse. 3. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved, etc.] That is, to stumble or
slide; see the Note Psalm. 38.16. And this may be taken as spoken by the
Psalmist to himself, or to every particular godly man, according to that Psalm.
91.3. for which see the Note there. As for the following clause, he that
keeps thee will not slumber; it is observed by some Expositours, that in that
expression the Psalmist alludes, according to what is said in the foregoing
Note, to that constant order in all armies of appointing Sentinels to watch for
the preservation of the whole army whilst they take their rest.

Verse. 5. The Lord is thy shade, etc.] Thy comfortable refreshing and
protection; see the Note Numb. 14.9: at thy right hand; see the Note Psalm.
16.8. And in this expression it may seem probable that the Psalmist alludes to
that pillar of a cloud, whereby the Lord did not only guide the Israelites, but
also shadow them from the heat of the sun, and the cold of the night; whence is
that of the Psalmist Psalm. 105.39. He spread a cloud for a covering; see the
Note also Exodus 13.21. And thence is that which follows in the next verse.

Verse. 6. The sun shall not smite thee by day, etc.] That is, It shall not hurt
thee with the heat thereof: nor the moon by night; to wit, with the cold and
moist vapors which it raises. The meaning is, that God should preserve him
from every thing that might hurt him. But the expression here used is suitable
to the condition of soldiers, that usually are abroad in the open fields both
by day and night, as is noted before verse. 1.

Verse. 7. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil; he shall preserve thy
soul.] That is, thy life; or, The Lord shall so far preserve thee from all
evil, that nothing which befalls thee shall hurt thy soul, or prove
prejudicial to thine eternal salvation.

PSALM CXXII.
Verse. 1. I Was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the
Lord.] The drift of David in this Psalm may be, only to set forth what delight
he took in frequenting Gods house. But yet it is the opinion of almost all
Expositours, that he composed this Psalm, when he had newly removed the Ark
from the house of Obed-Edom to the city of Zion, as to the place wherein God
had made known to him, that he would take up his settled habitation, according
to that Psalm. 132.13, 14; and that his aim herein was, to express how
exceeding glad he was, when he perceived by the peoples flocking together to
worship God in this holy mountain, and by their exciting one another thereto,
especially at the three solemn feasts, when all the males of Israel were to
appear there before God, how acceptable this which he had done was, not only to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, who had now gotten the Ark, the sign of Gods
presence, amongst them, but to all the people of the land in general, yea and
how unanimously they all rejoiced in this, that God had at last made good his
promise, in providing a settled place for his worship and service.

Verse. 2. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.] This may be
taken as the words of David, or as the words of those that stirred up him and
others to go to the Sanctuary, Let us go into the house of the Lord; our feet
shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. And it is as if it had been said, We
shall no longer now go sometimes to one place to worship God, and sometimes to
another, as we did before, when the Ark was now in one place and now in
another; but Jerusalem must now be the settled place where we shall constantly
meet to worship God, even unto the coming of the promised Messiah.

Verse. 3. Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together.] That is,
whose buildings, first did not stand scattering, some in one place, and some in
another, as it uses to be in villages, but were joined closely and handsomely
together, and that in a well-contrived order, and with a very comely proportion
and uniformity in the structure; and 2. whose inhabitants were as firmly knit
together with all possible unanimity and harmony of affection, being jointly
subject to the same government, and making profession of the same religion. All
which is here spoken of Jerusalem with relation doubtless to her former
condition; because in former times there had been two (if not three) towns in
the place where Jerusalem stood, the one inhabited by the Jebusites, which was
called the fort of Zion, the other by the Israelites: who did accordingly live
under several governments, and made profession of several religions, till
David took the fort of Zion; and then, it seems, he built all the vacant places
in and between these two towns, and compassed them both with the same walls,
and so did perfectly unite them together, and make of them one well-compacted
city. And this is noted here by way of extolling the beauty and glory of this
city, purposely thereby to settle in the hearts of the people an high esteem of
it, and (which was the only foundation of all their safety and welfare) that
they might still own it, as the city which God had chosen to be the only
peculiar place of his worship, and the royal seat of that kingdom, under
which they were to live in subjection unto all succeeding generations.

Verse. 4. Whether the tribes go up, etc.] To wit, at the three solemn feasts:
the tribes of the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel; that is, unto the Ark,
which is called the Testimony, see the Note Numb. 17.4; or unto the Tabernacle,
or the Temple, where the Ark was; whence the Tabernacle is usually in the books
of Moses called the Tabernacle of testimony.

Verse. 5. For there are set thrones of judgment, etc.] That is, God has
appointed that the supreme Courts of Judicature, both civil and
ecclesiastical, shall always be there, see the Note Deuteronomy. 17.8; or more
particularly, that the Regal throne for David and his successors shall
always be there, as is expressed in the following clause, the thrones of the
house of David.

Verse. 8. For my bre^hren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within
thee.] Least any should suspect, that in transferring the Ark into Zion, his
own city, and in speaking so much for Jerusalem in the foregoing verses, he
aimed at his own glory, and the establishment of his own kingdom, therefore he
protests here, that he desired that Jerusalem might flourish, not out of any
self respects, but for his brethren and companions sakes, to wit, the whole
Israel of God throughout the land, who were his brethren, and companions in the
fellowship of the same faith and religion; and that because he knew that the
safety and happiness of them all depended upon the welfare of Jerusalem, in
that God had established that to be the seat of the Sanctuary and kingdom:
neither could they be happy any longer then they enjoyed Gods Ordinances there,
and lived under the government of that kingdom.

PSALM CXXIII.
Verse. 1. UNto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens.]
As if he had said, Finding all things in outward appearance hopeless and
desperate here below, I look up unto thee, O Lord, in whom there is hope for
thy people in their greatest extremities. And indeed if this Psalm was composed
for the use of Gods people (as it is probably thought by many Expositours) when
they were in Babylon, or under the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, they
might well then say that they had no hope in the world, but in God only.

Verse. 2. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their masters,
and as the eyes of a handmaid unto the hands of her mistress, so our eyes wait
upon the Lord our God, etc.] The faithfuls waiting upon and looking up unto God
may here be compared to servants looking to the hand of their master or
mistress in three regards especially: 1. as servants and slaves of old did
wholly depend upon the good will and pleasure of their masters and mistresses
for their food and raiment, and whatever else they wanted, not daring to
challenge any thing, but patiently waiting to receive what they were pleased to
give them; so the faithful do quietly wait upon God for a supply in all their
necessities: 2. as such servants when they were beaten were wont to cast back
their eyes sadly upon the hand of their master or mistress that beat them,
even by their mournful looks begging as it were for mercy; so are Gods
servants wont to look with weeping eyes unto the Lord, when ever he corrects
them: and 3. as such servants, however they were wronged, yet were not allowed
to revenge themselves, nor to lift up a hand against those that injured them;
in such thraldom they lived in this regard, that they might not carry either
sword or any other weapon about them; and therefore whenever they were injured
they still had recourse to their masters for aid, expecting that they should
take their part, and defend them against those that injured them; so also it is
with Gods servants, they look up still to God, to whom vengeance belongs, for
protection and help against those that oppress and afflict them. And indeed
this last is most agreeable to the sequel of the Psalm, wherein they complain
how exceedingly they were oppressed by their enemies. As for that last clause,
until that he have mercy upon us, as it implies their confidence that God
would help them, so also their resolution patiently to wait upon God, till he
were pleased to help, though he deferred it never so long.

PSALM CXXIV.
Verse. 1. IF it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say,
etc.] Some Expositours conceive that David speaks here in general of all the
wonderful deliverance which God had wrought for the Israelites in all ages.
But because of those words, now may Israel say, I rather think that he speaks
here of some particular deliverance, upon occasion whereof this Psalm was
composed, and wherein it was unquestionably clear that God alone had saved them
by his almighty power; as happily that from Absaloms conspiracy, or that from the
invasion of the Philistines, 2 Samuel 5.17, 18, or some other of the like nature.

Verse. 3. Then they had swallowed us up quick, etc.] That is, They had utterly
destroyed us, and that as speedily as a man is swallowed up that falls into
deep waters; for that he alludes thereto in this expression, is evident in the
following verse.

Verse. 4. Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our
soul.] See the Notes 2 Samuel 22.5. Psalm. 32.6, and 69.1.

Verse. 6. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth.]
This phrase implies, 1. that the mightiest enemies of Gods people cannot
prevail over them, even in their greatest weakness, unless the Lord deliver
them into their hands; and 2. that this, because of their sins, God in his
justice might now have done, but that of his mercy he was pleased to spare them.

Verse. 7. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler.] See
the Note Psalm. 91.3.

PSALM CXXV.
Verse. 1. THey that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be
removed, etc.] The meaning is, that as mount Zion stood fast and could not be
overturned, though the winds on every side should blow with never such violence
upon it; so the Church shall never be overthrown, but in the midst of all the
changes and confusions that are in the world, and all the persecutions that are
raised against her, she shall stand fast and continue for ever: and so shall it
be with every faithful member of the Church, in regard of their constant
perseverance in the right way unto eternal salvation. Only we must know, that
because mount Zion was a type of the Church, therefore the Psalmist sets forth
the stability of the Church by the steadfast standing of mount Zion, rather then
of any other mountain.

Verse. 3. For the rod of the wicked, etc.] That is, the persecution and
oppression of wicked men, the rod whereby they scourge and beat Gods faithful
servants; or the rod and scepter, the tyrannical government of wicked men:
shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; that is, upon the Church, or upon
their substance and inheritance: lest the righteous put forth their hands unto
iniquity; that is, say some, lest they stretch forth their hands in praying to
idols; or, (for it is not safe so to limit the words) lest by the prosperity of
such wicked men they be tempted to partake with them in their sins; or, lest
through despair or faint-heartednesse and fear of suffering, they yield to do
any thing that is evil, or take any unlawful course to help themselves. And
indeed that phrase of putting forth their hands unto iniquity seems to imply,
either some sly, close and secret stealing forth of men's hands, as it were, to
do something that is evil, thereby to avoid suffering; or some sudden reaching
forth their hands, being overborn by the violence of temptation, to some
unlawful way of securing themselves, even as men ready to fall or sink in the
water will suddenly catch at any thing that is within their reach to save
themselves.

Verse. 4. Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good, etc.] This may be
understood more particularly (as in reference to what was said in the foregoing
verse) of Gods sending them such seasonable deliverance from the oppression of
wicked men, that they might not put forth their hands unto iniquity.

Verse. 5. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall
lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, etc.] That is, God shall cut them
off and destroy them; yea and at the last judgment, separating them from his
elect people, he shall cast them together with other reprobates into the pit of
hell: for in this expression, the Lord shall lead them forth, etc. there is
doubtless an allusion to that usual custom of leading forth malefactors in
public from the place of their imprisonment to the place of execution. But
what is meant here by those that turn asside unto their crooked ways? and why
is it said that they shall be led forth with the workers of iniquity? I answer,
that this may be probably expounded several ways: as 1. that those cunning
hypocrites, that profess themselves to be of the number of Gods people, and
make a show of religion, and yet the whilst do secretly turn aside into the
crooked ways of any base sinful practices, shall be punished no less then
those that are openly profane, yea no less then the heathen, that are
professedly workers of iniquity; or 2. that those that forsake the ways of
righteousness, and turn aside into the crooked ways of wickedness, shall be
destroyed no less then those that have always given up themselves to work
iniquity; or 3. (which I like the best, because it best agrees with that which
went before verse. 3, 4.) that those that in times of persecution, when the rod
of the wicked is upon the lot of the righteous, shall for fear or hope of
favor deny the faith, or take any other crooked sinful way, to secure or
advance themselves, shall be punished as workers of iniquity; no pretense of
the temptations by means whereof they were seduced, shall keep them from being
numbered amongst workers of iniquity, nor from being punished as such: for this
expression, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, is to
the same effect with this, the Lord shall punish them as workers of iniquity;
as if we should say, They that secretly filch away other men's goods, the judge
shall punish them with thieves. And as for that last clause, but peace shall be
upon Israel, therein is this covertly employed, that the destruction of such
hypocrites shall tend to the peace of the truly faithful.

PSALM CXXVI.
Verse. 1. WHen the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, etc.] That is, When
the Lord brought the Jews back from Babylon into their own country: we were
like them that dream; the mercy seemed so incredible, so far above all hope and
expectation, that at first we could scarce tell whether it were so indeed, or
whether we were not all the while in a dream; as it is said of Peter, when the
Angel had carried him out of prison, Act. 12.9. that he wist not that it was
true which was done by the Angel, but thought he saw a vision. And indeed that
a heathen king should of his own accord send home Gods captived people into
their own land, and that with a charge to build again the city Jerusalem and
the Temple therein, and a command to his subjects, to afford them all requisite
accommodations thereunto, giving them likewise all the vessels of the Temple,
with great riches besides, it was a matter of great wonder; and the people here
do observe it, to show what great cause they had to bless God for it.

Verse. 2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with
singing.] See the Note Job 8.21. The time was when they hung up their harps
upon the willows, and could not sing for bitterness of spirit, How shall we
sing, say they, the Lords song in a strange land? see Psalm. 137.2, 4: but now
they had taken them down again, and could sing Psalm upon Psalm, and were never
weary of singing. Then said they among the heathen, The Lord has done great
things for them; that is, even the Chaldeans and Persians, together with other
nations, amongst whom the Jews had lived as the most despised nation under
heaven, and who had wont to insult over them for their confidence in God, and
to flout at them and their religion, Psalm. 137.3. Sing us, say they, one of the
songs of Zion, were by the wonder of our deliverance forced to acknowledge,
that our God had showed great love to us in the great things he had done for us.

Verse. 3. The Lord has done great things for us, etc.] As if the Jews should
have said, (for in their name the Psalmist here speaks) If you that are our
enemies say so, who speak it happily with repining spirits, well may we say so
with glad hearts, for whom God has done it.

Verse. 4. Turn again our captivity, O Lord, etc.] That is, Bring home the rest
of our brethren, that are still captives in Babylon, as thou have brought us
home. For we must know, that though part of the Jews were returned, when this
Psalm was penned, upon liberty granted them by the Proclamation of Cyrus, as is
noted before verse. 1; yet the greatest number by far stayed still in Babylon,
according to that Isa. 10.22. though thy people Israel be as the sand of the
sea, yet a remnant of them shall return: apprehending the tediousness of the
journey, how great the perils were they were like to meet with in their way
homeward, and how impossible it seemed that they should recover their land
again, from which they had been carried away captives so many years ago, and
withal being grown, some of them at least, well enough contented with their
present condition; either for fear or sloth, they preferred certain rest,
though under bondage, and that amongst idolaters, before hope of liberty, and
of recovering their ancient inheritance, accompanied with so many dangers and
troubles. And therefore no wonder it is, though that remnant of the Jews that
were returned to their own country do still pray thus for their brethren that
were behind, Turn again our captivity, O Lord, etc. Yea some conceive that in
these words they do also pray that God would perfect the mercy of their
deliverance out of Babylon to those that were returned, by settling them
quietly in their land, and freeing them from that mighty opposition they met
with in their rebuilding of their city and Temple, by means of the envy and
malice of their neighbors round about them. As for that clause, as the streams
in the South, we must take notice, first, that by the South here is meant
barren and dry deserts; for because on the South of Canaan there lay great
deserts, dry and sandy, yea the South parts of Canaan it self were dryer then
other parts of the land were, whence was that of Calebs daughter to her father,
Thou have given me a South land, give me also springs of water, (see the Note
Josh. 15.19.) therefore by the South in the Scripture is usually meant the
desert or wilderness, as in Psalm. 75.6. promotion comes neither from the East
nor from the West, nor from the South, which is in the Hebrew, nor from the
desert: and 2. that in those dry deserts God did sometimes send mighty
land-flouds, either by sudden violent showers of rain, or by the melting of the
snow upon the mountains. Accordingly therefore when the Church here prays,
Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the South, either 1. they
mean thereby, that God would bring home their captivated brethren in great
multitudes, so that they might cover the ways as they went, as those mighty
streams in the South were wont to overflow and cover the earth, and that
speedily and suddenly too, as those land-flouds used to come suddenly, when
there was a little before no appearance of water: or 2. they would imply
hereby, that though it would be a work of great wonder, like that of bringing
streams of water into the dry deserts, yet God was able to do it: or 3. they
would hereby intimate how great a refreshing this would be to them; that the
turning again of their captivity would be as welcome a mercy to them, as it
would be to the traveller, that is to go through dry deserts, to meet there
with some sweet streams of water for the refreshing of himself.

Verse. 5. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.] That is, as the poor
husbandman that sows in tears, either for the toil of his work, or the
unseasonablenesse of the weather, or especially when in times of dearth and
scarcity he casts the corn, that should nourish himself and his family, into
the ground, and that too but upon uncertain hopes, as knowing that often when
men carry out much, they bring in little, as is threatened Deuteronomy. 28.38. yet when
a plentiful harvest comes, he then reaps with joy; and happily has the richer
harvest, when his seed-time was saddest, according to that usual proverb, that
corn sown in a flood, comes up like a wood: so they that do what God requires,
in hope of a retribution from God, according to his will revealed in his word,
though they may meet with much affliction and sorrow therein, yet shall
doubtless at last reap what they expected with exceeding great joy; yea their
foregoing sorrow shall be in part a cause or occasion of their greater joy. And
with this general sentence the Psalmist concludes this Psalm: partly with
respect to the experience which some of the Jews had already had of the truth
hereof in their deliverance out of Babylon, when they went into captivity, in
hope that God would make good what he had promised them by the prophet Jeremy,
that after a certain time he would bring them back again with joy into their
own land, their faith and patience and prayers was precious seed, sown not
without many tears because of their misery; but when God brought them back with
so much riches and glory, then they reaped with joy, according to that Isa.
51.11. the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion,
and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: and partly by way of
encouragement for the time to come, both to those that were behind in Babylon,
and those likewise that were employed in repairing Jerusalem, etc. but were
many ways in a very sad condition, by reason of the great opposition, and
manifold discouragements they met with in that service; even to put them in
hope, that after this sad seed-time they should have a joyful harvest; which
is again repeated in the following verse.

Verse. 6. He that goes forth; etc.] That is, that goes out of doors to sow
his seed; or, that in the field goes on still forward, casting his seed into
the ground: and weepeth, bearing precious seed; that is, good and choice corn,
that is fit for seed; or corn when it is scarce and dear, and so it grieveth
him the more to part with it: shall doubtless come again with rejoicing,
bringing his sheaves with him; to wit, when at harvest he comes home out of the
field with his carts laden with sheaves.

PSALM CXXVII.
The Title. A Song of degrees, etc.] See the Note on the Title Psalm. 120. for
Solomon, or, of Solomon, as it is in the margin of our Bibles. And indeed
because this psalm treats concerning the well ordering of private families and
public states, in the knowledge whereof Solomon through the grace of God did
especially excel, and because that which is here delivered is in effect much
the same with that which is declared in the book of Ecclesiastes, it may seem
very probable that Solomon was the author of this Psalm; see the Title Psalm.
72.

Verse. 1. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it,
etc.] For this phrase of building the house, see the Notes Exodus 1.21. and 2 Samuel 7.11: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain. The
meaning of both clauses is, that no care or labor of men can avail to the
increase and welfare of private families; and that no watchfulness or
endeavors of magistrates and others subordinate to them, can be successful
for the preservation and prospering of public states, except the Lord give a
blessing thereunto. And it is not improbable which some conceive, namely, that
this Psalm was composed to be used at the dedication of their new-built houses:
for which see the Notes Deuteronomy. 20.5, and on the Title of the 30. Psalm.

Verse. 2. It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late.] This may be
understood as spoken to them which watch and ward for the preservation of a
city, or to magistrates that use to wake when others sleep, in consulting about
the welfare of the commonwealth, according to what is said in the foregoing
verse; or rather of those that toil and moil themselves in private families,
for the advancing of their private estates, as appears by the following words,
to eat the bread of sorrows, that is, course homely meat, (as Dan. 10.3. that
which we translate there pleasant bread, is in the Original, bread of desires)
or rather, bread gotten with much labor and sorrow, and eaten with much grief
and vexation, whilst men out of a covetous humor do even grudge themselves the
very bread they put into their mouths. As for the following words, for so he
gives his beloved sleep, that has reference to what he had said concerning the
providence of God, that without that all endeavors of men were in vain: for,
says he, so he gives his beloved sleep; that is, through Gods provident care
over his beloved, and their reposing themselves quietly thereon, they can
seasonably sleep in peace, and fare better then those that wear out themselves
with carking cares. And probable it is that in those words, his beloved,
Solomon might allude to that other name of Iedidiah, which God had given him,
that is, beloved of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.25.

Verse. 3. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, etc.] This is added,
because by children a man's house is built, according to the phrase of the
Scripture; so to make good what was said before verse. 1. Except the Lord build
the house, they labor in vain that build it: see the Note there.

Verse. 4. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, so are children of the
youth.] That is, children in their youth, or children begotten in the youth of
their parents, as Joseph, because he was begotten by his father when he was
old, is called the son of his old age, Genesis 37.3. and a husband married to a
maid in her youth is called Joel 1.8. the husband of her youth. Now these are
said to be, to wit, when they are blessed of God, as arrows are in the hand of
a mighty man, to imply 1. that they are always ready at hand to go
whethersoever their father will send them, and to do whatsoever he will enjoin
them; 2. that they are healthful, strong, of generous dispositions, virtuous,
and active, fit for any service he shall employ them in, and able to effect the
greatest exploits; and 3. especially that they are a defense to their father
against all wrongs whatsoever, and a terror to his enemies. And this is said
here of children of the youth, that is, (according to the most received of the
Expositions before mentioned) children begotten by the father in his youth,
either because such are usually most strong and vigorous, and are also often
best qualified in other regards, by means that their father lives to see that
they be well educated; or else because parents seldom live to have any comfort
or service from children that are born to them in their old age.

Verse. 5. Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them, etc.] That is,
his house; or, that has many such children: they shall not be ashamed; that
is, all that are parents of such children shall not need to be ashamed, as
those parents must needs be that are usually reproached with the wickedness of
their children; or, they, that is, such children, shall not be ashamed, to wit,
because being virtuous and good, they shall be able therefore to give an
account of their lives, and to stop the mouths of false accusers; or, (joining
both together) such a father and his children shall not be ashamed, and why?
the reason is employed in the following words, but they shall speak with the
enemies in the gate: that is, they shall plead their fathers cause before the
tribunal of the magistrate, and defend him from the wrongs and oppressions of
his enemies; or, they shall be able to oppose any enemies that shall assault
the city: and indeed some read this last clause thus, they shall subdue (or
destroy) the enemies in the gate. See the Note Genesis 22.17.

PSALM CXXVIII.
Verse. 1. BLessed is every one that fears the Lord, etc.] This Psalm some
conceive to have been composed for the use of the Jews at their marriages.

Verse. 2. For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, etc.] Many blessings
are employed in this: as 1. that God should prosper the labors of such a man,
that he should reap the fruit of his labors; 2. that what he gets should be
preserved to him for his use; 3. that by this means he should be able to live
of his own, and neither depend upon the bounty of others, nor be chargeable to
others; 4. that this estate of his own whereon he lived should not be gotten by
any unjust means, but by his honest labors, which is of all the most
comfortable; 5. that he should live contentedly though he had no more then what
he earned with his daily labors; and 6. that God should give him a heart to
enjoy with comfort what he has gotten.

Verse. 3. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house,
etc.] That is, she shall bear thee many children, and shall be an ornament to
thy family, and the continual delight of thine eyes, and gladness of thy
heart. This I conceive is chiefly intended here in these words. Yet withal
observable it is how fitly a wife is compared to a vine by the sides of the
house, both because it is the praise of the wife to be much at home in the
house, and there her business continually lies; and because as the vine, being
a weak plant, cannot grow up by it self, but as it is by some means born up and
supported, so does the wife, by reason of the weakness of her sex, stand in
continual need of being upheld and born up by the care of her husband. And so
for the next clause, thy children like olive plants round about thy table, as
it implies the blessing of many children; so also that the children he had
should be healthful, fair, fresh and flourishing, (see the Note Psalm. 52.8.)
hopefully sprouting, and growing up continually, so that their father should
delight to look upon them, and to have them with him; as likewise that they
should be well qualified and virtuous, and such as in time should yield the
sweet fruit of much comfort and benefit to their parents: to which some add
too, because olive branches were used as emblems of peace, that they should be
the means of keeping peace between their parents.

Verse. 5. The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion, etc.] See the Note Psalm.
20.2. These words out of Zion are added, to put them in mind of the Covenant
which God had made with them: so that it is as if he had said, Our God that
dwells in Zion shall from thence hear the prayers which there thou offerest
up unto him, and shall bless thee with all the blessings of his people,
according to his covenant, and the promises he has made to us: and thou shall
see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life, meaning that he should
delight to see the flourishing estate of Gods Church, and that he should have a
share in her blessings.

PSALM CXXIX.
Verse. 1. MAny a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say,
etc.] That is, ever since God had first a Church upon earth, as was seen in the
murder of Abel; or rather, ever since the seed of Israel became a people,
which was whilst they abode in Egypt; for indeed the time of their being there,
and of Gods delivering them from thence, is often elsewhere in the Scripture
called the time of Isreal's youth, as Ezekiel. 23.3. and Hos. 2.14, 15.

Verse. 3. The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows.] By
the plowers plowing upon their backs is meant, that their enemies had rent and
torn them, and grievously afflicted them, with all possible cruelty, no
otherwise then as if men lying with their faces upon the earth should have
plows again and again driven over their backs; and by making long their furrows
is meant, that they had used them thus despightfully and cruelly a long time
together. But yet withal the aim of saying that this was done upon their
backs, might be to imply, either that this was done by the heavy burdens which
their enemies laid upon them; or that the deep slashes which their enemies by
scourging them had made in their backs, were like so many furrows which the
plow makes in the earth. Neither is it altogether improbable which some add,
that the Holy Ghost might also intend covertly to intimate by this expression,
that in all this cruelty of the enemy, God made use of them as his husbandmen
to till his field, the Church, that through these afflictions they might be the
better prepared to receive the seed of his word and spirit, and might afterward
yield him the more fruit, as a field does that is well plowed and manured.

Verse. 4. The Lord is righteous; he has cut asunder the cords of the wicked.]
That is, even in the heat of their persecuting Gods people, God has broken
their power, and frustrated all their plots and practices, and so has taken
them off, that they can proceed no further; and all this on a sudden, as when
one should cut asunder the harness or plow-gear, wherewith the plow is drawn,
the plow must needs stand still, nor can the husbandman carry it on any further.

Verse. 5. Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.] See the
Notes Psalm. 35.4. and 40.15.

Verse. 6. Let them be as the grass on the house tops, etc.] Because the houses
in Judea were built flat on the tops, and so out of the clefts and crevices
between the stones there grass or green corn would usually sprout out, which
yet for want of earth and moisture was soon blasted by the heat of the sun,
thence is it that the Psalmist uses this similitude, praying that the enemies
of the Church, even when they were at the greatest height, might yet be but as
such grass or green corn on the house tops.

Verse. 7. Wherewith the mower fills not his hand, nor he that binds
sheaves, his bosom.] That is, which never comes to be mowen, nor bound up in
sheaves, as the corn in the fields does. And in this expression here used the
reason hereof is intimated, namely, because if it should grow up, it would not
be worth the reaping and gathering; there is but only a little here and there
that sprouts up, the harvestman cannot cut it down by handfuls, nor grasp his
arms full in his bosom, when he gathers it to bind it up in sheaves, as he
does in the corn fields. And the same is intended in the following verse.

Verse. 8. Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon
you, etc.] That is, such grass or green corn on the house tops never comes to
be mowen, or gathered in by the harvest-men, who should thereupon have the
prayers of those that pass by, as they usually have when they are working in
the field. The drift of all this is, to express their earnest desire that the
enemies of Gods people might be suddenly destroyed.

PSALM CXXX.
Verse. 1. OVt of the depth have I cried unto thee, O Lord.] That is, out of the
depths of seeming desperate tribulations and dangers, and likewise of
overwhelming sorrows by reason of my sins; see the Notes Psalm. 40.2, and 68.22,
and 71.2. see also the Note upon the Title of the sixth Psalm.

Verse. 3. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, Lord, who shall stand?] See
the Note Psalm. 1.5. It is as if the Psalmist should have said, If thou
should take strict notice of the iniquities of men, with a purpose to deal
with them according to their deserts, no man could ever escape thy just
vengeance; and if the holiest of men cannot justify himself before thy
tribunal, alas, what shall become of me? For doubtless the Psalmists aim in
these words is to imply, 1. that he acknowledged that God had justly for his
sins cast him into those depths of misery wherein he lay, and that he might
also justly upon the same ground reject his prayers; and 2. that therefore he
did not desire deliverance out of his miseries, because of any righteousness
of his own, but only that he should do it of his own free grace and mercy; as
is also more fully expressed in the following verse.

Verse. 4. But there is forgiveness with thee. etc.] That is, Thou art and have
declared thy self to be a God ready to forgive poor penitent sinners; or, there
is forgiveness to be had from thee, if men seek it as they ought to do: that
thou may be feared; that is, that thou may be worshipped by men in a right
manner; for fear here is taken, as it is often elsewhere in the Scripture, for
the whole worship of God. Gods readiness to forgive poor penitent sinners, and
to deliver them out of their troubles, is the great encouragement to draw men
to serve God, and to pray to him for mercy when they are in misery (as the
Psalmist now did) and that as children seek to their father, fearing to offend
him, even because of his goodness.

Ver. 6. My soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the
morning, etc.] That is, more eagerly then they that watch in the last watch of
the night do wait for the first breaking of the day: either because they watch
abroad in dangerous times, and perhaps too in tedious weather; or else merely
because being tired with long watching they long for the morning, that then
they may go and take their rest. See the Note also Psalm. 119.148.

Verse. 7. With the Lord there is mercy, and with him there is plenteous
redemption.] That is, He is infinitely gracious to pardon the sins of his
people, though never so many and great, and as infinitely able, by innumerable
incredible ways and means, to deliver them out of all their troubles and
miseries.

Verse. 8. And he shall deliver Israel from all his iniquities.] That is, He
will pardon and deliver them from all their sins, which have been the causes of
their sufferings, and that for the merits of Christ their Redeemer; and so
consequently he will deliver them also from all their sufferings and sorrows.

PSALM CXXXI.
Verse. 1. LOrd, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, etc.] It is in
the Hebrew, my heart is not lifted up, etc. which was according to that law
which God gave for the king of Israel, that his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren, Deuteronomy. 17.20. But for the better understanding of these words, we
must know, that David might speak them, either with respect to the time before
he was settled in the throne of Israel, professing hereby, that however Saul's
flattering Courtiers had continually reported of him, that he sought Saul's
ruin, and out of pride and ambition sought to step into his throne, yet the
Lord the searcher of all hearts knew, that he did never of himself aspire to,
nor look after any such worldly greatness, but did still refer himself to the
will of God, being content to be in whatever condition God was pleased to
dispose of him: or else with respect to the times when he sat in the throne of
Israel; and that accordingly he protests in these words, that though God had
exalted him to the highest pitch of honor that man upon earth can be capable
of, in that he had made him both a prophet and a king, and had set him in the
throne promised to the Messiah, the only-begotten Son of God, and had furnished
him with excellent gifts suitable to this dignity, yet his heart was not
exalted hereby to think highly of himself, neither did he carry himself in his
place proudly and arrogantly, his utmost ambition being still only this, that
he might be serviceable to God and his people: neither (says he) do I exercise
my self in great matters, or in things too high for me; that is, I have kept my
self within the bounds of my calling, and have not, in the confidence of mine
own wisdom and power, undertaken things that were above my reach; neither did
I of my self undertake to be a prophet or king, nor have I sought to enlarge my
dominions, or attempted any thing of the like nature, but as I was called
thereto of God, to whose will in all things I submitted my self.

Verse. 2. Surely, I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is weaned
of his mother, etc.] By quieting himself he means, that he had bridled himself
from, and suppressed in himself, all those inordinate motions and desires,
wherewith ambitious men, that would be over-wise and provident for themselves,
do usually disquiet both themselves and others, and whereunto himself was
naturally inclined as well as others. And he compares himself to a child that
is weaned of his mother, which he repeats again in the last clause of the
verse, my soul is even as a weaned child, not to imply, that he was as free
from all pride, and ambitious desires after great things, and revengefull
thoughts, as such infants are (for to imply this it had been enough to have
said, that he was as a child, without adding that of a child weaned of his
mother, as we see in the like expression of our Saviors, Matthew. 18.3. Except
ye become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven;)
but rather to imply his quiet recumbency upon God in any estate and condition
whatsoever: that as a child that is weaned from the breasts of the mother, is
notwithstanding no way sollicitous for it self how it shall be fed, but still
hangs upon the mother, and rests upon her for every thing whatsoever, and
though it have not what it naturally most desires, the milk of the breast, yet
it is contented to be fed with what the mother gives it; so did he wholly cast
his care upon God, as one that could do nothing for himself, and even when the
Lord was pleased to withhold from him what he expected, and to keep him in a
low and afflicted condition, yet he patiently still submitted himself to Gods
good will and pleasure, and was contented to be what God would have him.

Verse. 3. Let Israel hope in the Lord from henceforth and for ever.] As if he
should have said, Let all the Israel of God therefore learn by mine example to
have mean thoughts of themselves, that so accordingly they may not trust in
themselves, but in God alone. And indeed because the performance of Gods
promises made to David concerning his being settled in the throne, tended so
much to the common good of the whole Israel of God, well might his confidence,
that God would perform his promises made to him, encourage them also to hope in
the Lord.

PSALM CXXXII.
Verse. 1. LOrd, remember David and all his afflictions.] Because Solomon made
use of some verses of this Psalm, to wit, verse. 8, 9, 10. almost word for word,
in his prayer at the dedication of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 6.41, 42. (for which
see the Notes there) it is hence evident that this Psalm was composed before
that time: and probably therefore either by David, to be sung when the Ark was
removed from the house of Obed-Edom to Zion, or for the use of his son Solomon
when he came to build the Temple; or else by Solomon himself, that the people
might use it all the time the Temple was building, or particularly at the great
solemnity of the Temples dedication. But however, the drift of this petition,
Lord, remember David and all his afflictions, is to desire of God, that by
settling and prospering the throne of David, and the Temple, the place of his
public worship, and by blessing the service that was there done him, he would
make it evident that he was mindful of him, and did highly esteem him, both
for what he had suffered for his sake, and especially for his great
sollicitousnesse to have built God a house, which is the chief thing that is
intended by his afflictions. For first, because when David had made known how
earnestly desirous he was to build God a Temple, God did hereupon tell him that
his son should do it, though he might not, and did withal make many gracious
promises to him, concerning his kingdom, the Temple, and the flourishing
estate of his Church and people, 2 Samuel 7.10, 16. (concerning which see the
Notes there) therefore this, Lord, remember David and all his afflictions, is
all one in effect as if this had been added too, And remember also the promises
which thou did then make unto him; for so we see the like expression used,
Deuteronomy. 9.27. Remember thy servants Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, look not unto
the stubbornness of this people, that is, Remember the covenant which thou
made with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and because of that do not destroy
this people, though they be a stubborn people. And 2. because David had
undergone so many afflictions, in a manner all his days, for the advancement
of Gods glory, and that in confidence that God would at last do for him what
he had promised him, and because he had been so anxiously sollicitous to build
a house for the Lord, therefore in these words, Lord, remember David and all
his afflictions, this also may be comprehended, that even in this regard God
would be the readier to do good to him, who had been so zealous for his glory,
and had suffered so much for his sake.

Verse. 2. How he swore unto the Lord, etc.] See the Note 2 Samuel 7.3: and vowed
unto the mighty God of Jacob; that is, the God whom Jacob worshipped and
trusted in, as an almighty God, Genesis 49.24. and who by his almighty power had
delivered Jacob out of all his dangers and troubles.

Verse. 3. Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, etc.] To
avoid the absurdity of thinking, that David should make such a rash and
unwarrantable vow as this might seem to be, that till he had his desire
satisfied in that which is afterward expressed, he would abide in the open
air, and never go within his doors, nor ever take any rest either by day or by
night, some say that David spoke this with reference to his purpose of taking
the fort of Zion from the Jebusites, 2 Samuel 5.6, where by revelation he knew
that God meant to have the Ark settled, and which he might probably think would
be accomplished within some short time. And then others again say, that he
meant it only of that stately cedar house, which he had lately built for
himself in Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 7.1, 2. to wit, that he would not go into that
house; and so also that he would not go up unto his bed; nor (verse. 4.) give
any sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids, to wit, in that house. But
neither of these expositions give me any satisfaction. I rather take these to
be hyperbolicall expressions of the continual exceeding great care, wherewith
he was perplexed about providing a settled place for the Ark to rest in, like
that Prove. 6.4, 5: Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids;
deliver thy self as a roe from the hand of the hunter, etc. Neither is it any
more in effect then if he had said, I will never lay by this care, to mind my
self in any thing whatsoever, I shall never with any content abide in mine own
house, or with any quiet rest in my bed, until, etc.

Verse. 5. Until I find out a place for the Lord, etc.] That is, Until I find
where the place is, of which God has so long since spoken, (see the Note Deuteronomy,
12.5.) that there he would have his habitation, and that there the Ark should
take up its settled abode; or rather, Until I provide, prepare or build a
dewlling place for the Lord; for so the same expression is used Act. 7.46.
where it is said of David, that he found favor before God, and desired to find
a tabernacle for the God of Jacob, and so it is more clearly expressed in the
following clause, an habitation (or, as it is in the Hebrew, habitations; for
which see the Note Psalm. 43.3.) for the mighty God of Jacob, see above verse. 2.

Verse. 6. Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah, etc.] A very obscure place this is.
But the most probable expositions that I find amongst Expositours are these. 1.
That in these words a reason is given why David was so sollicitous to have the
Ark brought into its resting place, and why the people were so glad to have
this done, to wit, because formerly it had been still in a fleeting condition,
carried up and down from one place to another: to express which they say, we
heard of it at Ephratah, that is, we heard of the Ark, that in old time before
our days it was in Ephratah, that is, in the land of Ephraim, to wit, in
Shiloh (and indeed why might not the land of Ephraim be called Ephratah, seeing
we find that Jeroboam, because he was of the tribe of Ephraim, is called an
Ephrathite? 1 Kings 11.26.) we found it in the fields of the wood, that is,
when the Philistines brought back the Ark out of their country, we found it in
the field of Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6.12, 13, 14; or when David went to fetch it
to mount Zion, we found it in Kiriathjearim, 1 Samuel 7.1. 1 Chronicles. 13.5, 6.
which signifies properly a town or city of woods, that is, situated nigh unto
woods; and so the full scope of these words is as if they should have said,
Thus has the Ark been formerly transported from place to place, but now care
has been taken to bring it to the place where it must always abide. 2. That
the care of David in bringing the Ark to the place which God had appointed for
it, is set forth by showing the different opinions which men formerly had
concerning the place of the Arks settled abode: we heard of it at Ephratah,
that is, we heard of the resting place for the Ark, the mansion or habitation
for the mighty God of Jacob, mentioned in the foregoing verse, that it was to
be in Ephratah, that is, in Bethlehem, Genesis 35.16. which was a very fruitful
place, and called therefore Ephratah, which signifies fruitfulness, as for
the same cause also it was called Bethlehem, that is, the house of bread (and
indeed it is not improbable that such a report might be spread abroad
concerning Bethlem Ephratah, in regard that many men might be inclinable to
think, that the city where David their king was born, was likely to be made the
seat both of the kingdom and Sanctuary;) we found it in the fields of the
wood, as if they should have said, but now we have unexpectedly found that the
place where the Ark must be settled is in the threshing-floor of Araunah the
Jebusite, see the Note 2 Samuel 24.18. which might be called the field of the
woods, because it was a woody place^ or in Jerusalem, or mount Zion, which
might be so called, because it was but a barren soil, and compassed about with
hills that were covered over with wood. 3. That this is spoken of David's
removing the Ark to the city of Zion, We heard of it at Ephratah, that is, the
same of this solemn transporting of the Ark to Zion was brought unto us the
inhabitants of Bethlem Ephratah; we found it in the fields of the wood, that
is, as is before noted, in Kiriath-jearim; for it is in the Hebrew in the
fields of ^oar, and Joar differs not much from jearim. Or 4. that this was
spoken by way of congratulating the bringing of the Ark in to the Temple,
according to the desire of David, as into the place appointed of God for its
settled abode: We heard of it at Ephratah, that is, say some Expositours, We
heard of the ancient men in Bethlem Ephratah, even when we were children, where
the Ark was to be settled; or, as others, we heard of it of David the
Ephrathite, that is, who was of Bethlem Ephratah; and accordingly we found it
in the fields of the wood, that is, in Jerusalem, or in mount Moriah, the floor
of Araunah, as is before noted; he being anointed king, the place of the Arks
settled abode is now discovered. But to me the two first seem the most probable.

Verse. 7. We will go into his Tabernacle, etc.] See the Note again Psalm. 43.3:
we will worship at his footstool; see the Notes 1 Chronicles. 28.2. and Psalm. 99.5.
In this verse the people are brought in, resolving that since the Ark was now
brought into the place which God had chosen for its settled abode, they would
now diligently frequent that place of his presence and public worship; and
they speak as rejoicing at the benefit which thereby would redound to Gods
people.

Verse. 8. Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, etc.] See the Note 2 Chronicles. 6.41.

Verse. 9. Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness, etc.] That is, Let
them be righteous and holy, and live holily and righteously; and particularly,
let them carry themselves justly and holily in the execution of their priestly
office: see the Note, Job 29.14. And in this expression he alludes to the holy
garments wherewith the Priests were clothed, Exodus 28.23. In the 2. Chron 6.41.
this clause is expressed thus: Let thy Priests, O Lord, be clothed with
salvation; and accordingly the meaning here may be, Let the manifestation of
thy righteousness, in protecting them by thy grace and providence, and in
showing thy self tenderly careful over them, be an ornament to them; for which
see the Note there. And they therefore that think this Psalm was composed to be
sung at the removing of the Ark from the house of Obed-Edom, do conceive that
David does hereby implicitly desire, that no such thing might now befall them,
as had before in the sudden death of Uzzah. And let thy Saints shout for joy;
that is, Let thy holy people exceedingly rejoice in the manifold mercies which
through thy favor they enjoy, or particularly in the benefits they enjoy by
means of the ministry of thy priests, and the settling of the Ark amongst them.
I know that some understand this of the Levites, whose work it was to praise
God with singing of Psalms in the Temple. But if we compare this with the place
before cited 2 Chronicles. 6.41. it will clearly appear that the former exposition
is the best.

Verse. 10. For thy servant David's sake, etc.] That is, (say some Expositours)
for thy Christ's sake, who is often in the Scripture called David; see the Note
2 Samuel 22.51. But others again conceive that David himself does here desire,
that God would remember him his servant, and make good his promises to him,
whom he had anointed king over Israel; turn not away, says he, the face of
thine anointed. And some restrain his request to this, that God would not send
him away without effecting the work he had undertaken, of removing the Ark from
the house of Obed-Edom to Zion, as he had done before when Uzzah was smitten,
But I rather take it to be the prayer of Solomon, or of the people on Solomon's
behalf, to wit, that God remembering the promises he had made to David, and out
of the respect he bare to him, who was a man after his own heart, would not
cast off his son Solomon, that was anointed to succeed him in the throne, out
of his sight, nor reject his prayers, or frustrate him of his hope in building
a Temple for the Lord, as his father had appointed him: all which will be
evident by comparing this place with that 2 Chronicles. 6.42.

Verse. 11. The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it;
Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.] See the Notes 2 Samuel
7.11, 16. and Psalm. 89.3.

Verse. 13. For the Lord has chosen Zion, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 78.68. and
1 Kings 9.3.

Verse. 15. I will satisfy her poor with bread.] That is, I will not only give
them food enough, but also, by my blessing upon it, cause their food to nourish
and satisfy them.

Verse. 17. There will I make the horn of David to bud, etc.] That is, In Zion I
will make the strength and glory of his kingdom to grow up and increase; see
the Notes 1 Samuel 2.1, and 10. 2 Samuel 22.3. and Psalm. 89.24. But withal this
expression of the budding of the horn of David seems to have respect, both to
the mean condition from which David was advanced, as likewise to the strange
growing up and shooting forth of his kingdom again in his posterity, when it
was brought very low, as it was by the schism of the ten tribes, that fell off
to Jeroboam, and often afterward in their civil wars; yea when it was in a
manner cut off, as it was in the Babylonian captivity; but especially when it
was so utterly ruined at last, that there seemed to be no memorial left of it,
and yet then in Christ, that horn of salvation, Luke 1.69. budded and sprang
forth again, and from Zion, where indeed Christ's kingdom began, did spread
abroad all the world over: whereto the prophets also seem to allude, where they
call Christ the branch, as Zach. 6.12. and Isa. 11.1 a rod out of the stem of
Iesse, and a branch out of his roots. And to the same purpose is the following
clause, I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed; that is, that there shall be
still one of his posterity, in whom the glory of his kingdom shall live and
shine forth; see the Note 1 Kings 11.39. Which yet was chiefly accomplished in
Christ, in whom this kingdom did indeed shine forth most gloriously even unto
the ends of the earth. But see the Note also 2 Samuel 21.17.

Verse. 18. His enemies will I cloth with shame, etc.] See the Note Job 8.22:
but upon himself shall his crown flourish; that is, upon his own head, and the
heads of his posterity, even unto Christ, in whom his kingdom shall flourish
unto all eternity.

PSALM CXXXIII.
Verse. 1. BEhold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell
together in unity.] That which is said most probably by Expositours, concerning
the occasion of penning this Psalm, is, either that it was purposely provided
to be sung by the Israelites at those three solemn feasts, when all the males
were to come up to worship God together at Jerusalem: or else that it was
composed upon occasion of that pacification that was made amongst the
Israelites, either after the suppressing of Absaloms rebellion, or rather when
after many years civil wars that had been in the land between David and the
house of Saul, all the tribes did at last jointly submit to David, and so lived
peaceably together as brethren under his government; whereupon, as from the
experience they now had, how much better it was with them, when they lived thus
comfortably together in unity and peace, then when before they were continually
seeking to destroy one another, he commends unto them brotherly love and
concord, Behold how good and how pleasant it is, etc.

Verse. 2. It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon
the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments.]
That is, It must needs yield as much refreshing content and delight both to God
and man, especially to those that live thus as brethren together, as that
precious ointment did, that was always poured forth upon the head of Aaron and
his successors, when they were consecrated to the high priests office; nor
only to the high priest himself, but also to all that were about him, to whom
the fragrant smell thereof did spread. And the rather does he compare the unity
of brethren to this holy ointment, which was peculiarly designed to that
religious service of consecrating the high priest, because he desired hereby to
intimate, first, that the brotherly concord which he chiefly intended, was when
they joined together with one consent in a way of religion, to wit, in the pure
worship of God, being all of them endued with the sweet smelling graces of Gods
holy spirit; and 2. that this brotherly concord is an effect of that spirit of
grace and peace, which being plentifully poured forth upon Christ the head of
the Church, runs down upon all the members of his body, and is the bond of
their spiritual union.

Verse. 3. As the dew of Hermon, etc.] As by the similitude in the foregoing
verse David showed how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity,
so by this here he shows, how good it is, that is, how profitable: As the dew
of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion; that is,
as the dew that falls from heaven upon such a fat and fruitful soil, as is
that of mount Hermon, and the mountains near about Zion or Jerusalem, does
cause these places to yield great increase and profit, so does brotherly love,
through Gods blessing, bring all variety of outward plenty with it to those
that do sincerely practice it, besides that it does also make men fruitful in
good works, both toward God and toward man. For there, that is, where
brethren do thus dwell together in unity, the Lord commanded the blessing, that
is, he pours forth upon such men all variety of blessings; see the Notes
Psalm. 42.8, and 44.4, and 68.28, and 71.3: even life for evermore; that is, not
only a long prosperous life here, but also life eternal in heaven, whereof
therefore brotherly love is made an unquestionable sign 1 John 3.14. We know
that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. Yet
some understand, that by life for evermore here is meant, that God would give a
happy life to all that should so agree together throughout all generations.

PSALM CXXXIV.
Verse. 1. BEhold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, etc.] That
is, all ye Priests and Levites, as appears by the following words, which by
night stand in the house of the Lord: for though some devout men and women of
the people were sometimes wont to wait upon Gods service in the Temple even by
night, as is noted of Anna, Luke 2.37. that she departed not from the temple,
but served God with fastings and prayers night and day; yet here the Psalmist
seems to speak of such as by their office and place were constantly to give
attendance upon the service of God in the Temple by night, as well as by day,
as the word stand does here import. And that this was the constant charge of
the Priests and Levites, as in their courses they waited in the Temple, is
evident Levit. 8.35. 1 Samuel 3.3. and in many other places: as a kings guard are
wont to watch by night in his Court, so did they keep their watches in the
Sanctuary. However, the aim and scope of this exhortation to these Priests and
Levites is all one as if he had said, Think it not enough that you watch by
night in the Temple, or that you perform there the outward ceremonial service,
but see that you give God that spiritual service of praising his name, which
he chiefly requires. See also the following Note.

Verse. 3. The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion.] That
is, say some Expositours, every one of you Priests and Levites that do
carefully perform your duty, as I have said, in praising the Lord. But now
others conceive that this is here added as the substance of that prayer,
wherewith the Psalmist desires that the Priests would bless the people, when
they lifted up their hands in the Sanctuary, as was said in the foregoing
verse. Yea and some also hold that this Psalm is written dialogue-wise, and
that accordingly the two first verses must be taken as spoken by the people to
the Priests and Levites, and then this as the answer of the Priests and Levites
to them; or else that the two first verses contain the words of David to the
Priests and Levites, and then this their answer to David their king: See the
Note Psalm. 118.26. As for the last words, out of Zion, see the Note Psalm. 128.5.

PSALM. CXXXV.
Verse. 2. YE that stand in the house of the Lord, in the Courts of the house of
our God.] Though this Psalm begins with the very same words, in a manner, as
does the foregoing Psalm; yet I conceive the drift of this is, not only to stir
up the Priests and Levites, as it was in the former, to this duty of praising
God, but the people also: and that 1. because the arguments which here he
brings to press this, did in common concern both Priests and people; and 2.
because that clause, which is here added, in the Courts of the house of our
God, may be extended to the people, as well as to the Priests, seeing there
were some Courts in the Temple which were for the people to worship God in.

Verse. 3. Sing praises unto his name; for it is pleasant.] That is, The name of
God is pleasant and delightful to his servants, when they think or speak of
it; or, It is a pleasant and delightful thing to sing praises to his name.

Verse. 5. Our Lord is above all gods.] That is, all that are called gods; see
the Note Deuteronomy. 10.17. And in advancing the Lord above all Idol-gods, he has
respect to the high esteem which the heathens had of them.

Verse. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in
the seas and all deep places.] That is, all deep rivers and lakes: or, by deep
places may be meant all the invisible depths, both of the earth and waters,
even to the very center.

Verse. 7. He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, etc.] Of
which in the middle region of the air the clouds are formed. Now in saying that
these ascend from the ends of the earth, either his meaning is, that they
ascend from all parts of the earth in every quarter of the world; or else that
they ascend from the sea, which is the lands end, or the utmost bounds of the
earth. And indeed those vapors of which watery clouds are formed do usually
rise from watery places of the earth, and especially from the seas; whence is
that of Elijahs servant 1 Kings 18.44. Behold, there arises a little cloud out
of the sea, like a man's hand; see also Amos 5.8. He makes lightnings for the
rain; that is, to make way for the rain, the lightnings bursting the clouds,
that so the rain may pour down; or, to go along with the rain, this being the
wonder here noted, that fire and water should so go together, and break forth
from the same cloud: he brings the wind out of his treasuries; that is, say
some, out of the caves and hollow places of the earth: but I rather conceive,
that because the wind rises many times on a sudden, and as our Savior says
Joh. 3.8. we cannot tell whence it comes, therefore God is said here to bring
it forth, as if he had it locked up in a readiness in some secret and hidden
treasuries or storehouses.

Verse. 13. Thy name, O Lord, endures for ever, and thy memorial, O Lord,
throughout all generations.] See the Note Psalm. 102.12.

Verse. 14. For the Lord will judge his people, and he will repent himself
concerning his servants.] That is, Though he may for a time afflict his people,
yet he will at last relent over them, and punish their enemies: see the Note
Deuteronomy. 32.36.

Verse. 15. The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, etc.] By this
description of the vanity of idols, compared with the forementioned works of
God, he clears what he had said before verse. 5. that our Lord is above all
gods. What is farther to be noted in this and the five following verses, see in
the Notes Psalm. 115.4, 11.

Verse. 21. Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, etc.] That is, Resorting to Zion,
the place of Gods presence and public worship, let us thence praise the Name
of our Lord.

PSALM CXXXVI.
Verse. 1. O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy endures
for ever.] See the Notes 2 Chronicles. 7.3, and 20.21.

Verse. 4. To him who alone does great wonders.] See the Note Psalm. 72.18.

Verse. 6. To him that stretched out the earth above the waters.] See the Notes
Genesis 1.9. and Psalm. 24.2.

Verse. 7. To him that made great lights.] See the Note Genesis 1.16.

Verse. 8. The sun to rule by day, etc.] That is, to have sole power under God
to give light by day, the moon and stars not then appearing; as on the other
side the moon and stars have the only power to give light by night, the sun
being then hidden from our sight, and are therefore also said in the following
verse to rule by night.

Verse. 14. And made Israel to pass through the midst of it.] To wit, the red
sea, (as was said in the foregoing verse) not only by opening a passage for
them through the waters, but also by giving them courage to pass between those
heaps of water, with as much confidence as if they had been to go on dry land
in any other place.

Verse. 16. To him which led his people through the wilderness.] To wit,
carefully and tenderly, as a father leads his child, or a shepherd his flock,
supplying them in their wants, and protecting them from dangers, going before
them, by day in the pillar of a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire; see
the Note Exodus 13.21.

Verse. 23. Who remembered us in our low estate.] That is, many and many a time
when our dangers and miseries were greatest.

Verse. 26. O give thanks unto the God of heaven.] That is, that created the
heavens, that has his habitation in the heaven, and from thence does support
and govern the whole world.

PSALM CXXXVII.
Verse. 1. BY the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea we wept, when we
remembered Zion.] For the better understanding of this and other passages in
this Psalm, take notice, 1. that it was penned as in the name of the holy
Levites, that had been singers in the Temple, as appears by many passages in
it; as those wherein there is mention made of their harps, and the enemies
desiring them to sing one of the songs of Zion, etc: 2. that the drift of this
Psalm might be different, according as we may differently conceive of the time
when it was written. For if it were penned after their return out of Babylon,
as some think, because he speaks here of those things that were done in Babylon
in the time past, there we sat down, yea we wept, when we remembered Zion, etc.
then the scope of the Psalmist was, to render the people the more thankful for
their deliverance out of Babylon, by putting them in mind how sad their
condition was when they were in captivity: but if it were composed whilst they
were yet in Babylon, Cyrus not having yet subdued the Babylonians, (which
others conceive may be probably gathered from those words verse. 8. O daughter
of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, etc.) then the drift of the Penman of
this Psalm might be, to keep the people from being too much dejected, and
especially from being polluted with the superstition and profaneness of the
nations amongst whom they lived in so lasting a captivity as seventy years, to
wit, by propounding herein to them the example of the steadfast faith and piety
of the holy Levites, how they could not be entangled by the delicacies of
Babylon, but still groaned and longed after Zion, and how they could not be
won to do any thing, that might be a dishonor to their God and their
religion, yea how they foretold the destruction both of the Edomites and
Babylonians, verse. 7, 8. which showed that they expected a time of deliverance:
3. that those words here, there we sat down, are either to imply their long
continuance in Babylon, or else to set forth hereby their weariness after this
toilsome labor, or rather their sadness and sorrow; for sitting is usually
mentioned in the Scripture as the gesture of mourners, as Job 2.12. So they,
that is, Jobs friends, when they found him in such a sad condition, sat down
with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, etc. and Jer. 15.17. I
sat alone, because of thine hand; for thou have filled me with indignation, and
Lam. 2.10. The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, and keep
silence: and 4. that it is expressed that they sat down and wept by the rivers
of Babylon, 1. because Babylon was a country full of goodly rivers, see Ezekiel.
1.1. Dan. 10.4. the chief whereof were Tigris and Euphrates; 2. because the
captive Jews were not suffered to dwell amongst the Babylonians in their towns
and cities, they being as odious to the Babylonians as formerly they had been
to the Egyptians, but were assigned to have their habitation by themselves in
the country, that they might there be set a work in their servile
field-imployments; and so they lodged in the open field, or at the best in some
poor tents and cottages, which there they reared up for themselves by the river
side; or 3. because they were wont when they had any leisure, to retire thither
by themselves, and there to sit down, and bewail their condition; or 4. that
this might imply that the pleasures of Babylon, which consisted much in their
goodly rivers, could not make them forget their sorrow for Zion, but that even
there they sat down, and poured forth many sad penitential tears, when they
remembered Zion, that is, in what a sad condition poor Zion lay, and how they
were deprived of that comfort in Gods presence and public worship they had
formerly enjoyed.

Verse. 2. We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.] Because
it may seem very improbable, that the Levites should have so much leisure, as
to mind the saving of the musical instruments of the Temple, (which are all
comprehended under the harps here mentioned) when the Babylonians were with
such rage burning the city and Temple of Jerusalem, and making such a slaughter
as they did amongst the inhabitants, and when therefore they must needs have
enough to do to secure their own lives; or that the merciless plundering
soldiers would show them so much favor, as to let them retain their musical
instruments; therefore some Expositours take these words, We hanged our harps
upon the willows, to be only a figurative proverbial expression, meaning only
that there they bad adieu to their musical instruments, being brought into
such a sad and doleful condition. But because there follows in the next verses
an historical relation of what the Babylonians said to them, and what they
answered again, I conceive it is clear that the Psalmist relates what was
actually done, namely, that they did indeed hang up their harps upon the
willows in the open fields; thereby showing how little they regarded them, and
giving the Babylonians to understand, in whose sight they did this, that the
pleasant shade of those willows by the rivers sides could not tempt them to
make use of their musical delights, when as their souls were so oppressed with
sorrow for the miseries of Zion. Neither seems it to me so improbable, either
that the Levites should in that confusion of the sacking of Jerusalem endeavor
with all sollicitous care to reserve to themselves, and to carry away with
them, those holy precious remainders of the Temples utensils, as memorials of
Gods Zion, and the delight they had formerly taken in Gods worship there, and
which in Gods good time they might hope again to use in the holy service of
God, as they had formerly done; and happily as hoping they might allay their
sorrow in their captivity by some musical refreshings, though afterward they
found themselves so overpressed with sorrow, that they could not take any
delight therein; or, that the Babylonians should afford this favor, especially
if we consider that they might out of curiosity desire to hear what the skill
of the Hebrews was in those kinds of melody; for which also see the following
verse.

Verse. 3. For, etc.] This word shows, that here another reason is given why
they hanged up their harps upon the willows: they that carried us away captives
required of us a song, and they that wasted us, that is, that sacked us and
pillaged us, and laid our city on heaps, as the Hebrew word signifies, required
of us mirth; to wit, not so much out of a desire to delight themselves with the
music of the Hebrews, or to hear what their skill was in playing and singing
(though that some might have respect to, as is before noted,) as by way of
scoffing at them, and insulting over them: Sing us, say they, one of the songs
of Zion; as if they had said, what? is your God dead, to whom you were wont to
sing? If he were formerly delighted with your music, why do you give it over?
And observable it is that the Psalmist does express this, that it was they
that carried them away captives that required this of them: for this was 1. to
imply, how unreasonable a thing it was, that they that had brought them into
such a sad condition should require mirth of them; and 2. to imply the courage
of these poor captives, that being in bondage could yet in this refuse to
gratify their lords and masters.

Verse. 4. How shall we song the Lords song in a strange land?] That is, being
in exile, where we are overpressed with sorrow, both for our own sufferings,
and the sad condition wherein Zion lies; what heart do ye think we can have to
sing? especially considering that the Lord does hereby call us to mourning.
Yea, how dare we profane the holy songs of Zion, composed for the worship of
the Lord our God, by singing them to an idolatrous heathenish people, to make
them merry, and so to expose them to their derision and scorn? This I conceive
is the drift of this their answer. Yet there may be in these words also a
covert intimation, that they hoped that God would carry them back into their
own land, and that then they would cheerfully sing the songs of Zion, though in
a strange land they could not do it. And so also some understand the following
verse.

Verse. 5. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, etc.] That is, say some Expositours,
so as not earnestly to long after, and to wait for the promised restoration of
poor Jerusalem, which our enemies do so scorn and despise; and so as not to be
most ready to sing the songs of Zion, if God should ever carry us back thither,
to see Jerusalem again in a flourishing condition, though now indeed we can
neither play nor sing; or rather, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, to wit, so as
to give my self to music and merriment, whilst thou art in so sad a condition:
let my right hand forget her cunning; that is, let my skill fail me of playing
upon musical instruments, that gift wherewith God has honored me for his
service; or, let a dead palsy seize upon my right hand, that I may never play
on instrument more: see also the following Note.

Verse. 6. If I do not remember thee, etc.] See the foregoing Note: let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; that is, let me be stricken with an
apoplexy, that I may not be able to sing or to speak. But indeed these
imprecations are no more in effect, then as if they had said, that they might
well expect some notable judgment from God upon them, if they should thus
forget Jerusalem. If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy; that is, If I
do not esteem, desire and pray for the happy recovery and flourishing estate of
Jerusalem, more then any thing that might yield me the greatest joy for mine
own particular; or rather, if I rejoice in any thing more then in the
restoration of Jerusalem, or till I see Jerusalem in a better condition, if I
prefer not my mourning for Jerusalem before the chiefest joy that can betide me.

Verse. 7. Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, etc.] To wit, how they
carried themselves toward thy people: in the day of Jerusalem; that is, in the
day of her destruction, as it is said of the Ethiopians, Ezekiel. 30.9. great pain
shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt, that is, in the day when Egypt
was destroyed: see also the Notes Job 18.20. and Psalm. 37.13. And how they
carried themselves is expressed in the following words, who said, Raze it, raze
it, even to the foundations thereof: the meaning whereof is, that they with
much delight assisted and encouraged the Babylonians in the destruction of
Jerusalem, as is largely related by the prophet Obadiah, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14.
But now the drift of this prayer of the holy Levites is, that as they remembered
Jerusalem to pity her, so God would remember the cruelty of her enemies to
punish them for it; covertly to assure the poor Jews, that this in his own good
time, God would certainly do; and that because God had foretold this by his
prophets concerning the Edomites in particular, and that with special respect
to their unthankfulness to the children of Israel, who had formerly spared
them as brethren, Deuteronomy. 2.4, 5. when they first entered the land of Canaan, as
Obad. 10. for thy violence against thy brother Jacob* shame shall cover thee,
and thou shall be cut off for ever, and so in many other places; of which
therefore in these words, Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, the Levites
desire the Lord to be mindful.

Verse. 8. O daughter of Babylon, etc.] That is, O thou great and mighty empire
of Babylon, now in the prime of thy beauty and glory; or, O thou nation, O ye
people of Babylon, see the Note 2 Kings 19.21: who art to be destroyed; which
they speak with confidence, because this the prophets had foretold, as Isa.
47.1, etc. and in many other places: happy shall he be that rewards thee, as
thou have served us; to wit, because it shall be counted an honor to them,
that they have executed Gods vengeance upon such a wicked cruel people; and
because God would recompense this with outward prosperity and success and many
earthly blessings. Yet some take this as only implying their desire, that they
might be happy that should so return the cruelty of the Babylonians into their
own bosoms.

Verse. 9. Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the
stones.] The Psalmist may seem herein to have respect to that place in Isaiahs
prophecy, where this very thing is expressly foretold concerning the
Babylonians, Isa. 13.16. Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before
their eyes, etc. And his aim herein was to set forth, that though this were in
it self an act of horrid cruelty, yet they that should so use the Chaldeans
should be honored for it, because they had exercised the same cruelty toward
Gods people.

PSALM CXXXVIII.
Verse. 1. I Will praise thee with my whole heart, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 9.1:
before the gods will I sing praise unto thee; that is, before princes and great
ones, see the Note Psalm. 107.32* (for these are often called gods in the
Scripture, see the Note Exodus 22.28.) or, before the angels, who are present
indeed in Church Assemblies, as was signified by the images of the Cherubims in
the Sanctuary. And thence it is that Paul says, that women ought to have a
covering on their heads in the holy assemblies, 1 Cor. 11.10. because of the
angels.

Verse. 2. I will worship toward thy holy temple, etc.] See the Notes Psalm.
5.7, and 28.2: and praise thy name for thy loving kindness and for thy truth;
to wit, in settling me in the throne of Israel, according as thou had promised
me: for thou have magnifyed thy word; to wit, in the promise thou have made
concerning the Messiah, the greatest good that ever thou did make known to
thy people: or, thou have magnified thy word; that is, thy faithfulness in
making good thy word, or the infallible truth and unresistable power of thy
word: above all thy name; that is, above all thy other glorious attributes, to
wit, in that men were chiefly ravished with the admiration of Gods
accomplishing the promises which he had made to David concerning the kingdom;
the promises seemed before hand so unlikely to be performed, that when God had
fully brought all to pass that he had promised, the faithfulness of God was
so admired herein, that comparatively nothing else was thought of.

Verse. 3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me; and strengthenedst me
with strength in my soul.] That is, Though thou did not presently deliver me,
yet a gracious answer I had of my prayer, in that thou did inwardly
strengthen my faith and patience and courage, and so did support me from
sinking under that pressure of afflictions that lay upon me, and enabledst me
quietly and cheerfully still to wait upon thee.

Verse. 4. All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord, when they hear
the words of thy mouth.] That is, So many of the kings of the earth, far and
near, as shall hear how wonderfully thou have made good what thou had spoken
concerning me, both when thou did command me to be anointed king, and when
thou did promise to settle me in the throne of Israel, though I lived then in
a low and mean condition, shall hereupon praise thy name. Yet because David was
a type of Christ, we may well also understand this of the kings of the
Gentiles, when they should be converted upon the preaching of the Gospel to
them.

Verse. 5. Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord.] That is, They shall
with singing praise the works of the Lord, in bringing me to the kingdom which
he had promised me, and the manifold strange ways whereby he brought it about;
or, They shall praise the Lord with singing, they themselves the whilst walking
in the ways wherein the Lord has appointed them to walk. But this indeed may
be most fitly said of the converted Gentiles, with respect to their exceeding
joy for the glad tidings of the Gospel.

Verse. 6. Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, etc.]
That is, Though the Lord be a God of transcendent majesty, and has his
habitation in the highest heavens, yet he beholds the lowest, the meanest and
the most despised amongst men: yea he beholds them with a favorable
countenance, to pity, deliver, and exalt them in due time, especially when they
are also of an humble and lowly spirit. For that this is included appears by
the following clause, but the proud he knows afar off; that is, though he
knows them well enough, yet it is not in a friendly manner, but with
contempt, he stands aloof from them; even as they look with contempt upon
others, so does the Lord upon them. And then taking these words also as spoken
with reference to the times of Christ, the meaning is clear, to wit, that God
is very tender over poor humbled sinners, but that he abhors those that are
proudly conceited of their own righteousness.

Verse. 7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me.] That is,
Thou will preserve and deliver me, even when I might seem to be in the very
jaws of death; or, Thou will comfort me against all terrors and sorrows,
inward and outward: see the Notes Psalm. 71.20, and 80.18.

Verse. 8. The Lord will perfect that which concerns me, etc.] That is, Though
I should still meet with more and more troubles, and though mine enemies should
still rage never so much against me, God will perfect the work of my
deliverance and salvation; yea whatever he has promised to do for me. Thy
mercy, O Lord, endures for ever; forsake not the works of thine own hands;
that is, give not over what thou have begun to do for me.

PSALM CXXXIX.
Verse. 1. O Lord, thou have searched me and known me.] That is, thou have
exactly known me; see the Note Psalm. 7.9. Yet some take it thus, that God had
proved and sifted him by many trials, and so had exactly discovered all that
was in him. But now the scope of this long discourse which David here enters
into concerning the omniscience of God, was either 1. hereby to intimate that
he made his addresses now to God with all sincerity, as to an all-seeing God;
or, 2. hereby to appeal, as it were, to God concerning his innocence in regard
of the false slanders of his enemies, as that he did no way favor any wicked
or bloody purpose in himself or in others, which he seems to urge verse. 19.
Surely thou will slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore ye bloody
men; or 3. hereby to press God to help him, because he knew his streights, and
exactly understood his condition in every regard.

Verse. 2. Thou understandest my thought afar off.] That is, Though thou art in
heaven and I upon earth, yet thus far off thou know every thought of my
heart; or rather, Thou know my thoughts long before they be brought to
effect, or long before they come into my mind.

Verse. 3. Thou compassest my path, etc.] This may be read, as it is in the
margin, Thou winnowest my path; and then the meaning is, that God did as
clearly see every way of his, as the corn is seen, when it is winnowed from the
chaff. But reading the words as they are in our Bibles, Thou compassest my
path, etc. the meaning must needs be, that God was on every side present with
him, wherever he was and whatever he did, and therefore must needs know all
his actions. And indeed considering the expressions here used, Thou compassest
my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways, it is not
improbable which some think, namely that David does herein allude to the
knowledge which huntsmen often get of some wild beast, by watching and tracing
her every way, that they know exactly where she uses to go, and where to lie,
both by day and night, and are acquainted with all her paths: see also verse. 5.

Verse. 4. For there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know
it altogether.] That is, I speak not a word but thou know it, yea and with
what mind and to what purpose it was spoken; or, If I be but about to speak,
whilst my words are yet, as it were, in my tongue, thou know what I mean to
say before I speak it, or, though I should never speak it.

Verse. 5. Thou have beset me behind and before, etc.] That is, Thou do
environ me on every side with thine omnipresence; see the Note above verse. 3:
and laid thine hand upon me; that is, there is no fleeing out of thy sight or
presence; I am in that regard, as if thou layedst thine hand upon me, and
keptst me prisoner, that I should not stir away from thee: or this phrase may
be used to imply, that he must needs be every where in Gods eye, because he was
upheld, and preserved, and guided, and led by Gods all-disposing power and
providence, so that he could not turn or stir any where, but as he would have
him. Yea and some conceive that here again David alludes, as before verse. 3. to
a huntsmans besetting and seizing upon some beast he has pursued, when at last
he claps his hand upon her.

Verse. 7. Whether shall I go from thy spirit? etc.] That is, that I may be
where thou, who art an infinite spirit, art not present? as it is more clearly
expressed in the following clause, or whether shall I flee from thy presence?
Or, Whether shall I go from thy spirit? that is, to be hid from thy eye, that
thou may not know where I am? Because men know and understand things by their
spirit, which is a faculty of the inward man, according to that 1 Cor. 2.11.
what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him?
therefore does David here put the spirit of God for the knowledge of God.

Verse. 8. If I make my bed in hell, etc.] That is, If I go down into the
lowest parts of the earth, or into the grave, which is as the bed where dead
men are said to rest. See the Note Job 26.6.

Verse. 9. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts
of the sea.] That is, Could I take my flight never so early, or, could I flee
never so swiftly from East to West, as the morning light does; for the
sunbeams are here compared to wings, (as also Mal. 4.2. the sun of
righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings) because they pass
through the air so exceeding swiftly, as it were in a moment; and the uttermost
parts of the sea are here put for the West, because the Mediterranean sea was
on the West of Canaan.

Verse. 10. Even there shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold
me.] That is, All the way I went I should be under thy power and custody and
conduct; so that to be sure there is no escaping out of thy presence: see the
Note above verse. 5.

Verse. 13. For thou have possessed my reins, etc.] That is, Thou did make
them at first, and so they are thine, and thou have absolute power over them,
and therefore thou must needs exactly know them; and consequently also all that
is within me, see the Note Psalm. 7.9: thou have covered me in my mothers womb;
that is, thou have cherished and preserved me there; or, this may be ^eant of
his being wrapped up in his mothers womb, in that which we call the
afterbirth; or, of his being covered with skin and flesh, see the Note Job.
10.11. However this which he says of Gods framing his body in his mothers
womb, does fully clear what he had said in the foregoing verse, that the
darkness and the light are both alike to God.

Verse. 14. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, etc.] That is, There are so
many wonders in thy making of me, that when I think of them, it strikes me with
astonishment, yea with dread and fear of thine infinite and incomprehensible
wisdom and power: mavelous are thy works; that is, all thy several works of
forming man in the womb; or, all thy works in general. As for those following
words, and that my soul knows right well, either the drift thereof was to
intimate, that even that understanding wherewith God had endued him, and
whereby he was able to take notice of the excellency of Gods works, was one of
those things that were wonderful in Gods making of him; or else rather to
signify, that through frequent meditation of Gods works herein, he knew full
well that they were exceeding wonderful, though how they were done he was not
able to conceive, or, though in words he was not able to express them.

Verse. 15. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and
curiously wrought, etc.] To wit, with nerves, sinews, veins, and variety of
bones and limbs, like a piece of embroidered or needle work, as the word in the
Original signifies. And it may well be, which some say, that because in the
first fashioning of an in^ants body in the mothers womb the several members do
seem like so many little thrids, therefore in allusion thereto David uses this
expression of his being ^uriously wrought; and where? in the lowest parts of
the earth, that is, in the clay-house of my mothers womb: for this he calls the
lowest parts of the earth, only to imply, that his forming in the womb was as
far from the reach of any mortal eye, as if he had been made in some deep and
dark cave of the earth, and no more to be discerned, then we can discern the
growth of metals and other things that are hidden beneath in the womb of the
earth. And indeed some conceive that where the Apostle says of Christ Ephesians.
4.9. that he descended into the lowest parts of the earth, he spoke that of his
Incarnation in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and used that expression as in
reference to these words of David. I know some conceive that there is no more
intended in these words then this, that though he were made beneath on the
earth, yet that was no hinderance but that God from heaven did in every thing
see how he was made. But the former exposition is the best.

Verse. 16. Thine eyes did see my substance yet being unperfect, etc.] That is,
so soon as ever I was conceived, whilst I was yet an imperfect embryo: and in
thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when
as yet there was none of them; that is, all those members of my body, which in
continuance of time grew to have their perfect shape, were as clearly seen by
thee, even when as yet there was none of them that had their shape and
proportion, as those things are seen by men, which for the help of their memory
they have particularly written down in a book; or as they see the fashion of
any work they intend to make, in those draughts and models which they have
beforehand drawn in a book, for their better direction. For this he means in
saying that all his members were written in Gods book, to wit, in the book of
his eternal prescience. And as for that clause, which in continuance were
fashioned, etc. if we read it, as it is in the margin, what days they should
be fashioned, etc. then the meaning may be, that God had determined how many
days his members should be fashioning in his mothers womb, and that before any
of those days were come, yea even from all eternity.

Verse. 17. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God? etc.] That is,
say some Expositours, The thoughts which I have of thee; or rather thine
eternal purposes and counsels, as particularly concerning the framing of man's
body in the womb, so concerning all other things whatsoever, how
incomprehensibly excellent are they, and how delightful to me to think of? how
highly do I esteem of them? how great is the sum of them? see the Note Psalm.
40.5.

Verse. 18. When I wake, I am still with thee.] That is, I am still meditating
of thy works; some admirable thing or other comes still to mind, which sets me
afresh on work to admire thine incomprehensible works, so that I can never find
out the full number of them. Yea some conceive that by this word still, I am
still with thee, David would imply, that falling asleep with these thoughts in
his mind, awaking he had them still fresh in his thoughts, yea and happily that
even in his sleep they were still in his mind; see also the Note Psalm. 73.23.

Verse. 18. Surely thou will slay the wicked, O God, etc.] Because God being
every where present, as he had said before, and seeing all things, must needs
see all the wicked counsels and practices of ungodly men, therefore he
concludes that God would destroy them. And his drift herein might be to imply,
that being thus persuaded of the end of wicked men, it was not likely that he
should be guilty of those wicked plots and practices which his enemies did
accuse him of; but rather that he must needs resolve, not to have to do with
any such, lest partaking with them in their sins, he should also partake with
them in their plagues; as he expresses himself in the following words, depart
from me therefore ye bloody men: but see also the Notes Psalm. 6.8, and 26.4.

Verse. 20. For they speak against thee wickedly, etc.] That is, not covertly,
but openly; they manifest their contempt of thee, and belch out blasphemies
against thee: and therefore it is no wonder though they slander me. Or, the
meaning may be only this, that they spoke wickedly against God, in that they
spoke against Gods servants, and against those things which they could not but
know were done by Gods command. And thine enemies take thy name in vain; to
wit, by their perjuries and profane speeches of God; or, in that they talked of
God, but in the mean season fancied a God according to the conceits of their
own brains, a God that did neither mind, nor would judge the wickedness of men.

Verse. 21. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? etc.] As if he had said,
So far am I from those ways of wickedness with which they charge me, that,
Lord, thou know there is nothing I so much abhor, as those cursed ways of
wickedness, whereby men do evidently declare themselves to be haters of thee
and enemies to thee.

Verse. 22. I count them mine enemies.] That is, I do not conceal my hatred, but
declare it openly, by avoiding their society, and carrying my self toward them
in every other respect, as if they were mine enemies; though indeed I do this
not because they are enemies to me, but because they are enemies to thee.

Verse. 23. Search me, O God, etc.] To wit, whether I be such a man as I am
accused to be, or as I have now professed my self to be; as if he had said, And
accordingly deal both with me and my accusers, that all men may see whether I
or they be guilty before thee. See the Notes also Job 31.6. and Psalm. 26.2.

Verse. 24. And see if there be any wicked way in me, etc.] In the Hebrew it is
any way of pain or grief; that is, say some, any way of wickedness, which may
hereafter prove matter of anguish to mine own conscience; or rather, any thing
wherein I do wrong or hurt to any man whatsoever; or, that may be grievous
either to God or man. It is therefore as if he had said, My heart is
deceitful; do thou therefore, Lord, try me, and see whether there be any way
of wickedness in me, that is, any sinful way, to which I do wittingly give up
my self; or, any gross way of injustice and rebellion against thee. And lead
me in the way everlasting; that is, in the way that leads to life everlasting;
or, the way that lasts for ever, the way which ever was and ever shall be the
way wherein thou have appointed thy servants to walk, to wit, the way of piety;
as if he had said, Uphold me in this mine integrity all my days.

PSALM CXL.
Verse. 1. DEliver me, O Lord, from the evil man, etc.] That is, from men that
persecute me of mere malice, without any provocation thereto on my part. And he
means Saul and his accomplices.

Verse. 2. Continually are they gathered together for war.] That is, to make
war, or to plot how to make war, or by their slanders to stir up others to make
war against me.

Verse. 3. They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent, etc.] That is, They
have framed their slanders so, that thereby they wound as mortally as does the
biting of a serpent, see the Note Psalm. 57.4: adders poison is under their
lips; see the Note Psalm. 58.4.

Verse. 4. Who have purposed to overthrow my goings.] That is, to frustrate and
overturn all my counsels and undertakings; or, to overthrow and ruin me.

Verse. 9. As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief of
their own lips cover them.] That is, say some expositours, let their
imprecations fall upon themselves; see the Notes Psalm. 109.17, 18: or rather,
let their own lips be their ruin; for which see the Note Psalm. 64.8. Having
said in the seventh verse, that God had covered his head in the day of battle,
here he desires that, on the contrary, the mischief his enemies sought to bring
upon him by their lies and slanders, might fall upon their own heads, and so
overwhelm and destroy them; see the Note Psalm. 7.16. But yet some understand
this verse thus. As for the head of those that compass me about, that is, As
for the chief and ringleader of mine enemies, to wit, Saul; let the mischief of
their own lips cover them, to wit, him and his parasites.

Verse. 10. Let burning coals fall upon them, etc.] To wit, as cast forth upon
them from the God of heaven; and see the Note Psalm. 11.6. Yet some think that
the drift of these words is this, Let the burning coals of their cruel
slanders fall upon themselves. Let them be cast into the fire, into deep pits,
that they rise not up again; that is, into mischiefs which may be their utter
ruin, and out of which they shall never be able to recover themselves. It is
as if he had said, As they dug pits for others, so let them fall into pits
irrecoverably: yea and some understand this of the pit and fire of hell.

Verse. 11. Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth, etc.] That is,
let him not prosper in his ways; or, let him not long continue upon earth,
either in himself or in his posterity. That which we translate an evil speaker,
is in the Original a man of tongue; but thereby is meant, at least principally,
one that by slanders and evil deceitful speaking seeks the ruin of Gods
servants, rather then by open violence: of which he speaks in the following
clause, evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him; to wit, as he has
hunted the righteous to destroy them.

Verse. 13. Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name, etc.] That is,
Though they may be sorely oppressed for a time, yet sooner or later, by
delivering them, thou will certainly give them occasion with great joy to
praise thy name: the upright shall dwell in thy presence; that is, say some,
they shall be always offering sacrifices to thee; or rather, they shall
always enjoy thy favor and protection, (as those of a man's family are
continually under his eye and care) and shall at last dwell for ever with thee
in heaven. But see also the Notes Psalm. 56.13, and 61.7.

PSALM. CXLI.
Verse. 2. LEt my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, etc.] It is in the
Original, Let my prayer be directed before thee as incense; which is all one as
if he had said, By the assistance of thy spirit, let me be so directed in
praying to thee, that my prayer may ascend up to heaven as incense, and find as
much acceptance with thee, as that legal service which thou have appointed to
be given thee in the Sanctuary: and the lifting up of my hands as the evening
sacrifice; that is, as the daily sacrifice that was offered every morning and
evening; for under one of these both are employed: though inded some think, that
the evening sacrifice is only here mentioned, either because therewith still
the worship of every day was finished, or because happily he did at first offer
up this prayer, or composed this Psalm to be used by him, in the evening.
However doubtless the rather did David desire, that this prayer might be
accepted of God as incense, and as the daily sacrifice, because he knew that
one main end of those ceremonial services was, to signify how acceptable
through Christ the prayers of the Saints were unto God; see the Notes Exodus
29.38, and 30.1. whence it was also that about that time, which was the ninth
hour of the day (about three a clock in the afternoon) the godly used to pray;
as it is noted of Daniel, Dan. 9.21. that he was praying about the time of the
evening oblation, and Act. 3.1. that Peter and John went up together into the
temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour. Yea and very probable it
may seem, which some say, that because David in his banishment could not come
at the tabernacle, therefore he desires that yet his prayers might be in stead
of incense, and of the evening sacrifice, and as acceptable to God.

Verse. 3. Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips.]
Because the lips are as a two-leaved door before the mouth of a man, through
which when they are opened our words do issue forth, hence is this expression.
And this now is that request which in the two foregoing verses he had desired
might find acceptance with God. Either because living in Saul's Court amongst a
crew of ungodly wretches, he feared he might be so far infected with their
society, as to learn of them to talk profanely, at least might speak amiss to
gratify them; or rather, because in the time of Saul's persecuting him, his
temptations were so many and great, by reason of his unjust sufferings, that he
judged it impossible for him of himself to bridle his tongue, at least he
feared lest through impatience or incogitancy he might speak something whereby
he might dishonor God, or grieve the godly, or wound his own conscience,
therefore he desires that the Lord would keep him from offending herein. Indeed
he elsewhere tells us that for for this he had resolved very carefully to watch
over himself, and yet within a while he forgot himself, see the Note Psalm.
39.1; and therefore now he commits himself to Gods keeping.

Verse. 4. Incline not mine heart, etc.] Because it is not enough to watch the
mouth, except the heart be also kept in awe, therefore is this next clause
added, Incline not mine heart to any evil thing; that is, suffer it not to be
inclined: to practice wicked works with men that work iniquity; that is, to
join with them in their wicked practices, or to live wickedly as they do: and
let me not eat of their dainties; that is, say some, let not me delight in
those things wherein they delight, or, let not me feast with them, lest I be
corrupted by their society; or, let not me feed on that which is gotten by
rapine and oppression, as their dainties are; or, let not me live in such
prosperity and plenty as they do, lest thereby I be puffed up in wickedness
as they are, let not the pleasant lives which they live in all prosperity,
plenty and pleasure, whilst God lets them alone as if they should never be
called to an account, tempt me to walk in their wicked ways; or, let not their
flatteries and courtesies ensnare me.

Verse. 5. Let the righteous smite me, etc.] That is, reprove me, according to
that Prove. 23.35. They have stricken me, and I was not sick, and 27.6.
Faithful are the wounds, that is, the reproofs, of a friend. This place may be
read, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, Let the righteous smite me kindly
and reprove me; let not their precious oil break my head: and then the meaning
is clearly this, Let the righteous reprove me, though it be never so sharply,
so it be done sincerely out of kindness and love; but let not the flatteries
and feastings of wicked men mischief me or destroy me. But indeed if we read
the words as they are in our Translation, Let the righteous smite me, it shall
be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be excellent oil, which shall
not break my head, the sense is much the same: for so this may be added as in
reference to the last clause of the foregoing verse, and let me not eat of
their dainties; as if he had said, Let me be rather smitten by the righteous,
then ensnared with the flattering dainties of the wicked: such reproofs I shall
take kindly, for I know they will not hurt me, but rather do me good, as
refreshing healing oils are wont to do, whereas the flatteries of the wicked
would destroy me. Yet some do otherwise conceive of the manner how these words
are here brought in upon that which went before: as 1. that having prayed verse.
4. that God would not suffer his heart to be inclined to any evil thing, etc.
to show how sincerely he desired this, he professes here, that to prevent that
he was most ready to accept of the reproofs of any good man whatsoever; or 2.
that having prayed verse. 3, 4. that he might not by the wicked practices of his
enemies against him be provoked to speak or do any thing that was evil, here
he professes, that if there were any good men that joined themselves with his
malicious persecutours, being merely misled by the false reports that were
spread abroad of him, let such come to him and reprove him, he should take it
as a kindness, not doubting but he should satisfy them. For yet my prayer
shall be in their calamities: which may be understood either 1. of his wicked
adversaries, thus, for yet, that is, yet a little while, or yet notwithstanding
their rage, I shall pray for them when they are in misery; as if he should have
said, And hereby the righteous that join with them may see, that mine enemies
do persecute me without a cause: or, of those good men, that being deceived by
his enemies, did in the simplicity of their hearts aid them; as if he had said,
I pity them for their unhappy engagement in so bad a cause, and am so far from
wishing them any hurt, that when these their evil courses shall bring misery
upon them, I shall heartily pray for them.

Verse. 6. When their judges are overthrown in stony places, etc.] That is, When
their princes and rulers, that are now mounted up in high places, shall be
utterly destroyed, as men thrown headlong down from the top of high craggy
rocks, or as men that stumble in stony places (and some think that this might
be prophetically spoken, with reference to the overthrow of Saul and his army
on the mountains of Gilboa) they shall hear my words; that is, the common
people, warned by their example, shall then hearken to me. The meaning is, that
when they should see how God had avenged him upon his persecutours, and how
unexpectedly he was advanced to the kingdom, they would then be brought to a
right understanding of him and of his cause, and so would hear his words, to
wit, when he should declare the righteousness of his cause, or when he
counseled them to take heed hereafter of joining with wicked men in any
sinful ways. For they are sweet; that is, though now they cannot relish them,
nor endure them, yet they are good and profitable, and then with comfort to
themselves they shall accept them as such. Some, I know, understand these last
words of the judges themselves, to wit, that when Gods judgments should seize
upon them, they should then hear his words, that is, they should then call to
mind what he had spoken to them, and should approve of it, wishing they had not
stopped their ears against it. But the former exposition I judge the best.

Verse. 7. Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth or
cleaves wood, etc.].1 Some understand this clause thus, that David and his
friends and followers were dispersed and scattered abroad, and thereby in
manifest danger of death. 2. Some take it as an hyperbolicall expression of the
terrors that often seized upon them, that in their fears their bones were
sometimes shaken, as if they would fall asunder. 3. Some take it to be a
figurative expression of the desperate danger they were in, as if he should
have said, We are all as dead men, as it were at deaths door; we are sure to be
hacked and hewed in pieces, and so to be scattered abroad upon the earth,
wherever they light upon us, if the Lord do not the more miraculously preserve
us; such traitors, as they account us to be, are like to find no mercy from
them either dead or living: and this is that which Saint Paul calls the having
the sentence of death beforehand in themselves, 2 Cor. 1.9.4. Again, others
take it as a poetical expression of the barbarous cruelty of their enemies, to
wit, that they used him and his party with as much inhumanity, as if men should
cut a man's throat, and then tear him in pieces before they would bury him. And
5. others understand this literally, that Saul and his party did thus use
David's followers, if any of them were but at any time surprised, to wit, that
they chopped them in pieces, and so left them unburied: yea some add, that
they dug up their dead bodies and bones, and so scattered them about the
graves mouth; which I see not indeed why we should judge incredible,
considering with what exceeding rage Saul and his favorers did a long time
make war against David.

PSALM CXLII.
Verse. 2. I Poured out my complaint before him.] See the Notes 1 Samuel 1.15.
Psalm. 42.4, and 62.8.

Verse. 3. When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, etc.] That is, When I was
so perplexed, that I was ready to faint, or that I was at my wits end, not
knowing which way to turn my self; see the Note Psalm. 61.2: then thou knew
my path; which may be understood three several ways: either 1. that God knew
the dangers he was in, and did accordingly deliver him, to wit, out of the
snares which his enemies had laid for him, of which he speaks in the following
words, in the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me; or 2.
that in those his troubles God knew and approved his innocence, though that
could not hinder his enemies from laying snares for him; or 3. that God knew
the way whereby he might and should be delivered, though he for his part knew
no way how to avoid their rage, and that because what way soever he took, they
had privily laid a snare for him.

Verse. 4. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that
would know me.] Either the right hand is only mentioned, because that is the
place for men to stand in for the defense of one they desire to aid, according
to that Psalm. 16.8. because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved, for
which see the Note there; or else, under the right hand the left is also
comprehended.

Verse. 5. Thou art my refuge and my portion, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 16.5: in
the land of the living; see the Note Psalm. 27.13. It is as if he had said, that
even in this life he hoped to find God merciful to him.

Verse. 6. Bring my soul out of prison, etc.] That is, Bring me out of this
cave, wherein I am now forced to hide my self; or, out of these streights I am
in, being beset on every side, as if I were in a prison: the righteous shall
compass me about, for thou shall deal bountifully with me; that is, upon Gods
delivering me, the righteous will flock about me, either to gaze at me, as by
way of admiring at the great things that God had done for me; or to
congratulate my deliverance, to rejoice and to praise God with me and for me;
or to hear what God had done for me; or lastly, to set the crown of Israel upon
my head.

PSALM CXLIII.
Verse. 1. IN thy faithfulness answer me and in thy righteousness.] See the
note Psalm. 5.8. This is the last of those that are usually called the seven
penitential Psalms. See the Note on the Title Psalm. 6.

Verse. 3. For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down
to the ground, etc.] That is, he has brought me to the very gates of death, to
the pits brink, he has brought me to so low a condition, that I look upon my
self no otherwise then as a dead man; see the Note Psalm. 7.5: he has made me
to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead; that is, he has
brought me into as hopeless and desperate a condition, as are those that are
in the darkness of the grave, yea as those that have been long since rotted in
the grave; and I am as much disregarded, in a manner, and forgotten, as they
are; see the Notes also Psalm. 88.5, 6. Yet some understand all this of lying
hid in dark caves of the earth, during the long time of his banishment.

Verse. 4. Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me, etc.] See the Notes
Psalm. 61.2, and 142.3: my heart within me is desolate; that is, destitute of
all strength, and void of all comfort.

Verse. 5. I remember the days of old, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 25.6, and
77.5, 11.

Verse. 6. My soul thirsts after thee, as a thirsty land, etc.] See the Notes
Psalm. 42.2, and 63.1.

Verse. 7. Hide not thy face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down
into the pit.] See the Notes Psalm. 28.1, and 88.3.

Verse. 8. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning.] That is, say
some Expositours, When in the morning I pray unto thee, let thy spirit inwardly
assure me of thy mercy to me; or rather, let me speedily find that thou have
been merciful to me: see the Notes Psalm. 5.3, and 51.8. That which he intended
hereby might be, that he might speedily, or in the morning, hear that Saul had
given over seeking and pursuing after him.

Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, etc.] That is, how I may in
all things conform my self to thy commandments; or rather, what course I may
take, that I may escape out of the hands of mine enemies, who now know not
which way to turn my self: for I lift up my soul unto thee; see the Note Psalm.
25.1.

Verse. 10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, etc.] That is, Enable
me to live so, that I may not do any thing which is contrary to thy commands:
and chiefly he intended hereby, that he might not be provoked by the injurious
dealings of his adversaries to speak or do any thing that was evil, nor might
be tempted by any sinful way to rid himself out of his troubles. Thy spirit is
good; lead me into the land of uprightness; as if he had said, Leave me not to
mine own corrupt spirit, which will certainly mislead me, neither suffer me to
be seduced by wicked men, or by any unclean spirits, (which he might the rather
intend, because he knew how Saul had been troubled with an evil spirit sent
from the Lord, 1. Sam. 16.14.) but let thy blessed and holy spirit, the author
of all the good that is in thy people, lead me into the land of uprightness,
that is, into the way of upright walking, or, into such a way or land or
ground, where all is plain, and clear and even, (see the Note Psalm. 5.8.) that
is, into such a condition, where I may be amongst those that walk uprightly, or
where there may be nothing to draw me aside from walking uprightly, or to drive
me into any crooked by-waies of wickedness. For so this phrase is used
likewise Isa. 26.10. Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn
righteousness, in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly; that is, he
will persist in his wicked ways, though he live where righteousness is both
taught and professed and practiced by others; or he will turn aside out of Gods
way where it is evenest and straightest, plainest and easiest, both to find and
follow. This, I conceive, is the meaning of these words. Others understand by
the land of uprightness the city of Jerusalem, where uprightness was taught,
and where God was sincerely served and worshipped: and others understand
thereby the state of the Saints in heaven, wherein uprightness shall dwell for
ever; those new heavens and new earth wherein dwells righteousness, as S.
Peter speaks 2 Pet. 3.13.

Verse. 11. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake.] That is, Deliver me out of
those desperate dangers, wherein I am no other then as a dead man in the eye of
reason: see also the Note Psalm. 80.18.

Verse. 12. Destroy all them that afflict my soul; for I am thy servant.] That
is, Thou have chosen me to be thy servant, and I am desirous to do thee the
best service I am able, and therefore I know thou will take my part against
mine enemies. See the Note Psalm. 86.16.

PSALM CXLIV.
Verse. 1. BLessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war and
my fingers to fight.] To wit, that had been formerly inured only to handle a
sheep-hook and to play on a harp, and not to meddle with weapons of war; this
discovering clearly that he had been extraordinarily taught of God herein. And
thus too by alleging what God had done for him, he makes way for that request
which follows in this Psalm, that God would deliver him from his enemies, as he
had formerly done.

Verse. 2. My goodness and my fortress, etc.] See the Note 2 Samuel 22.2. As for
the last clause of this verse, who subdueth my people under me, though it may
be extended to the Lords making him victorious over foreign nations, which
thereby became tributaries to him; yet I conceive it is chiefly meant of Gods
choosing and exalting him, who was before of a mean condition, to be king over
his own people, and of Gods bowing the hearts of that people to own him, and
submit to him as their king.

Verse. 3. Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? etc.] See the
Note Psalm. 8.4.

Verse. 4. Man is like to vanity, etc.] That is, to a vain thing, or thing of
naught; there is nothing in him whereof he can boast, wherein he can trust, or
wherewith he can deserve thy favor; see the Note also Psalm. 62.9: his days
are as a shadow that passes away; to wit, as the shadow of a bird flying over
ones head; or as any other shadow that goes speedily out of ones sight and
remembrance, and is then gone as if it had never been: but see the Notes also
Psalm. 102.11, and 109.23.

Verse. 5. Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down, etc.] See the Note 2 Samuel
22.10: touch the mountains, and they shall smoke; that is, draw forth from the
mountains those exhalations, that may afterward produce tempestuous storms; or
rather, with thy black clouds and storms of rain, thunder and lightning, cause
the mountains as it were to smoke; see the Note Psalm. 104.32. But however, that
which hereby he desires is doubtless this, that God would appear for him, and
by some extraordinary way destroy his mighty enemies, that they might vanish as
smoke.

Verse. 6. Cast forth lightnings, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows, and
destroy them.] See the Note 2 Samuel 22.15.

Verse. 7. Send thine hand from above, etc.] See the Note 2 Samuel 22.7: rid me
and deliver me out of great waters; see the Note 2 Samuel 22.5. Psalm. 32.6, and
69.1: from the hand of strange children; which some understand of enemies of
foreign nations, living in a strange land, as such countries are called Psalm.
137.4. and worshippers of strange gods, see the Note 2 Samuel 22.45. But the
words of the following verse do make it clear, that it is rather meant of those
that were his enemies amongst his own people, whom he terms strange children,
because they were but bastard Israelites, an adulterous generation, as our
Savior terms such as these were: but see the Note Psalm. 54.3.

Verse. 8. Whose mouth speaks vanity, etc.] That is, words of falsehood and
treachery: and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood; to wit, in that
their confidence in their own power will deceive them; or that they are wont to
deceive those to whom they promise assistance, yea that often their power is
employed in practices of treachery and falsehood. Yet some would more
particularly restrain this to their swearing falsely with hands lifted up to
heaven; concerning which custom see the Note Genesis 14, 22. or to their breaking
the promises they had made, and which they had confirmed by clapping of hands
together, according to that Prove. 11.21. though hand join in hand, the wicked
shall not go unpunished. And indeed it is well known that Saul did often do
that which was contrary to the oaths and promises whereby he had engaged
himself to David.

Verse. 9. I will sing a new song unto thee, O God.] See the Note Psalm. 33.3.

Verse. 10. It is he that gives salvation unto kings.] That is, that takes
special care to preserve and prosper them, and without whom even kings are not
able by their own power to preserve themselves.

Verse. 11. That our sons may be as plants, etc.] As if he should have said, And
this I desire chiefly, that being delivered from the rage of mine enemies, thy
people may live under my government peaceably and prosperously; That our sons
may be as plants grown up in their youth, that is, that they may be like young
flourishing plants: and indeed except trees sprout out fairly whilst they are
young and tender, they seldom thrive or grow up to any height afterward. But
see the Note also Psalm. 128.3.

Verse. 14. That there be no breaking in nor going out, etc.] That is, no going
out to war against an invading enemy, or against enemies that have wronged
them; or, no going out into captivity, nor no flying out of the land to avoid
the rage of invading enemies or oppressors: that there be no complaining in our
streets; that is, no public wailings and outcries upon any sudden uprores and
tumults amongst them, any tidings of distasters befallen them, or dangers
approaching by reason of any enemies invading them, or upon any other calamity
whatsoever.

PSALM CXLV.
The Title. David's Psalm of praise.] This is the last of the Alphabetical
Psalms; wherein all the Hebrew letters are found one after another in the
beginning of the verses, one only excepted. But see the Note Psalm. 25.1.

Verse. 1. I will extol thee my God, O king, etc.] This title of king David
here gives unto God, either because he meant in this Psalm to set forth the
glorious works of God, as he was the king of the whole world, and in Christ
more peculiarly the king of his Church; or else as desiring to acknowledge,
that he himself, though a king, was Gods vassal, and that he above other kings
did in a special manner hold his kingdom from and under God: and I will
bless thy name for ever and ever; see the Note Psalm. 89.1.

Verse. 4. One generation shall praise thy works to another.] That is, One
generation after another; in every generation God shall work works of wonder,
that shall put men upon praising his name: or, The men of one generation shall
praise thy works to others of a succeeding generation, and so shall stir up
them to do the like.

Verse. 7. They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, etc.]
That is, the many glorious things which they remember thou have done out of thy
great goodness; and so by this means they shall likewise perpetuate the memory
of them in succeeding generations: and shall sing of thy righteousness; to
wit, as it follows in the next verses, The Lord is gracious and full of
compassion, etc.

Verse. 14. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, etc.] That is, that are in danger
to fall, or that are ready to sink under any affliction. And so likewise the
same may be meant in the following words, and raises up all those that be
bowed down; that is, those that are even now tumbling down, or that are in
danger to yield under their burdens. And yet some understand the first clause,
of Gods bearing up those that are ready to fall; and the second, of Gods
raising up those that are fallen, or that are overpressed and crushed down with
sickness, or any other affliction or sorrow whatsoever. But however, his
meaning is only, that whenever any are upheld from falling, or raised up again
when they were fallen, it is the Lord only that does uphold them, and raise
them up.

Verse. 15. The eyes of all wait upon thee, etc.] To wit, in that by the
instinct of nature, which God has planted in them, they seek for their food in
the way that God has ordered and established for the feeding of them; see the
Note Psalm. 104.21: and thou give them their meat in due season; see the Note
Psalm. 104.27.

Verse. 16. Thou openest thine hand, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 104.28: and
satisfiest the desire of every living thing; that is, thou give unto each of
them severally such meat, as according to their kind they desire and are
pleased with.

Verse. 21. Let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.] That is, all
men; see the Note Psalm. 65.2. Yet some extend this to all living creatures.

PSALM. CXLVI.
Verse. 3. PVt not your trust in Princes, etc.] To wit, that so God may have all
the praise and glory; for in the two foregoing verses the Psalmist had stirred
up Gods people to praise the Lord: nor in the son of man; that is, nor in any
men, whoever and how great soever they be, and that because however they are
but men, poor frail creatures: in whom there is no help; that is, no power to
help, not so much as to help themselves, and much less therefore to help
others.

Verse. 4. His breath goes forth, etc.] As if he should have said, Though any
man should be both able and willing to help, yet there were no trusting in him,
because he may die on a sudden: His breath goes forth, he returns to his
earth; that is, the earth of which he was formed in his first creation, and
wherein it is decreed he must at last be laid: in that very day his thoughts
perish; that is, all those great designs which he had in his thoughts, and
consequently whatever he had purposed and determined to do for those that
depended on him* do vanish away and come to nothing.

Verse. 7. The Lord loses the prisoners.] So that the meanest that are may
trust in God. And indeed that which is here said concerning Gods setting
prisoners at liberty, may be also extended to the freeing of those that are in
any great streights, or under thraldom and oppression: see the Notes Psalm.
107.10. and 116.16.

Verse. 8. The Lord opens the eyes of the blind, etc.] This may be also
extended 1. to the curing of all other desperate bodily infirmities whatsoever;
2. to the Lords enlightening the eyes of his peoples minds, either by teaching
them the way of life and salvation, or by directing them by his spirit what to
do, when being in streights they are in the dark, and know not which way to
turn themselves; and 3. to the comforting of those that are in a manner
overwhelmed with the terrors of death and desperation, either by showing them
some hope of escape, or by delivering them out of their fears and dangers: the
Lord raises them that are bowed down; see the Note Psalm. 145.14. But now that
this which has been spoken is meant only of the righteous, when they are in
any of these distresses, he shows by adding the next clause, the Lord loves
the righteous; to wit, though he suffers them for a time to lie under those sad
calamities that are before mentioned.

Verse. 9. The way of the wicked he turns upside down.] That is, He utterly
overthrows all their counsels and enterprises, so that all things come to
pass quite contrary to what they expected.

Verse. 10. The Lord shall reign for ever, etc.] And so his people may safely
rest upon him in all generations.

PSALM CXLVII.
Verse. 1. PRaise ye the Lord; for it is good to sing praises to our God, etc.]
To wit, because it is a duty we owe to God, a service wherewith God is much
delighted, and which yields much benefit and advantage to us: for it is
pleasant; to wit, to those that are truly the children of God, though to the
wicked nothing is more wearisome, then are the duties of his worship and
service: and praise is comely; see Psalm 33.1. Now for the occasion of composing
this Psalm, some passages make it most probable, that it was written, either to
encourage Gods people that were captives in Babylon, to wait with hope for
their deliverance; or rather when they were already returned, and were
repairing their city and temple, as appears verse. 13. He has strengthened the
bars of thy gates, etc. but especially by that which follows in the next verse.

Verse. 2. The Lord does build up Jerusalem, etc.] As this is meant of the Lords
promoting the work of the Jews in repairing the city Jerusalem after their
return from Babylon; so it may be also meant of the spiritual building of the
Church, which is not done by any power or wisdom of man, but merely by the
mighty power of God, who increases their number, and advances their
prosperous estate, at his pleasure, and restores them to a better condition,
when their enemies have made any havoc amongst them. And so likewise the
following clause, he gathers together the outcasts of Israel, may be
understood both of Gods bringing home the scattered Israelites from the
Babylonian captivity, and likewise of Gods gathering together all his elect for
the building up of his Church, or of his reducing the straying members of his
Church, that have been as often for a time.

Verse. 3. He heals the broken in heart, etc.] To wit, with sorrow, either for
their afflictions or sins: and binds up their wounds; that is, cures them
both of their miseries and sorrows. For it is a metaphorical expression taken
from surgeons, who by their skillful binding up the wounds of their patients,
do chiefly promote the healing of them.

Verse. 4. He tells the number of the stars, etc.] That is, He knows exactly
how many stars there are. As for the next words, he calls them all by their
names, either the same thing is again there repeated in other terms, to wit,
that God knows them all as exactly and particularly, as we know those men
whom we can presently upon sight call by their names; or else the meaning is,
that he gives them all their several names: whereby may be employed 1. the
perfect knowledge that he has of them, in that he can give them names
answerable to their several qualities and operations; and 2. the power and
command that he has over them, because masters were wont to give names to
their servants, and parents to their children; and consequently that he knows
all, as a master knows those of his household that are at his disposing, and
that he assigns to each of them their several and distinct places and offices
and motions and influences, so that though there be such an innumorable
multitude of them, yet there is no confusion amongst them. The place is much
like that Isa. 40.26. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created
these things, that brings out their host by number, he calls them all by
names, etc. where God is compared to a captain or commander, and is said to
muster and keep a list of the stars, as they do of their companies; and to
bring them forth, as they draw forth their soldiers into the fields on a
training day, each one in his rank and order. But however the drift of the
Psalmist in these words is, to show how praiseworthy God is in regard of his
infinite power and wisdom. And many add too, that hereby he would imply,
that therefore it cannot be unlikely that this God should distinctly know all
his people, that shall one day shine as stars before him, though scattered
abroad in several countries, and that he should gather them and bring them
home together to their own land, according to what was said before verse. 2. And
indeed if this were intended, it might well be judged probable, that these
expressions were here used in reference to that promise made to Abraham, that
his seed should be as the stars for number, Genesis 15.5.

Verse. 6. The Lord lifts up the meek, etc.] To wit, both by comforting them,
and by raising them from an afflicted estate to live prosperously: he casts
the wicked down to the ground; to wit, such as were exalted with a high conceit
of their own power, and despised and derided the judgments of God.

Verse. 8. Who makes grass to grow upon the mountains.] See the Notes Job
38.26. and Psalm. 104.13.

Verse. 9. He gives to the beast his food, and to the young ravens that cry.]
To wit, though they are of those sorts of fowls that are most despised by men,
as being rather hurtful, then any way profitable, and such as they never use
for meat. But see the Note Job 38.41.

Verse. 10. He delights not in the strength of the horse; he takes not
pleasure in the legs of a man.] That is, in men's nimblenesse, high stature or
strength. The meaning of the whole verse is, that God cares not for companies
of horse or foot, or any such outward helps, for the delivering of his people
out of trouble; nor consequently for any outward means that may be helpful for
their good.

Verse. 13. For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates, etc.] Many conceive
that this is spoken with reference to what was done in Nehemiahs time, when
they repaired the several gates of Jerusalem, and as it is said Nehem. 3.3.
set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof: And so
likewise that which follows, he has blessed thy children within thee; that is,
thy inhabitants, or their children.

Verse. 14. He makes peace in thy borders, etc.] That is, He preserves the
borders of thy country round about from the invasion of foreign enemies: and
f^lleth thee with the finest of the wheat; which is in the Hebrew, the fat of
the wheat, for which see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.14.

Verse. 15. He sends forth his commandment upon earth; his word runs very
swiftly.] That is, Whatever he commands, it is presently done. And this he
proves by the snows and frosts, mentioned in the following verses, which come
many times in sudden changes of weather suddenly and unexpectedly. Whereby also
is covertly hinted to us, that God can make as sudden changes also in the civil
state and condition of his people.

Verse. 16. He gives snow, like wool, etc.] To wit, not only because it is
white and soft and light, and when the flakes are any thing great, seems to
fall like so many locks of wool, (whence the heathens of old have also called
it (...), woolly water;) but also especially because it keeps the corn in the
earth warm, and covers it from the cold wind like a garment of wool. And
observable also it is, that because the snow does usually fall gently from the
clouds, therefore is the expression here used for this, he gives snow like
wool, so different from that which is used in the following verse concerning
the hail, he casts forth his ye, because that does commonly fall with a
violent tempest. And so likewise that next expression, he scatters the hoare
frost like ashes, is grounded upon this, that it falls not so thick as the snow
does, nor is so white, but rather indeed of an ash color, and likewise because
it warms and battens the earth, even as dung and ashes do.

Verse. 17. He casts forth his ye like morsels, etc.] That is, great ycy
hailstones. Some, I know, understand this of those pieces or cantles of ye,
which will be in several places on the ground in frosty weather, wherever
there was any water standing; and that it is said that God casts it forth,
because it comes suddenly at Gods command: for of the hail they conceive it
cannot be meant, because that falls most frequently in the spring or summer. But
because those words, He casts forth his ye, do seem clearly to be meant of
an ye that is cast down with violence from the clouds, (see the foregoing
Note) I rather think it is meant of hailstones, which fall like bits or gobbets
of bread. And I conceive that that which is noted here as observable is, that
the water that freezeth in the air does not freeze and fall down in huge pieces
and rocks of ice, such as are in rivers and other waters here below, which must
needs overwhelm and destroy the creatures on earth, but piece meal, as we see
it does in showers of hail. Who can stand before his cold? that is, say some
Expositours, the cold that usually follows such storms of hail; or rather, the
cold which God sometimes sends in such frosty and snowy weather. And the
meaning is, that men cannot but be very sensible of it; or rather, that were it
not that men have clothes to cover them, and other means to keep them warm,
they would never be able to endure the cold in its extremity, but would perish
by it.

Verse. 18. He sends out his word, and melts them, etc.] That is, He
commands, and immediately they are melted, frost and hail and snow, yea and
the ice too, which perhaps a little before men could scarce break with levers
and pickaxes; and that either by the sudden breaking out of the sun, or by
sending some warm and moist thawing wind, as it follows in the next words, he
causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow; that is, the waters of the
rivers and streams, being then melted, run down their channels, which were
before bound up, as it were, with ice, see the Note Job 37.10. Yea being
increased by the snow water, they swell and flow beyond their ordinary bounds.

PSALM CXLVIII.
Verse. 1. PRaise ye the Lord from the heavens, etc.] In stirring up all the
creatures to praise God, (the drift whereof is only to show, that Gods
transcendent excellencies are clearly discovered in them all) first he begins
with those in the heavens, (which in the following verses are particularly
mentioned) and that because being exalted in place above others; it was fit
that they should, as it were, begin to others; and then afterward he stirs up
all the sublunary creatures verse. 7. Praise the Lord from the earth, etc. So
that Praise ye the Lord from the heavens is all one as if he had said, Praise
ye the Lord all ye creatures in the heavens; or, Praise the Lord so that your
praise may be heard from thence.

Verse. 2. Praise ye him all his angels, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 103.20, 21.

Verse. 4. Praise him ye heavens of heavens, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, the highest heaven, for which see the Note Deuteronomy. 10.14: but
according to our translation, where it is not as in Deuteronomy. 10.14. and 1 Kings
8.27. the heaven of heavens, but, ye heavens of heavens, I conceive that hereby
is meant all the several orbs of the heavens: and ye waters that be above the
heavens; see the Note Genesis 1.6.

Verse. 6. He has also stablished them for ever and ever, etc.] That is, He
has created the heavens, and the angels therein, yea and all the heavenly
bodies beforementioned, to continue unto the end of the world, yea unto all
eternity; to wit, in that he has created them of an incorruptible substance,
or in that he has decreed that they shall continue for ever, and does
accordingly uphold and preserve them by the same word of his power, whereby
they were created (whereas otherwise they would vanish to nothing, as well as
other creatures;) whence it is that they continue unchangeably the same as they
were in the first creation, and do herein differ from many of the sublunary
creatures, that decay and die, and then others spring up in their room. But now
how this may be reconciled with other places, where it is said that the heavens
shall perish and be no more, see in the Notes Job 14.12. and Psalm. 102.26. He
has made a decree; to wit, that they shall continue incorruptible, or rather
concerning their several situations, motions, operations and influences: which
shall not pass; that is, which shall never be abrogated, nor shall ever cease,
but shall be observed by an unchangeable order; see Matthew. 24.35.

Verse. 7. Praise the Lord from the earth, etc.] See the Note above verse. 1: ye
dragons; whereby may be meant all those huge formidable creatures which live in
caves of the earth, but especially such as live in the sea, as whales, etc. see
the Note Psalm. 74.13: and therefore is that which follows added, and all deeps,
to wit, with all things contained therein. But see the Note Psalm. 135.6.

Verse. 8. Fire and hail, etc.] By fire here is, at least especially, meant
lightnings, which are frequently seen in storms of hail, and all other fiery
meteors in the air: snow and vapor, stormy wind fulfilling his word; to wit,
all exhalations, cold and hot; which are all here numbered with the earth,
because they rise originally from the earth, and their force is chiefly felt
here.

Verse. 11. Kings of the earth, and all people, etc.] Man is here mentioned
last, because he was last created: but amongst the sons of men kings are first
named, (as before the angels were first named amongst all the creatures in
heaven, and the sun amongst all the heavenly lights) because they, in regard of
their dignity, were most engaged to do this, and yet were hardliest won
thereto; whence it is also that such great ones are again and again urged to it
in the following words, princes and all judges of the earth.

Verse. 13. His glory is above the earth and heaven.] See the Note Psalm. 8.1.

Verse. 14. He also exalts the horn of his people, etc.] See the Note 1 Samuel
2.1, 10* 2 Samuel 22.3. and Psalm. 89.24: the praise of all his saints; that is,
and this that God does for them is indeed the glory of his people, and yields
them continual matter of praising God: even of the children of Israel, a
people near unto him; to wit, in regard of their near relation to him, as being
by covenant his peculiar people, yea their spiritual alliance in Christ, Joh.
20.17; as also in regard of Gods familiar revealing himself to them, and their
drawing nigh to God in all the duties of his worship and service: see Ephesians.
2.13. and Heb. 10.19, 22.

PSALM. CXLIX.
Verse. 1. SIng unto the Lord a new song, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 33.3. Most of
our best Expositours conceive that this Psalm was composed immediately upon or
before the deliverance of the Jews out of the Babylonian captivity, and that
one main scope of the Psalmist therein was, to arm them against the streights
they were still to go through, and the sore calamities that would again befall
them, especially under the persecution of Antiochus, and that by putting them
upon the expectation of that their full redemption, which was then shortly to
be accomplished by Jesus Christ, whereof their deliverance out of Babylon was
but only an outward pledge. And if this were the drift of the Psalmist, it may
be probably thought that he took this expression from that prophesy of Isaiah,
chap. 42.10. where speaking of the kingdom of Christ, he has these very
words. Sing unto the Lord a new song, etc. But the truth is, I see not in any
clause of the Psalm, why it might not be as well written concerning the
victories of David over the nations round about him. However, in the next
clause, and his praise in the congregation of saints, there is an intimation,
that however Gods people had been scattered, or disturbed in the public
service of God, yet now they should have their holy assemblies again.

Verse. 4. For the Lord takes pleasure in his people, etc.] That is, of his own
free grace he has set his love upon them, and so he delights in them, and in
their service: he will beautify the meek with salvation; that is, he will make
his poor afflicted and despised people, that meekly wait upon him, glorious by
the wonderful deliverances he will work for them: Gods taking their part shall
be an honor to them; according to that Psalm. 91.15. I will be with him in
trouble, I will deliver him and honor him; see the Note also Psalm. 132.16. And
for this word, the meek, see tne Note Psalm. 22.26. Yea and this may be extended
also to the honor that God puts upon the faithful, when they are delivered
from the state of wrath, and translated into a state of adoption, and
especially when in heaven God shall cloth them with unexpressible glory.

Verse. 5. Let the Saints be joyful in glory, etc.] That is, Let them rejoice
gloriously; or rather, Let them rejoice in or for that glory which God shall
put upon them, to wit, by bringing them into a flourishing condition again. Yet
this too may be extended to the spiritual glory of the saints here, and their
eternal glory in heaven. Let them sing aloud upon their beds; that is, by
night, as well as by day; see the Note Job 35.10. Or else this expression of
singing upon their beds may be used, to imply the cause of their joy, to wit,
that God should bring them to live peaceably and securely again, according to
that Levit. 26.6. ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid: and that
the rather, because their consciences should now also be quieted, and should
yield them much sweet refreshing, whereas before, the apprehension of Gods
wrath in the sad condition they were brought into, had sorely perplexed them.

Verse. 6. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, etc.] It is in the
Hebrew, in their throat; thereby to set forth, that they should sing aloud,
which is not done without some straining of the throat, as we may see also Isa.
58.1. where that which we translate, Cry aloud, is in the Hebrew, Cry with the
throat. As for the following words, and a two-edged sword in their hand, that
seems to imply, that whereas of late years they had been of abject spirits, and
in a servile condition, forced to undergo any thing the heathens round about
would do to them, now they should take courage again, and go out against their
enemies with weapons in their hands, to defend themselves, and to destroy them.
And indeed, if we understand this of the beginning of David's reign, that which
follows in the next verses, To execute vengeance, etc. may well be meant of the
many glorious victories which he obtained over the heathen nations round about
him. But now because many of our best Expositours do understand this of the
times after the Babylonian captivity, and we cannot find that ever the Jews
after that did so universally prevail against the heathen, as seems to be set
forth in the following verses, To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and
punishments upon the people; to bind their kings with chains, and their nobles
with setters of iron, etc. (for that which was done by the Maccabees cannot
amount to so much, especially considering in what a sad condition they did at
last leave that people;) therefore they do generally refer this to the days
of Christ, and do accordingly hold that this, with that which follows in the 2.
next verses, is meant either 1. of the Churches victories in the days of the
Gospel over her mighty enemies; or 2. of the saints subduing the heathens, and
bringing them to submit to the yoke of Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel,
that two-edged sword of the word, as it is called Heb. 4.12. and Revel. 1.16.
wherein the high praises of God, in giving his son for man's Redemption, are set
forth, and thereby men are subdued unto God; or 3. of the saints judging the
world together with Christ at the day of judgment, the sword being a sign of
judiciary power.

Verse. 7. To execute vengeance upon the heathen, etc.] It is hard to conceive
how this can be applied to the subduing of the heathen by the preaching of the
Gospel, though some term it a holy revenge, to seek the eternal salvation of
implacable enemies, and others refer us to that of the Apostle 2 Cor. 10.6.
having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience: And indeed because of this
passage, I conceive the whole place is rather to be understood of the Churches
outward victories; for which see the foregoing Note.

Verse. 8. To bind their kings with chains, etc.] This, as is noted before, some
understand of bringing the greatest under the yoke of Christ, which at first
they count as bonds and fetters, see the Note Psalm. 2.3: and others, of the
saints passing that judgment with Christ at the last day, Matthew. 22.13. Bind
him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness. But
see the Notes above verse. 6, 7.

Verse. 9. To execute upon them the judgment written, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, decreed by God; or rather the judgment which God in his written
word has enjoined them to execute, or foretold they should execute: which some
refer to that Deuteronomy. 7.12. when God gave them that charge concerning the
Canaanites, thou shall smite them and utterly destroy them, thou shall make no
covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them; and others to that more general
prediction concerning the destruction of the Churches enemies, Deuteronomy. 32.43.
Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people; for he will avenge the blood of his
servants, etc. However, observable it is, that hereby they were bound up not to
proceed otherwise against the worst of their enemies, then according to the
rule of Gods written word. And there might be also in these words an allusion
to the old custom in courts of judicature, of writing down the sentence the
court had determined should be executed upon malefactors, which was
accordingly read out of that writing they had before them, when sentence was
pronounced against them. This honor have all the saints; that is, all the
people of God have the honor of doing what is before mentioned, to wit, of
destroying the Lords and their implacable enemies. This, I conceive, is the
plain meaning of the words: though others, I know, do understand this,
according to their different exposition of the foregoing passages, of the
honor of subduing men by the word, and of sitting with Christ on thrones to
judge the world.

PSALM CL.
Verse. 1. PRaise God in his Sanctuary, praise him in the firmament of his
power.] Diverse ways this may be understood: as that the people of God are
hereby stirred up to praise the Lord, who had his habitation both in the Temple
below, and in the heaven above; or, that in the first clause the people of God
in the Temple are called upon to praise God, and in the second the angels in
heaven, and, as some think, all the heavenly lights besides; or, that in the
first clause the Israelites in the Temple are excited to praise God, and in the
second all men that are within the compass of the firmament, to wit, all men
throughout the world. But I rather understand it thus; Praise God in his
Sanctuary, that is, Praise him for his Sanctuary, to wit, for his vouchsafing
to dwell there amongst his people, and to reveal himself there to them in his
ordinances: or, by his Sanctuary may be meant the heaven; for which see the
Note Psalm. 20.2. And then what is said in the first clause, is repea^ed again
and explained in the second, praise him in the firmament of his power; that is,
praise him for that glorious work of the firmament, wherein there is such a
clear and stupendous discovery of his infinite power, and from whence he does
also by his mighty acts declare the absolute power that he has over all his
creatures.

Verse. 4. Praise him with the timbrel and dance.] See the Note Psalm. 149.3.

Verse. 6. Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord.] That is, every
living creature. Yet many learned Expositours conceive, that as often in
Scripture by all flesh is meant all men, so here by every thing that has
breath is meant every living man. And so, say they, in the close of the Psalms
there is an intimation given, that the time was coming, when the Gentiles
should sing these Psalms of praise to God, as well as the Jews. And indeed this
expression of every thing that has breath for all men, seems thus also to be
used both Deuteronomy. 20.16. and Josh. 11.11.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Book of PROVERBS.
CHAP. I.
Verse. 1. THe Proverbs of Solomon, etc.] The first six verses here contain the
Inscription of this Book: and accordingly in these first words we are told 1.
what the chief subject of this Book is, to wit, Proverbs, or, as some translate
it, Parables, certain choice, divine, master-sentences, called by other writers
axioms and apophthegms; for which see also the Notes Numb. 21.27. and 23.7:
and 2ly, who was the author of it, Solomon, who was wiser then all men, 1
King. 4.31; so that here we are admitted to hear his wisdom, which to hear the
Queen of Sheba came from the uttermost parts of the earth, Math. 12.42. Indeed
though all Expositours agree, that the Proverbs in this book are the chief of
those three thousand which it is said Solomon spoke, see the Note 1 King. 4.32;
yet many think that this book was not composed by Solomon himself, but by some
other holy man of God, who gathered these Proverbs out of the writings of those
that had taken them from Solomon's own mouth as he spoke them, and so digested
them into a book, as now we have them. But because 1. it is probably thought by
most, that the nine first chapters, which contain an Introduction to the
Proverbs, were written by Solomon; and 2. that which is said Chap. 25.1. These
are also Proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah King of Judah copied
out, may seem to imply, that the former Proverbs from the beginning of the 10.
to the end of the 24. chapter were not only Solomon's, but also written by
Solomon himself; I see not why we should question, but that the book it self
was of Solomon's composing: though it seems it was afterward enlarged by some
other, long after Solomon's days. However observable it is, that this is the
first book of the Scripture that has the authors name prefixed to it; which
is done to make men prize it the more: to which end also the following words
are added, that he was the son of David king of Israel; and so not only both a
prophet, and the son of a prophet, David, a man after Gods own heart, by whom
he was educated with all possible care, but also a king, and the son of a king,
(whose words are usually by men highly esteemed and regarded) yea the king of
Israel, which shows that these proverbs were first delivered for the use of the
Church and people of God.

Verse. 2. To know wisdom, etc.] That is, To teach and stir up men to know,
and that more and more, those things whereby they may become wise unto
salvation, as to live piously, etc: and instruction; that is, that way of
holiness and righteousness, which by instruction is taught men; or rather to
make men to know and understand the instruction of their teachers, as it is
explained in the following clause, to perceive the words of understanding; that
is, to conceive and apprehend the wise sayings and profound sentences of their
instructours, wherein understanding is taught.

Verse. 4. To give subtilty to the simple, etc.] That is, To make those silly
ones, that of themselves are easily induced to believe any thing, prudent and
circumspect, that they may not be misled by the cunning craftiness of men,
and that they may wisely manage all their affairs: see the Note also Psalm.
19.7. And now because young men are usually thus simple, therefore is the next
clause added, to the young man knowledge and discretion.

Verse. 5. A wise man, etc.] That is, The man that truly fears God, and so has
withal attained some good measure of knowledge: will hear; to wit, the words
of this book, and consequently all other holy instruction: and will increase
learning; that is, will yet farther grow in knowledge, yea and be the more able
to teach others: and a man of understanding shall attain to wise counsels; that
is, wisely to contrive and determine how to manage all his affairs, or to give
wise counsels for the direction of others. However the drift of this is to
show, that these proverbs would be useful for the learned and the wisest of
men, as well as for the simple and unlearned.

Verse. 6. To understand a proverb, etc.] That is, say some, to invent proverbs,
or rather to find out the meaning of proverbiall speeches: and the
interpretation; that is, to interpret them, either for their own good, or for
the edifying of the Church: the words of the wise and their dark sayings; to
wit, either by reason of the profoundnesse of the matter therein contained, or
by reason of the figurative and obscure expressions, wherein after the manner
of riddles they are delivered: see the Notes Psalm. 49.4. and Judge. 14.12.

Verse. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, etc.] Here begins
the introduction to the proverbiall sentences, contained in the nine first
chapters, wherein Solomon stirs up men to seek after that wisdom which is
taught in this book; and accordingly he begins with that which is the beginning
and foundation of all saving knowledge, The fear of the Lord is the beginning
of knowledge; a lesson that he had learnt of his father David, Psalm. 111.10.
for which see the Note there. It may also be rendered, The fear of the Lord is
the principal part of knowledge; that is, not only the foundation, but also the
top and perfection of it. But fools, that is, ungodly men, see Psalm. 14.1.
despise wisdom, therein discovering their folly, and instruction, which is
the means of getting wisdom; and therefore their despising that is a clear
evidence that they despise wisdom too. The opposition that is betwixt these
two clauses (which it is evident that Solomon intended in most of his proverbs)
stands thus, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, and therefore
wise men will esteem highly of this filial fear, without which there is no
knowledge any thing worth; but men that fear not God are fools, and therefore
despising the fear of God, they must needs despise knowledge that depends
thereon.

Verse. 8. My son, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 34.11: hear the instruction of thy
father, and forsake not the law of thy mother. Solomon, say some, speaks thus
of himself, as desiring by these terms to express that he spoke this with the
affection of a father, yea and of a mother too; as we find the like expressions
often in Paul, as 1 Cor. 3.2. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, and
Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travel in birth till Christ be formed
in you. But I rather conceive that Solomon undertaking to teach men wisdom,
even from their tender years, (as he had said before verse. 3.) he does
accordingly here urge upon them, next after the fear of God, that they should
carefully obey the pious instructions and counsel of their natural parents,
teaching them, and pressing upon them the law of God. And observable it is,
that because fathers are fittest to instruct their children, therefore he
says, hear the instruction of a father: and because mothers, though not so
able to instruct, yet are wont with great earnestness to charge them to do
well, therefore he says of them, and forsake not the law of thy mother. And
besides this word, forsake not, does covertly also give warning, 1. that they
should not slight and reject the advice of a mother, because of the weakness
of her sex; and 2. that they should take heed of that which is the usual fault
of children, namely to be much affected and guided by the counsel of their
mothers whilst they are young, but then in their grown years to forsake their
counsel.

Verse. 9. For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains
about thy neck.] That is, Thy obeying the counsel and instruction of thy
parents, and walking in those holy ways which they prescribe thee, will be as
ornaments to thee: they will be no burden at all, but will make thee amiable,
both in the sight of God and man. Yea and some conceive that hereby also is
employed, that God would for this confer many good blessings upon them, which
should be an ornament to them, as long life, riches and honors, and a crown of
eternal glory heareafter: which may seem the more probable, because such
ornaments, as chains of gold and jewels, have been usually given to those that
for their wisdom have been advanced to places of honor; as to Joseph, Genesis
41.42. and to Daniel, Dan. 5.16. But indeed I rather think that seeking here
(as is noted upon the foregoing verse) to train up children in the ways of
piety, he uses expressions suitable to the affections of children, that do
usually delight in chains and jewels and gay apparel.

Verse. 11. If they say, Come with us, etc.] Having undertaken in the foregoing
verse to dissuade young men from hearkening to the enticements of wicked men,
he instanceth here particularly in the inticements of those cutthroats and
ruffians that live by robbing on the high way: (for this I conceive the words
do plainly hold forth; though under this particular we may comprehend also the
enticements of those that by oppression and cousenage do utterly ruin men to
enrich and exalt themselves, and that because even this is no better then
manslaughter and laying wait for blood, in Gods account, for which see the
Note that follows verse. 19.) And observable it is, first, in what a confident
and jocund manner they express themselves, Come with us: as who should say, No
men live a braver freer life then we do, and having us to side with you, who by
our number and strength are so well able to carry on our designs, you need not
fear any thing; and 2. that they endeavor to embolden them against the fear
both of shame and punishment, by assuring them, that they would lurk privily in
such close secret places, that they would on a sudden rush forth, and surprise
those that passed by, so that it should never be known, Let us, say they, lay
wait for blood; let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause. Yea and the
same some conceive is employed in their speaking of surprising the innocent
without cause; and that because such men are wont to travel by the way the more
securely and fearlesly. Had they watched to take revenge on any that had
wronged them, there would have been more danger in that, because they might
well expect, that such men would be the more jealous and watchful over
themselves: but when they should set upon poor simple-hearted innocent men,
that had never done any thing, for which any man should seek to take away their
lives, it would be a very easy work to surprise them. But then withal we must
know, that Solomon's purpose was not to set down the very words, wherewith such
varlets are wont to entice young men to join with them in their ways of
villainy. For it were enough to fright and to beat off a young novice, not yet
fleshed in sin, to have this at the first dash propounded to him, Come with us,
let us lay wait for blood, etc. And besides, it would have been more available
for the inveigling of such young men, to have pleaded, that those whom they
meant to prey upon, were covetous carles, and that they should but take from
them what they had before unjustly gotten from others, then to talk of
surprising the innocent without cause. But the holy Ghost does express their
solicitations in such odious terms, only to signify, that whatever they might
pretend when they sought to draw young men into their society, it was all one
in effect, as if they had impudently expressed themselves thus, Come, let us
lay wait for blood, etc. for this their robberies would end in at last; and
whatever they might pretend, their own consciences could not but bear witness
against them, that they did causlesly lie in wait to undo poor innocent men:
see the following Note verse. 16.

Verse. 12. Let us swallow them up alive as the grave, and whole as those that
go down into the pit.] As if they should have said, We will suddenly and
easily dispatch them, and withal make such a clean riddance of them, that
there shall be nothing left, whereby any discovery may be made of what we have
done. So that there are two arguments couched in these words, whereby they seek
to draw in the young man they speak to, to join in their robberies: to wit, 1.
that there would not be the least difficulty in effecting these things, which
they propounded to themselves; they would as speedily dispatch them, and make a
prey of whatever they had about them, as a man that is healthful and lusty
falling unawares into a pit is suddenly brought to destruction, or as the grave
does in an instant, as it were, swallow up and consume the dead bodies that are
laid into it; see the Notes Psalm. 55.15. and 124.3: and 2ly, that what they did
in this kind should never be known. For whereas it might be objected, that some
of those they sought to surprise might escape from them, or that the dead
carkases or the blood of those they should slay would be found, and so there
would be diligent search made to find out those that had done it; this is
prevented, by affirming confidently, that they would so surely dispatch those
they set upon, that they should never come to tell any tales of what had been
done to them: yea that such a course should be taken, that there should be no
more appearance of blood, or of any thing that might raise any suspicion of
what had been done, then if the earth opening her mouth had swallowed them up
alive. And then again the multitudes of those they would thus surprise and make
away may be employed in this, that they boast of swallowing them up as the
grave, of which Solomon says elsewhere, that it can never be satisfied, Prove.
30.15, 16.

Verse. 14. Cast in thy lot among us, etc.] These words propound to the young
man they labor to inveigle, 1. that he would join with them, and try what
their lot should be; and 2. that what money he had he would put it into a
common stock with them, till they had gotten some booty. And then withal they
imply a promise, that as they should get any thing by the ways propounded,
they would all have share and share like. Whereas he might fear, that when they
came to divide the spoil they should get, because they were many, and had been
long in league together, and were experienced men in these ways, they would
put him off with some small pittance; therefore they assure him that he should
have an equal share with any of the rest, and that, if he pleased, determined
by lot. And to the same purpose is the next clause, let us all have one purse:
for hereby they imply, either that they would justly divide their booties
amongst them all; or that they would all spend upon one common stock; if they
spent upon what he had at one time, he should as freely at other times spend
upon what they had.

Verse. 15. My son, walk not thou in the way with them, etc.] That is, join not
with them in any of their wicked ways; yea that thou may not be ensnared by
them, keep not company with them.

Verse. 16. For their feet run to evil, and make have to shed blood.] That is,
They are carried violently into sinful courses, or to do mischief unto poor
innocent men; yea they run headlong to the shedding of innocent blood. But, may
some say, why does Solomon inform young men of this, as of a thing which they
knew not, thereby to beat them off from harkening to such men's inticements,
seeing they themselves are brought in before verse. 11. plainly professing thus
much, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood? etc. I answer, To evade this
objection, some expound the words thus, For their feet run to evil, that is,
they run headlong upon their own destruction, they make all the speed they can
to the gallows, and make haste to shed blood, that is, to shed their own blood.
But for my part, I do rather look upon this as a farther confirmation of that
which is noted before upon those words verse. 11. to wit, that Solomon did there
express the solicitations of that kind of men in those terms, Come, let us
lay wait for blood, etc. not because he would have us think that they were wont
to use any such language, but only to intimate that whatever they might
pretend, this they would in the conclusion draw them to. Yet withal I see not
but that Solomon might use this as an argument to keep young men from harkening
to such evil counselors, yea though it be supposed that they had in express
terms encouraged them to lie in wait for blood, seeing the drift of these
words, for their feet run to evil, etc. might be all one in effect as if he had
said thus, Mind not so much the great riches they promise you in these ways,
as the evil and sin they tempt you to, which is no less then shedding blood.

Verse. 17. Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.]
According to this Translation of ours, there are only two literal expositions
that can be given of this parabolicall expression. The first is, that it is to
no purpose for a fowler to spread a net in the sight of any bird, because if
she espies the net, she will not come near it, but will presently betake her
self to her wings, according to that of the Poet, Quaeque nimis patent retia,
vitat avis; and for this very reason it may be probably thought, that it is in
the Hebrew, in the eyes of every thing that has a wing. And if we so
understand it, that which Solomon might intend thereby may be, 1. to imply the
reason why those robbers, of whom he had spoken, do lurk in thickets, and lie
in wait in secret places, to wit, because otherwise they should be frustrated
of their hopes and purposes, as the unskilful fowler is when his nets are
seen; 2. to show how little assurance those men have, that run these ways, of
those great spoils which they with so much confidence promise the young novices
they would draw in to be partners with them, as it was expressed before ver.
13; and that because, as the bird seeing the net or snare that is laid for her,
does usually fly away and evade the danger, so the innocent, discovering by
some means or other that there are such men lying in wait for them, do often
prevent the danger, and escape out of their hands, at least God, who sees all
things that are done upon earth, may by his providence many ways preserve them
from falling into their hands; or 3. rather to intimate, that seeing poor silly
birds will thus eschew a danger when once they discern it, much more should
reasonable men carefully avoid the snare that is laid for their lives in the
enticement of such wicked wretches, when once it is discovered to them. But
then the second and the most generally approved exposition that is given of
these words is this; that the net is spread in vain in the sight of any bird,
because though they see the net, yet poor silly creatures, so greedy they are
after the bait, they will run into the net, and so are taken and destroyed: And
then that which Solomon would imply hereby is, that just so it is with wicked
men that are tempted to these lewd courses, though they may see the snares
whereinto they are like to fall, in the gallows and gibbets that are set up in
several places for such varlets, though they may plainly see the destruction
which their desperate courses are like to bring upon them, by the example of
others that have run the same ways, and are daily cut off by the magistrate;
yet they will not take warning, but rush headlong upon their own destruction,
and bring themselves at last to a shameful death. And so indeed this
proverbiall expression seems to be explained in the following verse.

Verse. 18. And they lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily for their
own lives.] To wit, in that, whilst they lie in wait for others, through the
just judgment of God, they bring destruction hereby upon themselves, many
times a shameful death here, and without repentance eternal death always
hereafter.

Verse. 19. So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, etc.] As if he
had said, What has been hitherto said of these robbers, by way of particular
instance, may be in like manner said of all other covetous wretches, that out
of greediness after gain do by oppression, or any other wicked ways,
impoverish and undo men. And accordingly we must understand the next words,
which takes away the life of the owners thereof; that is, which greediness
after gain causes such men, even to take away the lives of those that have the
wealth they gape after in their possession; or rather, which gain, gotten by
such unjust and bloody ways, does usually bring destruction upon those that do
so unjustly possess it, and cut short their days, see 1 Timothy 6.9.

Verse. 20. Wisdom cries without, etc.] By wisdom, represented here to us
under the person of some grave matron, Lady, or Princess, is meant the word of
God, or the doctrine of life revealed by God unto men; or rather, the Son of
God, the Lord Christ, who is the coeternall and personal wisdom of the
Father, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 3.2.
as is more fully expressed chap. 8.22, 23, etc. The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way, before his works of old, etc. And in the Hebrew it is
expressed in the plural number, wisdoms; and that to imply, either 1. that
he is the most absolute, the most excellent and sovereign wisdom, the
wisdom of wisdoms; or 2. that he is the author of all wisdom, teaching
men all that is necessary to make them wise, and to make them walk wisely, even
the manifold wisdom of God, as the Apostle calls it Ephesians. 3.10; or 3. that he
has in all ages, by many several ways, persuaded men to forsake their
sinful ways, and to turn unto God. Now whereas it is said that this wisdom
cries without, she utters her voice in the streets, etc. the meaning is,
that whereas those seducers before mentioned do secretly and closely seek to
entice men to their sinful ways, the son of God does on the other side openly
and in public, with all plainness and earnestness, call upon all men in all
places that walk in such ways, both the seducers and the seduced, to abandon
their evil courses, and to live holily and righteously, showing them that in
the conclusion the following of this advice will be found to be the only true
wisdom.

Verse. 21. She cries in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the
gates, etc.] See the Notes Genesis 22.17. Judge. 5.11. and Psalm. 9.14.

Verse. 22. How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? etc.] By simple
ones here are meant such as err through weakness and ignorance, and are
carried away even in their grown years with childish vanities: and so likewise
in the following words, and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools
hate knowledge, by scorners are meant such as deride all means used to reclaim
them, and by fools such as wilfully run on in all kind of wickedness.

Verse. 23. Turn you at my reproof: behold I will pour my spirit unto you, etc.]
That is, I will fully and freely make known my mind to you, and inform you what
my will is, and what I would have you do.

Verse. 24. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand,
and no man regarded.] Many things may be here intended by wisdoms stretching
out her hand. But I conceive that which is here principally meant is, either
that she had by way of beckning called them to come in to her, (dealing therein
with them as with deaf men, or those that were gone far off from God;) or, that
she had pleaded earnestly with them, because in so doing men are wont to
stretch out their hands; or, that she had offered to receive them and embrace
them in her bosom, if they would come in to her.

Verse. 26. I also will laugh at your calamity, etc.] To wit, as you have
laughed at my reproofs. It is as if he had said, I will not help you, nor mind
you, when you cry and howl in your misery, no more then they regard men in
distress, that are wont to laugh at them and mock them when they are in
misery; for so afterward here this is explained verse. 28: but see also the Note
Psalm. 2.4. I will mock when your fear comes upon you; that is, when that which
you feared shall come upon you, or when in the time of your calamity you shall
be overwhelmed with fear.

Verse. 27. When your fear comes as desolation, etc.] To wit, as the desolation
of war, which comes suddenly and with unresistable violence, see the Note Job
30.14; or, any other desolation, that is made by any other means, that falls
upon men with fury, and brings upon them insufferable misery: and your
destruction comes as a whirlwind; see the Note Psalm. 58.9.

Verse. 28. Then shall they call upon me, etc.] That is, in their calamity,
though before they never regarded to do it: but I will not answer; to wit, no
more then they would heretofore regard me, when I called upon them: they shall
seek me early; that is, so soon as ever these calamities come upon them, see
the Note Psalm. 78.34; or with all earnestness, calling upon God, as it were
from morning to morning. Yea and some conceive that this word early implies,
that even in their youth these calamities should seize upon them, and drive
them perforce to God, but that even then it should be in vain, as the following
words show: but they shall not find me; to wit, because they seek me for
nothing, but that I may deliver them out of their calamities; see the Note 2 Samuel 22.42.

Verse. 29. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord.] That is, They did not before choose to fear God with a filial fear,
though now perforce they are afraid of him because of his judgments.

Verse. 31. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, etc.] Wicked
men may be said to eat of the fruit of their own way in three respects: 1. when
the honors, riches and pleasures, which they have sought after, prove the
occasion of much misery to them; 2. when they come to be destroyed by their own
counsels and courses; and 3. when God punishes them according to their
deserts. And whereas it follows, that they shall be filled with their own
devices, the meaning is, that they shall be abundantly punished, they shall
have enough of those sins in the punishment, whereof they could never have
enough in the practice: yea and more particularly this may intend, that through
the inward vexation of their minds for the evil they have done, they shall be
as men that loath those meats whereon they have formerly surfeited. But however
this seems to be spoken with reference to that foregoing language of such
wicked wretches, verse. 12. Let us swallow them up alive as the grave, etc.
implying, that however sweet those morsels might seem in the devouring of them,
yet they would prove bitter enough in the conclusion.

Verse. 32. For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, etc.] This may
be read, as it is in the margin, For the ease of the simple shall slay them:
and then by the ease of the simple may be meant, either their constant and
obdurate settlednesse in their evil ways, as pleasing themselves therein,
being free from all fear of evil, and promising themselves all prosperity and
peace, according to that Jer. 48.11. Moab has been at rest from his youth, and
he has settled on his lees, etc; or else the present peace and plenty wherein
they live; and then the same is meant here that is more fully expressed in the
following clause, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. But our
Translation, I conceive, is the best, For the turning away of the simple shall
slay them; that is, their turning away from God and his law, and the ways of
holiness and righteousness therein prescribed them; or, their turning away
from the reproofs and instructions of wisdom: and then this expression might
be used with reference to those foregoing words of wisdom verse. 23. Turn ye
at my reproof, etc: and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them; that is, it
hastens Gods judgments upon them, and makes them the more grievous, and that
because being fools they know not how to use their prosperity, but are puffed
up thereby, and mind only their worldly contentments; and especially because
seeing themselves to prosper in their wicked ways, and perhaps apprehending
that it is for their walking in those ways that things go so well with them,
they are hereby hardened and emboldened to persevere therein. Because against
the foregoing threatening of Gods just judgments, that should fall upon wicked
men, it might be objected, that none do usually live more quietly and
prosperously then such men, by way of preventing this objection it is here
said, that even their peace and prosperity does manifestly tend to bring the
sorer destruction upon them.

Verse. 33. But whosoever hearkneth unto me, etc.] That is, to the instructions of
wisdom here before in this chapter given, or that are contained in this book,
or to the instructions of wisdom in the word of God in general: shall dwell
safely; see the Notes Levit. 26.5. and Psalm. 91.1, 3, 10: and shall be quiet
from fear of evil; that is, not only from evil, but from fear of evil; so that
this implies not only a settled prosperous estate, wherein there should be no
danger of a change, but also security of mind not subject to terrifying fears:
see the Note Job 11.15.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. MY son, etc.] Some conceive that these are still the words of
wisdom, as those were in the later part of the foregoing Chapter from the 20.
verse. But because it is not said in the following verse, so that thou incline
thine ear unto me, (as it should have been if wisdom had been still speaking)
but, so that thou incline thine ear to wisdom, and especially because the
following instructions are clearly Solomon's, as we may see chap. 4.1, 2, 3.
where having said, Hear ye children, etc. he adds, for I was my fathers son,
tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother; therefore I rather think
that Solomon here returns to call upon men again in his own name, as before
chap. 1.8. My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments
with thee; that is, if thou will esteem them highly, and lay them up safely, as
men do their choicest jewels; or as men will carry some things continually
about with them in their bosoms, because they make such precious account of
them, that they think no other place safe enough to hide them in. But see the
Note Psalm. 119.11.

Verse. 3. Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, etc.] That is, if thou call
after her to have her come to thee, as children use to cry after their mother;
or rather, if in prayer thou call earnestly upon God for knowledge. And
indeed that this is meant here is evident, because verse. 6. the reason given
why men should thus cry after knowledge, is, because it is only God that can
give this knowledge, for the Lord gives wisdom, etc. As for the second
clause, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, it is in the Hebrew, and
give thy voice for understanding: which may imply a man's giving up himself
wholly to this business of praying for understanding. But this is not so clear
in the Text.

Verse. 4. If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures.] To wit, as men labor to get wealth, or as men seek to find and to
get silver and gold out of the mines in the earth, or as men, when they have
lost silver, or any such thing that they highly esteem, do endeavor by all
possible means to find it again; that is, if thou seek wisdom with all
earnestness, sparing no cost nor labor, seeking it all manner of ways, and
renewing thine endeavors again and again, if a while thou failest of what thou
seek for. Yea and withal, by comparing wisdom with silver and hid
treasures, Solomon does also imply, how precious wisdom is, how hard to be
obtained, and how delightful it is at last when it is gotten.

Verse. 5. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God.] That is, Hereby thou shall be brought truly and
experimentally to know what it is to fear God, to worship him, and to walk in
his fear, and so thou shall attain the true knowledge of God, wherein consists
true wisdom. But yet withal we must know, that the promise here made must be
understood of growing up unto farther perfection in the fear and knowledge of
God; for some measure of the fear and knowledge of God there must be in men,
before they can labor and pray for wisdom, as is before prescribed.

Verse. 6. For the Lord gives wisdom, etc.] See the Note above verse. 3: out of
his mouth comes knowledge and understanding; that is, he reveals it to men
by his word, and teaches it effectually by the inspiration of his spirit.

Verse. 7. He lays up sound wisdom for the righteous, etc.] That is, saving
wisdom, which has not an appearance only of wisdom, but is indeed true
wisdom, in regard it will do men good unto all eternity: this God gives not
to all, but lays it up, to wit, as a treasure, for the righteous, and is most
ready to bestow it upon them when they seek it of him: he is a buckler to them
that walk uprightly; to wit, chiefly in regard of defending them from
spiritual evils, as the following verses set forth.

Verse. 8. He keeps the paths of judgment, etc.] Some understand this of Gods
being exactly just in all his ways, and the next clause, and preserves the
way of his Saints, they understand of Gods preserving his servants in all their
ways and enterprises. But I rather take the meaning of these words to be this;
He keeps the paths of judgment, that is, he causes them to keep the paths
of judgment; he keeps his servants in the paths of judgment, not suffering
them by any temptations to be drawn aside to the right hand or to the left: and
preserves the way of his saints; that is, both from being drawn out of those
ways, and from all evil whilst they walk in that way.

Verse. 9. Then, etc.] To wit, when thou have, according to the advice given in
the beginning of this chapter, sought earnestly to God for wisdom; or, when
God thereupon has given thee wisdom, as was promised above verse. 6: shall
thou understand righteousness and judgment and equity; see the Note chap. 1.3.

Verse. 10. When wisdom enters into thine heart, etc.] That is, When thou
have attained wisdom, and art become truly wise; or, when thou art seriously
delighted with it: and then it is the same with that which follows, and
knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul.

Verse. 11. Discretion shall preserve thee, etc.] To wit, from sinful ways,
and the dangers thereupon ensuing.

Verse. 12. To deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that
speaks froward things.] That is, from all seducers, that teach false
doctrines, or entice men to wicked ways: see the Note 2 Samuel 22.27.

Verse. 13. Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of
darkness.] That is, Who do wilfully against knowledge live constantly and with
delight in the ways of ignorance and wickedness, yea in those abominable
ways, which men are ashamed to commit in the light, and for the freer doing
whereof they seek to be in the dark, such as are robbing, and drunkenness, and
filthiness. See the Note Job 24.13.

Verse. 14. Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the
wicked.] That is, both in their own and other men's wickedness; and that
because walking in darkness, as was said in the foregoing verse, they discern
not the danger of those lewd ways.

Verse. 16. To deliver thee from the strange woman, etc.] That is, To preserve
thee from being entangled by her, and to rescue thee out of her power, if thou
have already been ensnared by her. Now though by the strange woman may be meant
any whore, and that because God had severely forbidden this sin, and so such a
one might be called the strange woman, as ordinary fire which might not be used
in the Sanctuary is called strange fire in the Scripture, and the idol-gods
which the Israelites were forbidden to worship are called strange gods; yet I
rather think it is meant here of a whorish wife, and that because that suits
best with the words in the following verse, which forsakes the guide of her
youth, and forgets the covenant of her God: and such a one may best be
called the strange woman, because she is not the adulterers wife, but another
man's, and therefore ought to be held as a stranger to any other: which is also
intended in the following clause, even from the stranger which flattereth with
her words. Only we must know, 1. that because the Hebrew word, here translated
the stranger, does, as some conceive, most properly signify an alien, a woman
of a foreign nation, therefore some think that the common whore is so called,
because if any such were through abuse or toleration suffered amongst the
Israelites, contrary to that express law Deuteronomy. 23.17. they were looked upon as
heathens and excommunicate persons; and others hold that the adulteress is so
called, because she had alienated her self from God and his people by her
filthy conversation, or because it was as unlawful for a man to go in to such
a one, as it was for the Israelites of old to marry with the daughters of
Canaan: and 2. that though the adulteress is wont to flatter her husband, the
better to hide her sin, yet here Solomon speaks of the flatteries wherewith she
enticeth other men to commit folly with her, alleging this as the excellency
of wisdom, that it will preserve a man from the flatteries of such harlots.

Verse. 17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, etc.] Should we understand
the foregoing verse of the unmarried whore, then by the guide of her youth
might be meant her father, or any other guardian or governor under whom she
had been brought up; and accordingly likewise the following clause, and
forgets the covenant of her God, might be understood of the law of God, or
the covenant whereby all Gods people stand engaged to God, not to commit any
such abomination as whoredom is. But doubtless Solomon speaks here of the
adulteress: and accordingly by the guide of her youth is meant her husband, to
whom she was married in her youth, as one she took to be her head and guide,
even as the same title is given to God in relation to his spouse the Church,
Jer. 3.4. Will thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou art the
guide of my youth? and it is of her breaking the marriage covenant, whereof God
is the author and witness, that the following clause is meant, and forgets
the covenant of her God. And this, I conceive, is here added, to render such
adulteresses the more abominable, and to show how little cause there is why any
man should be moved with such a woman's flatteries, that has been already so
perfidious, not only to her husband, to whom she was married in her youth,
(when the love of women to their husbands uses to be most fervent,) and from
whom consequently she has received many expressions of love and kindness, but
also to the Lord himself, before whom she had solemnly promised to be faithful
to her husband.

Verse. 18. For her house enclineth unto death, etc.] Though it be most true,
that the whoredoms and adulteries of women do bring upon themselves without
repentance certain destruction; yet that this is not here, as some would have
it, at least principally, intended, is evident, because this is added to show
how great the benefit is, that wisdom delivers men from the strange woman, as
was said before verse. 16. For, says Solomon, her house enclineth to death;
that is, the very being with her in her house, or the frequenting of her house,
is infectious and deadly, and tends to the utter ruin of men, both in regard
of temporal and eternal death: and her paths unto the dead; that is, the way
that leads to her house, or the wicked courses wherein she brings men to live,
that follow her and converse with her, are the sure way to destruction. The
sum therefore of these words is this, that adultery is the way to death, not
only eternal, but temporal here in this world, to wit, both in regard that
lust does usually wast the vital powers, and shortens men's lives, and sometimes
they die of filthy diseases contracted by their uncleanness, and also in
regard they are often cut off, either by the rage of the jealous husband, or by
the sword of the magistrate, or by some quarrels arising amongst those that are
rivals in the love of these harlots, or by some other way of divine wrath, as
usually by the Lords suffering them to fall into other sins that bring them to
the gallows: see Heb. 13.4. As for the phrases here used, that her house
enclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead, they import as much as if it
had been said, either that her house is even bending and sinking, and ready to
fall upon the heads of those that are there (implying that both she and those
that keep her company are continually in danger of utter ruin;) or else that
her house is in the way that leads down-hill to death and eternal destruction;
or that the way to her house carries men down headlong to utter ruin.

Verse. 19. None that go unto her, etc.] That is, say some Expositours, that
lie with her, according to that Isa. 8.3. And I went unto the prophetess, and
she conceived, etc. But I rather take it thus, None that go unto her, that is,
that keep her company and converse with her: return again; that is, do ever get
out of her power, and leave this sin, and turn to the Lord by unfeigned
repentance; no more then dead men (of whom he had spoken in the foregoing
verse) do ever return from the grave or hell: neither take they hold of the
paths of life; that is, neither do they reform themselves, or betake themselves
to live a holy and spiritual life, that they may be saved: though upon some
sudden motions they may sometimes seem to catch at the paths of life, yet they
do not seriously and constantly lay hold on them. Indeed, because it cannot
truly be said, that none that are ensnared with harlots do ever repent and turn
to the Lord, therefore I take it to be an hyperbolicall comparative expression;
none that go unto her, return again, that is, few or none of them, none to
speak of, according to that Isa. 64.7. there is none that calls upon thy
name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee, that is, none in a manner.
And upon this account, because whoremongers and adulterers do so seldom return
to the Lord by repentance, in allusion thereto the same is said concerning the
idolatrous Israelites, Hos. 5.4. They will not frame their doings to turn unto
their God; for the spirit of whoredom is in the midst of them.

Verse. 21. For the upright shall dwell in the land, etc.] To wit, when wicked
men shall be cut off; see the Note Psalm. 37.3: and the perfect shall remain in
it; to wit, they and their posterity; see the Notes Psalm. 37.9, 18.

Verse. 22. But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the
transgressors shall be rooted out of it.] That is, they shall be violently
taken away; see the Note Psalm. 52.5.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. MY son, etc.] See the Notes chap. 1.8. and 2.1: forget not my law;
that is, neither let my doctrine slip out of thy memory, neither be unmindfull
to put it in practice: but let thine heart keep my commandments; that is, get
sound knowledge of them, love them, and delight in them, let thine heart be
ever thinking of them, and fully set upon the keeping of them.

Verse. 2. For length of days and long life shall they add to thee.] That is,
My commandments kept and obeyed shall bring thee to enjoy these blessings. For
length of days and long life, see the Note Psalm. 91.16; and for peace, see the
Note Psalm. 119.165. It is as if he had said, For the lengthening out of thy
life, this shall be in stead of diet and physic, etc. and for procuring thee
peace, this shall be in stead of all endeavors and policy of thine own: and
for that expression, shall they add to thee, I conceive it may particularly
imply, that hereby these blessings should be renewed and continued to him day
after day; or else the joint conferring of both these blessings upon him.

Verse. 3. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee, etc.] If we understand this of
Gods mercy and faithfulness, (for which see the Note Psalm. 57.3.) it is as if
he had said, By keeping my laws make sure that thou may never fail of
finding God merciful and faithful to thee; and so the words do also covertly
imply a promise, that thus it shall surely be with those that conscionably
observe Gods commandments. But I rather understand it of mercy and truth which
Solomon commends to us to practice. And accordingly by mercy may be meant all
acts of mercy and compassion and free grace toward those that stand in need of
our help; and by truth, all the duties which in justice we owe to God or man,
and without which we do not deal faithfully with them. And indeed mercy and
truth are often thus joined together for merciful and faithful dealing; see
the Notes 2 Samuel 15.20. and Psalm. 85.10. Or by mercy and truth may be meant
showing mercy to men, when it is done with a true and sincere heart; or mercy
in deeds, and truth in words. But I rather conceive that by mercy here may be
meant all the good offices that we are to perform toward men, and by truth or
faithfulness all the duties of Gods worship and service prescribed in his law;
and that because so, this will be a general precept including all the
particulars afterward mentioned; and because thus the promise annexed in the
following verse will the more fitly answer this precept, if here the duties be
enjoined that we owe both to God and man, and then thereupon that promise
follows, that hereby we shall find favor both in the sight of God and man.
As for that expression, Let not mercy and truth forsake thee, first it enjoins
a constant care to remember and practice our duty herein, as if he had said, Be
ever merciful to men, and true and faithful in performing the duty you owe to
God; and 2. it implies, that mercy and truth not being natural to men, through
our corruption we are prone, even after we have gotten these graces, to loose
them again, and therefore there had need to be the more care taken constantly
to keep and practice them. All which is again pressed in the following words
with figurative terms, bind them about thy neck; to wit, as a chain or jewel,
(see the Notes chap. 1.9. and Exodus 13.9.) that is, mind them continually and
keep them fast and safe: write them upon the table of thine heart; to wit, as
God wrote the precepts hereof on tables of stone, that is, let them be
imprinted on your heart; or think often on them to practice them, as men do
often remember those things which they have set down in writings or
table-books. I know some understand it thus, write them on the table of thine
heart, that is, on the tablet which thou wearest on thy heart; for, they say,
in those times they used to wear hanging down upon their breasts certain jewels
or tablets* (and some add too, that they were made after the fashion of a
heart) whereon they were wont to have engraven the pictures or names of those
they loved most dearly, to the end they might have them still in mind; and that
in allusion thereto this expression is here used, write them on the table of
thine heart. And indeed if there were any such custom, it may the rather seem
probable that Solomon does in these words allude thereto, because in another
place, where he seems plainly to allude to some such engravings that they used
to have on the rings they wore upon their fingers, chap. 7.3. this clause is
there again added, Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of
thine heart: to which purpose also observable is that which follows verse. 4.
Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister, etc.

Verse. 4. So shall thou find favor and good understanding in the sight of God
and man.] That is, say some Expositours, God will cause thy good estate to
testify thy good understanding; and accordingly some translate the words thus,
So shall thou find favor and good success, etc. But reading the words as they
are in our translation, either the meaning must be this, So shall thou know how
to behave thy self with good understanding in all thine actions, whether thou
have to deal with God or man; or rather this, So shall thy good understanding
be taken notice of, and thou shall be commended for a wise and understanding
man both by God and man.

Verse. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, etc.] To wit, 1. that he is thy God
and thy Lord, whom therefore thou art bound to honor and obey, that so thou
may consider what he requires to be done, not what seems good in thine own
eyes, and to that end may still ask counsel at his word, and when thou
know his will, may do it, leaving the success of all to God, and aiming
at his glory in all thy doings; 2. that he is the fountain of all thy
blessings, and of all thy abilities to do any thing as it ought to be done, and
of all the success thou do at anm time find in any of thy affairs, and
hereupon call upon him by prayer, trust in him, and be thankful to him upon
all occasions; and 3. that he is an omniscient God, that sees thee at all
times, and all that thou do, that so thou may be the more fearful to
offend him, and the more confident of his protection and blessing: and he shall
direct thy paths; to wit, by informing thee what to do, by enclining thy heart
thereto, and assisting thee in it.

Verse. 7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, etc.] This may be here inserted both
with respect to the foregoing direction that was given concerning trusting in
God, because self-conceit does usually make men trust in their own wisdom,
with neglect of God, thinking that they can well enough order their ways
without direction from the word and wisdom of God: or else with respect to the
following words, fear the Lord, and depart from evil; for because self-conceit
makes men think they do well when they sin greatly, and so to run on securely,
yea to defend themselves in their evil ways, therefore first he gives this
advice, be not wise in thine own eyes, which will make you follow your own
corrupt reason, both in matters of Gods worship, and in the ordering of your
life and conversation, and then he adds, fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

Verse. 8. It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.] That is,
It shall be the health and strength of thy whole body: see the Note chap. 4.22.
By this word It may be meant wisdom, or rather that which was mentioned in the
last words of the foregoing verse, fear the Lord, and depart from evil, (which
is indeed the only true wisdom;) or it may be referred to all the foregoing
precepts. And the navel and bones are mentioned in stead of the whole body,
either as comprehending the outward parts of the body under the navel, and the
inward under the bones; or else as putting the navel for the belly and the
inwards, and all the tender vital parts which have no bones in them, and the
bones for all the several bony limbs of the body. Or else rather, to express
that the whole body shall be in health, the navel is only mentioned, either
because the navel is the center of the whole body, and is as it were the button
or knot, whereby the sinews of the upper and lower part of the body are knit
together; or because the health of the whole body does chiefly depend on the
soundness of the entralls and vital parts, which are here all comprehended
under the navel, because they are all, as it were, knit up within the belly by
the navel, and are together fastened by certain arteries to the navel: see the
Note Job 40.16. And then to express that the body should be strong, the marrow
in the bones is only mentioned, because the bones are the main strength of the
body, and bones full of marrow are a sign of a strong and vigorous body: see
Job 21.4. I know that some Expositours conceive that this promise is chiefly
meant of restoring health to those that are sick, and accordingly that there is
in these words, It shall be health to thy navel, an allusion to the
fomentations, plasters and unctions usually applied to the navel for the
healing of diverse infirmities. But the first exposition is clearly the best.

Verse. 9. Honor the Lord with thy substance, etc.] To wit, by giving freely
and cheerfully to charitable and pious uses; for hereby we acknowledge Gods
Sovereignty over all, and with thankfulness confess that all we have we have
received from him, and profess the reverent and high account which we have of
him; yea and hereby his public worship by his ministers, which is the Lords
chief glory in this world, is maintained. Only still we must remember that what
we give in this kind must be of that which is justly our own, Honor the Lord
with thy substance; and it must not be given out of vainglory, but with a
sincere aim at Gods glory alone. As for the next clause, and with the
first fruits of all thine increase, see the Note Deuteronomy. 26.2.

Verse. 10. So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall
burst out with new wine.] This may be spoken with reference to the wine-presses
running over. But I rather take it to be an hyperbolicall expression.

Verse. 11. My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, etc.] That is,
slight it not; as those do that ascribe it to chance or fortune, or that
otherwise hardening their hearts against it, are never troubled at it: neither
be weary of his correction; that is, be not impatient, and discontented, so as
to be faint under it.

Verse. 12. For whom the Lord loves, he corrects, even as a father the son in
whom he delights.] See the Note Deuteronomy. 8.5.

Verse. 13. Happy is the man that finds wisdom, etc.] To wit, upon diligent
search made for it, according to the direction formerly given, chap. 2.3, 4:
and the man that gets understanding; it is in the Hebrew, that draws out
understanding, to wit, as silver is drawn up out of a mine, whereto he had
alluded before, chap. 2.4. If thou seek her as silver, etc. Yet some
understand this of men's bringing out the wisdom they have gotten, for the
instruction and good of others.

Verse. 14. For the merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of silver,
etc.] As if he had said, By making use of wisdom there is more to be gotten,
then by trading with any merchandise whatsoever; or rather, that wisdom is a
more precious commodity then silver or fine gold, and that there is more to be
gotten by trading for wisdom, then by trading for any other commodity
whatsoever.

Verse. 16. Length of days is in her right hand, etc.] See the Note above verse.
2. wisdom is here set forth as some great Lady, that does plentifully, as it
were with both hands, bestow rewards upon her favorites and followers: and in
her left hand riches and honor; that is, wealth and great preferments; or at
least an honorable esteem amongst those with whom they live.

Verse. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, etc.] As if he had said,
Though men do usually judge wisdoms ways sour and bitter, yet they do indeed
yield great joy and pleasure to those that walk in them: and all her paths are
peace; that is, they yield unconceivable peace of conscience, yea all kind of
peace and prosperity to those that frequent them. See the Note above verse. 2.

Verse. 18. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, etc.] To wit,
never parting from her when they have gotten her, but persevering in her ways
unto the end, as is expressed in the following words, and happy is every one
that retains her. There is an allusion in the words to the tree of life which
was in the midst of Paradise Genesis 2.9. for which see the Note there. And the
meaning thereof is, that wisdom does restore men to that life and happiness,
which they lost in Adam; it is a sure means to preserve life here, and to bring
them to life eternal hereafter.

Verse. 19. The Lord by wisdom has founded the earth, etc.] To wit, by his
word and Son, who is indeed the coeternall wisdom of God the Father; see the
Note chap. 1.20. Nor may we think that Solomon speaks here impertinently, in
that having spoken of the wisdom that is in men, consisting in their obedience
and conformity to the word and law of God, whereby they attain length of days,
etc. he should now come to speak of the wisdom of God, whereby the world was
created; for this wisdom that is in man flows from that, Christ is the author
of it, and it is indeed a kind of participation of that divine wisdom. And
accordingly the scope of Solomon in inserting this here may be either 1. the
more to endear that wisdom to us, which is here pressed upon us; if the son
of God be the author of it, if it flows from that wisdom whereby the world
was created, have we not cause to prize it the more? or 2. to assure us that
all the blessings here promised to them that seek after wisdom shall be made
good to them, seeing by that wisdom that invites us hereto the world was
created.

Verse. 20. By his knowledge the depths are broken up.] This may be meant of the
great channels and hollow places in the earth made for the receiving of the
waters, when God separated them from the earth in the creation, Gen 1.9. for
which see the Note there, as likewise Job 38.8. or else of the fountains and
floods breaking out from the nethermost parts of the earth, even as if the
earth did cleave it self asunder to give them a passage. And indeed these are
called depths Deuteronomy. 8.7. a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths,
that spring out of valleys and hills.

Verse. 21. My son, let not them depart from thine eyes, etc.] That is, wisdom
and discretion, which are mentioned in the next clause, keep sound wisdom and
discretion: yea this word them may comprehend all the precepts and instructions
here given for the gaining of wisdom, with all the reasons given to move them
to seek it, and particularly that which was before said concerning the Lords
creating the world. As for that expression, let them not depart from thine
eyes, it is doubtless used with respect to that above verse. 3. Bind them about
thy neck, etc. and implies that we should never forget them, yea that they
should be the delight of our eyes.

Verse. 22. So shall they be life unto thy soul, etc.] That is, wisdom and
discretion shall make thy soul active and lively in the works thereof; or
rather they shall quicken thee in the inward man, animating thy soul, which
otherwise is but a spiritual carcass, as thy soul does animate thy body. This I
take to be the plain meaning of these words: yet this word they, so shall they
be life, may comprehend all that is comprehended in that clause in the
foregoing verse, let them not depart from thine eyes. And because soul is
usually taken for the whole man in the Scripture, some take these words, so
shall they be life unto thy soul, as a promise of long life here, and eternal
life hereafter. As for the second clause, and grace to thy neck, see the Note
chap. 1.9.

Verse. 23. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, etc.] That is, thou shall
walk in the way of wisdom without danger of erring: and thy foot shall not
stumble; that is, being freed by wisdom from man's natural blindness, and
weakness, and carelesseness, there shall be nothing to make thee stumble; or
rather, Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, that is, thou shall prosper and
be safe wherever thou go, and in all thine affairs thou shall walk without
danger, or fear of danger: and thy foot shall not stumble; to wit, neither into
sin, nor any evil whatsoever.

Verse. 25. Be not afraid of sudden fear, etc.] Which is all one as if he had
said, Thou shall not be afraid of sudden fear: neither of the desolation of the
wicked when it comes; that is, the havoc and desolation which wicked men
shall make, when in an hostile manner they shall break in upon the place where
thou live; or rather, of the desolation which God shall bring upon wicked men.

Verse. 26. For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from
being taken.] To wit, either in the snares of sin or misery.

Verse. 27. Withhold not good, etc.] That is, Withhold not any good thing from
them to whom it is due, whether by the laws of justice, equity, or charity; as
just debts where they are owing, the hirelings wages, any thing that has been
lost, or committed to a man's trust, or the alms we are bound to give to them
that want, or any other act of charity whatsoever. And accordingly we must
understand the following clause: for if we understand the first words of
withholding any thing that is in justice due, then the meaning of the following
clause may be this, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it, that is,
though thou have power to withhold it, and to bear thy self out in the doing of
it. But if we understand the first clause of withholding any act of charity
from those that stand in need of our help, then the meaning is clear, that we
must not withhold doing them good when we have power to do it: and there may
be also a reason hinted in the words, to wit, lest afterward we become unable
to do it, though we would. And indeed it seems the more probable that the
words are, at least chiefly, meant of withholding alms from the poor, because
the following verse speaks also of giving, Say not unto thy neighbor, Go and
come again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by thee: though I know
that some do extend that also to deferring payment of what is in justice due.

Verse. 31. Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.] See the
Notes Psalm. 37.1.8.

Verse. 32. For the froward is abomination to the Lord, etc.] Because of that
before v. 30. Strive not with a man without cause, etc. some by the froward
here understand such as are contentious and quarrelsome with men; but I rather
conceive that thereby is meant such stubborn men, as will by no means be won
from carrying themselves perversely toward God; see the Notes 2 Samuel 22.27. and
Job 5.13: but his secret is with the righteous; that is, he is to them an
intimate friend, and as such reveals to them his secret counsel, see the
Note Psalm. 25.14. and his fatherly affection to them, which is hidden from the
world. Yea some do understand this particularly of Gods making known to them,
what torments are reserved for those that by wickedness do flourish in this
world.

Verse. 33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked, but he blesses
the habitation of the just.] To wit, though it be never so poor a cottage.

Verse. 24. Surely he scorneth the scorners, etc.] Who they are that are here
called scorners, see in the Notes chap. 1.22. and Psalm. 1.1. It may be here
more particularly meant of those that being in great prosperity do scoff at
the poor. And what is meant by Gods scorning them, see in the Notes chap. 1.26.
and Psalm. 2.4. to wit, that God shall pull them down from their great
prosperity; see Jam. 4.6. But he gives grace unto the lowly; that is, favor
amongst men, yea all good blessings, but especially the graces of his spirit.

Verse. 35. The wise shall inherit glory, etc.] That is, They shall have it as
due to them, and continue in it, both here, being honored both of God and man,
and hereafter eternally in heaven: but shame shall be the promotion of fools;
that is, that shall be all the promotion they shall have; or, if they be at any
time promoted, it shall turn to their greater shame.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. HEar ye children the instruction of a father.] See the Notes chap.
1.8. and Psalm. 34.11.

Verse. 3. For I was my fathers son, etc.] As if he should have said, his
darling son: tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother; see the Note 1 Chronicles. 3.5. And by tender here is meant both that he was a young child, of
tender years, and so weak in knowledge; and also that he was accordingly
tenderly regarded, and daintily and tenderly brought up by his mother. Now
Solomon intending to show how his father taught him, he premiseth 1. that
concerning his parents dear affection to him; both to imply how necessary
instruction is in the ways of wisdom, in that his parents, though very fond
of him, would not neglect that, but rather were therefore the more careful to
teach him; and likewise to hint to those to whom he now speaks, that it was out
of the same fatherly love, that moved David to instruct him, that he now
pressed these things upon them: and 2. that concerning his own tender years,
thereby to press the youngest to learn from his example, who had gotten so
much by it.

Verse. 4. He taught me also, etc.] To wit, my father David, who was a great
prophet, and a man after Gods own heart; he taught me the same things that I
teach you, and therefore my words ought to be received with the more attention
and ready obedience; neither can you reject me, without rejecting him too: and
said, Let thine heart retain my words, keep my commandments and live; see the
Notes chap. 3.1, 2. Now both these, and all the following words to the end of
the 9. verse, may most probably be taken as the words of David to Solomon,
recited here by him.

Verse. 6. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee, etc.] See the Note
chap. 2.11.

Ver. 7. Get wisdom, and with all thy getting get understanding.] That is,
even with the expense of all that thou have gotten; or with all the care and
diligence which thou can use for the getting of any thing: be sure to get
that, whatever thou go without.

Verse. 8. Exalt her, etc.] To wit, by loving her, and making precious account
of her, seeking her with all possible diligence, and preferring her before all
things whatsoever: and she shall promote thee; that is, advance thee to great
dignities, and make thee to be highly honored both by God and man: and indeed
the wisdom of Solomon it was, that made him so renowned, and that confirmed
the crown of Israel upon him.

Verse. 10. Hear, O my son, etc.] Here Solomon returns again to his own
exhortation; see the Note above verse. 4.

Verse. 11. I have led thee in right paths.] That is, in ways of
righteousness, agreeable to the straight rule of Gods law: yet others by right
paths understand plain and even ways, wherein there is no danger of stumbling;
according to that which follows.

Verse. 12. When thou go, etc.] To wit, say some Expositours, in the way of
wisdom: thy steps shall not be straightened; that is, though those ways may
seem at first very irksome and difficult, yet by degrees they shall become
pleasing, and no way troublesome to thee. But I rather take it thus: When thou
go about thy businesses and affairs, thou shall not be brought into any
streights, not knowing which way to turn thy self; see the Notes 2 Samuel 22.37.
and Job 18.7. And when thou runnest thou shall not stumble; that is, though
thou make never so much haste in any thing thou undertakest, thou shall not
miscarry therein. But see the Note chap. 3.23.

Verse. 13. Take fast hold of instruction, etc.] That is, Be sure to persevere
in the ways wherein I have instructed thee: let her not go, keep her; to wit,
wisdom; see the Note chap. 3.1: for she is thy life; that is, the guide of thy
life, or the means of life to thee; see the Notes chap. 3.2. and Psalm. 91.16.

Verse. 14. Enter not into the path of the wicked, etc.] See the Note chap.
1.15: and go not in the way of evil men; that is, if thou have been tempted
into any of their ways, yet at least go not on therein.

Verse. 15. Avoid it, pass not by it, etc.] That is, Keep aloof, and come not
nigh it, for fear of being tempted into it: turn from it, and pass away; to
wit, with all the speed you can, lest you be endangered thereby.

Verse. 16. For they sleep not except they have done mischief, etc.] Some
conceive that Solomon does here set forth the time when wicked men play their
lewd pranks, namely, that before they sleep, in the dark of the night, they go
forth to accomplish their mischievous devices, and then, and not till then,
they betake themselves to their rest. But the words are clearly an expression
of their eagerness to do evil, namely, that they cannot sleep in their beds
for plotting and contriving how to do evil, and that hence it is that they
many times rise so early to bring about their wicked projects: which is yet
clearer in the following clause, and their sleep is taken away, unless they
cause some to fall; to wit, into the snares they have laid for them; or into
the mischief they have plotted against their persons or estates; or into the
sins to which they have tempted them.

Verse. 17. For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of
violence.] That is, Wickedness and violence are as meat and drink to them; see
the Note also Job 15.16: or rather, They live by wickedness and violence; the
meat they eat, and the wine they drink is gotten that way.

Verse. 18. But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more
and more unto the perfect day,] That is, As the morning light does by little
and little shine brighter and brighter unto noon; so the righteous, though at
first they have their light much darkened with thick mists of ignorance and
sinful infirmities, and with diverse clouds of afflictions and sorrows, yet by
degrees they grow in knowledge and grace, yea their joy and glory and
prosperity does increase; see the Notes 2 Samuel 23.4. Job 11.17. and Psalm.
97.11. till they come at last to perfect joy and bliss in heaven.

Verse. 19. The way of the wicked is as darkness, etc.] To wit, as the evening
darkness, which grows darker and darker even unto midnight; for thus these
words must be understood, as in opposition to what was said of the righteous in
the foregoing verse. And the meaning is, that in regard of ignorance and
misery, terrors and fears, their condition grows usually by degrees worse and
worse: even that light of reason, which at first they had, by the just
judgment of God they many times loose, and they become stupid and brutish, and
in a manner void of all understanding: their joy and prosperity comes by
degrees to extreme sorrow and misery, till they be at last cast out into utter
darkness in hell. They know not at what they stumble; that is, they go they
know not whether, and do they know not what, not discerning the dangers of sin
and misery, which lie in their way; they must needs be unable to avoid them,
and so they run on in their wickedness without repentance, often thinking to
please God in those things wherein they grievously sin against him; and then
think themselves most secure, when the judgejudgements of God are readiest to
seize upon them. See the Note Job 5.14.

Verse. 21. Let them not depart from thine eyes, etc.] That is, my sayings,
verse. 20. see the Note chap. 3* 21: keep them in the midst of thine heart; that
is, hide them deeply and surely in thy mind; see the Note Psalm. 37.31.

Verse. 22. For they are life unto those that find them, etc.] See the Notes
chap. 3.2, 18, 22. and Psalm. 91.16: and health to all their flesh; that is, to
their whole bodies; namely, because piety, besides that it brings the blessing
of God upon men in every regard, does also keep men from all excess, and lusts
of uncleanness, and violent passions, which do usually bring upon men many and
many diseases. But see the Note chap. 3.8.

Verse. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, etc.] It is in the Original,
above all keeping, that is, with more diligence then is used for the keeping
and preserving of any thing else; even as men are more careful to safeguard
their hearts, then any part of the body besides: for out of it are the issues
of life; that is, as the heart in the body is the fountain of all natural
life, so is the mind and will, the heart here intended, the spring of
spiritual life, and thence all our actions both good and bad do proceed,
Matthew. 12.35, and 15.19. Unless the heart be pure, all conformity to the word
in the outward man is but mere hypocrisy, nor will there be any constant
stability in it.

Verse. 24. Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from
thee.] To wit, with loathing and detestation. But doubtless, as the foregoing
verse speaks of keeping our own hearts, so this is meant of ordering our own
lips: because as the outward parts receive defilement from the heart, so they
also reflect defilement upon it; therefore in the next place charge is given
concerning them. And because next to the keeping of the heart, the keeping of
the tongue is both most difficult and most necessary, therefore of the outward
parts this is first mentioned.

Verse. 25. Let thine eyes look right on, etc.] That is, Let them look
constantly to that only which is just and right: and let thine eyelids look
straight before thee; that is, to that straightness of way which God has
prescribed thee; and he mentions the eyelids, to intimate that they are given
us of God as a covering for the eyes, to guard them from looking after any
thing that is evil: or, Look diligently to the end thou propoundest to thy
self: or, Do nothing rashly and unadvisedly, but mind what thou do, as men
are wont to observe the way wherein they are going; consider seriously of every
thing thou meanest to undertake, before thou undertakest it. I know that some
understand these words more particularly, 1. of taking care that we look
modestly, and avoid all vain roving and wandering of our eyes; and 2. that we
should mind our own business, and not look after those things which belong not
to us. But the more general Expositions before mentioned are the best. And to
the same purpose is that which follows in the next verse.

Verse. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet, etc.] That is, Weigh well and consider
seriously with thy self, whether that you intend to do be just and right
according to the direction of Gods word: and let all thy ways be established;
to wit, by this means: as if he had said, and so shall all thy ways be
established, that is, so shall all thy ways succeed prosperously; or rather,
so shall thou be sure to go on constantly in the right way: and accordingly
some translate this last clause, and all thy ways shall be ordered aright.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. THat thou may regard discretion, etc.] To wit, that spiritual
policy, whereby men are enabled to order their way circumspectly, and to avoid
the snares whereinto others fall; see the Note chap. 1.4: and that thy lips may
keep knowledge; that is, that thou may be able upon all occasions to speak
wisely, both for the resisting of temptations, and in other ways, and as
opportunity is given even for the instructing of others also.

Verse. 3. For the lips of a strange woman, etc.] See the Note chap. 2.16. It is
as if he had said, Therefore do I call upon thee so carefully to attend unto my
words, or, Therefore is it fit that thy lips should keep knowledge, that
amongst other things thou may be able to avoid and repel the flatteries of
a harlot; whose lips drop as an honeycomb, are full of sweet words, which
without any pressing do plentifully flow from her: and her mouth is smoother
then oil; that is, her words are soft and gentle, and have no harshnesse in
them.

Verse. 4. But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.] To
wit, in regard of the bitter terrors of conscience, and the death and
destruction which do usually at last fall upon those that are ensnared with her
flatteries. The first clause, her end is bitter as wormwood, may be principally
meant of the terrors of conscience, which at last are wont to surprise those
that defile themselves with harlots, as in opposition to the first clause of
the foregoing verse, the lips of a strange woman drop as an honey-combe; and
then the next clause, sharp as a two-edged sword, may be meant principally of
the death and destruction which such uncleanness brings men to, as in
opposition to the last clause of the foregoing verse, her mouth is smoother
then oil. And besides these words may be spoken as in allusion to the effects
of honey eaten: that look as honey, when men eat much of it, does usually turn
to gall and choler in the stomach, and so does cause there exceeding bitter
gripings and pains; so the flatteries of a strumpet do usually bring upon men
many bitter and deadly terrors and miseries.

Verse. 5. Her feet go down to death, etc.] That is, thither she leads those
that follow her; see the Note chap. 2.18: her steps take hold on hell; that is,
both she and her associates are at the very brink of hell.

Verse. 6. Lest thou should ponder the path of life; her ways are moveable,
thou can not know them.] This is a very hard place. But two expositions are
most commonly followed. For 1. some understand it of the young man's pondering
the ways of the strange woman's life and conversation; Lest, says he, thou
should ponder the path of life; that is, lest thou should mark her way of
life, which being discovered were indeed enough to make thee loath her: her
ways are moveable, thou can not know them; that is, her ways are so
variable, she will have so many several devices to entangle thee, and will be
so cunning to transform her self into all forms and fashions, that though thou
should observe her never so diligently, and as it were weigh her actions,
and the ways she takes in a balance, it would be lost labor, thou will never
be able to find her out, nor to evade all her snares, but wilt be overthrown by
her pestilent enchantments, before thou can discern her villainous designs and
courses. But now, because it is not rendered in our Bibles, Lest thou should
ponder the path of her life, but, Lest thou should ponder the path of life,
we may see that our Translatours did rather understand it of the young man's
pondering the way of life, that is, the way how he should preserve his life, or
the way of holiness, which is the true way of life, and the way that leads
unto life eternal. Because the young man might think, that though he kept
company with the whorish woman, yet he would take care to preserve his life, by
getting in time away from her, or that yet he would in time repent, and have a
care of his soul; to beat him off from thus flattering himself, Solomon tells
him here how impossible this was: Lest, says he, thou should ponder the
path of life; that is, Lest thou should consider what course thou might
take for the preservation of thy life; or, Lest thou should bethink thy self
of saving thy soul, and of betaking thy self to the ways of holiness: her
ways are moveable, thou can not know them; that is, her ways are so
variable and inconstant, sometimes pretending one thing, sometimes another,
that thou will never be able to know what thou may give credit to and what
not, and consequently what course it were best for thee to take to escape the
danger thou art in; or, her ways are so crafty and crooked, so many several
devices she will have to ensnare thee, that thou will never be able to discover
her devices therein, that so thou should bethink thy self of avoiding the
danger of them, but it will be with thee as with men that go in bypath full
of windings and turnings, thou will be sure to loose thy self; or, her ways
run headlong to hell, and thither they will carry thee, without suffering thee
to discern the danger thou art in, or to bethink thy self of the ways of life.
This expression of the moveablenesse of the harlots ways may be used, either
with reference to the impossibility of thoroughly discerning those things that
are in continual motion, and so may imply, that by reason of the harlots
continual various ways and devices she has to delight and ensnare the young
man that converseth with her, though he now and then may think of the evil of
her ways, and of betaking himself into the path of life, yet she will soon
cause such motions to vanish away, neither will he be able seriously to ponder
them in his mind; or else by way of allusion to malefactors, or foxes and
badgers, that have usually many secret holes and hiding-places to shelter
themselves in, that they may not be taken, thereby signifying the many wiles
the harlot has to keep her lovers from finding out her mischievous designs.

Verse. 9. Lest thou give thine honor unto others, etc.] That is, Lest thou
suffer others to rob thee of thy good name, the credit and good esteem which
formerly thou did enjoy. And by others may be meant either simply harlots,
because usually one does not satisfy the lustful person; or else together with
them bawds and parasites, and such other lewd companions, with whom such
unclean persons do usually converse. I know that some Expositours do under this
word honor comprehend the wealth wherewith God has honored a man, and the
children he begets of the adulteress, as likewise the flower of a man's life,
his strength and beauty, all the honorable endowments both of his body and
mind, (yea and some extend it also to that honor of a man's being created after
Gods image.) But because these may be better comprised under the following
clauses, I rather take this to be meant of the shame and dishonor which this
sin brings upon men. And thy years to the cruel; that is, lest thou suffer
cruel harlots to wast and shorten the years of thy life; or lest thou spend
the precious time of thy youth upon them, which might be spent otherways to
Gods glory, and thine own great advantage. And indeed well may the harlot be
called cruel, because whereas the wife is careful of her husbands estate and
health and safety, the harlot cares not how she wastes them, and yet afterward,
when he is brougnt to poverty, will never mind him nor pity him: besides that
often such kind of women will not stick to poison or make away their lovers,
that so some other may be entertained in their stead. I know that by the cruel
some understand the strange woman's husband, that in his jealousy will fall upon
the adulterer with all possible fury, not admitting of any excuse or
satisfaction, see chap. 6.34, 35; and others, those that are the young man's
rivals, or else those bawds and ruffians and usurers that do cruelly wast his
estate. But the first exposition is clearly the best.

Verse. 10. Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the
house of a stranger.] That is, Lest thou do wast thy substance upon whores
and bawds, and such like vile persons; upon the adulteress, her husband,
children, and servants; upon usurers of whom thou must borrow money, or such as
must be bribed to conceal thy wickedness. And hereby Solomon does covertly
intimate, what a folly it is for a man to squander away that which he has
gotten, by wasting his strength in hard labor, upon mere strangers, so that
neither his wife, children, kindred or friends, shall be any way the better for
it. The first clause is in the Original, Lest strangers be filled with thy
strength, that is, with thy wealth gotten by strength, or which is thy
strength, according to that Hos. 7.9. Strangers have devoured his strength,
that is, the riches of the land: yet some understand it of men's wasting their
strength to satisfy the lust of a harlot.

Verse. 14. I was almost in all evil; etc.] That is, say some Expositours, I had
almost fallen into all kind of wickedness; I was almost grown to that, that I
was not ashamed to commit all kind of wickedness openly in the midst of the
congregation and assembly. But I rather take it thus, I was almost in all evil,
etc. that is, I had almost been overwhelmed with all kind of miseries, openly
and in the sight of all men, or in the place of arraignment and execution; for
adultery by Gods law was punished with death: or, I was almost in all evil,
that is, I had almost fallen into hell, which is worse then all other evils
whatsoever, there was but a step betwixt me and hell: in the midst of the
congregation and assembly; that is, even then when in the public assemblies I
had good instructions, and saw many good examples, and was pressed to do
better by many sweet motions of Gods spirit within me. So that it is all one as
if he had said, that he was in a manner in the portall of hell, even whilst
heaven in the means of grace was daily set open before him.

Verse. 15. Drink waters out of thine own cistern, etc.] That is, say some,
Enjoy that estate which God has given thee for thy use and benefit; husband it
as may be most for thine advantage, and then enjoy it with comfort, and do not
lavish it away upon strangers. Yea and some add very well, that whilst men are
thus advised to take the comfort of their own estates themselves, Drink waters
out of thine own cistern, etc. there is covertly herein a promise employed, to
wit, that if a man will live soberly and chastely, he shall then through Gods
blessing keep his possessions, and enjoy them with comfort, whereas the
whore-monger shall drink of the bitter cup of penury and want. Now for the
better clearing of this exposition, it must be considered, that in regard they
made such precious account in those hot countries of their springs and wells of
water, it is no wonder though drinking of their own cisterns be here put for
the comfortable enjoying of their estates in general. But now most conceive
that Solomon, in these words, prescribes the lawful and undefiled use of the
marriage bed, as a remedy against adultery and fornication; alluding, in the
expression he uses, to those that having a cistern or spring of water of their
own at home, use not to fetch water from other men's houses: Drink waters out of
thine own cistern; that is, Quench the heat and thirst of thy natural desires
by the enjoying of thine own wife; and do not follow after harlots, which
indeed does rather increase then quench this thirst, even as the dropsy-man the
more he drinks the more thirsty he is. But see the Note also Numb. 24.7.

Verse. 16. Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the
streets, etc.] That is, As men are wont to pleasure their neighbors with the
water of their springs and fountains, so let thine estate be laid out for the
public benefit of the place where thou live, especially for the relief of
the poor that lie in the streets. And observable it is, that the expression
here used may seem to imply, that a man's giving to the poor should be as the
flowing of a fountain, which has never a whit the less water in it, because
of that which is given. Yea and this also may imply a promise, as is noted in
the foregoing verse, that if they do not waste their estates upon harlots, in
stead of wanting themselves, they should through Gods blessing be able to do
good unto others. Or 2. thus, So shall thy children, which shall numerously
spring from thee and thy wife, (see the Notes Numb. 24.7. and Deuteronomy. 33.8.) be
disposed abroad in several places and employments, or be playing and sporting
in the streets, being a delight to their parents, and an ornament to the places
where they are, like so many rivulets of pure spring water running along in the
streets. So that the drift of this place seems to be, both to advise, that this
should be the aim of men in their marriage, and also to promise, that this
shall be the fruit of their marriage, to wit, the having of a numerous and
comfortable offspring: which cannot be expected from common whores, both
because children of whoredom men dare not usually own; and because such lewd
women seldom have children, according to that of the prophet Hos. 4.10. they
shall commit whoredom, and shall not increase; and because the curse of God
does usually cut off such children, or at least make them uncomfortable to
their parents.

Verse. 17. Let them be only thine own, and not strangers with thee.] That is,
1. Do not squander away thine estate and goods upon harlots, and others that
are mere strangers to thee, but keep them for thine own use, and for those that
belong to thee, or to be disposed at thine own will, in any good use as thou
shall see cause. For Solomon does not contradict in this what he had said in
the foregoing verse, Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, etc. And therefore
this which he says here is only a charge to young men, not to wast their
estates in lewd courses; though indeed it may be extended to that also, as we
find in some Expositours, that even in giving to good uses men should be
careful not to dispossess themselves of all, and so to bring themselves to
poverty. Or 2. thus, Let thy children be, or, So shall thy children be only
thine own, and not a strangers with thee: and the meaning is, that if he kept
to his own wife, he should be sure not to be put to father other men's children;
and that both because by avoiding harlots, he should be sure they should not
do him this mischief, whose children might be other men's, though they
pretended they were his; and also because by being faithful to his wife, he
might the rather assure himself that she would be faithful to him.

Verse. 18. Let thy fountain be blessed, etc.] That is, say some Expositours, Be
careful to keep thine own vessel in holiness and honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. But I
conceive that the two expositions given of the foregoing verses are here
likewise most probable. 1. Let thy fountain be blessed, that is, Lay not out
thine estate upon lewd women, but live chastely, and so the blessing of God
shall be upon what thou have; or, Be ready to disperse thy fountains abroad,
that is, to give liberally of thine estate for relieving the poor (as this
phrase was expounded before verse. 16.) that so God may bless thine estate, and
the poor may pray for a blessing on it. Or 2. Let thy fountain be blessed, that
is, Let thy wife be blessed, or, so shall thy wife be blessed with children,
and thy children shall be blessed that shall flow from her. And this
expression, I conceive, is the rather used, because barrenness was looked upon
in those times as a heavy curse; and because it tends not a little to the
fruitfulness of the wife, when the husband has not, nor does not, spend his
strength upon harlots. However, the drift of these words is, to show how much
better it is for a man to live chastely in honest wedlock, then to haunt the
company of lewd women. And to the same purpose is the following clause, and
rejoice with the wife of thy youth, see chap. 2.17. For herein either the
husband is enjoined to make use of his wife for his delight, to wit, of her and
of no other woman; or, taking delight in her is prescribed as a remedy against
lusting after others. Yea and this may also intimate, that there was no true
pleasure but in this way of living: in this lawful way of wedlock he should
rejoice in his wife and children, and should take the more delight in his wife
because of his children; whereas in whores, as he has already showed, there is
nothing but bitterness and sorrow to be expected.

Verse. 19. Let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe, etc.] That is, Let
her be as delightful to thee for her beauty and love, as hindes and roes are
usually to great men, who are wont, when they are brought to be tame, and to
follow them up and down, to play with them, and to take great delight in them,
as being very beautiful and comely creatures. And some add too, that as these
creatures are tamed by gentle and tender usage, so the wife should be allured
to delight in her husband, by all possible gentleness and love. But I rather
take it thus* As the heart does dearly love the hinde^ and the ^oe buck the roe,
following their mates up and down, and, as it is said, keeping to them and no
other; so, if thou will not be worse then beasts, do thou as ardently love thy
wife, delight in her, and be faithful to her. Let her breasts satisfy thee at
all times; which cannot be done with harlots, to whom men go only at some
times, and by stealth; and let this be as a sure remedy to keep thee from
minding the strange woman: and be thou ravished always with her love; which is
in the Original, and err thou always in her love, (alluding to the wandering
of these creatures up and down after their mates,) that is, be inamoured with
her even to some fondness and doting, some erring in her love, to wit, so as
not to see any blemish that is in her, to have too high rather then too mean an
opinion of her; and that always, not suffering any thing to alienate thine
affection from her, continuing as constant a liking to her to the last, even
when her beauty shall be decayed, as when she was in the flower of her youth,
and when thou did first set thy love upon her.

Verse. 20. And why will thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, etc?] To
wit, considering what has been said concerning the dreadful dangers and
miseries that attend whoredom, and the many blessings and comforts which they
enjoy that live honestly in the married estate.

Verse. 21. For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, etc.] And
therefore though the unclean person commit his sin never so secretly, that will
do him no good: see the Note Job 31.4.

Verse. 22. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be
holden with the cords of his sins.] In three several regards it may be said,
that wicked men, and so particularly fornicatours and adulterers, are taken and
held with the cords of their own sins. 1. Because by reason of the guilt of
their sins they stand bound over before God, and liable to destruction; so that
though they may escape for a time, and thereupon may think themselves as safe
as may be, yet the truth is, that wherever they go, they carry their chains
and setters about them, their own consciences do condemn them, and their
wickedness shall certainly at last bring destruction upon them. 2. Because
their own iniquities are usually the very means and occasion of their ruin:
see the Notes Psalm. 7.16. and 9.16. And 3. because they are so by custom
entangled in their sins, that they cannot possibly leave them: which is more
especially true of unclean persons; though they see the evil and danger of
their sin, and so may think they will repent hereafter, yet it will not be,
they are so fast held in the cords of their lusts. And this agrees best with
the following words.

Verse. 23. He shall die without instruction, etc.] That is, because he has
despised instruction; or, God shall at last deny him the means of instruction,
because whilst he had it, he would not regard it: and in the greatness of his
folly he shall go astray; that is, God shall leave him to run on in great
folly to eternal perdition. Now his running on in a way of impenitency is
ascribed to greatness of folly, either because no folly, no no^ the folly of
children and idiots, is so great as that, when men to satisfy their own carnal
desires will reject Gods counsel; or else because wicked men do befool
themselves so many several ways; as in that they mind not Gods displeasure,
or can be content for a little momentany pleasure to hazard their eternal
salvation, or in that they can flatter themselves with such vain conceits, as
that God will not punish them, or that they will repent hereafter, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. MY son, if thou be surety, etc.] Solomon here shows the danger of
suretiship: yet not as condemning all suretiship whatsoever, (for as it is a
work of mercy to lend in some cases, Psalm. 37.26. so also in some cases it may
be to be surety for another, as Paul for Onesimus Philem. 19.) but only rash
suretiship, when men will unadvisedly engage themselves for any that desire it
of them, without due consideration of the persons for whom they do it, or of
that for which they are engaged, whether it be not more then they are willing
or well able to discharge, without the ruin or exceeding great prejudice of
them and their families, if it should fall upon them. If thou be surety for thy
friend, if thou have stricken thy hand (see the Note Job 17.3.) with a
stranger; that is, if thou have with or for a stranger engaged thy self to any
man. I know that many by the stranger here do understand the creditour to whom
a man gives his hand, and so engages himself for his friend. But I rather
conceive that Solomon does here advise men what they should do in case they
have been sureties for another man, whether he were friend or stranger.

Verse. 2. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, etc.] As if he had said,
Though thou had not the money thy self, nor any benefit by it, and before
thou did undertake as a surety, thou were free whether thou would have
done it or no; yet having once passed thy promise, thou art now bound.

Verse. 3. Do this now, my son, and deliver thy self; when thou art come into
the hand of thy friend, etc.] By thy friend here may be meant, either the
friend for whom a man has engaged himself as a surety, into whose hands the
surety may well be said to be fallen, because if he does not now discharge his
debt, it will fall heavily upon the surety; or else it may be meant of the
creditour, (for to friends men may be sureties for others, as well as to
strangers,) and then the meaning must be this, When thou art fallen into the
hands of the creditour, who may take the forfeiture of thy engagement, and
bring thee into great troubles, though he be thy friend, and much more if he be
a stranger, take care to free thy self. And accordingly we must understand the
following words, go, humble thy self; to wit, to him for whom thou art engaged,
pressing him, yea with begging it of him, that he would discharge his debt
himself, and not suffer it to fall upon thee; and so likewise, yea rather, to
the creditour, fall down before him, and by all humble deportment and
entreaties sue to him for favor, to wit, that he would not proceed in
extremity against thee, but that he would forbear thee for some time, till thou
may bring him to discharge the debt, whose proper debt it is, or that thou
may pay it by little and little, or that he would accept of some reasonable
composition from thee: and make sure thy friend; that is, make sure that thy
friend, for whom thou art engaged, do discharge his debt, and so free thee; or,
make sure that thy friend, to whom thou have engaged thy self, may deal
favorably with thee.

Verse. 6. Go to the ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise.] That
is, Be so wise as to learn of her; or be wise according to the wisdom thou
may learn of her. And though there be many things which may be observed
concerning the industry and providence of this poor creature, as that they will
carry grains of corn as big as themselves, and will labor herein by night,
when the moon shines, as well as by day, that they will, when they discern it
will be a fair season, bring out their corn that has taken any wet, to dry it
in the sun, that it may be kept sweet and good (whereupon they say that the
husbandman concludes it will be fair weather, when he sees these creatures
laying out their store a drying) and that they are wont to bite off the end or
eye of the grains of corn they gather, where the seed uses first to sprout
forth, that so they may not grow with lying in the earth, and many other
particulars; yet that which Solomon here intends, at least principally, is that
which follows verse. 8. that she provideth her meat in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest, that so in winter she may have whereon to
live. However, observable it is, that Solomon does here put up, as it were into
the pulpit, this little despicable creature, to instruct brutish men. And some
think that those words, consider her ways, are spoken with reference to those
tracks which are sometimes made in the very stones, by their continual going
up and down.

Ver. 11. So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, etc.] That is, it
shall come into thine house speedily, sudde^ly and unexpectedly, as a Post, say
some, or pursevant that rides post to apprehend a man, or rather as a guest
that comes to an house unlooked for; or it shall overtake him, as a swift
traveller overtakes one that walks slowly; whereby also is intimated, that
therefore it should be the more grievous to be born: and thy want as an armed
man; that is, irresistably; for what hope can there be that a sluggard half a
sleep and half awake should resist an armed man? The drift is, that poverty
should rush upon him as an armed robber, or as soldiers that break in upon a
house and plunder it, scarce leaving any thing behind them.

Verse. 12. A wicked man walks with a froward mouth.] That is, it is his
constant course to talk perversely and wickedly. And though the most of
Expositours understand this particularly of the wicked man's lying and
dissembling, yet I rather understand it of all wicked speaking whatsoever; for
whatever it is wherein men do perversely cross God in what he requires of us,
that the Scripture calls frowardness. See the Notes 2 Samuel 22.27. and Job 5.15.

Ver. 13. He winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with
his fingers.] As if he had said, So eager he is to utter the mischief that is
in his heart, that if he be in company where he dares not speak openly, yet by
some privy sign or other he will make known his mind in a manner with all the
parts of his body, as by winking with his eyes, or by stamping with his feet,
or by the holding up of his fingers, etc. Most Expositours, I know, understand
this particularly of the secret tokens, which wicked men are wont to give to
their companions for the doing of some mischief to those, to whom at the same
time they make a fair show of friendship, as by winking with the eye, or
treading secretly on their feet, or some such hint given them. But I rather
understand it more generally, of any intimation given closely, whether by eye,
hand or foot, of any wicked thoughts that are in his heart, as of lust, or
malice, or any such.

Verse. 15. Suddenly shall he be broken without remedy.] That is, No power nor
policy, nor any means whatsoever shall be ever able to prevent his ruin: or,
he shall be ruined irrecoverably, there shall be no possibility of restoring
him to a good condition again; he shall be broken as a potters vessel, which
being broken cannot be mended and made up again. And herein also may be
employed, that when God began to punish him, there should be no more place for
repentance then.

Verse. 16. These six things does the Lord hate; yea seven are an abomination to
him.] Though God hates and abhorres all sin, yet some are more abominable to
him then others; and so these are here mentioned as horrible villainies, and
such as God does above many other sins abhor.

Verse. 17. A proud look, etc.] It is in the Original, haughty eyes. And thus
Solomon expresses most of these seven abominations by the members of the body
wherewith they are acted, beginning with the eyes, and so going downward till
he comes to the feet, as we see in the following words, a lying tongue, and
hands that shed innocent blood; and then verse. 18. An heart that devises
wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief: see the Note
chap. 1.16. And withal observable it is, that the heart is here placed in the
midst, as the fountain from whence all kind of wickedness does stream forth on
every side to all the members.

Verse. 21. Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy
neck.] See the Notes chap. 1.9. and 3.3.

Verse. 22. When thou go, it shall lead thee, etc.] That is, The command or
counsel of thy godly parents, mentioned before verse. 20. or, which is all one,
the word of God which they press upon thee, shall direct thee in all thy
ways, still carrying thee on unto greater perfection; see the Note chap. 3.23:
when thou sleep, it shall keep thee; that is, say some Expositours,
meditating thereon in the day, or falling asleep with some good meditation
thereof in thy mind, it shall keep thee in the night from all foolish and
sinful dreams and illusions of Satan; or rather, being carefully observed by
thee, it shall be a sure means of thy preservation, in that the Lord will
thereupon be tenderly watchful over thee when thou sleep, to keep thee from
all evil: and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee; that is, it will
bring to thy remembrance some spiritual and heavenly meditations, happily some
meditations which thou had before in the night season, according to that of
David Psalm. 139.18. when I awake, I am still with thee: and thus, before thou
can make thy self ready that thou may be fit to talk with any body else,
that will be as it were conferring with thee; and as masters are wont early in
the morning to appoint their servants what they shall do all the day after, so
will that direct thee how to carry thy self in all the businesses of the
following day.

Verse. 23. For the commandment is a lamp, and the law is light.] That is, as a
candle in the night, and as the light of the sun by day. Yea and some
Expositours conceive, that having spoken in the foregoing verse of the benefits
that redound to men by the word, both whilst they sleep by night, and when they
wake in the morning, therefore in allusion thereto he adds here, that it is as
a lamp or candle, whereof men have great use both when they go to bed at
night, and when they rise in the morning. But see the Notes Psalm. 19.8, and
119.105.

Verse. 25. Lust not after her beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee
with her eyelids.] That is, with the handsomeness of her eyes, wherein the
beauty of the countenance does chiefly consist, whence is that Cant. 4.9. thou
have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes; or with her casting her eyes
upon thee; or with her pleasant and wanton looks, which are the very pit-fals
and trap-doors wherewith harlots are wont to catch those that haunt their
company.

Verse. 26. For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of
bread, etc.] That is, to such extreme poverty, that he has scarce a piece of
bread to eat, or that he is forced to beg from door to door for a morsel of
bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life; that is, she
pursues men time after time, seeking by all possible craft and subtlety to
bring them to that wickedness, which does usually cost them the loss of that
which men do naturally esteem above all earthly things, and that is their
lives: and hence is that also which Solomon says of the whorish woman, Eccles.
7.26. that her heart is soars and nets, and her hands as b^nds. But see the
Note Prove. 2.18.

Verse. 27. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his cloths not be burnt?
etc.] Why the sin of adultery is compared to fire, both here, and in the
following verse, Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burnt? see the
Note Job 31.12.

Verse. 29. So he that goes in to his neighbors wife, etc.] That is, that
lies with her (for so this phrase is often used in the Scripture, as Genesis
29.21, 23;) whosoever touches her, to wit, in that kind, shall not be
innocent, that is, the Lord will not hold him guiltless; he shall be as surely
punished either by God or man, as he that takes fire in his bosom is sure to
be burnt: or he that usually keeps her company, and converseth familiarly with
her* whosoever touches her* that is, comes near her, or any way dallieth with
her, shall not be innocent, that is, whatever his intentions may be, or however
confident he may be to the contrary, he shall not keep himself from sinning
with her, either by actual uncleanness with her, or by secret lusting after
her, which also by degrees will bring on the other; at least he shall not avoid
scandal, he shall be commonly reputed an unclean person, the smell of this fire
will at least be upon him. See also the Note chap. 2.19.

Verse. 30. Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he
is hungry.] That is, his natural desire after meat. In this case men are not
wont to entertain any hard thoughts of such a one, as they do of the adulterer,
but rather to pity him; and much less will they seek to take away his life,
or to put him to any public shame: yea though he may lie under some disgrace
for a time, yet men are soon ready to forgive and forget it. Now all this
Solomon speaks with respect to what was usually done in those times amongst the
Israelites, who were not commanded by the law of God to punish theft with death.

Verse. 31. But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold, etc.] See the Note
Exodus 22.4. It is as if he had said, It is true, full satisfaction shall be
required of him; yea if it cost him the parting with all the estate that he
has, if there be no other way to appease those from whom he has stolen, and
to satisfy for his theft according to Gods law, even this must be done; which
is employed in the following words, he shall give all the substance of his
house: well but yet this is the utmost that is done to him, his life is not
endangered, as the adulterers is, and that justly, because he can make no
restitution nor satisfaction to the abused husband, as the thief does to those
he has wronged.

Verse. 32. But whosoever commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding,
etc.] That is, he is not compelled by necessity, as the thief is, but being
merely besotted by his lusts he does that which none but a mad man, a man void
of all reason and understanding would do, to wit, in that not considering the
greatness of his sin, and Gods wrath against it, nor contenting himself with
the lawful use of the marriage bed, which God has appointed as a remedy for
such unlawful lusts, he wilfully chooses to hazard his life and eternal
salvation by seeking to satisfy his brutish desires upon another man's wife;
which is expressed in the following words, he that does it, destroys his own
soul.

Verse. 33. A wound and dishonor shall he get.] By his getting a wound here may
be meant, that he should be wounded in his name and credit; and so much was
happily employed by adding the word dishonor, to explain the other, A wound and
dishonor shall he get: or else thereby may be meant the punishments inflicted
on him by the magistrate, or the wounds given him by the woman's enraged
husband; which may seem most probable, because of the following words.

Verse. 34. For jealousy is the rage of a man, etc.] That is, It is that which
above all things enrageth a man; though an effeminate person may bear, he that
has any true manhood in him cannot bear it: therefore he will not spare in the
day of vengeance; that is, he will not spare him his life, or he will not
afford him the least mercy, whenever he gets opportunity to take vengeance on
him: for herein Solomon shows what was usually done, not what might lawfully be
done, seeing God did never allow private revenge, no not in this case. Yet the
words may be also understood of the enraged husbands prosecuting the adulterer
to death before the civil magistrate, and not suffering himself to be stopped
by any mediation of friends, or by any gifts that came to be proffered him, as
is expressed in the following verse.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. MY son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.] See
the Notes chap. 2.1, and 3.1, 2. and Psalm. 119.11.

Verse. 2. Keep my commandments, and live; and my law, as the apple of thine
eye.] That is, with all possible diligence, as esteeming it of all things most
dear to thee, and most necessary for thee, and as charily avoiding the least
sin forbidden by the law, as men are watchful to keep the least mote out of
their eyes.

Verse. 3. Bind them upon thy fingers, etc.] That is, think continually of them,
let them be always in your eye and mind, as are those things which men use to
wear as memorials upon their fingers, see the Note Exodus 13.9. that you may by
continual meditation on them be so expert in them, that you may have them upon
all occasions, as we use to say at your fingers ends. And if that were truly so
which some say, that in those days they used to have the names or pictures of
those they loved most dearly engraven upon their rings, (whereto there may seem
to be an allusion in that Jer. 22.24. As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah,
the son of Iehoiakim king of Judah, were the signet upon my right hand, yet
would I pluck thee thence) Solomon might also with respect hereto use this
expression: for which, and for the following clause, write them upon the table of
thine heart, see the Note chapter 3.3.

Verse. 4. Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister; and call understanding thy
kinswoman.] That is, Love her as thy sister, and be familiarly acquainted with
her as with thy kinswoman. It may seem all one in effect as if he had said,
Since young men will have their Loves, their Ladies and Mistresses, let me
commend a Love to thee, my son, and that is wisdom: There is none more
honorable, rich, affable, beautiful and lovely then she is; and therefore in
stead of those wantons that foolish youngsters hunt after to their own ruin,
do thou set thy heart upon wisdom, and so thy love shall be a pure and chaste
love, such as may be between a brother and sister, Say unto wisdom, Thou art
my sister, etc. Some Expositours conceive that in reference to this place
Christ used those words, Matthew. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the will of my
father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

Verse. 6. For at the window of my house I looked through my casement.] To wit,
that I might the more clearly see what was done in the streets. Whether this
were really done by Solomon, as is here related, or whether he only propounds
it in the way of a parable, is not evident from any thing in the Text, neither
is it indeed much material.

Verse. 9. In the twilight in the evening, in the black and dark night,] That
is, when it began to be black and dark: the usual time when such youngsters
are wont to frequent such lewd places, because then they hope that they shall
not be seen.

Verse. 10. And behold, there met him a woman with the attire of an harlot.]
Some Expositours understand this of such an attire as was peculiar and proper
to harlots, and whereby they were distinguished and known from other women. But
though this were usual amongst other nations, see the Note Genesis 38.15. yet I
conceive it was not so amongst the Israelites, where none were allowed to be
open professed whores. And therefore the meaning of the words I take to be only
this, that the woman that met him was dressed in a wanton whorish attire, as
happily with crisped hair and naked breasts, an attire fit to entice men to
uncleanness, and which none therefore but harlots would wear.

Verse. 11. ( She is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house.] By her
loudness may be meant in general, that she is ordinarily bold and free in
talking, and that her tongue will be heard above all wherever she comes: but
yet I conceive it is principally meant of her brawling with her husband;
agreeable whereto is that which is next added, She is loud and stubborn, that
is, froward and rebellious against God and her husband: and that this is the
rather expressed, to show, that when wives are once disquiet with their own
husbands, and despise them, and rebel against them, there is no little danger
of their being unfaithful to them, and becoming unclean with other men.

Verse. 12. Now she is without, now in the streets.] By being without may be
meant either her being any way from home, as in the fields, or in any other
men's houses, or in taverns and other drinking-houses, etc. or else, her
standing or sitting without at her door: as if he had said, One while she is
sitting without at her door, another while she is gadding up and down in the
streets, etc.

Verse. 14. I have peace offerings with me; this day I have paid my vows.] See
the Note Levit. 7.15. Some conceive that the harlot does here tell the young
man of her peace offerings and her vows (which was an extraordinary act of
piety, a voluntary gift not enjoined, and therefore usually offered only by
those that were devout above others) thereby to pretend piety and devotion: and
that either 1. because this might draw him on to the sin wherein she desired to
inveigle him, by hinting to him, that as long as they were mindful to make
their peace with God, by performing the duties of his worship and service,
though they did a little transgress in their mutual solacing of themselves
one with another, there would be in that no fear or danger; or 2. because she
knew that men are more easily drawn to commit wickedness with one that has
the reputation of an honest woman, then with such as are open professed
strumpets. But I should rather think that the only, at least the main thing
intended in her speaking of this to him, was to let him know, that she had good
cheer ready prepared for his entertainment. For the greatest part of the flesh
of their peace offerings belonged to the sacrificers, and therewith they used
to feast their families and friends. See the Note 1 Samuel 1.4.

Verse. 15. Therefore came I forth to meet thee, etc.] That is, Being thus
provided with good cheer, I desired to enjoy thy company, and that thou
should have thy share in it, and therefore not contenting my self to send a
messenger for thee, I came out my self to seek thee, diligently to seek thy
face; that is, to look thee out, and earnestly to beg this favor, that thou
would be my guest this day. And to this some add too, that in this
expression she sought also to imply how much she was taken with his beauty, and
delighted to look upon him. As for the last clause, and I have found thee, that
is spoken with a kind of ravishing joy, as if she blessed the day and hour
wherein she had so happily met with him; yea as if she would intimate, that
upon her sacrifices and the payment of her vows, God had answered her desires
in bringing him to her: it is as if she had said, I came forth to meet thee,
and lo presently I have found thee, even according to mine own hearts wish and
desire.

Verse. 19. For the good man is not at home.] She says not, My husband is not
at home, but, the good man is not at home, in a kind of contempt and scorn; and
it may be, as fearing lest the very naming of her husband should awaken the
young man's conscience, and stagger him as concerning that wickedness she was
drawing him to.

Verse. 20. He has taken a bag of money with him, etc.] To wit, say some
Expositours, as having many great businesses to dispatch, and many rich
merchandises to buy; or rather, because he is therewith to defray the charges
of a long journey: and will come home at the day appointed; as if she had said,
He has appointed me the day when I may expect him, which is many days hence,
and till then to be sure he will not come.

Verse. 21. With much fair speech she caused him to yield, etc.] To show how
perilous the flattering language of a harlot is, the Spirit of God does here
ascribe her prevailing over the young man rather to this, then to her embraces
and kisses.

Verse. 22. He goes after her straightway, as an ox goes to the slaughter,
etc.] To wit, no otherwise then as if they were driving him to some fat
pasture: or as a fool to the correction of the stocks; who goes jeasting and
laughing, not considering the punishment he is like to undergo. But in this
last comparison there may be something more employed, to wit, that the adulterer
can no more rid himself out of the harlots snares, then such a fool can get out
of the stocks when he is shut up therein.

Verse. 23. Till a dart strike through his liver, etc.] This may be referred
both to that which went before, and to that which follows after: but I rather
refer it to that which went before. He goes after her straightway, as an ox,
etc. Till a dart strike through his liver; that is, till his soul be mortally
wounded with the sin of adultery; or rather, till he be suddenly by some means
cut off by the just vengeance of God; see the Note chap. 2.18. Because the
wounding of the liver must needs be deadly, therefore is his destruction set
forth by the striking through of his liver: yet happily this expression may also
the rather be used, because lust does putrify the blood and corrupt the liver.
As for the following clause, as the bird hastes to the snare, that has clear
reference to that in the foregoing verse, He goes after her straightway. And
then for the last words, and knows not that it is for his life, I conceive
they are clearly meant of the birds hasting to the snare immediately before
mentioned; though I know some understand it of the young man, that knows not
that the enticements of the harlot tend to the bereaving him of his life.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. Does not wisdom cry? etc.] See the Note Prove. 1.20: and
understanding put forth her voice? that is, freely discover unto men the whole
will of God. Having shown in the foregoing chapter how young men are seduced by
harlots, here he sets forth how wisdom does every where instruct men better;
and so hereby he proves, that neither these, nor consequently any other wicked
men, can plead ignorance, but that they wilfully run upon their own perdition,
because they will not hearken to the instruction of wisdom.

Verse. 2. She stands in the top of high places, etc.] To wit, where she may
best be heard: by the way in the places of the paths; that is, where several
ways meet together; or rather, in all places where men use to walk, or where
they are wont to resort and meet. The drift of the words is, to show that
wisdom instructs men in all places whatsoever: see the Note chap. 1.20. But in
the expressions here used there may seem to be an allusion to magistrates, that
cause their proclamations to be published by their heralds and other officers,
standing aloft above the people, and that in places of greatest concourse.
Neither is that altogether improbable, which some conceive is signified hereby,
to wit, that wisdom does direct men when they are in the greatest streights,
not knowing what course to take, as travelers use to be, when they come to a
place where several ways meet together.

Verse. 3. She cries at the gates, at the entry of the city, etc.] See the Note
chap. 1.21: at the coming in at the doors; to wit, of men's private houses: so
that the meaning is, that wisdom instructs men both in public and private.

Verse. 4. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of man.] That
is, all men whatsoever. Yet by men may be more particularly meant aged men, or
men of chief rank and quality; and by the sons of man, young or mean men.

Verse. 5. O ye simple, understand wisdom, and ye fools, be ye of an
understanding heart.] This may be spoken to all wicked men, and that with an
intention to give them to understand, that how wise soever they thought
themselves, yet they were indeed but simple fools. But see also the Notes chap.
1.4, 22.

Verse. 6. The opening of my lips shall be right things.] See the Note Psalm.
19.8.

Verse. 9. They are all plain to him that understands, etc.] That is, to those
that do with honest and upright hearts use all holy means to find out the
meaning of them, and so thereupon God does enlighten them, and takes away that
vail of ignorance that is naturally upon the hearts of all men. It is want of
understanding in us, and so of diligence in searching into the knowledge of
them, if they seem dark and obscure.

Verse. 10. Receive my instruction, and not silver, etc.] That is, rather then
silver, as the following clause explains it, and knowledge rather then choice
gold. Yet withal this may imply, that unless men take off their affections
from an over-eager pursuit after worldly riches, they will never mind wisdom
as they ought to do.

Verse. 12. I wisdom dwell with prudence, etc.] As if he should have said, we
are never asunder. So that this expression does imply, 1. that Christ has both
wisdom and prudence essentially in him; and 2. that by his word and spirit he
does teach men prudence, and to carry themselves prudently, that is, discreetly
and circumspectly, in all their ways. It may be translated, I wisdom dwell
with subtlety, for which see the Note chap. 1.4. And find out knowledge of
witty inventions; that is, I suggest to men all those inventions whereby they
contrive the effecting of any good to themselves, whereby they may do things
cautelously and prudently according to the will of God, or may do well in the
best manner, wherein the wit as it were of religion appears.

Verse. 13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, etc.] And this is added here,
because the fear of the Lord is the fruit, the first and chief part of wisdom;
see the Notes chap. 1.7. and Psalm. 111.10: pride and arrogance, which is first
mentioned because it is the root of all vices, and the evil way, that is, every
sinful practice and custom, and the froward mouth do I hate; see the Note
chap. 6.12. As if it had been said, And consequently I teach others to hate
them, and am the fountain from whence every good grace must flow into their
souls. See the Note also Psalm. 45.7.

Verse. 14. Counsel is mine, etc.] Whence it is said of Christ Isa. 9.6. his
Name shall be called wonderful, Counselor: All policy that is not from
Christ, and according to the word of God, is no better then folly: and sound
wisdom; see the Note chap. 2.7. I am understanding, that is, I give men
understanding, or I teach men prudently to effect what by good counsel has
been well contrived. Yet the phrase is here changed; he says not,
Understanding is mine, but, I am understanding, to show that understanding is
essentially and perfectly in Christ. As for the last clause, I have strength,
either it may be meant 1. of that almighty power that is in Christ, whereby he
is able to do whatsoever he pleases, and whereby he has conquered hell and
death and sin; or 2. of that spiritual strength, that fortitude and
magnanimity and strength of grace, which by the word and spirit of Christ men
attain, whereby they are enabled to bear all afflictions, and to resist all
temptations, and to carry themselves in all things as strong Christians; or 3.
that divine assistance whereby they accomplish the greatest enterprises which
upon due consultation they have resolved upon.

Verse. 15. By me kings reign, etc.] This is ascribed to wisdom, 1. because all
government is the ordinance of Christ, the son and wisdom of the Father; 2.
because by his providence they are advanced to the throne, (and that many times
too for that excellent measure of wisdom which he has given them,) and by his
providence they are supported and protected in their places; and 3. because by
the wisdom which he gives them they govern the people prudently and justly and
successefully, and by his providence they are prospered in their enterprises:
and princes decree justice; that is, they make just laws, and pronounce just
sentences, when they sit in the judgment seat. And now by all this may be also
employed, that if the great ones of the world have so much advantage from
wisdom, much more may others expect the like in their private affairs.

Ves. 17. I love them that love me, etc.] The meaning is, that they who
heartily affect wisdom shall find her ready to impart her self to them,
according to that which follows in the next clause, and they that seek me
early shall find me. And though it be true that Christ loves us before we can
love him, 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us; yet it is true
also, that when we love him, the more we love him, the more he loves us.

Verse. 18. Riches and honor are with me, etc.] See the Note chap. 3.16: yea,
durable riches, and righteousness. And this is added, either to show, that
even the outward wealth and honor which wisdom confers upon men are better
then the riches and honors of worldly men, and that because that which she
confers is ever gotten with righteousness, and is therefore durable, whenas
theirs are usually gotten by injustice and wickedness, and so continue not
long with them: or else to show, that besides outward riches and honor, he
gives also durable riches; or that the riches and honor which he intended in
the first clause, was not the riches and honor of this world, but riches which
were durable, even spiritual and eternal riches and honors. And by
righteousness, which is particularly added, may be meant either the imputed
righteousness of Christ, or the righteousness of men's lives and
conversations. Now this last exposition seems to agree best with the following
verses.

Verse. 19. My fruit is better then gold, etc.] See the Note chap. 3.14. If we
understand this not of the gain of wisdom, but of that which is gotten by
wisdom, then hereby may be meant the righteousness mentioned in the foregoing
verse; or more generally both remission of sins, and sanctification, and a holy
conversation here, and eternal life hereafter.

Verse. 20. I lead, etc.] It is in the Original, I walk; but the meaning is, I
cause men to walk: in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of
judgment; to wit, where there is no danger of erring, or, without turning
aside to the right hand or to the left. And the drift of this is to show,
either that the riches which wisdom gives are not gotten by unrighteousness,
as wicked men's are; or rather, that this is, or this brings men to, that
durable riches before spoken of, or that fruit of wisdom, which is better then
gold, etc. as it is in the foregoing verse.

Verse. 21. That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, etc.] Some
Expositours conceive that under this word substance even worldly riches are
comprehended, to wit, when they are well gotten, and so continue with men, and
are enjoyed with contentment; which last they take to be employed in those last
words, and I will fill their treasures. But the most and best Expositours do by
substance understand true happiness, which consists in the enjoyment of God,
in having our souls adorned with true grace here, and in the bliss of life
eternal hereafter: and that because these have true substance and solid
consistency in them, and shall be possessed by them that have them as an
inheritance for ever, and fully satisfy the desires of their souls; whereas
worldly wealth (though for that men are usually miscalled substantial men) in
true judgment is not, but only in show and semblance, in opinion and
imagination, Prove. 23.5. will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? at
least such things can only be reckoned amongst men's movables, nor can ever
fill the desires of our souls; it is only life eternal that deserves to be
counted our inheritance.

Verse. 22. The Lord possessed me, etc.] To wit, as his wisdom and as his son,
that was always with and in the Father, according to that Joh. 1.1. In the
beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God: in the
beginning of his way; that is, say some, of his eternal decrees; or rather, of
his works of Creation, and consequently from eternity, as the following words
explain it, before his works of old; see the Note Psalm. 93.2: for he that was
in the beginning of the creation, must needs have had a being before, and that
must needs be an eternal being.

Verse. 23. I was set up from everlasting, etc.] That is, say some Expositours,
I was appointed to be the Mediator, the anointed king of his Church; or
rather, I was with and in the Father, of equal majesty and power with him, and
by me he appointed to make and govern all his creatures: from the beginning, or
ever the earth was; to wit, so much as in the Chaos, when it was yet without
form and void, Genesis 1.2.

Verse. 24. When there were no depths, etc.] To wit, of water; no seas, lakes or
rivers; see the Note chap. 3.20: I was brought forth; that is, I was from all
eternity begotten of my Father: for the wisdom of the Father speaks here of
himself after the manner of men.

Verse. 26. While as yet he had not made the earth, etc.] That is, He had not
yet separated the waters from it, and compacted it into a solid body, and made
it dry land, that it might be habitable for man and beasts; see the Note Genesis
1.9: and thence are those following words added, nor the fields, that is, he
had not yet adorned and furnished the earth with grass and herbs and plants
and trees; nor the highest part of the dust of the world, that is, those parts
of the earth which are above the water, the dry land, that admirable
superficies of the whole earth, which is now so goodly to behold. Yea hereby
may be employed, that there was not yet so much as a little dust made. I know
that because those words in the Original, which we translate the fields, may be
rendered the open places, therefore some conceive that thereby is meant the
air, or the whole superficies of the continent, so far as it may be seen by the
eye of man, or the plains and champian countries, as opposed to the mountains
and hills mentioned in the foregoing verse. And so likewise, because those last
words, nor the highest part, etc. may be read, nor the chief part of the dust
of the world, therefore some understand thereby the habitable part of the
world, or the most commodious, goodly and delightful parts of the earth. But
the former exposition seems to me the clearest.

Verse. 27. When he prepared the heavens, I was there, etc.] To wit, as an agent
and fellow-worker with the Father: when he set a compass (or, a circle) upon
the face of the depth; that is, when he reduced the immense depth of the earth
and water into a perfect globe, making it exactly round, as if it had been
measured with a pair of compasses.

Verse. 28. When he established the clouds above, etc.] That is, When he caused
them to abide in the firmament, notwithstanding they are full of water, which
one would think might make them break in pieces at all times, and fall down to
the earth; see the Note Job 26.8: when he strengthened the fountains of the
deep; that is, when he gave power to the springs and fountains, that come
originally from the sea, or however out of the deep places of the earth, to
yield continually, without being ever drawn dry, abundance of waters, which run
in their several channels with mighty strength and violence; whence is that
expression of the Prophet Isa. 8.7. the waters of the river strong and many.

Verse. 29. When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass
his commandment.] See the Note Job 26.10.

Verse. 30. Then I was by him, as one brought up with him, and I was daily his
delight, rejoicing always before him.] The Son of God, the wisdom of the
Father, applying himself to our capacity, does here compare himself to a child
that precious in the eyes of those that bring him up, to a nursling smiling
upon his nurse, or to a little child sporting and playing before his father;
and that to set forth 1. the mutual delight and complacency which the Father
and the Son took in each other from all eternity, and the great delight which
they jointly took in the excellency of the work of wisdom, to wit, the
creation, as likewise his wise ordering of all the creatures that he had made;
and 2. more particularly, the delight which the Father took in his Son, in whom
he was always well pleased, and in whom he rejoiced more then in the works
that were made by him, which is expressed in that clause, and I was daily his
delight.

Verse. 31. Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, etc.] To wit, as some
say, in that the wisdom of God made it with ease, and without any toil and
labor; or rather, as taking pleasure in the excellency of the work, as
likewise afterward in the governing of it by his providence, and in doing good
unto all the creatures therein. And my delights were with the sons of men; to
wit, first, in that he delighted in man as the masterpiece of the whole work
of creation, for whom the whole world was made, and who himself was made after
the image of God, and so only capable both of observing the works of wisdom,
and of being instructed in the ways of wisdom: and 2. in that he loved them
dearly, and so accordingly delighted in them, as 1. to be with (...); whence it
was that he often appeared to the patriarchs and prophets, and at last, when
the fullness of time was come, took upon him man's nature, and dwelt amongst
them, and as the son of man conversed familiarly with them, and does still,
where his Church is, dwell amongst them by the presence of his grace in his
Ordinances, and by his spirit in their hearts; and 2. to teach and instruct
them; and 3. to do all the good that might be done for them, to redeem them,
to reconcile them to his Father, to sanctify them, to watch over them for good
here, and then at last to bring them to live for ever with him in his kingdom
of glory.

Verse. 34. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates,
waiting at the posts of my doors.] That is, that seeks me with all diligence
and constancy. In the words there seems to be an allusion to suitors or
clients, that will be betimes at the doors of princes and great men, and will
wait there day after day, till they get that which they wait for; or to
Scholars, that will be so early at school, that they are fain to stand waiting
when they come thither, till the doors be open; or to young men that wait at
the doors of their mistresses; or to those that resorted diligently to their
Synagogues that they might hear the Word.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. Wisdom has builded her house, etc.] See the Note chap. 1.20.
Solomon having shown chap. 7.14. how the harlot tempted the young man with the
feast she had provided, here, as in opposition thereto, he shows how much
better a feast wisdom had provided for those that would hearken to her. And
some conceive that he begins with the building of her house, upon occasion of
the mention that was made in the foregoing chapter verse. 34. of her gates and
doors and posts, Blessed is the man that hears me; watching daily at my
gates. The great question is, what is meant here by the house which wisdom is
said to have built, and the seven pillars thereof, and why her house, or, as
some more peculiarly conceive of it, her banqueting house, is here set forth as
such a goodly, stately and spacious palace. To which I answer, that there are
some that by this house understand the soul of every just man, and that because
there Christ dwells by his spirit, and because the soul is the proper seat of
wisdom, and is in the Saints adorned with manifold graces. But there are two
other expositions which seem to be most probable. The one is, that by this
house is meant the third heaven, of which Christ speaks Joh. 14.2. In my
fathers house are many mansions; which shall not perish, as the lower heavens
shall, 2 Pet. 3.10. the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, but shall
continue unto all eternity the most glorious habitation of Christ and his
members, 1 These. 4.17. and Joh. 17.24. and is therefore said here to be built
upon seven, that is, many pillars; see the Note 1 Samuel 2.5. The other is, that
by this house is meant the Church of God which Christ has raised from the
beginning of the world, and richly adorned with the gifts and graces of the
holy Ghost, and is now spread over the whole world, and so established by the
mighty power of Christ, that it shall certainly continue unto all eternity, and
so may well be compared to a stately house built upon seven pillars. Yet the
most of Expositours also add, that by the seven pillars are meant the Prophets
and Apostles, and other Teachers which in all ages Christ has raised in his
Church, and has furnished with gifts and graces, that they might be enabled
for their work, and might be great means to bear up and support the faith of
others; see Gal. 2.9: and that this might also be expressed thus by Solomon,
with reference to that material Temple which, by the wisdom that God had given
him, Solomon had built, and that upon many pillars, and which was a type of the
Church of God.

Verse. 2. She has killed her beasts, etc.] This which is here added concerning
wisdoms feast, following immediately upon that in the foregoing verse
concerning the building of her house, seems to imply an allusion to the feasts
they were wont to make at the dedication of their new-built houses: she has
mingled her wine; to wit, with some choice kinds of waters, as they used to do
in those hot countries, to allay the heat thereof, wherewith they were
exceedingly refreshed; or rather with spices, for by mixed wine seems to be
meant the choicest sort of wine, Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe? etc. They that
tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. And now by this feast
which wisdom provides for her guests is meant, 1. that spiritual food of the
Word and Sacrament, with all those spiritual blessings and refreshing delights
and comforts which thereby are conveyed unto our souls; as a partaking in the
body and blood of Christ, the assurance of Gods love, and our salvation, the
sanctifying graces of Gods spirit, and peace of conscience, which is a
continual feast; and 2. the glory and joys of heaven, which Christ also sets
forth under the similitude of a feast, Luke 22.30. That ye may eat and drink at
my table in my kingdom. This I conceive is the full drift of these words. Yet
some add too, that by wisdoms mingling her wine is employed, that she
condescends to the capacity of the weakest, as it is noted of our Savior Mark
4.33. that he spoke the word unto the people, as they were able to hear it. As
for the last clause, she has also furnished her table, it may imply, that all
things being in a readiness, it was fit that her guests should make have to
come in.

Verse. 3. She has sent forth her maidens, etc.] Because wisdom has been
hitherto represented as some great Princess or Lady, therefore her servants,
whom she sends forth to invite men to her feast, to wit the Prophets and
Apostles, and other incorrupt teachers of the word, are here sutably termed
maidens; and that happily the rather to set forth the weakness and
contemptiblenesse of Gods messengers, and to show that wisdom draws in men,
not by force, but by gentle invitations. And it may be that these modest
maidens are here opposed to that harlot mentioned afterward verse. 13. However
observable it is, how expressly this agrees with that of our Savior, Luke
11.49. Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and
Apostles, etc. And then for the following words, she cries upon the highest
places of the city, see the Note chap. 8.2.

Verse. 4. Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hither, etc.] See the Note chap.
1.4. He seems to intend those that are simple, and do see and with all humility
acknowledge that they are so.

Verse. 7. He that reproves a scorner, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 1.1: gets to
himself shame, etc. to wit, in that the scorner will not only mock and deride
him, but also cast some aspersions or other upon him; and likewise because
others will be ready enough to censure him for his imprudent meddling with such
a one. Now this is here added, either to show why in the foregoing verses
wisdom did invite none but the simple to come in to her; or at least to show
who they are that reap no good by wisdoms invitations.

Verse. 8. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee, etc.] As if he had said,
and so thou shall to no purpose expose thy self to his malice, and withal
shall be an occasion of farther sin to him. But now this must be understood
only of those, that after sufficient trial, are by their continued obstinacy
found to be incorrigible; and so likewise it must be understood only of private
reproofs; for in the public ministry the worst of men must be reproved. Rebuke
a wise man, and he will love thee; to wit, sooner or later.

Verse. 10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, etc.] See the
Notes chap. 1.7. and Psalm. 111.10. Here this is inserted, either 1. as a reason
why the wise and just man is the better for reproof and instruction, as is said
in the two foregoing verses, namely, because such men do fear God; or 2. to
show what it is wherein the wise are to be instructed, to wit, that they are to
be taught to fear God; or 3. rather, to show what that wisdom was, and where
men must begin to learn it, whereunto they were invited before verse. 6. Forsake
the foolish and live, and go in the way of understanding. As for the following
words, and the knowledge of the holy is understanding, the meaning is, that
true understanding consists, not in the knowledge of natural and civil
things, but either 1. in the knowledge of the holy God (for though that word
the holy be in the plural number in the Original, yet we know the Scripture
does usually speak of God in the plural number; and it may seem most probable,
that the knowledge of the holy here is made to answer, as it were, the fear of
God in the first clause, as being the same in effect with that:) or 2. in the
knowledge of holy things, that is, the holy mysteries of salvation revealed in
the Scriptures: or 3. the knowledge of the holy Saints and servants of God. And
indeed these three are all one in effect: for what is the knowledge of the
Saints, but the knowledge of those holy truths in the Scripture concerning God
and his will, which by the Spirit of God is wrought in them, and which they
teach others?

Verse. 11. For by me thy days shall be multiplied, etc.] See the Notes chap.
3.2, 18, 22. and Psalm. 91.16. This depends, as most Expositours conceive, upon
that which was said before verse. 6. Forsake the foolish and live, says wisdom
there, and go in the way of understanding; and then it follows here, for by me
thy days shall be multiplied, etc. And very fitly is this promise made upon
wisdoms invitation of men to the feast she had made, since the end of eating
and drinking is to preserve life, and lengthen men's days.

Verse. 12. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, etc.] See the
Notes Job 22.2, 3. This could not be said of the worldling, because he is not
wise for eternity. But if thou scornest, thou alone shall bear it; see the Note
Job 35.8. The drift of the whole verse is, as if Solomon or wisdom had said, I
speak not for mine own profit, but for thine; all the good or hurt, according
as thou obeyest or despisest my counsel, will redound unto thy self.

Verse. 13. A foolish woman is clamorous, etc.] Many learned Expositours do
understand this of the whorish woman, of whom so much has been formerly said;
and conceive that she is here again described by wisdom, or Solomon, that
young men might especially be warned to take heed of this sin. And indeed the
description that is here given of this foolish woman does well suit the harlot;
as that she is clamorous, for which see the Note chap. 7.11. and that she
knows nothing: for though before it be said chap. 7.10. that she is subtle of
heart, in regard of her wicked craft and cunning, yet in regard of true wisdom
and understanding it may well be said that she knows nothing, there being no
sin that makes men and women more stupid and brutish then that does. Yea in the
words that are afterward here verse. 18. used, concerning those that are
overcome by this foolish woman, that he knows not that the dead are there,
etc. there seems to be a clear reference to what was said before concerning the
harlot, chapter 2.18. and 5.5. which indeed does most prevail with me to account
this the best exposition of the words. But yet the truth is, that the most of
our best Expositours, and that with very great probability, do otherwise
conceive of this place, namely, that it was intended to be an allegorical
expression: and accordingly some say, that by the foolish woman here is meant
either philosophy, or pleasure, or carnal reason, or false doctrine, or
Antichrist; and others, worldly wisdom, and that this is opposed to true
wisdom before described; and others better, that hereby is meant all sinful
folly whatsoever, even whatever is contrary to that wisdom of God which is
revealed in the Scriptures, which is indeed no better then folly, what show
soever it may make of wisdom; and that this sinful folly is here set forth,
as wisdoms corrivall, and represented under the person of some base beggarly
harlot, to show that whatever men set their hearts upon besides God and Christ
and his grace, they are guilty of spiritual adultery: and accordingly they
understand the following words; as that she is clamorous, that is, 1.
generally, that, as Solomon says elsewhere Eccles. 10.14. a fool is full of
words; and 2. more particularly, that sinful folly uses many arguments from
the pleasure and profit of it to draw men into it, and that in men of erroneous
judgments and wicked lives she is eager and violent to draw men into the
crooked ways of error and wickedness: and then again that she knows
nothing, that is, that there is nothing of sound and saving knowledge in all
the persuasions that are used to draw men into error or wickedness.

Verse. 14. For she sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the high
places of the city.] Understanding this of the harlot, it implies 1. her
idleness, which is indeed the chief foment of lust; and 2. her impudence, in
that openly and shamelessely at her door, and in public assemblies, she seeks
to entice men unto her. But if we understand it allegorically, according to
what is noted upon the foregoing verse, of sinful folly, it may imply 1. that
sin, in wicked men and men of corrupt judgments in religion, watches for all
occasions and opportunities to corrupt and seduce others; 2. that she is
impudent in tempting and soliciting all sorts of people; 3. that she is full
of proud vaunting and boasting, and does by her pomp and carnal delights seek
to inveigle men; and 4. that often she allures men by the hope of high places,
and the countenance of great ones, as having many Nobles and Princes to be her
agents.

Verse. 15. To call passengers, who go right on their way.] That is, if we
understand it of the harlot, those that are following their businesses, not
having any thought of her till she allured them; or, (if we understand it, as
in the verses before, of sinful folly,) to seduce the truly godly from the
right way of truth and holiness, according to that 2 Pet. 2.18. they allure,
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean
escaped from them who live in error: for wickedness cannot endure to see
others virtuous, and Satan is always most eager to foil the righteous.

Verse. 16. Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hither, etc.] If this be referred
to the harlot, it cannot be thought that she would with such language call in
men to her; only hereby is employed, that none but simple and foolish men will
be inveigled by her: see the Note upon a like expression chap. 1.11. But if we
take it, as before is noted, as the invitation of sinful folly, it is as if
she had said, You that are such fools as to deprive your selves of the profits,
honors and pleasures of this life, choosing to toil your selves in wisdoms
ways, wherein you macerate your bodies, and expose your selves to the hatred
of the world, and to manifold afflictions and crosses, be wise at length, and
embrace the delights that are in my ways. And indeed wicked men count piety
folly and madness.

Verse. 17. Stolen waters are sweet, etc.] That is, Sinful delights taken by
stealth are the more pleasant. This is follies, or the harlots banquet, opposed
to that of wisdom mentioned above verse. 2. And in the words there may be an
allusion to those feasts in harlots houses, where the provision is made up of
such things as are stolen by filching servants and other lewd companions.

Verse. 18. But he knows not that the dead are there, and that her guests are
in the depths of hell.] To wit, that they are spiritually dead, in the high way
to be cut off by some violent death, and as sure to be damned as if they were
in hell already: see the Notes chap. 2.18. and 5.5. and 7.23. And thus death is
made here the effect of follies banquet, as before verse. 11. life was made the
effect of wisdoms. See the Note also chap. 2.19.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. THe Proverbs of Solomon, etc.] See the Note chap. 1.1. Because
Solomon's aim in these Proverbs is chiefly to instruct young men, therefore he
begins with a Proverb that may teach them to be obedient to their parents, even
as before he began his exhortation with this chap. 1.8. A wise son makes a
glad father; to wit, both in regard of the virtues that are in him, and the
blessing of God that is upon him: but a foolish son is the heaviness of his
mother; to wit, both in regard of his wickedness, and the miseries which
thereby he brings upon himself. Both parents are comprehended in both clauses,
though in each of them one only be expressed. Yet by most Expositours several
reasons are given, first, why gladness for the wisdom of their son is
ascribed to the father particularly: as namely 1. because the father is best
able to judge of any thing that is commendable and praiseworthy in him; 2.
because such a son is usually a great help to his father in his businesses; 3.
because the father going abroad can best take notice of the sons wise and
prudent and pious carriage of himself, and the worthy things that are done by
him, and does most frequently hear how he is every where commended and
applauded; and 4. because the well-doing of the son tends most to the honor of
the father that gave him such good education: and secondly, why heaviness for
the folly of their son is particularly ascribed to the mother: to wit, 1.
because the mothers indulgence is usually judged, and is many times, the cause
of the sons wickedness, as is also more clearly employed Prove. 29.15. a child
left to himself brings his mother to shame; 2. because such a son lying
always lusking idly in her eye at home, she is chiefly troubled with it; 3.
because being the weaker vessel, she is most passionate, and grieves most
extremely for it; and 4. because the mother is usually most despised by such
ungracious sons: and so this Proverb seems to be explained chap. 15.20. A wise
son makes a glad father; but a foolish son despises his mother.

Verse. 2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, etc.] Though all wealth,
even that which is justly gotten, may be called treasures of wickedness, as
our Savior terms them Luke 16.9. the mammon of unrighteousness, because they
are usually the fuel of all kind of wickedness, neither can any wealth profit
a man any thing in point of delivering him from death; yet here, by the
opposition that is made betwixt the treasures of wickedness, and
righteousness in the second clause, we may plainly see, that treasures gotten
and kept by wicked means are here meant. And though of these it may be
absolutely said, that they profit nothing, because whatever outward advantage
they yield to men, yet they are the cause of their eternal destruction: yet
here the meaning is, that in point of delivering men from the vengeance of God,
and in the hour of death, they profit nothing; as is evident by that which is
opposed hereto in the following clause, but righteousness delivers from
death: and therefore so this proverb is elsewhere expressed, chap. 11.4. Riches
profit not in the day of wrath: see the Notes also Psalm. 49.6, 7. And inded
ill-gotten wealth, though continued till death, which it seldom is, does
rather at that time hurt then profit men, in that their minds are sore troubled
that they must part with it, and the remembrance of the wicked ways whereby
they have gotten it does wound their conscience, as being an evidence to them
of their eternal damnation. But now righteousness, which men foolishly
abandon to get wealth, delivers from death; both because, 1. such as are
righteous are never in danger to be ^ut off, either by the sword of the
magistrate, or by the hand of divine vengeance; and 2. such are wonderfully
preserved many times by the Lord, when their enemies would put them to death,
and from other deadly dangers; 3. though they do die, death is no way hurtful
to them; and 4. it always delivers certainly from death eternal. And this
proverb is added next to that which went before, as some conceive, to show that
therefore the way for parents to do good to their children, is not to hoard up
for them ill-gotten goods, but to train them up in the ways of righteousness.

Verse. 3. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish, etc.]
Though it cannot be denied but that some of Gods righteous servants may have
been starved and died by famine; yet because this is very rarely so, see the
Note Psalm. 37.25. and usually God does provide things necessary for them, yea
even in times of famine God does usually provide for them in some extraordinary
way, and because however God gives them those inward refreshings and that sweet
contentment of spirit, that this is in stead of food to them, therefore are
these temporal promises commonly expressed in the Scripture in such general
terms. But yet still we must remember, that in all such promises this
exception is employed, to wit, that thus it shall be with them, unless God
shall deal better with them in taking them up into heaven. But he casts away
the substance of the wicked; to wit, so, that they are many times famished.

Verse. 5. He that gathers in summer, etc.] To wit, in harvest, as it is in
the opposite clause; that is, He that dispatcheth his business, and does what
is to be done for his own advantage, whilst time serves; as for instance, he
that in his youth, or whilst he is in his full strength, stores up for himself
before the winter of old age: is a wise son; and so consequently is himself
honored amongst men, and is an honor to his parents and family: but he that
sleeps in harvest; that is, neglects the seasons of providing well for
himself: is a son that causes shame; that is, by his carelessness and sloth,
and the beggary he brings upon himself, he does not only shame himself, but
his parents too, men being ready to charge the faults of young men upon the
parents neglect, in not giving them good education.

Verse. 6. Blessings are upon the head of the just, etc.] See the Notes Genesis
49.26. The meaning of this expression is this; All men do wish and pray for the
just man that he may be blessed, and God does shower down plenty of all kind of
blessings upon him, which are openly and in the sight of all men as an ornament
to him; and so consequently he can with confidence open his mouth in praising
God, and in a holy boasting of Gods favor, and in maintaining his own
integrity: for this is employed in the following opposite clause, but violence
covers the mouth of the wicked; that is, for the oppression and extortion and
other violent practices of the wicked, the curses and judgments of God shall
be showred down abundantly upon them, insomuch that thereby, and by the
remembrance of their former sins, they shall be even overwhelmed with shame,
and their mouths shall be so stopped, that they shall have nothing to say,
either by way of excuse or defense for themselves, or by way of begging mercy,
or of speaking mischievously in regard of the righteous, as formerly they have
done: see the Notes Job 5.16. and Psalm. 63.11. I know some understand the last
clause otherwise, Violence covers the mouth of the wicked; that is, Violent
judgments from God shall, as it were, choke or stop the breath of the wicked;
they shall be condemned and executed as malefactors: see the Notes Esth. 7.8.
and Job 9.24.

Verse. 7. The memory of the just is blessed, etc.] That is, the remembrance of
them shall be sweet and delightful to men, and whenever they speak of such a
one, they shall bless and praise him, scarce ever making mention of him
without his due commendation: but the name of the wicked shall rot; that is,
his name shall become loathsome and abominable, it shall stink above ground
like a rotten carcass, and at last it shall be utterly abolished and forgotten.

Verse. 8. The wise in heart will receive commandments, etc.] That is, They
that are truly wise, and do not only boast and make a show of wisdom, will
cheerfully and readily hearken to the instructions and reproofs, and obey the
commandments of God in his word, and of those whom God has ordained to direct
and govern them, for the well-ordering of their lives, without any replies or
cavils; and so consequently (for this is employed by the following opposite
clause) by this means they avoid those mischiefs and miseries whereinto
otherwise they might have fallen, and are abundantly rewarded of God: but a
prating fool shall fall; that is, the man that, out of the abundance of folly
that is in his heart, slights and gainsays the holy instructions and directions
that are given him, as loving to speak himself rather then to hear others, and
to teach and command others, rather then to be taught and commanded by others,
shall certainly fall into many sins and miseries; both because he rejects with
scorn those that would teach him better, and because, being full of talk, and
blurting out any thing that comes into his mind, he exposes himself thereby to
manifold mischiefs* The last clause may be rendered, but a prating fool shall
be beaten, that is, punished. And accordingly some conceive the drift of the
words to be this, that whilst wise men do willingly obey what is given them in
charge, fools must by stripes be beaten to do their duty, or they will never
do it.

Verse. 9. He that walks uprightly, etc.] That is, He that lives holily and
righteously, and that does all that he does in the uprightness and simplicity
of his heart, without any fraud or dissimulation: walks surely; that is,
safely and securely, without danger, and without fear of danger, even when in
the judgment of the world he may seem to be in greatest danger: and that 1.
because he fears not to be found false or deceitful in any thing he has
spoken or done; 2. because he knows that God loves him, and that he is not
liable to those plagues that God has threatened against wicked men; and 3.
because, though he may be at some time in an afflicted estate, yet he is sure
that God will cause all things to work together for his good, and that heaven
will at last make amends for all. But he that perverteth his ways; that is, he
that allows himself in any evil course, though never so secretly; or, he that
deals deceitfully in any thing whatsoever: shall be known; that is, that
which he fears continually, to wit, that he shall be discovered, (so far he
is from walking surely) that shall come upon him; though he carries his
matters never so cunningly, his wickedness and false dealings shall be
discovered to his shame, and by his punishments he shall be made known, and so
also be made an example to others.

Verse. 10. He that winketh with the eye causes sorrow, etc.] See the Notes
chap. 6.13. Job. 15.12. and Psalm. 35.19: but a prating fool shall fall; see the
Note above ver. 8. There is not here an opposition made between some virtue and
the contrary vice, as it is most usually in the Proverbs; but here, as
frequently elsewhere, two vices are compared together, the one of the eyes, the
other of the lips. And if by him that winketh with the eye be meant the
scoffer, or the man that secretly seeks to do mischief to those to whom
outwardly he carries himself fairly and friendly, or more generally the man
that does by any dissimulation or cunning craftiness deceive those with whom
he has any dealing, then the drift of the Proverb may be only to show, that as
such sly deceitful persons are the cause of much sorrow to others, so those
men that through simplicity and folly will unadvisedly be prating of any thing
that comes in their minds, do as usually bring mischief and sorrow upon
themselves; and that therefore though it be commendable to deal plainly and
sincerely with men, without any craftiness and dissimulation (as was employed
in the foregoing Proverb) yet there is a foolish boldness and rashness in
speaking, when men cannot conceal any thing, but unadvisedly babble out
whatever they think of, which is as bad, if not worse then the hypocrites
dissembling; and that because thereby men do usually bring so much mischief and
sorrow upon themselves. Or, if by him that winketh with the eye be meant those
that by signs only do move others to sin, or those that covertly do any evil,
which may not happily be mischievous to others, then the drift of the Proverb is
only to show, that such shall be punished, and so shall be a cause of sorrow to
themselves, as well as those that boldly utter any wickedness that is in their
hearts.

Verse. 11. The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life, etc.] That is, it is
like a spring or well of living water, that continually sends forth running
streams of fresh and sweet and wholesome waters, (which amongst the Jews were
very highly prized:) and that, 1. because such men will be continually speaking
of something that may tend to the begetting or quickening of spiritual life in
those with whom they converse, and whereby they may attain at last life
eternal; yea and likewise for men's civil affairs, by their counsel and
advice, they do much good both in public and private; and 2. because such men
can always speak with a holy freedom and liberty in their own just defense:
for that this is also intended in these words, we may well conceive by the
opposition of the following clause, which shows that wicked men's mouths are
stopped in this regard, but violence covers the mouth of the wicked; for
which see the Note above verse. 6. Yet the opposition betwixt these two clauses
may be otherwise framed: as that whilst righteous men are by their
communication a means of life to others, wicked men, by the wicked and
mischievous things which they utter, do not only hurt others, but also destroy
and murder themselves: or thus, Righteous men's lips by holy communication save
many a soul; but the guilt that lies upon wicked men's consciences stops their
mouths, so that they dare not counsel others to walk in those ways of life
wherein themselves have not walked.

Verse. 12. Hatred stirs up strife, etc.] That is, it not only raises new
quarrels, where there never had been any before, but also stirs up old
quarrels, that were laid asleep, and in a manner forgotten, even as when a man
stirs up the fire, and makes it glow and burn afresh, when it was before
covered over with ashes; yea and this it does many times upon the slightest
occasions, and the vainest surmises that can possibly be conceived; to wit,
because men are naturally prone to suspect and to speak evil of those they hate
causlesly, to interpret ill what they never intended ill, and to aggravate the
smallest offenses beyond all measure: but love covers all sins; to wit,
though they be never so many and never so great: and that because love is not
suspicious, but ready to interpret all things to the best, therefore where love
is, men are of a peaceable disposition; either they will take no notice of that
which is done amiss; or excuse it so far as may be with truth; or, if they
must reprove it, they will do it with a gentle private admonition, and will by
no means publish it to the dishonor of the party offending, and for any wrong
done to them, they will be most ready to pardon it. The opposition of the two
clauses in this Proverb may be set forth thus: Hatred stirs up strife, and
that frequently by upbraiding men with their sins, or by blazing them abroad to
others; but love covers sins, and so thereby makes and maintains peace.

Verse. 13. In the lips of him that has understanding wisdom is found; but a
rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding.] That is, Wise men
will be still speaking wisely and graciously, (this is a sure sign of a wise
man) and so they are not in danger to be corrected for their words, as many
are, but rather their speech is an honor to them: But now the rod of God or
man is continually upon the backs of fools, for their rash and foolish
speeches, (so that they may be in a manner known by their stripes) and this is
a constant shame and reproach to them. Or thus; The wise man will still be
speaking of wisdom for the instruction of others; and because the fool will
not be instructed thereby, therefore is the rod upon his back, or therefore he
deserves the rod.

Verse. 14. Wise men lay up knowledge, etc.] That is, By the use of all holy
means they store up knowledge as a choice treasure; and so by that means (for
this is employed by the following clause) they are able to order their speech
so, when occasion serves, as thereby not only to keep off destruction from
themselves and others, but also to be a means of much good to them: but the
mouth of the foolish is near destruction; they, for want of storing up this
knowledge, are always forward and ready to utter those things that bring
present destruction upon themselves and others. I know that some Expositours
give another interpretation of the first branch of this Proverb, to wit, that
wise men lay up knowledge, that is, they do not at all times utter all they
know, which must needs only be done in a way of boasting, but reserve it for a
fit place and season, when they may do it to the profit and advantage of many,
according to that chap. 12.23. A prudent man concealeth knowledge. But the
first exposition is clearly the best.

Verse. 15. The rich man's wealth is his strong city, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, it is the outward means whereby he secures himself and others from
many miseries; as indeed Solomon says elsewhere, that as wisdom is a defense,
so also money is a defense, Eccles. 7.12: and then on the other side, the
destruction of the poor is their poverty; that is, the poverty of the poor
gives advantage and encouragement to the rich to devour them, even as the
greater fish devour the less. And they that thus expound these words do
accordingly conceive that Solomon's aim herein is to show, that therefore men
should be painful and industrious, that they may keep themselves from poverty.
But doubtless the meaning of the words is rather this: The rich man's wealth is
his strong city; that is, he trusts in his wealth as in a strong city; for so
Solomon explains himself chap. 18.11. The rich man's wealth is his strong city,
and as an high wall in his own conceit: whereas on the other side, the
destruction of the poor is their poverty, that is, the poor are ready, as
despairing, to conclude that their poverty will be their destruction. And thus
the main drift of this Proverb may be, hereby to show what cause men have
therefore to be contented with a moderate estate, according to that chap. 30.8.
Give me neither poverty nor riches, etc.

Verse. 16. The labor of the righteous tends to life, etc.] This is several
ways expounded, and that upon very probable grounds. 1. Thus; that all the
endeavors of the righteous are, that they may obtain life eternal, and
consequently, that they may live holily and righteously; and herein we may
include also, that they labor to procure this to others too: but the fruit of
the wicked, that is, their ways, the fruit of their thoughts, tend to sin, and
so to death temporal and eternal, which is the wages of sin. Or 2. thus; The
labor of the righteous tends to life; that is, they labor merely that they
and theirs may live, without taking any sinful courses to help themselves, not
that they may have to spend luxuriously and to satisfy their lusts: the fruit
of the wicked to sin; that is, the fruit of all their labors is, that they may
make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Or 3. thus; The
labor of the righteous tends to life; that is, the goods that righteous men
get by their labor (or any other honest way) tend to life here, and eternal
life hereafter, because they are careful to employ them for good, which the
Lord will recompense with life and blessedness: the fruit of the wicked to
sin; that is, all their revenues are spent in sinful courses, which must needs
tend to death: and thus the poor estate of the godly laboring man, as tending
to life, may in that regard be preferred here before the great revenues of
wicked rich men, attending to death. The two last Expositions I judge the best.

Verse. 17. He is in the way of life that keeps instruction, etc.] That is, he
that is willing to receive and obey instruction and reproof: but he that
refuses reproof erreth; and so is in the way of death; to wit, because
refusing the means of grace, he must needs straggle into the bypath of sin,
and so perish everlastingly: yea and with himself he is likely to draw others
into the same condemnation; which is expressed in the last clause, according as
some translate it, he that refuses reproof causes to err.

Verse. 18. He that hides hatred with lying lips, and he that utters a
slander is a fool.] That is, they are both fools; though their practices are
contrary to one another, the one dissembling his hatred, the other discovering
it presently with slandering or reviling language, yet they are both wicked men.

Verse. 19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin, etc.] To wit, when
they are hastily and unadvisedly uttered, and by men that effect to be always
talking; and therefore such men are no better then fools, Eccles. 5.3. A fools
voice is known by multitude of words: but he that restaineth his lips is wise;
that is, that considers what is fit to be spoken and what not, and so
restrains himself from speaking at all adventures every thing that comes into
his mind. It is not therefore all speaking much that is here condemned; Act.
20.7. it is noted of Paul, that at Troas he preached unto the disciples there,
and continued his speech until midnight: but Solomon's aim is only to show,
that because it is a very hard thing for a weak man a long time together so
strictly to watch over and order his tongue, but that at some time or other it
will slip aside, therefore those men that give liberty to their tongues to run
out at random, must needs speak many things that they should not. Whence is
that counsel of the Apostle, be swift to hear, slow to speak, Jam. 1.19.

Verse. 20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver, etc.] Though we may
conceive several reasons why the tongue of the just may well be compared to
choice silver, as 1. because it is purified from the dross of all lying,
flattery, vanity and babbling, and all other the sins whereto the tongues of men
are naturally inclined, and 2. because it yields a pleasant sound, pleasing and
delightful both to God and good men, Let me hear thy voice, for thy voice is
sweet, says Christ to his spouse Cant. 2.14: yet the main reason why Solomon
uses this expression here, is to show, that the speech of the righteous is
precious and profitable, full of many holy instructions and admonitions, that
are much for the profit and benefit of those that hear them; and therefore much
more precious must their hearts needs be, from whence all this store comes, and
where there are more excellent things treasured up, then with their tongues
they are able to express. But now on the contrary, the heart of the wicked is
little worth, like dross rather then silver: the meaning is, that all their
wisdom, thoughts and counsels are little worth, and therefore accordingly also
their tongues, though they may make a great noise, must needs be of no worth
nor use at all.

Verse. 21. The lips of the righteous feed man, etc.] That is, He has not only
whereon to live himself, but also, out of the abundance of his heart, his lips
do with holy instructions and admonitions and consolations feed the souls of
many unto life eternal, and cheer and refresh them when they are ready to
faint; and so he is as some great rich man that keeps open house, where all
comers may freely eat and refresh themselves: but fools die for want of
wisdom; that is, because they will not hearken to those that would afford them
the instructions of life, they destroy themselves with their folly; or, they
are so far from this feeding of others, that they themselves starve and perish
for want of wisdom.

Ver. 22. The blessing of the Lord it makes rich, etc.] That is, that, and
only that does it: and he adds no sorrow with it; that is, with that blessing
whereby men are enriched. Now though this be most true of spiritual riches,
(to which some therefore apply it;) yet here questionless Solomon speaks of
outward riches. And the difference which here he makes between those that are
enriched by the favor and blessing of God upon them, and those that are
enriched any other way, consists in these things: 1. that such men are not
terrified in conscience, as worldly men usually are, for those unjust ways
whereby they have scraped their wealth together, but are on the contrary
cheared with the discovery of Gods love to them in the blessings he conferres
upon them; 2. that such men are free from those anxious cares and troubles
about the getting and keeping their riches, with which worldly men are
continually perplexed; 3. that such men are not in danger of those griefs
wherewith worldlings are surprised, when God in his wrath strips them of their
wealth; and 4. that such men, resting upon the providence of God, and rejoicing
in Gods favor, are contented with what God bestows upon them, whereas wicked
men are never satisfied. It cannot therefore be concluded from hence, that good
men have never any troubles with their riches; but only, that if it be so,
their cares and troubles proceed then from their own infirmities: so far as God
gives, and they depend upon Gods provident care over them, they are free from
those vexations which must needs perplex other men.

Verse. 23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief, etc.] That is, he makes
light of it; or, he rejoices and delights himself in it: but a man of
understanding has wisdom; as if he should have said, And so he knows that
sin is no sporting and laughing matter, but that men ought to flee from it as
from a serpent; or, and so he delights therein.

Verse. 24. The fear of the wicked it shall come upon him, etc.] See the Note
chap. 1.26; as namely when he fears the discovery of his sins, or some evil of
judgment, etc: but the desire of the righteous shall be granted; to wit, when
their desires are according to Gods will, (as indeed the desires of the
righteous are usually such,) and of such things as may be for their good. And
then again, God does usually stir up in the righteous a desire of those things
which he means to bestow upon them, that so they may be the more thankful for
them when they have them. The opposition of these two clauses stands thus: The
fear of the wicked shall come upon him, but his desire shall perish; but that
which the righteous fear shall not come upon them, and their desires shall be
granted them.

Verse. 25. As the whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more, etc.] That is,
Though the wicked man's rage be violent and terrible as a whirlwind, yet as a
whirlwind also it soon passes away, the Lord suddenly cutting him off; or,
Though the wicked man may seem unremoveable, yet no sooner does the whirlwind
of Gods wrath pass upon him, but he is presently gone; see the Notes Job
27.20, 21, 22. and Psalm. 58.9: but the righteous is an everlasting foundation;
that is, he stands sure, even in the greatest tempests; he is preserved,
through Gods favor in Christ, a long time here, and lives afterward in heaven
unto all eternity.

Verse. 26. As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the
sluggard to them that send him.] That is, As they vex and hurt the teeth and
eyes, so is the sluggard a cause of much vexation and mischief to those that
send him upon any err^nd, or set him about any business, because he is so long
ere he brings an answer of that which they earnestly desire to know, and
because he so grossly neglects and slubbers over any business committed to him.

Verse. 27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, etc.] To wit, beyond what
could be probably expected, considering their constitution, etc; or beyond the
time which wicked men do usually live; see the Notes chap. 3.2, 18, 22. Psalm.
91.16: but the years of the wicked shall be shortened; to wit, in that wicked
ways are usually the very means of bringing them by sicknesses or otherwise to
an untimely end, or at least provoke the Lord to cut them off; see the Note
Psalm. 55.23.

Verse. 28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, etc.] That is, it not
only yields them a good measure of joy, even in the midst of tribulation,
according to that of the Apostle, rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation,
Romans 12.12; but also shall bring them at length to far greater joy; though for
a time they may meet with many troubles and sorrows, yet their hope shall not
perish, but this their patient expectation shall end in gladness, when they
shall receive those good things, which upon the warrant of Gods promises they
have hoped for: but the expectation of the wicked shall perish; that is, though
for a time they be in prosperity, and so they may promise themselves great
matters, yet their hopes shall come to nothing, and so shall end in sorrow and
vexation.

Verse. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, but destruction
shall be to the workers of iniquity.] Because it is evident that the way of the
Lord is here opposed to working of iniquity, and so likewise strength is
opposed to being destroyed, (and yet withal I have always judged it the
safest way to interpret the Scripture in the largest sense,) therefore I
conceive this Proverb may best be expounded thus; The way of the Lord, that is,
men's observing the ways wherein God has appointed them to walk, so it be done
in uprightness of heart, is strength to the upright; to wit, in that it
strengthens and preserves them from being destroyed, and that because such are
also strengthened in other regards; by the spirit of God such are enabled both
in prosperity and adversity to overcome all temptations, and are carried on
continually from strength to strength, from one degree of grace to another: but
destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity; to wit, because they walk not
in Gods ways. So that the drift of this Proverb is to show, that this plain
sincere dealing is a surer means of security, then all sinful carnal policy,
and that the contempt and reproach that is cast upon this way does not
dishearten, but rather encourage and inflame the upright in their walking in it.

Verse. 30. The righteous shall never be removed, etc.] Though it may be truly
said of the righteous, that they shall never be removed, in several respects;
for which see the Notes Psalm. 13.4, and 15.5, and 16.8, and 55.22, and 125.1;
yet here, by the antithesis of the following clause, but the wicked shall not
inhabit the earth, we may probably conceive that these words are at least
principally meant of the Lords preserving the righteous, and continuing them
and their posterity for a long time together in the place of their habitation,
and in the good estate they enjoy here in this world; for which see also the
Notes Psalm. 37.3, 9, 18. The opposition therefore between the two clauses of
this Proverb may be conceived thus; The righteous shall for ever continue in a
blessed estate, in regard that they shall live for ever in heaven, whereas the
wicked shall not so much as abide in the earth: or thus; The righteous shall a
long time live happily here in this world, both they and their posterity, but
the wicked shall soon be rooted out; for which see the Notes chap. 2.22. and
Psalm. 52.5.

Verse. 31. The mouth of the just brings forth wisdom, etc.] To wit, as being
herein like a good tree that brings forth good fruit plentifully; (whence it
is that speech is called the fruit of the lips, Isa. 57.19.) and therefore
shall such a man be carefully preserved, even as such trees are: but the
froward tongue shall be cut out; to wit, because it yields nothing but
wickedness and folly, even as men cut down barren and corrupt trees, that they
may be cast into the fire. See the Note Psalm. 52.5.

Verse. 32. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, etc.] That is,
they speak those things which the righteous man knows do in truth deserve to
be acceptable unto all men, and that will be acceptable to God and good men,
and that because such a man will wisely weigh what he speaks before he speaks
it: but the mouth of the wicked speaks frowardness; that is, he knows not
nor regards not how to speak any thing that is good, but his tongue is well
acquainted with all kind of evil speaking, and accordingly his talk is
continually wicked, and such as is justly distasteful to others.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. A False balance is abomination to the Lord, etc.] See the Note Deuteronomy.
25.13. It is as if he had said, Though men may slight this sin of deceiving men
in this kind, and the offenders may happily boast of it, yet God abhorres it, yea
it is to him abomination it self; and that because it is a sin that tends to
the overthrow of humane society, because such multitudes are wronged thereby,
poor men especially, that are forced to buy all by the penny in little
parcells; and all this too under a pretense of exact justice. And observable it
is, that the very instruments used in this way of deceit are said to be
abhorred of God, which doubtless is only to show how exceeding detestable this
sin is unto God, and that such false balances and weights ought to be broken,
or some other way destroyed. But a just weight (it is in the Hebrew, a perfect
stone, because in those times they used to weigh with stones) is his delight.

Verse. 2. When pride comes, then comes shame; but with the lowly is wisdom.]
Some understand this Proverb thus; that proud men, by reason of their folly,
will be speaking those things, wherever they come, that tend to the shame and
reproach of others; whereas the humble on the other side will be still speaking
of wisdom. But the common stream of Expositours runs another way: When
pride comes, then comes shame; that is, When men through vanity and folly
become proud, and are exalted in their spirits, shame usually follows them
close at the heels: and that not only because proud men are usually hated of
all men; because they are so ready to despise others, therefore others are as
ready to despise and speak evil of them, tearming them proud and stately fools,
etc. but also especially because God abhorres them, and so by his just
judgments does several ways bring them to shame: but with the lowly is
wisdom; and so they avoid that shame which is the portion of the proud, and on
the other side are honored amongst men; their humble and prudent carriage
makes them to be highly esteemed amongst men; God reveals his will and imparts
of his grace more and more to them, and their wisdom makes their faces to
shine.

Verse. 3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, etc.] That is, say
some Expositours, so that they shall avoid the snares of wicked men: but the
perverseness of transgressors, to wit, whereby they seek to ensnare others,
shall destroy them. But I conceive these words must be understood more
generally: The integrity of the upright shall guide them; that is, it shall be
a means to make them go still in a right and safe way; and that because when
men's hearts are upright, 1. that will not suffer them to do any thing that
they know is displeasing to God upon any pretense whatsoever, as hypocrites
will, and 2. God will be sure to direct and preserve and prosper such men in
all their ways: but the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them;
that is, it shall mislead them to their utter undoing.

Verse. 4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, etc.] See the Note Chap. 10.2.

Verse. 5. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way, etc.] See the
Note above verse. 3: but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness; to wit,
from their prosperous estate into many miseries and troubles, and at last into
utter destruction^ but see the Note Psalm. 34.21. and chap. 10.8.

Verse. 6. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them; but
transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness.] Some would have the
opposition of this Proverb to be this; that the righteous shall be delivered
from the snares of the wicked, whereas on the other side the wicked shall be
taken in, that is, by, their own naughtiness, by those wicked practices which
they have divised against others. But I rather take it more generally, that
though the righteous may fall into sin and troubles, yet they shall be
delivered out of them; see the Note chap. 10.2: but transgressors shall be
taken in their own naughtiness; that is, they shall be irrecoverably
destroyed; see the Note chap. 5.22. yea and many times cut off in the very act
of their sins.

Verse. 7. When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish, etc.] Some
understand this particularly of his expectation that he should oppress Gods
righteous servants, or that he should be delivered from death by his riches and
greatness. But there is no reason why it should not be understood generally,
to wit, that the wicked man is by death irrecoverably cut off from all the good
he expected, either for the obtaining or enjoying of any earthly advantages, or
especially for finding any mercy with God after this life is ended, and that
because after death there is no more place for repentance; see the Notes also
chap. 10.28. Job 8.11, 14, and 27. As for the following clause, and the hope of
unjust men perishes, it seems most probable that it is a mere repetition of
the same thing, for the greater confirmation of it. Yet some conceive that one
clause is meant of the wicked man's being cut short of the good he expected, and
the other of the disappointment of those that had placed their hope in him; or
else that the first clause is meant of the affection, the second of earthly
things hoped for.

Verse. 8. The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in
his stead.] This change God often works in this life, that the righteous
being delivered, the wicked man falls into the same, the like, or greater
tribulations: yea Solomon's aim in these words may be to show, that the wicked
man often falls into those very mischiefs, which he had plotted to bring upon
the righteous, and that God brings troubles upon them because they had troubled
the righteous, yea and that by these troubles of the wicked the righteous are
often delivered. But now it may be meant also of that great change that is made
after this life is ended, to wit, that whereas in this world usually the
righteous are in great troubles, and the wicked live in a prosperous estate;
when death comes, then the righteous are delivered and taken up into glory, and
the wicked that flourished before are cast into endless miseries.

Verse. 9. An hypocrite with his mouth destroys his neighbor, etc.] That is,
by his tempting them to embrace errors, or to do any thing that is evil,
(which is farthered much by the show that he makes of piety;) and so likewise
by his dissembling and pretending love to those against whom he has plotted
mischief, he destroys many, and as much as in him lies he seeks do destroy
the righteous servants of God: but through knowledge shall the just be
delivered; that is, by their knowing the evil of such errors and sins, and the
danger of being in such company, and so likewise by their wise discerning the
hypocrisy and plots of such men, notwithstanding those fair words and
flattering speeches wherewith they deceive the simple, the righteous are
delivered from these snares wherein others are taken.

Verse. 10. When it goes well with the righteous, etc.] That is, when they live
long, and are enriched, and advanced to places of honor and magistracy, etc:
the city re^oyceth; to wit, not only because such men will be very
isntrumental for the public good, and will that way employ all the good that
God does for them; but also especially because God usually blesses their
endeavors, yea and the people for their sakes: and when the wicked perish,
there is shouting; which the people durst not have done whilst they were in
their prosperity. The reason of this shouting may be understood from that which
is said before on the contrary concerning the righteous. And for rejoicing at
the ruin of the wicked, see the Note Psalm. 58.10.

Verse. 11. By the blessing of the upright, etc.] This may seem to be annexed as
one reason of the foregoing Proverb, why men are wont to rejoice when it goes
well with the righteous, and when the wicked perish, that it is because by the
blessing of the upright the city is exalted, that is, by their prayers and good
counsel, and other their religious, prudent and profitable speech: but it is
overthrown by the mouth of the wicked; that is, by their wicked and pernicious
commands and counsels, by their false witnesses, perjuries and blasphemies,
etc. Some Expositours do otherwise conceive of those words, by the blessing of
the upright, as that thereby is meant their bounty and good deeds, whereby they
become a blessing to the people; or, Gods blessing the upright by increasing
the number of them, or any other way; or, Gods blessing on the people for the
sake of the upright. But because the mouth of the wicked in the second clause
is opposed to the blessing of the upright in the first, the first exposition is
clearly the best.

Verse. 12. He that is void of wisdom despises his neighbor, etc.] That is,
He not only despises him in his heart, but also speaks contemptuously of him
by reproaching and reviling him; not considering (as he would do if he were
not void of wisdom) that he is a man as himself, and as capable of heaven as
himself, though never so poor, mean, deformed, etc. and that it is God that
has made the difference betwixt him and the man he despises, and that he
himself may become as blameworthy any way as he is: but a man of understanding
holds his peace; to wit, when he is so despised and reviled; or, he does not
despise his neighbor, and dares not therefore speak any thing to his disgrace,
but winks at his infirmities. There is another way which some go in expounding
this Proverb, to wit, that a man void of understanding despises his neighbor,
namely, when he hears him speak, or when he is reproved by him; but a man of
understanding holds his peace, that is, hearkeneth to him when he speaks, or
takes his reproofs patiently. But this exposition is not so clear.

Verse. 13. A talebearer reveals secrets, etc. That is, the secret faults of
men, or rather, those secret things that have been privately imparted to him
upon condition of secrecy; and so hereby he discovers himself a faithless man;
(for this the opposite clause implies.) It is in the Original, He that
walks being a talebearer reveals secrets: and in this expression, as the
Hebrew word manifests, the talebearer is compared to some pidling pedlar, that
having taken up several wares in several places, carries them up and down
from one place to another, and is ready to open his pack in every place where
he comes, for some little gain that he gets by the sale of his goods; and that
because tale-bearers are usually idle persons, that wandering up and down, do
spread abroad in every place where they come whatever they can any where get
the knowledge of, in hope thereby to please, and to get some small matter of
those to whom they tell their tales, which they neglect to get by their honest
labor. But he that is of a faithful spirit ^^^ealeth the matter; that is, He
that is a faithfull-hearted man indeed, and not only a man of many words and
promises, will not thus discover secrets.

Verse. 15. He that is surety for a stranger, etc.] That is, one to whom he is
no way obliged to do any such cou^tesy for him; or one whose estate or
conversation he knows not, see the Notes chap. 6.1, 2, 3: shall smart for it;
which is in the Hebrew, shall be sore broken; to wit, his heart shall be broken
with cares and grief, and his estate with losses and damages.

Verse. 16. A gracious woman retains honor, etc.] That is, As by the gracious
deportment of her self, she gets honor, credit and esteem, not only with her
husband and family, but also amongst all that know her, yea and is an honor to
her husband ^^others that have relation to her; so by the same means she does
also preserve both her own honor and theirs: whereas other women are only
curious and sollicitou^ to preserve their beauty, or to uphold their wealth and
greatness in the world; she propounds nothing to her self more, then that she
may, by the use of all holy means, cherish all those saving and sanctifying
graces which God (...) wrought in her, and so may preserve the good repute ^he
has gotten by carrying her self as becomes a good woman: these are the chains
and jewels and other ornaments, wherewith she seeks to uphold her credit
amongst men; and though she be never so many ways tempted to abandon these,
that she may be brought under shame and reproach, it will be all in vain, she
will persevere in those holy ways, and thereby still preserve her honor
untainted: and strong men, that is, men able to endure great pains and labor,
stout and hardy mighty men, retain riches; that is, as by their industry and
labor, perhaps too by extortion and oppression, they get great riches, so by
the same means they do also preserve them; which agrees with that Isa. 49.24.
shall the prey be taken from the mighty? The meaning of the Proverb is
therefore this, that A gracious woman retains honor, as strong men retain
riches; that is, that a gracious woman does as strenuously hold fast her
integrity, and so also does as surely uphold her credit and good name, as the
stoutest of men do preserve their wealth. I know that diverse Expositours do
otherwise express the drift of this Proverb: as that, whereas honor, the
woman's treasure, is gotten and maintained by meekness and gentleness, the
chief graces of the female sex* 1 Pet. 3.4. yea after their beauty may be
decayed; men quite contrary do usually get and preserve riches by oppression
and violence: or, that the work of a wife is only to maintain her honor by her
holy behavior; but husbands must by much labor and industry both get and
preserve riches. But the first Exposition is the most genuine.

Verse. 17. The merciful man does good to his own soul, etc.] To wit, not only
because his own soul must needs be refreshed by the mercy that he shows to
others, but also because God will be sure to reward him for it, and cause
others also in his distress to show mercy to him: but he that is ^ruell
troubles his own flesh; that is, he brings troubles upon himself, to wit,
vengeance from God, and terrors of conscience in the expectation of it before
it comes. Many, I know, by the cruel man's troubling his own flesh do
understand, his not allowing of himself so much as necessary food and raiment;
or his being hard-hearted to his nearest relations, wherein the Prophet says
Isa. 58.7. that men do hide themselves from their own flesh. But the first
Exposition is far the clearest.

Verse. 18. The wicked works a deceitful work, etc.] To wit, not so much
because his work is to deceive others, as because his work will in the
conclusion deceive himself: because God does usually cross him in his plots
and enterprises, though carried on with never so much diligence, power and
policy; and because he usually fails of the hope he propounds to himself in
this life, whether of the secrecy of his sin, or the bliss and prosperity of
his outward estate, either by reason the terrors of his conscience deprive him
of all comfort therein, or by reason that God suffers him not long to continue
in his supposed happiness, or at least he shall not leave it, as he expected,
to his posterity* and lastly because whatever he does in a way of religion for
the good of his soul shall do him no good at all, his very prayers and alms,
etc. shall deceive him: see the Note Job. 15.35. But to him that sows
righteousness, that is, that does much good, and walks diligently in all the
ways of righteousness: shall be a sure reward; to wit, either here or
hereafter, and a plentiful reward too, as the husbandman receives his seed
with great increase: see the Notes Psalm. 122.9. and 126.5.

Verse. 21. Though hand join in hand, etc.] It is in the Original only, Hand in
hand, or, Hand to hand; and by reason the expression is so concise, every
Interpreter almost gives a several interpretation of the words. But even
according to our Translation, Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be
unpunished, there may be several expositions given of these words. But yet
doubtless that Exposition which is the most common is far the clearest, to
wit, that though never so many wicked men do join together in any wicked work,
as happily in conspiring together against the righteous, and though they should
enter into leagues with others (which is usually done by joining of hands,
according to that Lam. 5, 6. We have given the hand to the Egyptians and to the
Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread) and so agree together to help one
another; or, more generally, though wicked men may have never so many and never
so mighty friends to defend them, yet they shall not be unpunished, but both he
and his children shall be destroyed: which last may seem to be employed, because
of the opposite clause that follows, but the seed of the righteous shall be
delivered; that is, not himself only, but his seed also shall be delivered,
both from the conspiracies of the wicked, and from all other dangers they are
in. And thus whilst one wicked man cannot be delivered by the help of many,
the righteous man on the contrary is the cause of delivering many.

Verse. 22. As a jewel of gold in a swines snowt, so is a fair woman which is
without ^iscretion.] That is, As a jewel of gold is not seemly in a sows ^now^,
it is pity such a gemme should be disposed of in such a place, because of her
deformity, and because it will not restrain her from rooting in the mire, where
she will be sure to defile it in the dirt; nor is it indeed any ornament to
her, but rather a cause that her deformity is the more viewed: so neither is
beauty seemly for a foolish wicked woman, that is as it were brutish and void
of reason, because it suits not with her evil qualities, and because she will
be sure to abuse and defile it with pride and uncleanness; and it is rather a
dishonor then any ornament to her, in that the more famous she is for her
beauty, the more her vices are also discovered and talked of.

Verse. 23. The desire of the righteous is only good, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, The desire of the righteous is constantly and only to do good to
all; though they cannot always do what they would, yet this only they desire:
on the other, side, the expectation of the wicked is wrath; that is, they are
always in hope, according to their desires, to proceed in a way of wrath
against men, by doing them some evil or mischief, and so are desirous always
to do more mischief then they are able. Thus some, I say, expound these words,
holding that the drift of this Proverb is, to show, that the righteousness and
wickedness of men is chiefly to be judged of by their desires. But now the
most of Expositours do otherwise conceive of the drift of this Proverb, namely,
that it is to show the bliss of the righteous, and the misery of the wicked:
only they differ in giving the sense of the several terms in both clauses.
For some understand by good in the first clause, that good which the righteous
desire to do, and others the good which they desire to obtain; and so for the
second clause, some by wrath understand the wrath of the wicked, others the
wrath of God poured forth upon the wicked. But indeed I conceive they may be
both joined together, and so the opposition of both clauses may thus be
conceived, The desire of the righteous is only to do that which is good in
Gods sight; that is, the chief current of their desires runs that way, so
far as they are righteous it is so with them, they delight in the law of God
after the inward man, willing in all things to live honestly, Heb. 13.18: and
accordingly the good which they desire and expect hereby, as namely the good
favor and blessing of God here, and life eternal hereafter, they shall be
sure to obtain; and so their desires end in good, or their desires accomplished
are good; for when, through ignorance or inordinate affections, their desires
are not such as they ought to be, God will not satisfy them. But now on the
other side, the desires, and so the expectation also, of the wicked is only
evil; as namely in that usually they proceed from wrath, and tend to the
pouring forth of their wrath upon the righteous: and accordingly their
expectation must needs be of wrath, the guilt of their consciences working in
them that which the Apostle calls Heb. 10.27. a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries: or their
expectation must needs end in wrath, not only because their wicked desires and
hopes must needs bring the wrath of God upon them, according to that of the
Apostle Romans 2.8, 9. indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every
soul of man that does evil; but also because when God executes his judgments
on them, both the frustrating of their designs and hopes, and the misery that
otherwise they undergo^ does make them vex and fret, and even as mad men to
rage against God.

Verse. 24. There is that scatters, etc.] See the Note Psalm 112.9: and yet
increases; to wit, if he gives liberally, yet with respect to his estate, and
not more then is meet: which is to be added from the opposite clause, and there
is that withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to poverty; not only
because sometimes such covetous fools cannot find in their hearts to part with
their money, even when it might have been done in some way for their own
worldly advantage; but especially, because God for their hard-heartednesse to
the poor curses and scatters their estates.

Verse. 25. The liberal soul, etc.] See the Note above verse. 17: shall be made
fat; that is, he shall richly be rewarded, not only with spiritual and eternal
blessings, but even with temporal blessings also, both for the health of his
body, and the great increase of his estate: and he that waters; that is, that
relieveth the wants of the poor, that they may be able to live, even as a
gardener waters his herbs and plants when in a time of drought they are even
ready to die: shall be watered also himself; that is, blessed from heaven, both
with an increase of wealth and grace, whereby he may be made both more able,
and more cheerfully ready still to relieve the poor in their necessities. The
similitude may be taken from springs, that are filled with water as fast as
they empty themselves, whereas if they be stopped, they grow empty, the water
diverting it self some other way: and we find it used Isa. 58, 11. to the very
same purpose; And the Lord shall -- satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat
thy bones: and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water,
whose waters fail not. The Proverb may also be meant of their increasing in
knowledge that instruct others, according to that 1 Cor. 3.6. I have planted,
Apollo watered, etc.

Verse. 26. He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him, etc.] And so,
though they sin in cursing, God will hear and revenge their cries and
complaints. Yea observable it is, that this must needs be thus, especially in
our land, where corn serves us both for meat and drink, because we have not
wines and such pure waters to drink as are in other countries. But blessing
shall be upon the head of him that sells it; see the Note chap. 10.6.

Verse. 27. He that diligently seeks good, etc.] That is, to do that
constantly which is good in Gods sight, or rather, to benefit those amongst
whom he lives: procures favor; to wit, both from God and man: but he that
seeks mischief, it shall come unto him; see the Notes chap. 5.22. and Psalm.
10.2.

Verse. 28. He that trusts in his riches, etc.] That is, that places his
happiness and safety in them, and therefore cares not by what means he gets
them, nor how close-fisted he is to the poor, nor what evil he does, because he
thinks his wealth will secure him: shall fall; that is, shall be brought down
and fall into mischief, and that because he rests upon such transitory
things, that will fail him and be gone in an instant; or rather, he shall fall,
to wit, as withered leaves fall from a tree when the wind blows upon them,
according to that Isa. 64.6. we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like
the wind have taken us away. For this may seem the more probable, because of
that which follows in the opposite clause, but the righteous, to wit, because
he trusts only in God, shall flourish as a branch; see the Note Psalm. 1.3.
And indeed as a living branch that continues firmly fixed in the tree, though
in the winter it may seem withered, yet in the spring it will flourish again;
so the righteous, though they may seem to be forlorn in the hour of adversity,
yet in due time shall be sure to flourish again.

Verse. 29. He that troubles his own house, etc.] To wit, by continual
quarrelling and unquietness in his family, and lawsuits with others abroad,
by idleness, or improvident ordering his family or affairs, by profuse wasting
his estate, by extreme niggardliness, or any other way of wickedness, that
draws the curse of God upon his estate and family: shall inherit the wind;
that is, shall bring all to nothing; or, what he has or gets, he will be no
more able to keep, then a man is able to lay hold on and retain the wind: and
the fool shall be servant to the wise in heart; that is, such a fool as thus
troubles his house, shall not only loose all that he had, but besides he shall
not long be master of himself, but shall become a servant, happily a bond slave
(for in those times men in great want were wont to sell themselve for servants)
to him that has been wiser to take care of his estate; see the Note chap.
10.8. There is another exposition given of the first branch, which is not
improbable: He that troubles his own house shall inherit the wind: that is, He
that is ever jangling and quarrelling in his family, shall be sure of
continual storms and uproars, others becoming thereby as violent as himself,
and so he shall never have any peace in his house. But the former exposition is
generally followed by Interpreters.

Verse. 30. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life, etc.] That is, say
some Expositours, their righteousness will be a means of life to them; see the
Note chap. 3.18. But rather the meaning seems to be, that the benefit which men
may get by the example, the counsel and instruction of the righteous, is no
less then life, yea life eternal, and that therefore there is little reason
why such men should be despised, as usually they are, in the world. Yea
observable it is, that this fruit of the righteous does restore life to dead
men, which the tree of life in the garden of Eden could not do. Now in the
following clause there is one special instance given of this fruit of the
righteous; and he that wins souls (it is in the Hebrew, he that takes
souls) that is, that takes them with the sweetness of his speech, and so
persuades them to embrace his saving doctrine, or that is a means of saving
souls, is wise; that is, he approves himself to be a wise man, both because
there is much wisdom to be used in this work of winning souls, and because
this service above all God will be sure abundantly to reward.

Verse. 31. Behold, etc.] As if he should have said, This which I tell you now
may be observed to be true by daily experience; or, is a strange and wonderful
thing, and therefore very considerable: the righteous shall be recompensed in
the earth; that is, God will make them smart for their sins here in this world:
much more the wicked and the sinner; that is, much more therefore shall they
receive the reward of their wickedness, either here in this world, or however
eternally hereafter. Some of our best Expositours would have the Lords
rewarding the righteousness of the righteous here in this world to be also at
least included in the first clause: but I see not how that can agree with the
following clause, much more the wicked and the sinner. The meaning of the words
we have cleared by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.16, 17. where he alludes to this
passage of Solomon.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 2. A Good man obtains favor of the Lord, etc.] That is, though he may
be out of favor with the world, yet God of his free grace, whenever he seeks
to him, will show himself favorable to him, and do him good: but a man of
wicked devices will he condemn; and so also punish him, to wit, though he may
flourish for a time, and may justify himself, and may happily by his crafty
hiding of his wickedness deceive many, and though however he shall be surely
applauded by the men of the world.

Verse. 3. A man shall not be established by wickedness, etc.] That is, He
shall not be established as long as he lives in any way of wickedness, and he
shall not secure himself from danger by any wicked practices; but, on the
contrary, he shall be utterly rooted up: which is employed from the following
clause, but the root of the righteous shall not be moved; that is, though they
may be shaken with many storms of afflictions, yet they shall not be overturned
by the roots; or, though they spread not upwards so loftily as the wicked do,
yet by their righteousness they shall be unmoveably established: see the Note
chap. 10.25.

Verse. 4. A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband, etc.] That is, she is an
honor to him, his chiefest and choicest ornament, and consequently the
continual rejoicing of his heart; she is what woman was by creation appointed
to be, 1 Cor. 11.7. the glory of the man, who is her head: but she that makes
ashamed is as rottenness in his bones; that is, she is a continual
heartbreaking grief and vexation to him, which pierces so deep, that it
wastes his strength, and consumes not his flesh only, but his bones also. And
thus the wise that was made of a bone of the husband becomes an incurable
disease to him, even as rottenness in his bones.

Verse. 5. The thoughts of the righteous are right, etc.] That is, to do that
which is every way just, and to give every man his right; see the Note chap.
11.23: but the counsels of the wicked are deceit; to wit, how they may deceive
men, and that many times by cloaking their wickedness under fair pretenses and
professions of honesty and good intentions.

Verse. 6. The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood, etc.] They tend
to the destroying of men both in soul and body, see the Note chapter 1.11, 19; as,
by consulting together how to effect it, by bearing false witness against
them, by seeking to draw them into their snares by their flatteries, etc: but
the mouth of the upright shall deliver them; that is, those for whose lives the
wicked lie in wait; to wit, by giving them warning of their danger, by
dissuading the wicked from such bloody practices, by pleading their cause
before the magistrate, by stirring up others to appear in their defense, and
many other ways.

Verse. 7. The wicked are overthrown, and are not, etc.] See the Note Psalm.
37.36. both they and their families are overthrown: which is employed by the
following clause, but the house of the righteous shall stand; that is, not they
only, but their families also shall be established in an estate of happiness.

Verse. 8. A man shall be commended according to his wisdom, etc.] That is, as
a man is more or less spiritually wise and godly, and manifests it in word and
deed: but he that is of a perverse heart, and manifests it in his speech and
behavior, and therefore is indeed no better then a fool, though otherwise
never so carnally wise, shall be despised. The main drift of the Proverb may be
to show, that though the counsels and enterprises of the godly-wise may be
unsuccessefull for a time, and seem to produce very sad effects, yet at last
they shall have their due praise; and that though, on the other side* the
wicked may be successful and prosper for a while, yet in the conclusion they
shall be despised for their folly.

Verse. 9. He that is despised, etc.] That is, He that having modest thoughts of
himself, aspireth not after things too high for him, and so lives in a plain
way without any pomp or state, being willing to live in some honest calling,
and if need be, to work with his own hands, and so is slighted and despised in
the world; and has a servant, that is, and yet as meanly as he lives, he has
wherewith to maintain himself and his family, at least he is able to keep one
servant for the easing of himself, the furtherance of his business, and the
advancement of his estate: is better then he that honors himself, and
lacks bread; that is, is in a better condition then he that boasts of his
great parentage, and carries himself as some great man, and yet even then
perhaps has not at some times so much as bread to eat; or, that makes a great
flourish in rich attire and the state of his attendance, and so comes to
extreme poverty and want.

Verse. 10. A righteous man regards the life of his beast, etc.] And therefore
much more will such a man show mercy to poor men, when he sees them in want,
and show pity to his servants and those of his own family: but the tender
mercies of the wicked are cruel; that is, they, in stead of being merciful,
are cruel, even to those that are men as themselves, and much more therefore to
their beasts: or, even those actions of theirs which carry the fairest show of
mercy have cruelty mixed therewith; when they deal cruelly with men, and yet
pretend great mercy, in that they do not proceed to greater extremities, and so
their mercies are but at the best a lesser kind of cruelty; and so likewise,
when they give alms to the poor of that which they have gotten with grinding
the faces of other men, or with their alms do add such base reproachful
language, that this wounds the hearts of the receiver more then their alms can
refresh them; or, when they pretend to show mercy to a man, but it is with a
purpose to do him some mischief; and so many other ways that might be added.

Verse. 11. He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread, etc.] And so
he approves himself to be a wise man: which is employed by the following clause,
but he that follows vain persons (see the Note Judge. 9.4.) is void of
understanding; and so shall come to beggary, and want bread to eat. And thus
the opposition of these two clauses is more fully expressed Prove. 28.19.

Verse. 12. The wicked desires the net of evil men, etc.] Several ways is
this Proverb expounded by Interpreters. 1. Some take it thus; that when wicked
men, that have no root of true piety in them, see how some other evil men
prosper and thrive by ways of rapine and fraud, catching men in their net, and
gathering them in their drag, as the Prophet speaks Habak. 1.15. they earnestly
covet the wealth which they get, and thereupon are eager to learn their
devices, and to go the same way to work as they do, yea and to join in society
with them, that they may be sharers with them in their great gains: but the
root of the righteous yields fruit; that is, their piety and uprightness of
heart, which as a root under ground is not seen by the eyes of men, makes them
as a tree that being well rooted does flourish and bring forth fruit, and so
they have what is sufficient for them, without any such injurious vile courses,
as wicked men take to enrich themselves, and herewith they are well contented.
2. Others conceive the meaning of the Proverb to be this; that wicked men
desire that which none but evil men can desire, namely, to draw men into the
ways of perdition, or to ensnare them some way or other, that they may spoil
them of their lives or estates; yea that this is a sport and delight to them,
in the prosecution whereof they can be content to endure any hardness or
labor, as fishers and fowlers and huntsmen will in following their game: but
the root of the righteous yields fruit; that is, though they be of those whom
the wicked seek to ensnare, yet they shall flourish for all this, and will be
never a whit the less serviceable to God in their places for them; or, they
are so far from desiring to spoil others, that they are ready to give of their
own for the relief of others. 3. Some understand it thus; that the wicked
desire to enrich themselves in their sinful practices, and that their plots
may be successful; but their devices are usually blasted, and they seldom
enjoy the fruit of their desires: but the root of the righteous yields fruit;
that is, they only enjoy the fruit of their desires, though a while they may
seem to be in a withering condition, yet they shall flourish again. And 4. some
read the first clause thus, The wicked desires the fortress of evil men; and
accordingly they take the meaning of the Proverb to be this, that the hope of
wicked men, when they are in trouble, is still in such as themselves; they
desire to be protected by them, or, they desire to defend themselves as they
do, by their riches, policies, and power; and it may be all in vain: but the
root of the righteous yields fruit; that is, they need no such fortresses,
their righteousness does effectually preserve them.

Verse. 13. The wicked is snared by the trangression of his lips, etc.] That is,
he draws down the judgments of God and just destruction upon himself by the
wickedness of his lips; or, by his own words, wherein unadvisedly he often
overshoots himself, he is many times entangled, and brought into great troubles
and inconveniences amongst men: but the just shall come out of trouble; to wit,
by the wisdom and righteousness of his lips; or, the meaning may be this,
that though he may come into trouble by the words of wicked men* or by his own
words, whether by speaking his conscience and what he ought to speak, or by
speaking any thing unadvisedly, yet God will deliver him out of his troubles.

Verse. 14. A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth, etc.]
The drift of this Proverb may be to show, that not only the good works of the
righteous shall be rewarded, of which he speaks in the following clause, and
the recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him, but even his good
words also. But the first clause I conceive implies more then so, namely, that
a good man shall receive abundant blessings from God, as the reward of the good
which with his mouth he has done unto others; as he has satisfied many with
the wisdom and graciousnesse of his words, so shall himself be satisfied with
many blessings from God. And then for the last clause, one of our best
Expositours understands it thus: and the recompense of a man's hands shall be
rendered unto him; that is, by using his mouth well he shall peaceably enjoy
what he has gotten by the labor of his hands, whereas many by the folly of
their lips come to be stripped of all their estates.

Verse. 16. A fools wrath is presently known, etc.] And so he does hereby
exceedingly shame and dishonor himself: which is employed in the following
opposite clause, but a prudent man covers shame; that is, he suppresseth the
folly of his passion, which, together with his unseemly behavior, in his
anger, being discovered, would have redounded much to his reproach and shame.
Some understand this last clause otherwise, namely, that a prudent man covers
shame, by passing by the reproaches that are cast upon him, or the shame and
dishonor that is any other way done him, taking no more notice of it then if
it had never been; and that not in hope of getting the fairer advantage
hereafter to be revenged on them, but because having withstood the first
violent boiling up of his passion, he can afterward the more easily keep his
spirit in order; or because he can patiently endure reproaches and wrongs, and
will rather suffer then revenge. But the former exposition is the best.

Verse. 17. He that speaks truth shows forth righteousness, etc.] That is,
He that makes a conscience in his ordinary talk to speak nothing but truth,
will speak nothing but what is just, and what becomes a righteous man to speak,
when he is called forth in public to be a witness: for that this is employed,
the following clause shows, but a false witness, deceit; that is, a man that
is inured to lying, when he is called to be a witness, will utter deceit, that
is, he will deceive the judge and others with his lies; or, though he makes a
show of truth, and perhaps speaks somewhat of truth, yet it shall be done in
such a cunning way, that it shall tend to the overthrow of the righteous man's
cause. Or else we may understand it thus; He that speaks truth, to wit, when
he is called to be a witness, shows forth righteousness, that is, shows
himself thereby to be a righteous man: but a false witness, deceit; that is,
such a one shows himself thereby to be a fraudulent person. Or thus; He that
speaks truth in his testimonies does thereby promote the doing of justice;
or, will not be afraid to declare boldly what is just: but a false witness
furthers deceit.

Verse. 18. There is that speaks like the piercings of a sword, etc.] It is as
if he had said, as appears by the opposite clause, that there are a company of
fools, whose words do wound men like sharp swords; see the Note Psalm. 57.4. And
many ways this may be done: as by drawing men into any error or wickedness
to the manifest destruction of their souls; by setting men together by the
ears; by reviling and slandering, etc. And so likewise that which follows,
that the tongue of the wise is health, that is, a means of health to men, may
be done several ways: to wit, by curing men of their errors and sins; by
pleading in the defense of the innocent^ by pacifying offended minds, and
making peace between those that are at variance; by satisfying scrupled
consciences, and comforting the heavy-hearted, etc. But because both in the
foregoing and following verses Solomon may seem to speak concerning witnesses,
therefore some understand this Proverb also particularly of them; to wit, that
there are some that, by swearing falsely against the innocent in judgment, do
as much as in them lies wound them mortally; but that then the wise, by
examining their testimonies, and by using other means to clear those that are
thus falsely accused, do heal these wounds, and preserve the lives of those that
were in so great danger. Yet I conceive it is best to take the words in the
more general sense.

Verse. 19. The lip of truth shall be established for ever; but a lying tongue
is but for a moment.] This may be understood several ways. As 1. that he that
speaks truth will not vary in what he says, but will always speak the same
thing, whereas the liar will be now in one tale, and by and by in another. Or
2. that truth shall at last prevail against error: though truth may be
overborn for a time, and error may be then cried up for truth; yet this shall
be but a while thus: the time shall soon come, that maintainers of error shall
proceed no farther, for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, 2 Timothy 3.9.
and then the truth shall again prevail. Or 3. that he that speaks the truth
may stoutly stand to what he has spoken, no man shall be able to convince him
of falsehood; and though he may be falsely accused, or suspected of falsehood, yet
his innocence herein shall at last be cleared: whereas the liar, though he may
outface men for a while, shall soon be discovered and proved to be a liar. Or
4. that the man that constantly makes a conscience of speaking the truth, shall
be blessed from heaven here, and live for ever in heaven hereafter; but that on
the other side, though men may seem to thrive by lying for a time, yet they
shall soon find it otherwise, and without repentance shall be eternally
punished. And indeed I see not but that all these may be intended in the words.

Verse. 20. Deceit in the heart of them that imagine evil, etc.] The meaning of
this is, either 1. that those that imagine mischief against the righteous have
many plots in their hearts, whereby they hope to deceive them, and bring them
into trouble, but that hereby they shall certainly bring upon themselves
extreme grief and vexation of spirit; which is employed in the opposite clause,
but to the counselors of peace is joy: the one shall have much trouble and
sorrow, through the disquiet of their own minds, the terror of their
consciences, and the curse of God upon them; the other much joy, through the
blessing of God upon them, and the sweet refreshings of their own consciences.
Or 2. that such plotters of deceit and mischief may glory and rejoice therein
for a time; but that true joy shall be only to the counselors of peace, with
whom it shall be well, notwithstanding the plots of the wicked against them. Or
3. which to me seems the clearest Exposition, that the plots of the wicked
against the righteous will deceive them, and bring the evil intended against
the righteous upon themselves, to their great vexation and torment; whereas
those that seek the good and peace of others shall have great joy and comfort
thereby: see the Note chap. 11.18.

Verse. 21. There shall no evil happen to the just, etc.] That is, nothing that
is truly evil, nothing shall come upon them in a way of vengeance, or shall
tend to their destruction, but only to try them, and purge them, and do them
good, Romans 8.28: but the wicked shall be filled with mischief; that is, they
shall be overwhelmed, inwardly with terrors, and outwardly with the judgments
of God upon them.

Verse. 22. Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, etc.] To wit, Not only
because lying is in it self a sin most hateful to the God of truth; but also
because liars do usually deal unfaithfully with men, breaking their promises,
and not carrying themselves according to that they have with their lips
professed: whence the opposite clause is thus expressed, but they that deal
truly, to wit, both in word and deed, are his delight. Lying alone makes men
abominable to God; but God delights only in those that both speak the truth,
and deal truly.

Verse. 23. A prudent man concealeth knowledge, etc.] See the Note chap. 10.14:
but the heart of fools proclaims foolishness; that is, their hearts do set
their tongues on work with all eagerness to make known their folly to all men
where they come, to wit, by their vain ostentation of themselves, and by their
foolish and ignorant and wicked speeches: Such a man, as Solomon says
elsewhere Eccles. 10.3. says to every one, that he is a fool; he cannot
conceal his folly, as the prudent man concealeth his knowledge.

Verse. 24. The hand of the diligent shall bear rule; but the slothful shall be
under tribute.] It may be read, but the deceitful shall be under tribute. And
well indeed may those two be joined together; because slothful persons, to
supply their wants caused by their sloth, or to avoid labor, are wont by any
false and fraudulent courses to shift for themselves.

Verse. 25. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes it stoop; but a good word
makes it glad.] That is, even one word of commiseration or comfort; especially
any word of promise out of Gods word, which is called a good word, Jer. 29.10.
I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to
return to this place.

Verse. 26. The righteous, etc.] To wit, though he be in never so afflicted a
condition, is more excellent, (or, more abundant,) that is, is indeed richer,
and has more true worth in him, is more honored of God and good men, and is
every way in a better condition, then his neighbor, to wit, though never so
great in the world: and that because such a one is rich in grace, and an heir
of heaven, which is far better then all worldly greatness; and because he is
well contented with his estate, and consequently his way is answerable to his
hopes; which is employed in the following clause, but the way of the wicked
seduceth them. And this may be understood several ways: as 1. that they
flatter themselves with vain hopes of happiness in their ways which will
deceive them, see the Note chap. 11.18; or 2. that their way of heaping up
wealth, and making themselves great in the world, whereby they seek to excel
others, and for which they think themselves more excellent then the righteous,
does indeed deceive them, because for all this they are but contemptible men;
or 3. that the reason why the wicked do not seek after the forementioned
excellency of the righteous is, because they see that wicked men flourish and
prosper in their way; or 4. that the pleasure and content which wicked men,
through the corruption or their nature, take in their lewd ways, keeps them
from the ways of righteousness, and draws them away still farther and farther
into all kind of wickedness.

Verse. 27. The slothful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting, etc.]
The most received exposition of these words is this, That as the hunter does
many times loose the venison which, with much labor and craft, he has gotten
in hunting, his dogs sometimes eating it up, and the keepers of the park at
other times taking it away; so the slothful man usually never enjoys what he
has gotten by much fraud and oppression (see the Note Genesis 10.9.) either
because through mere sloth he is not careful to keep it from perishing; or
because the curse of God bereaves him of it, or cuts him off by death, or
gives him over to such unreasonable covetousness, that he cannot find in his
heart to spend it upon himself. But yet there is another way of expounding
these words, which seems very probable; namely, that the slothful man will not
labor, and therefore it cannot be said that he rosts what he took in hunting,
that is, that he eats what he has gotten by his labor: no, either such an one
must not have to eat, or else he must live upon other men's labors, perhaps of
what he gets by fraud and deceit. In opposition whereto it is said in the next
clause, but the substance of a diligent man is precious; to wit, either 1.
because his substance is great, he has plenty of gold and silver and other
things which men esteem precious; or 2. because men are wont most to esteem
that which they have gotten with their own hard labor; or 3. because substance
so gotten is like to be continued to men, that so they may enjoy it, and use it
to their comfort. But see the Note also Psalm. 37.16.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. A Wise son hears his fathers instruction; but a scorner hears not
rebuke.] No not the rebuke of his own father; and therein shows himself to be
a fool. For the word scorner, see the Note Psalm. 1.1.

Verse. 2. A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth, etc.] That is, By
speaking of good things to others, men shall benefit themselves, in that they
shall become the wiser and the holier thereby: but the soul of the
transgressors shall eat violence; that is, by speaking wickedly such men
become more violently wicked. But the words may be better taken in a more
general sense: A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth, that is, he
shall fare the better for the good he has done by using his mouth well, he
shall enjoy those blessings that shall be very sweet and delightful to him,
see the Note chap. 12.14. and so it shall be likewise with him for his
righteous and religious behavior; which is employed by the following opposite
clause: but the soul of the transgressors, to wit, that break Gods laws, and
abuse their mouths to evil speaking, shall eat violence, that is, shall for
their violence and cruelty both in word and deed be requited with violence,
namely, with such bitter miseries as they would never endure, but that they
should come upon them with unresistable violence. See the Notes chap. 1.31, and
10.6.

Verse. 3. He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life, etc.] That is, He that
is sparing in his speech, slow to speak, as the Apostle calls it, Jam. 1.19.
scarce ever speaking without good deliberation, does thereby avoid many deadly
dangers: but he that opens his mouth wide, that is, the man that is full of
talk, and will out with any thing that comes into his mind, shall have
destruction, that is, his tongue many times cuts his own throat. Because the
mouth in man is, as the gates are in a city, with care to be observed both for
the opening and shutting of it, especially in dangerous times, hence is this
expression of keeping the mouth: see the Note also Psalm. 141.3.

Verse. 4. The soul of the diligent shall be made fat.] See the Note chap. 11.25.

Verse. 5. A righteous man hates lying, etc.] To wit, both in himself and
others, and that in it self, as looking upon it as a loathsome abominable
thing; and therefore he is reverenced and honored by those that know him, his
name is sweet amongst men as a precious ointment: for this is employed in the
following opposite clause, but a wicked man is loathsome and comes to shame;
to wit, for his lying. But that which is intended in these words is this, that
though such a man be loathed and reproached by every man when his lying comes
to be discovered, and though he be brought to that shame, that scarce any body
will believe any thing he says, yet he will not leave his lying, but loves it
still.

Verse. 26. Righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way, etc.] It
secures him from being drawn out of the way by any temptations, and defends him
against all flanders and dangers whatsoever: but wickedness overthrows the
sinner; that is, it carries him violently into sin, so that he has no power
to avoid it, it overturns his designs, and at last utterly destroys him. See
the Notes Psalm. 25.21. and chap. 10.29, and 11.3, 5, 6.

Verse. 7. There is that makes himself rich, yet has nothing; there is that
makes himself poor, yet has great riches.] Many several expositions are
given of this Proverb* as, that many a man that has nothing raises himself to
great riches, and that others that have great riches bring themselves to
poverty; or, that there are some that being poor make themselves rich by being
well contented with their condition, and that there are others again that being
rich make themselves poor by their covetousness, being as greedy as if they
had nothing, and scarce willing at any time to spend any thing upon themselves;
or, which seems the best, that many a man that is a very beggar makes a
vaunting show of very great riches, (see the Note chap. 12.9.) and that on the
other side many a rich miser pretends himself to be very poor. And this is also
most true concerning men's spiritual estates.

Verse. 8. The ransom of a man's life are his riches; but the poor hears not
rebuke.] The aim of this Proverb seems to be, the setting forth of the
commodities and discommodities both of riches and poverty, and to show that
even in this regard the rich are in a worse condition then the poor. The
discommodities of riches that seem to be employed in these words are these: 1.
that because of their riches they are the bolder to transgress the law, to
gather wealth by unjust means, and to be injurious to others, and so do many
times bring themselves into trouble, and not seldom even to the endangering of
their lives; and 2. that however their lives are usually in danger, either by
reason of thieves and robbers, or of false accusers, tyrants and oppressors.
But then this commodity the rich man has by his riches, that they will help at
such a dead lift, herewith he can stop the mouths of those he is in danger of,
and so ransom his life, and procure his peace, as it was with those Jer. 41.8.
Slay us not (say they to Ishmael) for we have treasures in the field, etc. so
he forbear, and slew them not: see the Note chap. 10.15. But then on the other
side, the discommodities of the poor are very many: only this commodity there
is in poverty, that the poor hears not rebuke; so far he is from being in
danger of his life, that he shall not be so much as rebuked or reviled: to wit,
either 1. because the poor man is not in danger to be rebuked for his
ill-gotten goods, as the rich man is; or else 2. because his poverty will make
him afraid to offend, or to be injurious to others, and so freeth him from
trouble; or 3. because there is nothing to be gotten from him, and therefore
neither robbers nor false accusers will meddle with him; or 4. because even out
of pity, when they have offended, men are ready to pass by the poor, not
taking any notice of their offenses, yea sometimes out of a slighting of them,
not looking upon them as any way considerable.

Ver. 9. The light of the righteous rejoices, etc.] That is, The prosperity,
the comfort, the knowledge and holy conversation of the righteous shines
brightly and gloriously, increasing still more and more, even as the sun does,
(from whence the similitude seems to be taken) that rejoices as a strong man
to run a race, Pro. 19.5. and so shall do unto eternity: see the Note chap.
4.18, 19. Because those things that flourish do seem as it were to rejoice, as
the Poet says concerning the flourishing of all the in the spring, Omnia nunc
rident nunc formosissimus annus, and with all, because the shining light of the
righteous (according to the foregoing Exposition) is matter of much joy both to
themselves and others, therefore it is said that the light of the righteous
rejoices; see the Note Psalm. 97.11. But the lamp of the wicked shall be put
out; that is, the prosperity of the wicked, which compared with the prosperous
estate of the righteous, is but as a candle in comparison of the sunshine,
shall either be violently put out on a sudden, or else by degrees consume away
to nothing, and so shall end in sorrow; see the Notes Job 18.5, 6. and 21.17.
Yea so shall it also be with the show which the wicked sometimes make of
knowledge and holiness, it shall come to nothing. This I conceive is the full
meaning of the Proverb. Yet some understand the first clause, the light of the
righteous rejoices, of the peoples rejoicing in the exaltation and prosperity
of the righteous; for which see the Note chap. 11.10.

Verse. 10. Only by pride comes contention, etc.] That is, pride tends only to
contention; or, pride is the chief, and in a manner the only cause of
contention; or rather, pride alone is usually the cause of contentions amongst
men; though there be no injury done him, nor no cause of quarrelling, yet the
proud man, merely out of pride, will take some occasion or other to quarrel
with men, either by being injurious to them, or by taking some offense
causelessly; and all this because he is foolish, (see the Note chap. 11.2.) and
yet withal thinks no man so wise as himself, and so will hearken to no
counsel and advice of others, either for the preventing of contentions, or the
making of peace: which last is employed by the following clause, but with the
well-advised is wisdom; that is, the humble are wile, and so will do nothing
rashly, but upon mature deliberation, and will be ready to hearken to the
advice of others, and by that means they are careful to avoid contentions, and
are all for peace.

Verse. 11. Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished.] That is, that which is
gotten by deceit and wickedness; (see the Note Job. 31.5.) as particularly
that which is gotten by any vain course of life, which no way tends to the good
either of Church or commonwealth, such as that of stage players, jugglers,
wandering fiddlers, etc. or by the abusing of any lawful art in any unlawful
way.

Verse. 12. Hope deferred makes the heart sick; but when the desire comes, it
is a tree of life.] That is, it is a singular comfort and restorative to such a
grieved fainting soul; even as when a man ready to faint for hunger lights upon
some fruit-tree, and eating of the fruit thereof is refreshed and revived. But
see the Note also chap. 3.18.

Verse. 13. Who so despises the word shall be destroyed, etc.] To wit, Not
every one that disobeyeth it; (for thus even David was charged with despising
the commandment of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.9.) but he that does wholly slight and
despise it in his heart: but he that fears the commandment shall be
rewarded; that is, he that fears, not punishment only, but sin it self.

Verse. 14. The law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares
of death.] That is, say some Expositours, The law of God is to wise men a means
of life, in that it teaches them to avoid all sins, which are the snares of
death. And some too understand it of good laws made by wise magistrates. But it
is better taken to be the same with that, chap. 10.11. (for which) see the Note
there) namely, that the instruction of the wise is a means of life to others,
and that it refreshes men, as spring waters do those that are hot and thirsty.

Verse. 15. Good understanding gives favor, etc.] That is, That which may be
truly called good understanding, which is, not the wisdom of the world, but
the wisdom that is taught in the word of God, procures men favor both with
God and man, and that because it causes men in all things to be have
themselves wisely, to live justly and holily, and to be gentle, and ready to do
good unto all men, by instructing them, or any other way; all which makes their
way of life plain and comfortable: for all this is employed in the following
clause; but the way of transgressors, to wit, by reason of their folly, is
hard, that is, it is offensive to men, as a hard rugged way is to them that
walk in it; or it is harsh and fierce, and untractable, cruel and
hard-hearted, and so it causes them to be hated of those amongst whom they
live; or it is hard, that is, it is, through their wickedness, and their being
hated of God and man, full many times of trouble and miseries.

Verse. 16. Every prudent man deals with knowledge, etc.] That is, he does
all things prudently, with good advisednesse and deliberation, still
considering with himself, whether that which he is moved or inclined to do be,
in regard of circumstances of time and place, convenient to be done or no: but
a fool lays open his folly; to wit, by the rashness and folly of his
actions: see the Note chap. 12.23.

Verse. 17. A wicked messenger falls into mischief, etc.] By a wicked
messenger may be meant either one that is sent forth and employed in any wicked
business, or else rather (as appears by the opposite clause) such an one as
does not faithfully manage the message or charge he is sent about. The first of
these falls, as it were suddenly and unexpectedly, into mischief, through the
just vengeance of God upon him; the other also by incurring the displeasure of
those that sent him, who accordingly will be sure to punish him for the hurt he
has done by his unfaithfulness. But a faithful ambassador is health; to
wit, by composing of differences, and removing of offenses, and otherwise doing
good both to those to whom, and also to those by whom and for whose sake he is
sent; and so also by procuring good consequently to himself, not only in the
peace of conscience he enjoys, but also in the reward he shall be sure to
receive both from God and man. See the Note chap. 12.18.

Verse. 18. Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses instruction, etc.]
Shame is joined with poverty, because poor men do usually lie under shame and
contempt, especially when men become poor by their own obstinacy; and withal
to show the folly of such men, that being causelessly ashamed to be instructed,
do by despising instruction bring true shame upon themselves: but he that
regards reproof shall be honored; that is, he shall be enriched, and so
advanced to places of honor; or, he shall be honored, though he may be poor.

Verse. 19. The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul: but it is abomination
to fools to depart from evil.] That is, they abhor it both in themselves and
others. The words of this proverb are all considered apart by themselves easy
enough: but what reference the two branches thereof have the one to the other,
and so what the drift and aim of the Proverb is, it is hard to say; there being
many several ways wherein it may be understood, and most of them may seem
equally probable: As 1. that in the first clause the ground is laid down why it
is said in the second clause, that it is abomination to fools to depart from
evil; when men's desires are satisfied, it does much delight the soul; and
therefore it is that fools abhor to depart from evil, because they take such
delight in satisfying their carnal lusts and desires: Or 2. that in the first
clause we are told what is delightful to wicked men, and in the second what is
hateful and displeasing to them: though the things they desire be never such
vain toys, and foolish sinful pleasures, yet they are exceedingly delighted
to enjoy what they desire; but on the other side, it is as grievous and irksome
to them to be taken off from their sinful vanities: Or 3. that the first
clause must be understood concerning the desires of the wise and righteous,
(which is employed by the opposition of the second clause, which is concerning
wicked fools) to wit, that wise and holy men take great delight in the
satisfying of their just and righteous desires, which are always to do good
and avoid evil; whereas wicked men take delight only in sin, and so it is an
abomination to them to depart from evil: Or 4. that the difference betwixt the
righteous and the wicked is set forth in this, that though the righteous do
many times wait long ere their desires be accomplished, yet when they are
accomplished, they yield them much refreshing delight, (according to what was
said before verse. 12. for which see the Note there;) but that fools, on the
other side, are all for their present enjoyments, and therefore they cannot
abide to depart from evil, in hope of any good or happiness they might enjoy
hereafter: Or 5. that the first clause is meant of Gods satisfying men's
desires, to wit, that when men desire any thing of God, and he does it for
them, this is most sweet to men's souls; and that the second clause shows that
wicked men must needs be strangers to this joy, because they abhor to depart
from evil, and God will only fulfill the desires of them that fear him, Psalm.
145.19.

Verse. 20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise; but a companion of
fools shall be destroyed.] That is, he will be tainted with their wicked ways,
and so shall share with them in their punishments.

Verse. 23. Much food is in the tillage of the poor, etc.] To wit, because they
are usually skillful in husbandry, and laborious, and are wont to till their
ground themselves, and so having also but a little tillage it is the better
done, and by that means through Gods blessing it yields them the better crop;
which accordingly they make use of for the food of themselves and their
families. And thus the drift of this clause is to show that even the poorest
sort of people, if they be diligent, may have enough to live on; see the Note
above verse. 11. But there is that is destroyed for want of judgment; that is,
there are some that have fair estates, and yet perish in a manner, because they
have not food to eat, (as is employed in the opposite clause:) to wit, either
because they want judgment to till their ground, (the prophet calls it the
husbandmans discretion, Isa. 28.26. His God does instruct him to discretion)
and so they commit the tilling of their ground to lazy, negligent, unfaithful
servants; or because they want judgment to husband and manage what they have
in a right manner, and so many times all is lost by their folly and
wickedness. See the Note Psalm. 112.5.

Verse. 25. The righteous eats to the satisfying of his soul, etc.] To wit, in
that 1. through Gods blessing upon his labors, he shall always have a
sufficiency whereon to live; 2. he is still contented with what estate God is
pleased to afford him; and 3. he will comfortably live upon that he has, and
not pinch his own belly: but the belly of the wicked shall want; which may
imply, (...) that such men, because of their wickedness and unjust gains,
shall not have so much as bread to eat; 2. that they are always insatiably
greedy to get, and yet can scarce allow themselves necessary food; and 3. that
when they do eat, through Gods curse upon them, their food does neither
satisfy their appetites, nor nourish their bodies: Hos. 4.10. Hag. 1.6.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. A Wise woman builds her house, etc.] Though this might be
understood literally of her provident care to repair her dwelling house
betimes, so soon as any where she espies any decaies in it, (and so the like
may be said on the contrary of the foolish woman in the opposite clause;) yet I
rather conceive that both clauses must be taken figuratively: A wise woman
builds her house; that is, she upholds and enlarges her family and estate,
to wit, by her prudent education and government of her children and family, by
her diligence and good huswifery, but especially by her piety, which procures
Gods blessing both on her and hers; see the Notes Exodus 2.21. 2 Samuel 7.11. and
Psalm. 127.1: but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands; as if he had
said, with both hands earnestly, as it is Mich. 7.3. that is, she undoeth all,
to wit, by her pride, idleness, and ill huswifery, by her riotousnesse, and by
neglecting her family and household affairs, and in general by drawing the
curse of God upon her and hers by her wickedness.

Verse. 3. In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride, etc.] To wit, 1.
because foolish men out of the pride of their hearts are wont with their
insolent, scornful and opprobrious language, to smite in a manner all they come
near, laying about them like mad men, yea sometimes by their presumptuous
speeches to strike at God himself, according to that Psalm. 73.9. they set their
mouth against the heavens, etc: for as the almighty word of Christ's command,
whereby he executes judgments upon wicked men, is called the rod of his mouth,
Isa. 11.4. because thereby the men of the earth are smitten to their utter
ruin; so the slanderous and insolent language of foolish men is here called a
rod in their mouths, (as elsewhere it is called the scourge of the tongue, Job
5.2.) because much pain and mischief redounds to men that are smitten thereby.
And 2. because such foolish men are usually beaten, as it were, with this rod
of their own mouths, in that they provoke God thereby to punish them, and in
that those men that are smitten by them are many times thereby provoked to fall
foul upon them, and so they do as it were put a rod or staff into other men's
hands for the beating of themselves. Yea and observable it is, which one of our
best Expositours has noted in this place, to wit, that this phrase, In the
mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride, may seem also to imply, 1. the sudden
punishment of such men, in that the proud and presumptuous words they utter do
presently become a rod for the punishing of themselves; and 2. the
reproachfulnesse of their punishment, in that, notwithstanding the pride and
loftiness of their spirits, they are threatened, not with a sword, but with a
rod or a staff, even as amongst men the baser sort are usually threatened with
being caned or cudgelled: whence it was that Goliahs spirit did so swell with
disdain against David, 1 Samuel 17.43. Am I a dog, says he, that thou come to
me with slaves? As for the following clause, but the lips of the wise shall
preserve them, the meaning must needs be, either that such men are preserved
from the hurt of slanderous and reproachful speeches, by their discreet
answers and defenses; or that by avoiding such proud presumptuous speeches,
they are secured both from the wrath of God, and from provoking others to smite
them; and on the contrary, by their humble and gentle and courteous language,
do procure the favor of those amongst whom they live. But see the Note also
chap. 12.6.

Verse. 5. A faithful witness will not lie, etc.] To wit, in his private
speeches at other times: but a false witness will utter lies; that is, he that
has falsified his faith in a cause of public judgment, will make no
conscience of lying in his private discourse; see the Note chap. 12.17: and
therefore he that would be accounted a faithful witness must always make
conscience of lying, because otherwise he will not be believed when he speaks
truth. Or, A faithful witness, having witnessed the truth, he will stand to
it; whereas a false witness will easily be brought to unsay what he has
testified. But I rather conceive the plain meaning of the Proverb to be this; A
faithful witness will not lie, that is, He that is indeed and out of
conscience faithful in bearing witness, will not for fear or favor, for any
threatenings or rewards, be drawn to lie, as by concealing any part of the truth
he should utter, or dealing deceitfully any way in his testimony; but a false
witness will utter lies, that is, a false man called to bear witness will
make no conscience at all of lying.

Verse. 6. A scorner, etc.] See the Notes chap. 1.22. and Psalm. 1.1: seeks
wisdom; that is, that knowledge whereby men become wise unto salvation (for
even the worst of men may pretend in their way to be careful for their souls;
and some wicked men in a formal way attend upon the means of grace; especially
in the time of any great calamity, or at the hour of death; then they would
repent, and get an interest in Christ, and pray earnestly to God for it:) and
finds it not; to wit, either because he seeks it in a way of his own carnal
wisdom, and not, where only it is to be found, in the word of God and the
ministry of the word; or because he seeks it not in a right manner, diligently,
seriously and sincerely, not out of love to God or goodness, but merely for
his own glory, or some other outward respects, and so the continuing
wickedness of his heart hinders the gaining of true wisdom, and makes him
like those 2 Timothy 3.7. that are ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth; or because having long despised the tenders of wisdom
and grace, God regards not his desires and prayers in the time of his
extremities: but knowledge is easy unto him that understands; to wit, that
understands his own defects and infirmities, and the way wherein wisdom is
to be certainly found, and that has already attained some true knowledge. But
see the Note chap. 8.9.

Verse. 7. Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in
him the lips of knowledge.] That is, either 1. as soon as he begins to talk
wickedly and profanely; that thou may not by staying with him receive hurt
by him, or at least seem to approve his wickedness: or 2. when thou thereby
perceivest his folly; and that because fools are always self-conceited and
obstinate, so that no counsel or reproof of thine will do any good upon him;
and for thy self, no good can be expected, but much hurt rather, from the
society of such men.

Verse. 8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way, etc.] Two
particulars are employed in this: as namely that the wisdom of the prudent is,
1. to know himself; to endeavor to know, and thereby to come truly to know
whether he be in the state of nature or grace, whether the course of life
wherein he lives be such as will bring him to heaven or no, and so thereupon to
order his whole conversation aright; and 2. to weigh well every particular
action of his, not to undertake any thing rashly, but to understand aright how
he ought to behave himself, and what he ought to do, and to make sure that he
does nothing but what becomes a wise man, and one that fears God. And thus
hereby is employed also, that true wisdom does not consist so much in
contemplation and knowledge, as in the practice of what we know; not so much in
prying into other men's ways, in reproving and teaching other men, as in
looking carefully to our own ways; and especially (for this I conceive is the
main drift of the Proverb) that it consists not in that wisdom and policy of
worldly men, in being cunning to deceive others, but in taking care that they
do not deceive and destroy their own souls: for this is hinted in the following
clause, but the folly of fools is deceit; that is, that which the world counts
a high pitch of wisdom, but is indeed the folly of fools, is that they are so
cunning and crafty to deceive those they have any dealing with, and understand
all the mysteries and depths of Satan herein, not considering what the issue of
these courses will be; or thus, the folly of fools is deceit, that is, the
wickedness of wicked men, that never mind their ways, but give up themselves
to live after their own hearts lusts, proceeds merely from their folly and
ignorance, however wise they may think themselves, and tends to the deceiving
of themselves, be guiling them both in the opinion of what they are, and in the
expectation of what they hope for: see the Note chap. 11.18.

Verse. 9. Fools make a mock at sin, etc.] See the Note chap. 10.23: but amongst
the righteous is favor. It is very hard to say how this second clause does
answer the first; and hence it is that so many different expositions are given
of this Proverb by several Interpreters. 1. That wicked men make a sport of
wronging and abusing their neighbors; but the righteous are so far from
this, that they bear unfeigned good will one toward another, and are still
ready to show any favor they are able to those with whom they converse. Or 2.
that wicked men make a mock of sin, as if there were no danger in it, and so
never seek to appease Gods displeasure, and to procure his favor, and that by
this means they usually draw Gods wrath upon themselves; whereas the righteous
are afraid of sin, and if they sin, are very careful to seek reconciliation
with God, and so they enjoy the love and favor of God. Or 3. that wicked men
make a pastime of sin, therein lies all their jollity and delight; whereas the
righteous, on the other side, take as great complacency and delight in their
assurance of Gods favor, and in their loving fellowship and friendly society
one with another. Or 4. that wicked men are wont to make a sport of other men's
sins, and to report them abroad in a way of derision and flouting at them, and
by this means provoke men to hate them, and to be angry with them; but the
righteous, quite contrary, do compassionate their brethren when they sin, and
are favorable and gentle toward them, seeking to hide and excuse them as far
as lawfully they may; and by this means they themselves find favor also both
with God and man. And indeed there is not any one of these expositions but has
much probability in it.

Verse. 10. The heart knows his own bitterness; and a stranger does not
intermeddle with his joy.] The meaning of this Proverb seems to be this in
general; that the sorrows and joys that are within the heart of a man no man
can know but himself only: and that not only because men may cunningly
dissemble both their griefs and joys, but also because their griefs and joys
are such that they are not able to express them; and if they do undertake to
relate what they feel inwardly, yet it is not possible that others should
conceive of it, as they inwardly feel it.

Verse. 11. The house of the wicked shall be overthrown; but the tabernacle of
the upright shall flourish.] That is, Though the estate and family and
posterity of the righteous be but, in comparison of that of the wicked, as a
little weak tottering tabernacle, in camparison of a stately strong-built
house; yet shall this estate, a family and posterity of the righteous prosper
and increase, when that of the wicked shall be utterly ruined. See the Note
chap. 12.7.

Verse. 12. There is a way which seems right unto a man, etc.] Some understand
this thus; that many men think, that to live in plenty, and to enjoy all
variety of pleasures and delights, is the only happy and desirable life. But by
right here I conceive is not meant that which is delightful and desirable, but
that which is blameless and just. And though there be no evil way, wherein
wicked men are not wont, upon some pretense or other, to flatter themselves,
according to that chap. 12.15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes; yet
because there are some gross ways of wickedness, which are so directly
against the very light of nature, that the worst of men cannot but judge them
to be evil, therefore I rather think that Solomon's aim here is, to show that
there are some ways, which though they be contrary to the will of God, and
therefore hateful in his sight, yet men are apt to think that they are just
and right, and pleasing to God: and that either because they have some
appearance of goodness in them; as it is in will-worships, and insurrections
against a lawful magistrate abusing his power, and opposing the true religion,
and many such like ways: or because the gain and pleasure they may find in
those ways, and happily the great success which God may give them therein, does
many times bribe their judgments, and makes them call evil good, and darkness
light. But the end thereof are the ways of death; that is, in the conclusion,
if they persevere therein to the end, they will be found to be ways that do
certainly bring men to eternal death and destruction. And besides, in that it
is said that the end of this way, which seems right to a man, is, not the
way, but the ways of death, this also may be hinted to us, that one such evil
way of error and sin does usually lead men into many more, till at last it
brings them to eternal destruction.

Verse. 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth
is heaviness.] Because excessive laughter does naturally cause pain in the
body, and makes the heart to be afterward the heavier, therefore some
Expositours conceive that Solomon does in these words allude hereto. But that
which this Proverb seems to hold forth to us may be, 1. that as in outward
prosperity there is usualy somewhat of affliction that goes along with it, and
accordingly with all natural joys there is still some mixture of sorrow, even
as there is still some le^s in the sweetest wines; so likewise great prosperity
is usually followed with some great affliction, and so great joys do usually
end in great sorrows: 2. that when men do counterfeit mirth, and labor to
drive sorrow from their hearts, it will not be, there will be still some secret
gripings of grief even in their laughter, and at last their sorrow will return
upon them again, and so that mirth will end in heaviness: and 3. that it is
thus especially with wicked men, whose mirth is usually mingled with terrors
and tortures of conscience, and at last is followed with Gods wrath and
vengeance, and then their sorrow is pure sorrow without any allay of hope or
comfort. And the drift of noting all this here is, to teach us rather to seek
after those joys that are solid and permanent, and that will cheer up the
heart even in outward distresses.

Verse. 14. The backslider in heart, etc.] That is, The man that turns away his
heart from God and his ways, and grows daily worse and worse; or rather* The
man that falls away from those ways of holiness and righteousness wherein he
walked for a time, not slipping back only through infirmity in some particular
actions, but having his heart wholly estranged from God: shall be filled with
his own ways; that is, he that has so soon his fill of goodness, shall at
last have his fill of wickedness, to wit, in the punishments of it; see the
Note chap. 1.31: and a good man shall be satisfied from himself; that is, from
his own comforts that he feels within himself, or from his own works, which God
will abundantly reward, especially in heaven, where he shall be able to desire
no more then he shall have.

Verse. 15. The simple, etc.] See the Note Chap. 1.4: believes every word; to
wit, every false report and flattery, and every fair plea of deceivers, and so
is easily deceived and drawn into evil: but the prudent man looks well to his
going; that is, he will not take things upon trust, and so will not be drawn to
do any thing, but what upon due consideration he finds he may lawfully and
safely do; see the Note above verse. 8. It is indeed said 1 Cor. 13.7. that
charity believes all things; but the meaning of that is only, that charity
teaches men not to be causelessly suspicious, but to interpret all things to
the best, unless there be apparent reason to the contrary; and there is a
great deal of difference betwixt this goodness of charity, and the lightness
of credulity.

Verse. 16. A wise man fears, and departs from evil, etc.] That is, when
such a man sees Gods judgments executed upon men, or foreseeth any evil
approaching, whether it be by the warning that is beforehand given him, or
otherwise, he will be afraid, and so wisely decline the evil feared; or rather,
he will be afraid of Gods displeasure, and the punishment whereof he apprehends
himself in danger, and so will forsake his sins, as the cause of those evils:
but the fool rages, and is confident; that is, he rages against those that
reprove him, and tell him of the evil that is coming upon him; or, like a mad
man, he breaks out into all manner of outrageous wickedness, and furiously
proceeds from sin to sin, and so rusheth upon the pikes of Gods displeasure,
being as the Apostle Jude speaks, verse. 13. as raging waves of the sea, foaming
out their own shame, and yet is confident that all shall be well with him.

Verse. 17. He that is soon angry deals foolishly, etc.] That is, he usually
speaks and does many absurd things, many things that are hurtful to
himself; and hereby he makes himself a laughing stock to men; yea such a man
for his folly is rather to be pitied then hated: and a man of wicked devices is
hated; that is, he that concealeth his anger, carrying all fair outwardly, but
inwardly plotting revenge several ways, is usually hated as a mischievous
person. The still malicious man is far worse then the man that is hasty of
spirit.

Verse. 18. The simple inherit folly, etc.] The grounds of this expression may
be these: 1. that the folly of simple wicked men is bred and born with them, it
descends to them as an inheritance, by natural generation from the loins of
their parents: 2. that it is proper and natural to them in all things to
behave themselves foolishly; there is nothing so foolish and ridiculous but
they will embrace it, nor so absurd and wicked but they will do it; though
they pretend to seek after knowledge, yet it will not be, though they be ever
learning, yet they will never come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.7:
3. that they rejoice in their folly, as men do in their inheritance, and will
by no means part with it; they are as wise as their forefathers, and they are
resolved to be no wiser: and 4. that folly in due time will certainly be the
fruit and reward of their silliness and wickedness; all their great hopes
will deceive them, and folly at last will be their recompense, to wit, when the
punishments of God shall fall upon them, and in particular shame and reproach:
which seems to be employed by the opposition of the following clause, but the
prudent are crowned with knowledge; that is, they by diligent searching after
true wisdom attain sound knowledge, which is an honor and glory to them; a
means many times of their advancement here in this world, but always a means
of bringing them to a crown of glory hereafter.

Verse. 19. The evil bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the
righteous.] To wit, as suitors are wont to wait at the gates of great men,
bowing themselves before them, when they come out unto them; which shows that
this is meant here of Gods exalting the righteous in regard of their outward
condition, and the wickeds crouching before them in that respect: though it be
true too, that many times wicked men are forced by their own consciences to
reverence and respect the righteous, even merely for those eminent gifts and
graces, that admirable wisdom and piety which they discern in them, and
sometimes in an humble submissive manner to seek unto them for their counsel
and prayers.

Verse. 21. He that despises his neighbor sins, etc.] That is, He that so
slights and vilifies his poor neighbor, that he relieves him not in his wants,
shall find by his punishments that he did therein greatly offend God; though
the world may judge otherwise of it, yet by experience he shall find it so: and
therefore he is a wretched unhappy man. For that this is employed is evident by
the opposite clause, but he that has mercy on the poor, happy is he; to wit,
because he does that which is pleasing to God.

Verse. 22. Do they not err that devise evil? etc.] That is, They do
unquestionably err. And two ways this may be understood: 1. that they who sin
not of infirmity, but do advisedly plot mischief against men, are quite out of
the way of life eternal; yea, as some add, though they never bring it to
pass, but only devise it: or 2. that they that devise evil against others do
usually miss of that which they aim at, and bring evil upon themselves. But
mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good: see the Note 2 Samuel 15.20.

Verse. 24. The crown of the wise is their riches, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, wisdom, which is the crown of the wise, is also their riches. But
doubtless Solomon speaks here of outward riches, and says that these are the
crown of the wise, that is, they are an ornament and an honor to them: to wit,
1. because their wealth is many times obtained by their wisdom and piety: 2.
because men will honor and admire them and their wisdom the more for their
riches; whereas the wisdom of poor men is usually disregarded, in rich men it
shall be sure to be highly extolled: 3. because the wise being rich have the
greater advantage and opportunity to manifest their wisdom and piety: and 4.
especially, because the wise having the command of their riches, do to their
great glory use them well, for the advancement of Gods glory, for their own
spiritual and eternal benefit, and for the good of others. But the
foolishness of fools is folly; that is, be they poor or be they rich, they
will show themselves fools, and their folly is all the ornament they have to
honor them. As an ape will be an ape, though men put him into a golden coat;
so a wicked Nabal will show himself a fool, though he have never so great
riches, and so will live and die with contempt and dishonor: yea the richer
such men are, the more wicked and foolish they will be, and the more they will
discover their wickedness and folly; because they will trust in their riches,
and abuse them exceedingly to the dishonor of God, and to the hurt both of
themselves and others. This, I conceive, is the full meaning of this Proverb.
Yet some make this only to be the meaning of the last clause, that the
foolishness of fools, that is, of wicked men, is folly, that is, folly indeed;
there is no folly like unto that folly.

Verse. 25. A true witness delivers souls, etc.] That is, by testifying the
truth he often delivers many innocent men from those dangers wherein they
were for their estates, or otherwise by some false accusation; or, he
delivers souls, that is, the lives of men, when through false accusations
they were in danger of death: see the Note chap. 12.6. Yea in delivering any
one man from such dangers, it may be truly said that he delivers souls,
because all that have their livelihood by him are thereby also delivered. To
which some add also, that even by bearing witness against malefactors, a
faithful witness may be truly said to deliver souls, because the cutting off
such mischievous persons tends to the preservation of many. But a deceitful
witness speaks lies, and so destroys souls: see the Note above verse. 5.
and chap. 12.17.

Verse. 26. In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, etc.] That is, Whereas
the fear of man does usually work in men much faintness of heart and spirit,
they that fear the Lord, on the contrary, are, and have just cause to be, very
courageous and confident; see the Note chap. 10.9: and his children, that is,
say some, the children of God, or rather, the children of the man that fears
God, shall have a place of refuge; that is, shall be protected by God in times
of danger.

Verse. 27. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, etc.] That is, it is a
constant never-failing means to make men live holily and comfortably here, and
to bring them to life eternal hereafter: see the Notes chap. 10.11. and 13.14.

Verse. 28. In the multitude of the people is the kings honor, etc.] And
consequently his strength and safety also, as is employed in the following
clause, but in the want of people is the destruction of the prince; that is, it
tends to his dishonor and contempt* and so also to his ruin. And the ground
of both these is, because a numerous people does not only yield great revenues
to a Prince, and, when occasion is, mighty armies for his defense, but is also
a very probable sign that such a Prince is wise and just and merciful in his
government, and does maintain peace and piety amongst them, seeing such a way
of government does of it self tend to the increase of the people; and besides
God does usually bless good kings with a great people: But then where there is
want of people, the contrary may be said in every regard.

Verse. 29. He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding, etc.] To wit,
because much wisdom is required for the subduing of men's corrupt passions,
that are so hardly tamed: but he that is hasty of spirit exalts folly; that
is, he discovers himself to be a man of great folly; or he makes his folly
conspicuous that all men may see it, as things lift up are the more easily seen
by many: but see the Note above verse. 17.

Verse. 30. A sound heart is the life of the flesh, etc.] This may be spoken in
allusion to the heart in a man's body, and so the full meaning of the words may
be this: that as when that principal part of man's body, the heart, is sound
and incorrupt, it makes the whole body lively and healthful; so when the mind
is sound, that is, free from all sinful passions, which are the moral
sicknesses and distempers of the soul, and particularly from envy, (as the
opposite clause implies) even this also, through Gods blessing, and the quiet
and joy which it works in those that have it, Prove. 17.22. does render the
whole body vigorous and healthful, and so to appear outwardly, and
consequently it lengthens men's lives; yea it has this effect in those that are
of the weakest and tenderest constitution: for this some think may be employed
in the word flesh. But envy the rottenness of the bones; as if he had said, A
rotten heart full of envy does, on the contrary, waste and consume the
strongest bodies: see the Notes chap. 12.4. and Job. 5.2.

Verse. 31. He that oppresses the poor, etc.] That is, that any way wrongs him,
though it be but by neglecting to relieve him, out of a base esteem that he
has of him, not regarding though he perish in his wants, (for that this is
employed the opposite clause shows) reproacheth his maker; to wit, 1. because
it is a wrong to the Creator, when his creature is wronged, especially a man,
that is made after Gods own image, which the poor man is, as well as the rich:
2. because it is God that has made him poor, and the oppressing of those that
God has put into a poor condition, is a base perverting of the wise providence
of God, in making some rich and some poor, which God has done for many holy
ends and purposes; and it imports as much as if one should think, that God made
them poor, that the rich might crush and oppress them: 3. because by
oppressing the poor he does as it were set himself at defiance against God, who
has promised to protect them; or at least carries himself as if he thought
that God could not or would not maintain their cause against him. But he that
honors him, has mercy on the poor; that is, he that has a desire to honor
God, will show mercy to the poor; or, he that shows mercy to the poor, does
thereby honor God* to wit, 1. in that he is careful to obey Gods command
herein; 2. in that he relieves those for whom God has undertaken to provide,
and so God is honored in the accomplishment of his promises; 3. in that he
relieves them as Gods creatures, and made after his image, and so God takes it
as done to himself; and 4. in that this argues that he reverenceth the wise
providence of God in mingling rich and poor together.

Verse. 32. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, etc.] That is, for his
wickedness, or in the very act of his wickedness; or, his wickedness is the
very outward means of his ruin. And that Solomon means here the wicked man's
being driven away in his death is evident by the opposite clause, wherein he
mentions the death of the righteous; see the Note also Job. 18.18. Accordingly
therefore the full drift of this expression may be to imply, 1. that the wicked
are many times suddenly and unexpectedly and violently hurried away out of this
world, where because they live in pleasure, they would by their good will live
for ever; and hereto also agree those expressions elsewhere, Luke 12.20. Thou
fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee, and Job 27.8. what is the
hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul? 2.
that when God begins to raise the storms of his displeasure against wicked men,
they are no way able to free themselves, but are driven away, as dust or smoke
or chaff is driven away by the wind, and so sent packing to their place; see
the Note Psalm. 1.4: if they seem to escape for a time, yet God does so follow
them on with his judgments, that he never leaves till he has driven them into
the pit of destruction: and 3. that wicked men are driven away by death, not
only from their present enjoyments, but also from all their hopes either for
this life or that which is to come. But the righteous has hope in his death;
to wit, because death it self is a great advantage to them, and the spirit of
God chears up their hearts in their greatest agonies with a hopeful
expectation of their glory hereafter. I know some Expositours understand the
first clause, either of wicked men's being driven away from sin to sin by the
violence of their corrupt lusts and affections; or of their disappointments in
general, that they are usually driven away from the accomplishment of their
wicked designs, yea that nothing succeeds well with them. And so likewise some
understand the second clause, either of the righteous man's hope in the most
desperate dangers, even when he walks, through the valley of the shadow of
death, as David expresses it, Psalm. 23.4. (for which see the Note Job 3.53) or
else, that the righteous has hope in his death, that is, the wicked man's, he
hopes that God will in time cut him off, and that then it will be better with
the righteous. But the first exposition is, I conceive, that which Solomon
intended.

Verse. 33. Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding, etc.]
That is, He that is truly an understanding man will be sure to store up holy
and heavenly wisdom in his heart, and when he has gotten it, he will as
carefully preserve it as a precious treasure; see the Note Psalm. 119.11: there
wisdom constantly resides as in her own house, and from thence they that
desire it may fetch it; for thence she does upon all just occasions manifest
her self: which last is employed by the following opposite clause, but that
which is in the midst of fools is made known; that is, nothing but folly dwells
in such men's hearts, and that themselves do continually proclaim. Or (which is
far the most probable) Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has
understanding, that is, A wise man can and does usually conceal his wisdom; he
will not indiscreetly or vain-gloriously utter what he knows: but that which is
in the midst of fools is made known; that is, such men will be babbling whatever
they know, be it good or bad; in it is, and out it must, according to that
Hebrew proverb, One farthing in an empty pitcher will make a great noise; and
so they will be sure to make known their folly: see the Notes chap. 10.14, and
12.23.

Verse. 34. Righteousness exalts a nation, etc.] To wit, because when a
people is for the generality religious and righteous, this is both in it self a
glory and an honor to them, and also a means to bring them into a flourishing
condition in every regard, and so thereby they become renowned: but sin is a
reproach to any people; to wit, both in it self, and by means of the calamities
and ruin it brings upon them.

Verse. 35. The kings favor is toward a wise servant, but his wrath is against
him that causes shame.] To wit, that by his foolish carriage of himself in his
place, makes his Prince ashamed, that he has entrusted his business with such
an one, according to that, Isa. 22.8. then the charriots of thy glory shall be
the shame of thy lords house: see the Note also chap. 10.5.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. A Soft answer turns away wrath; but grievous words stir up anger.]
That is, they both kindle anger where there was none before, and make it flame
higher and higher where it was before.

Verse. 2. The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright, etc.] That is, aptly
and seasonably, so as may be most for the good and profit of those with whom
they converse: but the mouth of fools pours out foolishness; see the Note
chap. 12.23.

Verse. 4. A wholesome tongue, etc.] That is, A tongue that is in it self sound,
and free from those moral sicknesses and distempers that are naturally found
in the tongues of men, and that does accordingly utter those things which may
be for the good and health of others, (for which see the Note chap. 12.18:) is
a tree of life; that is, a means of life both to the speaker and the hearers;
see the Notes chap. 3.18. and 11.30. and 13.12: but perverseness therein is a
breach in the spirit; that is, the frowardness and wickedness of the tongue
does rather wound then heal the spirits of men; it makes a breach in the peace,
health, and strength of men's spirits, by disturbing them, by grieving and
vexing and angring them; yea many times by corrupting them it is a means of
destroying their souls: and so likewise this may be extended also to the
disturbance that wicked men's tongues do make in their own spirits, both in
regard of the anguish which thereby they bring upon their consciences, and the
pollution and disposednesse to farther sin which they work in their hearts.

Verse. 6. In the house of the righteous is much treasure, etc.] To wit, because
Gods blessing is upon them, both to increase that they have already gotten in
an honest way, and to preserve it to them and theirs, so that they and their
children after them enjoy it with much quiet and comfort; yea besides, when the
righteous has but a little, no more it may be then a little house to hide his
head in, yet this is indeed better then the treasures of the wicked, see the
Note Psalm. 37.16: but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble; that is, by
reason of many troubles, many miseries, crosses and calamities which God brings
upon them, their revenues do usually waste away and come to nothing; or, if
they leave any thing behind them, their children or kindred do usually quarrel
and contend about it. To which may be added also, that the wicked, whether they
have much or little, are never free from inward perplexity and trouble; partly
through the unsatiablenesse of their covetous desires, and their toiling and
afflicting themselves to get riches; partly through their continual vexing
fears and cares for the keeping of what they have, and the terrors of
conscience they endure for what they have gotten unjustly, and the apprehension
they have or Gods displeasure against them for their wickedness in general;
and partly through their fretting and vexing for every loss that befalls them,
they scarce ever enjoy what they have with any quiet or comfort.

Verse. 7. The lips of the wise disperse knowledge, etc.] To wit, as the
seeds-man scatters his seed: they do what they can to impart unto many that
knowledge which they have stored up in their own hearts, studying within
themselves how they may impart it with most advantage to others: which last is
employed in the following opposite clause, but the heart of the foolish does not
so; that is, whatever they may pretend, their hearts being void of true
knowledge, they neither can disperse knowledge with their lips, nor do they
care or ever think to do it; it is only vanity and wickedness which their
lips can disperse.

Verse. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; but the
prayer of the upright is his delight.] Both sacrifices and prayers, and
consequently all outward duties of Gods worship and service, are to be
understood in both clauses: But yet the prayers of the righteous are said to be
Gods delight, and the sacrifices of the wicked to be an abomination, to imply,
that the services of the godly are accepted of God, though there be not therein
that cost bestowed, that solemnity and pomp as is in wicked men's sacrifices,
and which therefore are the only thing for which they hope to be accepted of
God.

Verse. 9. The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, etc.] To wit,
because the ways that he follows are ways of wickedness. And so this may
be added as a reason of the foregoing Proverb; God therefore hates the
religious services of wicked men, because he abhors the wickedness of their
conversation. Yet by the way of the wicked here may be meant all the wicked
man's actions, whether natural, civil or moral, because the wicked man being
under Gods wrath, nothing that he does can please him. But he loves him that
follows after righteousness; that is, that striveth with all his might, even
against the stream of his corrupt nature, to do only that which is righteous,
though he cannot attain to do it as he desires. And thus as in the foregoing
Proverb he compared the wicked and the righteous together in regard of their
religious services, so here he compares them together in regard of all other
the actions of their lives; showing that the sincere desires and endeavors of
the righteous, though full of weakness, are accepted of God, whereas all the
actions of the wicked, even those that may seem most splendid and glorious, are
an abomination to him.

Verse. 10. Correction is grievous to him that forsakes the way, etc.] Some
would have the meaning of these words to be this; that grievous correction is
prepared of God for those, and shall certainly befall those, that forsake the
way, that is, the right way, the way prescribed by the word of God. But
according to our Translation (whether we read it as it is in our Bibles,
Correction is grievous, etc. or, as it is in the margin of our Bibles,
Instruction is grievous unto him that forsakes the way) the meaning of the
words is clearly this; that instruction or correction is irksome and
displeasing to him that chooses the way of sin, rather then the right way of
holiness, or, that having gone on a while in the right way, does afterward
forsake it, and turn aside into false wicked ways; and that because reproofs
and correction are displeasing in themselves to man's corrupt nature, and
because men of an evil life cannot endure those that go about to take them off
from those ways that are so pleasing to flesh and blood, and do account the
strict ways of holiness a very bondage to them. And he that hates reproof
shall die; that is, he shall be cut off here in a way of wrath, and shall die
eternally hereafter. And the drift of Solomon's joining these two together seems
to be, either 1. to imply the difference between those that are troubled at
reproof and correction, and those that hate it; correction may be displeasing
to men, and yet afterward it may do them good, but they that hate reproof
shall certainly perish: or 2. rather to imply the sad effect that follows
discontent against instruction or correction; naturally men are displeased with
those men that thus seek their good, but they that do thus are in the ready
way to destruction, because he that hates reproof shall surely die.

Verse. 11. Hell and destruction are before the Lord, etc.] See the Note Job.
26.6: how much more then the hearts of the children of men? Now this must not
be so taken, as if it were easier for God to know some things, then it is to
know other things. Only Solomon here speaks of God after the manner of men, to
whom it must needs seem harder to know the state of the dead and hell, then the
hearts and thoughts of men; both because hell and destruction are farther off,
and though the hearts of men are deep, yet not so deep as hell; and likewise
because men may by outward discoveries guess shrewdly at the thoughts of men's
hearts, whereas of hell and the state of the dead men know nothing at all but
only by faith, so far as any thing thereof is revealed in the Word.

Ver. 13. A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance, etc.] That is, A
cheerful heart, especially when it is so upon spiritual grounds, does usually
make the whole body healthful and vigorous, refreshes the spirits, and so
consequently also it makes the countenance in particular fresh, lightsome and
cheerful: but by sorrow of the heart, that is, by carnal and immoderate
sorrow, the spirit is broken: that is, either 1. the mind of a man will be
afflicted and dejected, the understanding and memory weakened, etc; or else 2.
the vital spirits will be dulled, which causes frequent sighs and groans, and
often brings men to such extremities that they can hardly draw their breath;
and so consequently also the countenance is hereby made cloudy and sad. And
thus God speaks here to us, to persuade us to take heed of such sorrow, as
tender mothers are wont to speak to their children, telling them they will
mar their faces with crying.

Verse. 14. The heart of him that has understanding seeks knowledge, etc.]
That is, A man that has understanding seeks knowledge with all his heart,
even as a hungry man seeks meat: which is employed in the following clause,
but the mouth of fools feeds on foolishness; that is, their hearts delight
it and greedily devour all kind of foolishness and wickedness, as it were
with open mouth; it is as meat and drink to them to satisfy their lusts, and to
do any thing that is sinful and wicked; for which see the Notes chap. 4.17.
and Job 15.16. They love to speak foolishly and vainly; such language and
speeches are continually in their mouths, as if they fed and lived upon them:
and greedy they are to hear the talk of fools, it is as delightful to them as
their food; and indeed it nourishes their folly in them.

Verse. 15. All the days of the afflicted are evil, etc.] By the afflicted here
most Expositours understand the man that is not contented with his estate; all
whose days must needs be evil, that is, grievous, tedious and irksome to him,
because he is continually fretting, and so can neither eat, nor sleep, nor
follow the labors of his calling with any quiet, nor take any joy in any
thing, whatsoever: and so likewise in the following clause, but he that is of a
merry heart has a continual feast, by the man of a merry heart they
understand the man that is contented with his condition, because contentation,
be a man poor or rich, must needs yield continual delight and refreshing to
him. But I see no reason why we should not take it more generally, thus, All
the days of the afflicted are evil, that is, as long as men lie under any
heavy affliction, whether poverty or sickness, etc. or inward anguish and
trouble of mind, they scarce enjoy a comfortable hour, which makes their lives
bitter to them: but he that is of a merry heart, to wit, especially if it
proceed from a good conscience, and assurance of Gods love in Christ, has a
continual feast; that is, he has that which will cheer him up in the midst of
his afflictions and sorrows, and that will be as a feast to him, when he
perhaps has not so much as bread to eat.

Verse. 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, etc.] Which is of it
self the greatest of treasures, and causes men to enjoy that which they have
with much peace and comfort: then great treasure, and trouble therewith; to
wit, as it is usually with those that fear not the Lord, who have commonly the
more trouble the greater their wealth is, either by reason of their fear of
loosing what they have, or their continual toll and vexing cares about the
preserving and ordering and increasing their estates, or by reason of their
terrous of conscience for their wickedness, and particularly for the unjust
ways whereby they have raised their estates, and the clamours and outcries of
those that have been oppressed by them, or because of the strife and contention
and suits at law, which do usually attend great estates.

Verse. 17. Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, then a stalled ox, and
hatred therewith.] This may be meant of the love or hatred, either of him that
invites men to his table, or of those that sit at table together either at home
or abroad, especially when men's hatred breaks forth in strife, brawling and
fighting together. Yea it may be meant also of the love and hatred of God, to
wit, that the coursest fare with Gods love, is better then the greatest
dainties given by God in hatred.

Verse. 18. A wrathful man stirs up strife, etc.] See the Note above verse.
1: but he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife; to wit, not only by his
readiness to reconcile others that are at variance, but also by his own
backwardness to take exceptions causelessely, and by his patience, and wise
and gentle answers and carriage, when he is really injured.

Verse. 19. The way of the slothful man, etc.] That is, The way wherein the
slothful man is to go, is as an hedge of thorns, that is, as a way that is
hedged up with a hedge of thorns; he apprehends it impossible that he should
ever get through it: or, as a path overgrown like a hedge with thorns and
briars; that is, he conceits it to be full of difficulties and dangers. Now
this may be meant either 1. of any commendable work which such an one is to
undertake, to wit, that he is still ready to fancy so many dangers and
difficulties in it, that either he concludes that he shall never effect it, and
so gives it over; or else through mere sloth it is so tedious and troublesome
to him, that he goes on but creepingly, and makes no riddance of his work: or
else 2. of the way of holiness and righteousness prescribed in Gods word, to
wit, that every slothful wicked man does either apprehend this way not only
hard, but impossible to be gone, and so altogether declines it; or else judges
it a rough and dangerous and troublesome way, wherein a man must go as it were
amongst thorns, and so it is always tedious and irksome to him to do any th^^g
that God requires him. And so likewise for the following clause, but the way of
the righteous, that is, the upright man, who is always conscionably diligent
in every good work ^e undertakes, it made plain, or, as it is in the Hebrew, is
raised up as a causey; that is, it is to him as a plain, easy, commodious way;
he goes lustily and cheerfully on in any work he undertakes, there being
nothing hard to a willing mind. And so for the way of piety and righteousness,
he finds no rub therein, nothing that is so hard and uneasy, nothing that does
offend and beat him off from it; through faith in Gods assistance and the
encouragement of his hope of eternal glory, he sticks not at any difficulties
or troubles therein, he proceeds therein vigorously, and with much content and
delight.

Verse. 20. A wise son makes a glad father, etc.] To wit, as by other things,
so also particularly by his obedience and dutiful behavior toward him: but a
foolish son despises his mother, and so is a cause of much sorrow to her. But
see the Note chap. 10.1.

Verse. 21. Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom; but a man of
understanding walks uprightly.] That is, As fools rejoicing in evil do live
wickedly, see the Note chap. 10.23; so wise men rejoicing in goodness do live
uprightly.

Verse. 22. Without counsel purposes are disappointed, etc.] That is, When men
in difficult and doubtful cases will trust to their own wisdom, and will not
take counsel of others, how to bring their purposes to effect, they usually
come to nothing; either because apprehending some danger, and being unable to
satisfy themselves therein, they give over their purposes, or because not
taking a right course, they fail of effecting what they intended: but in the
multitude of counselors, that is, of good counselors, (for they only deserve
the name of counselors) they are established, that is, both the men are
encouraged to hold on in their good purposes, and their purposes are executed
with good success.

Verse. 23. A man has joy by the answer of his mouth, etc.] This may be added
with reference to that which was said in the foregoing Proverb concerning the
benefit of asking counsel of others; and so the meaning of it seems to be
this: that it is a great comfort to any man, when he has been able to give any
one good counsel, and to express himself in good terms; or rather, when he
perceives that the answer that he has given to those that have asked his
counsel has proved well, when it has been for the glory of God, and the good
of his brethren, and that thereupon it has been to them very acceptable. And
the drift of this may be to show, for the encouragement of those that are to
ask advice, that giving counsel to men is a thing that most men do naturally
delight in. Or else we may take this Proverb in a more general sense; to wit,
that gracious speech does always yield joy and comfort sooner or later to him
that utters it. And accordingly we must understand the following clause, and
a word spoken in due season how good is it? that is, counsel and instruction,
and comfort given in a time of need, all circumstances, both of person, place
and time, being duly observed, is very profitable and delightful both to them
to whom it is given, and to him that gives it.

Verse. 24. The way of life is above to the wise, etc.] That is, The way which
he takes here in this world, that he may attain life eternal, is to be ever
minding and seeking after those things that are above, the favor of God, and
heavenly glory; and accordingly he has his conversation in heaven, even whilst
he lives here below, see Phil. 3.20. Col. 3.1. he minds not earthly things
comparatively: yea even in his worldly businesses he goes a higher way then
others, because even those things he does in faith and obedience to God, and so
he is always passing on heavenward: and though his way, being thus above, is
hard and difficult, as when men are climbing up hill, yet he holds on, and is
still ascending higher and higher in it: the reason whereof is shown in the
following clause, that he may depart from hell beneath; that is, that he may
escape destruction, and avoid the pit of hell, to which a sensual course of
life will certainly bring men, and whereto earthly-mindednesse does as in a way
downhill carry men headlong continually. That which I conceive therefore is
chiefly employed in this proverb is this, that though earthly-minded men think
the intending of earthly things the only wisdom, because thereby men become
great and glorious here; yet they that are truly wise do rather look after
those things that are above, because thereby they know they shall escape hell,
and attain life eternal hereafter.

Verse. 25. The Lord will destroy the house of the proud, etc.] As namely all
proud oppressors of the poor, though they be never so mighty, and highly
conceited of their own security; see the Notes also chap. 12.7. and 11: but he
will establish the border of the widow; that is, he will secure the estates of
those that are poor and helpless* and withal humble, and not suffer any man
in the least to encroach upon any thing that is theirs.

Verse. 26. The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, etc.] And
consequently also his wicked words that flow from thence: but the words of the
pure are pleasant words; that is, delightful and pleasing to God, as are
likewise his thoughts from whence they proceed.

Verse. 27. He that is greedy of gain, etc.] And thereupon sticks not at taking
bribes, mentioned in the following opposite clause, or any other sinful way of
enriching himself; see the Note chap. 1.19; Or he that is covetously greedy
after gain, though he gains nothing thereby, nor seeks it by any unjust ways:
troubles his own house; that is, he shall not only die himself, (which is
intimated in the following clause) to wit, by destruction from God, or by
wasting his own life with vexing cares, pinching himself in things necessary,
and immoderate grief when he loses any thing, if not by laying violent hands
in such cases upon himself; but also troubles his own estate, house and
family: to wit, either 1. by his oppressing them with too much labor, and
withholding things necessary from them, and by continual quarrelling with them
about these things; or 2. by exposing himself and his to many miseries, whether
by the punishments that men inflict on him, which tend to the ruin of his
estate and family, and to the confusion of those of his household, or the
judgments that God brings upon them* see the Notes chap. 11.17, 29. and Jobs
15.34. And thus whilst such a man aims at enriching himself greatly, or at
least that he himself may have wherewith to live in the world, it proves quite
contrary to what he intended. But he that hates gifts shall live; that is, he
that is not greedy of gain, and therefore not only takes no bribes, but abhors
the taking of them, though he will not use any such unlawful means to get a
livelihood for himself, but is content to rest upon God in an honest way, yet
shall his family be in a peaceable and quiet condition, and he himself shall
live long and comfortably here, and eternally hereafter.

Verse. 28. The heart of the righteous studieth to answer, etc.] That is, A
righteous man will not speak any thing rashly out of any corrupt passion, but
weighs beforehand what he means to speak, and so does usually speak nothing
but what is good and profitable, and seasonable to be spoken: but the mouth of
the wicked pours out evil things; that is, wicked and hurtful things,
without ever thinking beforehand of what he means to speak; even as a man that
speweth pours out his vomit, or as the sea casts forth mire and dirt. See the
Note above chap. 12.23.

Verse. 30. The light of the eyes rejoices the heart, and a good report makes
the bones fat.] That is, As the light which men behold with their eyes, or
those pleasant things which they behold by the light of their eyes, revive
their spirits, and rejoice their hearts; so a good report, that is, the having
a good report amongst men, or the hearing good news and glad tidings (which is
most true of the glad tidings of the Gospel) makes the bones fat, that is, it
rejoices the heart, and so makes the body of a man healthful and strong; see
the Note chap. 14.30. Solomon does here compare the two chief senses of seeing
and hearing together: and his drift is to show, either that both of them do
affect the mind with joy, and so the body with health; or else, that though
both work powerfully upon men, yet the efficacy of what we hear is greater then
of that we see: the joy which the light of the eyes works in the heart soon
passes away; but that which a good report works in men, because it is
grounded upon things most profitable, does so affect the inward parts, that it
mightily refreshes and strengthens the very bodies of men.

Verse. 31. The ear that hears the reproof of life, etc.] That is, The man
that willingly hearkneth to and obeys wholesome life-giving reproofs, that
tend to the reforming of men's lives, and to bring men to life eternal
hereafter, abides among the wise: that is, either 1. he shows himself hereby
to be a wise man; or 2. he shall hereby attain wisdom, so that he shall in
time come to be numbered amongst the wisest of men, and shall be honored and
esteemed amongst them, and enjoy their society; or 3. he shall by degrees come
to be of the number of those that for their eminent wisdom are advanced to
places of honor in Church and commonwealth, it may be to be Teachers and
instructers of others; or 4. he shall in Gods kingdom of glory live for ever
amongst those concerning whom it is said Dan. 12.3. they that be wise shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament; or 5. he will choose to abide amongst
them that he may be reproved; he will familiarly converse with them, and by his
good will would dwell always amongst them. And this last indeed I like the
best.

Verse. 32. He that refuses instruction despises his own soul, etc.] As if he
should have said, whilst he seems to despise his instructor, and to count it an
honor not to be under a teacher, the truth is, he despises his own soul, and
does wilfully, as it were, cast it away and destroy it: but he that hears
(or, obeys) reproof, gets understanding. It is in the Hebrew, possesses
an heart, that is, he has power over his own heart, and can overruled his
affections, in that he can submit himself to be guided by others, which is a
great evidence of wisdom; or rather, he has an heart, he is not a man that is
excors, a heartlesse man, void of reason and judgment, but he is an
understanding man.

Verse. 33. The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom, etc.] That is,
That which the instruction of wisdom does chiefly teach, is the fear of the
Lord; or, To be taught to fear God is that instruction or doctrine that does
indeed teach men true wisdom; see the Notes chap. 1.7. and Job 28.28: and
before honor is humility; that is, before that glory which is attained by
wisdom goes that humility which makes men submit to reproof or correction; or
rather, before honor, whether that of earthly preferments, or that of heavenly
glory, is humility, to wit, that which in men proceeds from the sense of
their corruptions and the apprehension of their own unworthiness. And then the
joining of these two clauses thus together may seem to imply, that the fear of
the Lord goes before true wisdom, even as humility goes before honor. See
the Note Job 22.29.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. THe preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue is
from the Lord.] That is, both the one and the other are from God; according to
that of the Apostle, Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you, both to will
and to do, of his good pleasure. Man can neither prepare his heart to speak,
nor speak what he has prepared, without Gods assistance: and therefore
observable it is, that Solomon says not, that the preparations of the heart
are from man, but in man, and from the Lord. Yea, if we should conceive that in
the first clause the word ( are) was to be understood, as some translate it,
The preparations of the heart are in man, but the answer of the tongue is from
the Lord, the meaning can be no more but this, that when men have meditated in
their hearts both what they will speak, and how and in what order they will
speak it, (and so there are in their minds whole armies, as it were, of
thoughts, marshalled in order, as in battel-array; which the Hebrew word, that
we translate preparations or disposings, does clearly signify) yet shall they
for all this be no farther able to express themselves, then as God shall
enable them, and give them utterance; nor shall they always speak what they
purposed, but what God shall cause them to speak; a multitude of thoughts they
may have in their minds, but without God they shall not be able to utter a word.

Verse. 2. All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, etc.] See the Note
chap. 14.12: but the Lord weighs the spirits; that is, he does exactly know
and observe the souls and hearts of men, what their intentions, the affections
and dispositions of their minds are, whether their hearts be purged by faith or
no, whether they be pure and sincere, or profane and hypocritical; and so he
discovers how vainly they deceive themselves, and so condemns that which to
them seems right.

Verse. 3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, etc.] To wit, by taking direction
from his word, and aiming in all things at his glory; but see the Notes Psalm.
37.5. and 55.22: and thy thoughts shall be established; that is, thou shall
enjoy a sweet settlement and tranquillity in thy thoughts and spirit; or, thy
purposes and desires shall be accomplished, thy heart being confirmed with
cheerfulness to proceed on, in those ways which shall be most effectual for
the accomplishment of them.

Verse. 4. The Lord has made all things for himself, etc.] That is, for his own
glory: and there are some that under these words comprehend not only Gods work
of Creation, but also the works of his continual Providence, to wit, that he
does all things for his own glory: yea even the wicked for the day of evil;
that is, say some Expositours, that he might use them as his instruments for
the punishment of others; or rather, that he might glorify himself by the
manifestation of his justice in their deserved destruction. The wicked, both
angels and men, were not created wicked by God, but were made so by themselves;
yet God foreseeing what they would be, made them, that his glory might be
advanced by their ruin, whilst they continually do what they can to
dishonor him, and to oppose his glory.

Verse. 5. Every one that is proud in heart, etc.] Not every one that has pride
in his heart, but every one in whose heart pride rules and reigns; yea though
he show it not outwardly as many do: is an abomination to the Lord; to wit,
though outwardly he lives in never so gallant a condition, and so God seems to
give him all things according to his own hearts desire: though hand join in
hand, he shall not be unpunished: see the Note chap. 11.21.

Verse. 6. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged, etc.] First, Most of our best
Expositours understand this of Gods mercy and truth; to wit, that by Gods free
grace in Christ, and by his faithful performance of the promises that he has
made to his people in him, namely, when they do what he has required of them
in those his promises, all the sins they have committed are perfectly expiated
and pardoned* And indeed these words mercy and truth are frequently thus taken
in the Scripture, as before chap. 14.22. and 2 Samuel 15.20. and in diverse other
places. Again 2. many others understand it of mercy and truth in the people of
God, meaning by mercy and truth, true mercifulness, or mercifulness and all
justice and truth in men's dealing; or mercy and the profession and belief of
Gods saving truth: and that hereby iniquity is said to be purged, not because
these are the meritorious cause of purging men from their sins, but either 1.
because these are tokens and evidences of those whose sins are pardoned; or 2.
because these things do many times procure from God a remitting of temporal
punishments, as Ahabs humiliation did for him, 1 Kings 21.19; and 3. because
mercy and truth, that is, true faith, working by love and charity, are the
means of giving us an interest in that blood of the Mediator, whereby our sins
are purged. So that the drift of these words, they say, is to show, that in all
the sacrifices, which were in those times offered for the purging away of sins,
God did not so much regard the pomp of their sacrifices and outward ceremonial
worship, whereon the most of men did wholly rely, as the spiritual graces of
mercy and truth in those that offered them. Both these Expositions, I conceive,
are safe, though the first seems to me the clearest. And then accordingly for
the second clause, and by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, that is,
they avoid it, or abandon it for the time to come, the drift of that must be to
show, either that when God of his mercy and truth does acquit men from their
sins, it is upon condition that they return not to those sins again, but that
thenceforth they should fear God and serve him in holiness and righteousness
all the days of their lives; or else that, as mercy and truth do clear us from
sins already committed, so the fear of the Lord preserves us from sin for the
time to come.

Verse. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his very enemies to be
at peace with him.] To wit, by over ruling their hearts so, that though they
hate him, yet they shall not seek to hurt him; or by inclining their hearts to
love him, and to do him good; or else by bringing things on either side to
that pass, that his enemies shall be in policy glad to seek to be at peace
with him. So that if by endeavoring to do that which may please God, we
provoke men to displeasure against us, it matters not, God can easily help this.

Verse. 8. Better is little with righteousness, etc.] To wit, when the man that
enjoys it is righteous, and his little estate has been gotten righteously:
then great revenues without right; see the Notes chap. 15.16. and Psalm. 37.16.

Verse. 9. A man's heart devises his way, etc.] That is, whether he will go, or
what he will do: but the Lord directs his steps; that is, he connot take a
step without Gods assistance; he shall neither do nor effect any thing, but
according to the will and providence of God. But see the Note above verse. 1.

Verse. 10. A divine sentence is in the lips of the King, etc.] That is, a
sentence agreeable to the word of God; or, as true and certain as if it came
from God himself. It is indeed in the Original, Divination is in the lips of
the King, that is, as it were divination; as if he should have said, There is
in the lips of kings a sagacity like that of diviners; or, the sentence which
they pronounce, and the words which they speak, are as sure and certain, as
those of diviners are usually pretended and esteemed to be: And indeed, though
in the Scripture by divination is usually meant that divination of
south-saiers, which is condemned as an abomination, Deuteronomy. 18.10; yet sometimes
the word is used in a good sense, as in Isa. 3.2. where that which we translate
the prudent, is in the Original the diviner, and yet thereby is only meant men
of such a piercing judgment and deep reach* that they are able shrewdly to
guess at the future events and consequences of things, as if they had a spirit
of divination: see also Mich. 3.6. Now accordingly Expositours do understand
this Proverb four several ways: as 1. that because kings (and so all other
supreme magistrates) are Gods vicegerents, their sentences are to be esteemed
as the oracles of God: or 2. that kings are usually endued by God, in whose
place they sit, with such singular wisdom and sagacity, that they are able to
bolt out the truth of things difficult and abstruse, and so when they come to
hear or decide controversies, or to give judgment in doubtful cases, they are
wont quickly to discover any evil that is, or has been practiced by the
parties contending, or by their witnesses; and so they seldom or never mistake
in pronouncing judgment, as it is in the last clause, his mouth transgresses
not in judgment; implying, that therefore it is a weakness and folly in men,
either to attempt to deceive the supreme magistrate, or any way to carp at his
decrees: or 3. that thus it is with wise and pious kings, who only indeed
deserve the name of kings, see 2 Samuel 14.20. and 1 Kings 3.27, 28; because they
are conscientiously careful to search out the truth, and to speak the truth,
making the word of God their rule in all things, and are not wont to pronounce
sentence at any time without mature deliberation, grave advice, and begging
direction from God, and because God does in a special manner assist and direct
their minds and tongues in searching out the most secret wickednesses, and in
giving judgment, therefore their sentence is usually divine and just, and
their mouth does seldom err in judgment: or 4. that thus it should be with
kings, that they should wisely consider of all things, and search into the most
secret causes so, that they may still speak that which is right, and may not at
any time err in judgment. And indeed these two last expositions are clearly
the best, because there are two other Proverbs that follow verse. 12, and 13.
that must necessarily be expounded after the same manner. I know the words may
be also capable of some other expositions: as that kings will have their
decrees stand, and be accounted just, whatever they be; or, that Princes and
other great men's words are usually esteemed as oracles, and all their decrees
are counted just, whereas with poor men it is no way so. But the former
expositions are clearly the best.

Verse. 11. A just weight and balance are the Lords; all the weights of the bag
are his work.] That is, they were devised by his special providence and
direction, and are ordained and appointed by him; they have, as it were, his
seal upon them, so that none may use any other; if they do, they must give an
account of it to God, and he will punish them for it: see the Note also chap.
11.1.

Verse. 12. It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness, etc.] To wit,
either to commit it themselves, or that others should commit it; they abhor
it in themselves, and dare not do it, neither will they endure it in others.
And the meaning is only, that thus it should be with kings, or that thus it is
with good kings: see the Note above verse. 10. For the throne is established by
righteousness; that is, by executing justice in punishing the wicked; or, more
generally, by a constant care to obey Gods laws, whether in prince or people.

Verse. 13. Righteous lips are the delight of kings.] As namely, men that will
not lie nor slander, judges that will give righteous judgment, and wise and
faithful counselors, that will not dissemble nor flatter, but will speak that
which is just and true, though it be by way of showing them any evil they have
done, or any thing else that may be extremely harsh and distasteful to their
corrupt nature. But see also the foregoing Notes verse. 10. and 12.

Verse. 14. The wrath of a king is as messengers of death, etc.] That is, It is
as terrible, and as sure a forerunner and token of unavoidable death, presently
to be expected, as if many messengers should be sent to a man, which shows the
thing is certain, to give a man notice that he shall be put to death, or as if
many should be sent to him to take away his life, against whom there can be no
hope to defend himself. And the reason of this is, because kings have such
absolute power, many several ways, to cut off any man with whom they are
offended. Indeed if their servants do but see them angry with any man, they
will be ready of their own accord to make him away. But a wise man will pacify
it; to wit, by his prayers to God, by the mediation of friends, or by his own
wise and calm and gracious speeches. I know it may also be meant of a wise man's
stepping in to pacify the kings wrath on the behalf of others. But however the
main drift of this clause is, to set forth the excellency of wisdom, in that
hereby men can pacify the wrath of kings, which no gifts nor tender of service
can do, because they have no need of those things.

Verse. 15. In the light of the kings countenance is life, etc.] That is, his
lightsome and cheerful countenance is, as the light of the sun is, a means of
chearing and reviving the hearts of men, yea though they were before as dead
men by reason of some bitter affliction and sorrow: and his favor is as a
cloud of the later rain; that is, a great refreshing, and that which usually
brings men to a flourishing and prosperous condition. The Proverb may also be
understood more particularly; to wit, that when a man was in danger of death by
reason of a kings anger, if he be pleased to look cheerfully again upon him,
that will again re-assure life to him, and his favor in pardoning him, when it
is at last procured, will be as a cloud of the later rain: for which see the
Notes Deuteronomy. 11.14. Job 29.23.

Verse. 16. How much better is it to get wisdom then gold? etc.] To wit,
because wisdom is the riches of the soul, that can never be lost, that never
brings those vexations with it that do always accompany outward riches, that
is many ways advantageous to men in this life, and will surely bring them to
life eternal hereafter: see the Notes also chap. 3.14. and 8.11.

Verse. 17. The high way of the upright is to depart from evil, etc.] That is,
this is their ordinary course; their constant purpose, desire and endeavor is,
to shun every evil way, though through mistake or violence of temptation they
may sometimes step into the by-waies of sin. To which some add also, that to
depart from evil is said to be the high way of the upright, because it is, as
rode-waies are wont to be, an easy and a safe way: an easy way, because it is
plainly made known in the word of God, and because his affection to it, and
inuring himself to walk in it, makes it no way so hard to him as it is to
others; and a safe way, because there is no ^anger of any evil or mischief in
it. Which is farther set forth in the following clause, he that keeps his
way, that is, that keeps close to the way that God has prescribed him,
preserves his soul; to wit, because he shall be surely under Gods protection
here, and shall as certainly escape eternal destruction hereafter.

Verse. 18. Pride goes before destruction, etc.] See the Note chap. 11.2.

Verse. 19. Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, then to
divide the spoil with the proud.] This seems to be inferred from the foregoing
Proverb. And if by the lowly here we understand those that are in an afflicted
and low condition, then the meaning of the Proverb is clearly this; that it is
much better to be a poor man and humble, (which are joined together, because
such a condition does many times bring men to be of an humble spirit) then to
be rich and proud, as usually rich men are: or, that it is better to be in the
state of poor captives, and to be humble, then to be in the state of
conquerors, and proud; which is said because nothing does more puff up the
spirits of men, then victories in the war usually do. But if by the lowly we
understand men of a lowly and humble spirit, then the meaning must be, that it
is better to be one of those that are of an humble and lowly spirit, to wit,
though thereby a man be the more wronged, as the humble that will bear injuries
usually are, then to be one of those proud ones that are usually oppressors of
others, and so to have a share among them, when they divide the spoil.

Verse. 20. He that handles a matter wisely, etc.] Or, He that understands a
matter, that is, that will undertake nothing rashly, but by due pondering and
advising beforehand of what he intends to do, makes sure that he thoroughly
understands what he is to do, and how it is to be done, and then does
accordingly manage his work in a prudent manner: shall find good; that is,
shall prosper in what he undertakes, and shall have much refreshing comfort in
the prudent and successful carrying on his enterprises: and who so trusts
in the Lord, happy is he; to wit, because the Lord will not fail those that
trust in him, but will bless their endeavors, yea though they should some way
fail in managing their affairs. Now the joining of these two thus discovers
that the drift of this Proverb is, to show that both these must be joined
together: we must not, under a pretense of trusting in God, neglect any due
care of ordering our affairs as becomes wise men; neither must we trust in our
care and wisdom for the managing of our undertaking; but for our success
therein must rest wholly upon God, without whose blessings the endeavors of
the wisest men are nothing worth.

Verse. 21. The wise in heart shall be called prudent, etc.) By the wise in
heart may be meant the godly man, or the man that is truly wise, see the Note
chap. 10.8. the man that has some good measure of knowledge and understanding;
and by this, that he shall be called prudent, may be meant, that he is, and is
deservedly to be accounted, a wise and prudent man; (as Isa. 4.3. he that
remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy, that is, shall be holy) or, that
he shall show himself to be, and shall be acknowledged and commended to be an
intelligent prudent man, yea though he never seeks to set forth himself as such
in any way of ostentation. And so in the following clause, and the sweetness
of the lips encrease^^* learning, by the sweetness of the lips may be meant,
any manner of speaking in a way of instruction, whereby men's words are pleasing
and delightful to the hearers, as when men speak fitly and meekly and
affectionately and prudently, which will indeed allay the sharpness of
reproofs; or else more particularly the gift of speaking eloquently and
elegantly: and then of this it is said, that it increases learning; which
though it may be truly said of the teachers improoving his own knowledge by
instructing others, yet here it is meant of the edifying and profiting of his
hearers. Because men will usually flock after such a teacher, and because such
a gift of utterance and elegancy in speaking does work powerfully upon the
hearts of the hearers, therefore it must needs increase learning very much. And
so the drift of the Proverb may accordingly be, either 1. to set forth the
excellency of wisdom; the first clause showing the good it does to the wise
man himself, to wit, that thereby he attains to the virtue and praise of
prudence; and the second, what good it does to others, by causing in them an
increase of learning: or 2. to discover what an accession to wisdom eloquence
is: a wise man shall be esteemed for his knowledge and learning, though he be
not able elegantly to express himself; but it is the gift of eloquence that
makes men isntrumental for the increasing of knowledge and learning in others.

Verse. 22. Understanding is a wel-spring of life to him that has it, etc.]
That is, it yields life constantly and abundantly to those that have it; or
rather, it is in those that have it a constant means of conveying life to those
that are instructed by them; see the Notes chap. 10.11. and 13, 14: but the
instruction of fools is folly; that is, say some, it is a folly to instruct
fools; or, fools will be instructed no way but by their own folly, that is, by
the miseries which their folly brings upon them. But the meaning is rather
this, that when fools undertake to advise any body, they can utter nothing but
that which is foolish and wicked; or, that when false teachers instruct men,
their instruction is mere folly. And so that which may seem to be intended by
the opposition of these two clauses is, either 1. that the understanding of the
wise is in their instructing of others as a wel-spring of life to them; but the
folly of fools (to wit, wicked foolish men, or seducers and false teachers) is
in their instructing of others as a wel-spring of poisonous waters, tending to
the death of those that are instructed by them: or 2. that wise men at all
times, even in their ordinary discourse, will be speaking to the benefit of
others; whereas fools on the other side, where they would show most gravity,
when they undertake to advise and teach others, utter nothing but folly, and
that which tends to the destruction of those that hear it.

Verse. 23. The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, etc.] That is, A man by
his wisdom knows when, and what, and how to speak: and hence it is that the
better a man understands any thing, the better able he will still be to speak
of it; and that wise men are wont to speak the more discreetly and well in
every regard, because they are not wont to speak rashly, but to meditate
beforehand what they shall speak; see the Note chap. 15.28. Yea and needs must
they speak wisely, whose hearts are endued with true wisdom and grace, because
always out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34. And
adds learning to his lips; that is, the wisdom that is in the wise man's
heart enableth him to speak learnedly, and to teach others; or, by teaching
others he himself learns to be more and more able to speak, both wisely and
elegantly.

Verse. 24. Pleasant words, etc.] To wit, such as are the words of the holy
servants of God, see the Note chap. 15.26, as namely, when they are full of
wisdom, learning, eloquence, comfort, gentleness, compassion and love,
(whether uttered by way of instruction or reproof, or any other way;) are as an
honeycomb, see the Note Psalm. 19.7. that is, sweet and wholesome, as is
expressed in the following words, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones:
which may be referred to the honeycomb, as being sweet to a man's taste, and
healthful several ways, or to those pleasant words, which, as an honeycomb,
are delightful to the minds of men, and a means of health to the body. See the
Notes chap. 14.30. and 15.30.

Verse. 25. There is a way that seems right, etc.] See the Note chap. 14.12.
The very same Proverb is again repeated here, because this self-delusion is so
exceeding dangerous, and men are naturally so exceedingly inclined to it. Or it
may be here again inserted with reference to the foregoing Proverb, that men
might consider, that all words that may seem pleasant to carnal reason, are not
those pleasant words which are there intended.

Verse. 26. He that labors, labors for himself, for his mouth craveth it
of him.] It is in the Hebrew, his mouth boweth unto him* that is, it humbly
beggeth it of him, to wit, because a man cannot live except he gets meat to
eat. The drift therefore of this Proverb may be to show, both how willingly men
should submit to any honest labor, and how unnatural a sin idleness is, even
such that it is pity such persons should eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10; and likewise that
they should not wear out themselves with toiling for superfluities, because if
a man by his moderate labor can but get things absolutely necessary, as food
and raiment, it is sit that herewith he should be content.

Verse. 27. An ungodly man, etc.] It is in the Hebrew, A man of Belial; see the
Note Deuteronomy. 13.13. As before verse. 21, 22, etc. Solomon showed how much good is
done by the lips of the righteous, so here, in the four next verses, he tells
us how mischievous wicked men's tongues are. An ungodly man diggeth up evil;
that is, either 1. he wittingly and continually endeavors in a secret way to
undermine men and to ensnare them, even as men dig pitfals for others to fall
into, see the Note Job 6.27; or 2. that night and day he is still plotting to
commit sin, or rather to do mischief unto others, being still searching in his
mind how to effect it, even as men by digging search for minerals in the earth,
and then afterward with great pains he endeavors to accomplish it. And to
these some add too, that he is said to dig up evil, because he rips up things
long since done and forgotten, that he may bring some evil upon men. And in his
lips there is a burning fire; to wit, 1. because therewith he vents his fiery
passions and distempered heats, by railing, threatening, lies and slanders, etc;
2. because by the tongue, which has in a manner the shape and color of a
flame of fire, they kindle strife and divisions amongst men, and are as very
firebrarnds both in Church and commonwealth, whereby they are usually burnt up
and brought into utter desolation; and 3. because by the slanders and other
evils of the tongue men vex and torture others, even as men are pained and
tortured with the scorching and burning of fire.

Verse. 28. A froward man, etc.] See the Notes chap. 3.32. and 6.12. It seems to
be meant here of those that out of crossenesse and peevishness are still prone
to misinterpret and pervert other men's ways and words: sows strife; that is,
spreads contentions in every place where he comes: and a whisperer
separateth chief friends; that is, say some, princes, men in high places, that
are united in a strict bond of friendship one to another; or rather, friends
that are most intimate, and do most entirely love one another.

Ver. 29. A violent man, etc.] That is, A man headstrong in wickedness, that
cannot sleep except he do evil, and is regardlesse of all laws ordained to
restrain men from evil; or, a man violently bent to do mischief: enticeth his
neighbor, and leads him into the way that is not good; that is, into courses
sinful or hurtful. The meaning may be, that such men are wont with their
flattering speeches either to draw others to join with them in their
wickedness, see the Notes chap. 1.10, 11; or else to allure them into some
snare or other, that they may bring upon them the mischief they have plotted
against them.

Verse. 30. He shuts his eyes to devise froward things, etc.] That is, He
shuts his eyes that he may the more intentively plot and contrive some
mischief in his mind; but see also the Notes chap. 6.13, and 10.10: moving his
lips he brings evil to pass; that is, by his wicked speaking, or, as soon as
he begins to speak, he presently effects the mischief he has so contrived in
his mind. Yet by moving his lips may also be meant such a kind of mumbling and
muttering to himself, as is usual with men when they are plotting some
mischief against men, or when their hearts are swollen with rage, and a full
resolution to do them some evil; or, his whispering and speaking softly to his
companions, lest he should be overheard by some body, and so prevented in what
he has designed to do. In a word, the meaning is, that wicked men by their
cunning plots, and hypocrisy in the close carrying on their designs, do work
much villainy.

Verse. 31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.] To such a one the gray hairs wherewith his head is compassed
round about is a glorious ornament, even as a silver crown which God himself
has put upon his head; to wit, because such an one does in a special manner
bear in himself the image of God, who is the Ancient of days, Dan. 7.9. as
likewise because old men by long experience do often attain the greater
wisdom, and the very gray hairs of such men do render their countenance the
more comely and grave, and do naturally procure the more authority and respect
amongst men.

Verse. 32. He that is flow to anger is better then the mighty, etc.] That is,
he is a man of greater excellency, and more to be commended for his strength
and fortitude, then he that is of mighty bodily strength; to wit, because the
strength of the soul is better then bodily strength; it enables men to bear
reproaches and injuries, which are of all burdens the heaviest and hardest to
be born, and to resist and overcome a man's own unruly passions and sinful
lusts, together with those principalities and powers Ephesians. 6.12. which of all
enemies are most hardly resisted and subdued. And by men's subduing these much
benefit redounds to other; whereas the mighty man cannot obtain victories nor
subdue cities, without much bloodshed and hurt to others. And to the same
purpose is the following clause, and he that rules his spirit, that is, that
overruleth his affections and passions, then he that takes a city; who may the
while be a slave to his own lust. But see the Note also chap. 14.29.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. BEtter is a dry morsel and quietness therewith, then a house full
of sacrifices with strife.] We had a Proverb before much like this, chap.
15.17. for which see the Note there. But the meaning of this is briefly thus;
that the smallest and coursest pittance, with quiet, is more comfortable, safe
and wholesome, then a house full of good cheer (for that is meant by a house
full of sacrifices, see the Note chap. 7.14.) with strife and contention. Which
may be said, because at feasts wine and good cheer do usually cause many
quarrels; or else to imply, that it is better to be in a low then in a high
condition, because these are usually exposed to more envy and hatred and strife
then meaner men are. Others also understand this Proverb of the happiness of
those that enjoy a little with quiet of conscience, above those that have
plenty with a conscience that continually chideth them for what they have
gotten unjustly, or for some other wickedness.

Verse. 2. A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causes shame, etc.]
See the Notes chap. 10.5. and 14.35: and shall have part of the inheritance
among the brethren. Thus it is usually in both particulars mentioned. The
first, when a servant for his wisdom is advanced to some place of honor and
magistracy, and so the foolish son having wasted his estate, and being become
poor, lives under his command; or else, when the master of such a servant
shall give him the rule over his whole family, or shall make him at his death
one of his Executors, and a guardian over his foolish son, perhaps over all his
children. And so the second also, either when such a servant, growing rich and
great, buys the estate of his masters prodigal child; or rather, when a master
shall give one of his daughters in marriage to such a servant, or shall adopt
him for his son, and thereupon shall at his death allot him a share in his
inheritance. But the drift of the Proverb is, to show, that wisdom does often
prefer men above those that otherwise, had it not been for their folly, might
have been their betters.

Verse. 3. The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold; but the Lord
tries the hearts.] Either we must understand these words thus; that as the
fining pot and the furnace do try silver and gold, so the Lord, whose eyes are
as a flame of fire, Rev. 1.14. tries the hearts of men: or thus; whereas the
goldsmiths can by his art try of what goodness his silver and gold are, and
can purify them from the dross that was in them, none but the Lord only can
try, that is, exactly know, or purify and purge by affliction or otherwise, the
hearts of men. See the Notes Psalm. 7.9. and 26.2. and 66.10. and Job 23.10.

Verse. 4. A wicked doer gives heed to false lips, etc.] That is, to lies,
slanders, flatteries, or generally to all manner of evil speeches whatsoever:
and a liar gives ear to a naughty tongue; that is, a mischievous tongue, or a
lying slanderous tongue. The drift of this Proverb therefore may be to show, 1.
that not only to speak evil, but also willingly to hearken to evil speakers,
and to be prone to believe lies, is the property of a wicked man; or 2. that
wicked men are still ready to yield to the evil suggestions, enticements and
commands of others; or 3. that because men are delighted with such talk as is
suitable to their disposition, therefore liars and slanderers love to hear the
lies and slanders of others, and generally all wicked men delight to hear those
that talk wickedly.

Verse. 5. Whosoever mocketh the poor reproacheth his maker.] That is, he that
derideth a man distressed with poverty, or any other sad affliction. It is a
sin to deride any body; but the poor man is mentioned, because men do usually
take most liberty to scoff at such men; and yet the deriding of them is worst,
because thereby men add affliction to the afflicted. But see the Note chap.
14.31.

Verse. 6. Childrens children are the crown of old men, etc.] To wit, because
this makes known that they are very aged, and because children are a glorious
blessing of God, and do render their parents to be the more reverenced and
respected, and to be of the more authority amongst men: and the glory of
children are their fathers; to wit, whether living or dead: for living with
them, their wisdom and authority do supply many defects in their children; and
whether living or dying they are an honor to them. But now both these clauses
must be understood both of parents and children that are virtuous and pious;
for otherwise they will both be but a crown of thorns to their nearest
relations.

Verse. 7. Excellent speech becomes not a fool, etc.] Some by excellent speech
understand copious fluency of speech, which, they say, becomes not a fool,
because the more he speaks, the more he will discover his folly. Again, others
by excellent speech understand a stately and eloquent way of speaking, which,
they say, becomes not a fool, because when he speaks so, he speaks not
like himself, no more then a prince does (as it follows in the next clause)
when he tells lies. But the most and best of Expositours do by excellent speech
understand any grave speech, discourse or counsel, concerning high and weighty
and excellent things: as namely, concerning matters of great importance,
tending to the welfare of commonwealths, which becomes not a fool, because
the vanity and weakness of such a man's mind, and the great importance of such
affairs, do not suit well together; it becomes grave and learned men to give
their judgment in such things, whose worth and renown will add weight to
their words; or else concerning the holy things of God, and Christ and his
Church, as faith and repentance, etc. the reproving of vice, and commending of
any thing that is good, which becomes not an ignorant wicked sot, that
understands not nor practices what he says.

Verse. 8. A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that has it, etc.]
That is, it is most acceptable to him to whom it is given; even as precious
stones, which men are wont earnestly to desire and highly to esteem; or rather,
it is so in the eyes of him that has it to give: Rich men, that have gifts to
give, look upon them as effectual alluring baits, like a precious stone that
draws the eyes of beholders to it; they think to do what they please with
their gifts: whithersoever it turns, it prospers; that is, it prevails for
the most part with any man to whom it is given, it will make him that receives
it to understand the mind of the giver, and to do whatever he desires of him.

Verse. 9. He that covers a transgression, etc.] That is, any fault which a
man has committed, or any injury done, whether by word or deed, against
himself or others; see the Note chap. 10.12: seeks (or, procures) love; that
is, he gains or preserves the love of the man whose transgression he so
covers; and by so doing he takes also the best way to make peace, and to
preserve friendship amongst others: but he that repeateth a matter; that is,
that reports abroad the faults men have committed, or upbraids them with former
injuries, or being to make peace between party and party rips up old offenses:
separateth very friends; that is, he makes his best friends weary of him, y^a
to become his enemies; or, he makes divisions betwixt the most intimate
friends: see the Note chap. 16.28.

Verse. 11. An evil man seeks only rebellion, etc.] That is, A carnal man in
all that he does sins against God, so that his whole life is one continued
course of rebellion against him; yea he delights in nothing so much as that:
even when he does any thing that is evil, it is not so much any outward
temptation of pleasure or profit that draws him thereto, as his own perverse
inclination to rebel against Gods commands, which therefore he many times
does, when there is no outward bait of any advantage to himself, that may tempt
him to it. Or it may be understood with reference to men, to wit, that a wicked
man minds nothing so much as that he may carry himself stubbornly and
rebelliously against those that, either by words or stripes, seek to reclaim
him from his evil ways. Therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against
him; to wit, either from God or man; see the Note chap. 16.14. And by this
cruel messenger may be meant an accusing torturing conscience, or death, or
the devil, to whom God gives over wicked men, as the just executioner of his
wrath. But I conceive it best to understand it generally of all punishments
sent from God, and all executioners of vengeance employed by the civil
magistrate.

Verse. 12, Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather then a fool in
his folly.] That is, in the extremity of his wickedness and rage. And the
reason is, because a bear may be resisted and shunned, but there will be no
withstanding or avoiding the rage of such a fool; and because by such an one
men may be not only bereaved of their lives, but also of their good name and
their estate, which should be the livelihood of their children after them.

Verse. 14. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water, etc.] That
is, strife is easily begun; as it is an easy matter to make some little
passage through a bank to let out waters: but contention being once begun will
soon grow more and more violent, so that it will be within a while almost
impossible to make up the breach, but it will proceed happily to the utter ruin
of families and kingdoms; even as waters so let out through a bank, are wont
quickly to make such a breach greater and greater, and so to carry away all
that stands in their way with unresistable violence, nor can the breach be made
up again almost by any means. Therefore leave off contention before it be
meddled with; that is, do not any thing that is likely to be an occasion of
strife; or, though another man gives occasion of strife, yet forbear.

Verse. 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom,
seeing he has no heart to it?] That is, say some Expositours, seeing he is not
capable of being taught wisdom; or rather, seeing he has no mind or desire to
be wise or good? It is therefore all one in effect as if he had said, that he
is unworthy of riches, that will not make use of them to get wisdom; or, that
such a man's riches are to no purpose, because he knows not how to employ them
for his own good, but rather is usually the worse for them.

Verse. 17. A friend, etc.] That is, A true friend, whose friendship is grounded
upon unchangeable things, the virtue and piety of those whom he makes his
friends; loves at all times, to wit, in adversity as well as in prosperity:
for that this is chiefly meant the following clause shows, and a brother is
born for adversity^ that is, a brother or near kinsman is by the bond of nature
engaged to help his brother in adversity. So that the meaning of the Proverb is
clearly this; that they only show themselves true friends and brothers, that
manifest themselves to be such in the hour of distress and trouble. Yet some
conceive that the second clause concerning brothers is added to show, that
therefore the man that shows himself loving to his friend in adversity, does
herein carry himself as a brother, and ought so to be esteemed.

Verse. 18. A man void of understanding strikes hands, and becomes surety in
the presence of his friend.] That is, rashly, at the very first sight and
presence of his friend, in a manner before he desires him to do it, without
ever looking into the business, or considering the danger that is in it: or,
in the presence of his friend, viz. the Creditor, to whom he obliges himself
for some third person. But see the Notes chap. 6.1, 2, 3.

Verse. 19. He loves trangression that loves strife, etc.] That is, that
loves to strive with other men, or that loves to see or make strife between
man and man. And of such a one it is said that he loves transgression, either
because his loving strife shows him to be a wicked man, as being one that
takes pleasure in sin, and consequently one that will not stick at any other
wickedness; or rather, because strife does usually bring men into all manner
of transgressions, according to that Jam. 3.16. where envying and strife is,
there is confusion and every evil work. As for the following clause, and he
that exalts his gate seeks destruction, some by the word gate understand
the door of a man's mouth, as it is taken Mic. 7.5. keep the doors of thy mouth
from her that lies in thy bosom; and so they take the meaning of this clause
to be, that he that is wont to speak proudly and loftily, in any way of
boasting, or despising others, partly by stirring up men thereby against him,
and partly by provoking God to displeasure, seeks his own ruin. But I rather
think that the words are to be understood literally, of a man's exalting his
gate, that is, his house, (a part being put for the whole) and that the meaning
therefore is, 1. that as a man that builds his house higher then the foundation
will bear, may justly expect the downfall thereof, so the man that, out of the
pride of his heart, builds his house more sumptuously and stately then is
fitting for his condition, is in the highway to beggary; or that he that
builds lofty houses to the prejudice and with the oppression of others,
exposes himself thereby to the hatred and envy of men, and to Gods high
displeasure, and so does in a manner seek his own destruction: and 2. that
accordingly he that any way exalts himself proudly above others, despising
them, and seeking to bring them into subjection under him, does hereby draw
destruction upon himself; see the Note chap. 11.2. For this is that, I
conceive, which Solomon chiefly intended in these words.

Verse. 20. He that has a froward heart, etc.] That is, He that is of a peevish
quarrelsome spirit, that will be still taking offense at every thing that is
spoken and done, and wishing and plotting the hurt of others, see the Note
chap. 3.32. finds no good; that is, finds no favor any where neither from
God nor man. Or, by the man of a froward heart may be meant a man that is
stubbornly wicked, see the Notes 2 Samuel 22.27. and Job 5.13; or else an
hypocrite, that carries a fair show outwardly, when there is nothing but
frowardness, wickedness and mischief in his heart; whence it is that the
upright man is opposed to the froward in heart, chap. 11.20. They that are of a
froward heart are abomination to the Lord, but such as are upright in their way
are his delight: and then by this that is said of such an one, that he finds
no good, may be meant, that he shall never obtain any favor or blessing,
either for his everlasting estate, or his condition in this world, though for
the present he may seem to enjoy many earthly commodities; he that seeks to
avoid any evil or obtain any good by deceit or hypocrisy, will be frustrate of
his hopes: or else, that on the contrary, such a one shall surely fall into
evil. And he that has a perverse tongue falls into mischief; that is, he
that abuses his tongue in any way of wickedness, or more particularly, he
that has a false deceitful tongue, shall bring thereby mischief upon himself,
perhaps the mischief he intended to others. The drift of this Proverb may be to
show, that God will punish not only the wickedness of men's works, but also of
their hearts and tongues; or, that if God abhor all wickedness in the heart,
much more will he punish it when men express it with their tongues.

Verse. 21. He that begets a fool, does it to his sorrow, etc.] As if he had
said, Whereas naturally men are glad to have children, and do expect much joy
from them, if a child proves foolish and wicked, he is an occasion of much
sorrow to his parents; not to the mother only, that is more prone to grieve,
but even to the father also; see the Note chap. 10.1: and the father of a fool
has no joy; to wit, in that his foolish child; or, he will not be able to take
comfort in any thing in the world. Yet some Expositours understand the first
clause of the child's sorrow, He that begets a fool, does it to his sorrow,
that is, the sorrow of that his foolish son, to wit, because his folly and
wickedness will bring much misery and sorrow upon him: and then the next
clause they understand of the fathers sorrow, and the father of a fool has no
joy.

Ver. 22. A merry heart does good like a medicine, etc.] That is, it does as
much good for the curing of the distempers of the soul, as a medicine does for
the curing of bodily diseases; or rather, it does a man as much good for his
bodily health, see the Note chap. 15.13. Yea, the words may be also translated
thus, A merry heart does good to a medicine; that is, it helps the operation of
physic for the recovery of health. But a broken spirit dries the bones; that
is, a heart broken with grief wastes all the strength of the body; see the
Notes chap. 3.8. and 12.4.

Verse. 21. A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom, etc.] That is,
secretly; for so Solomon himself explaineth this expression chap. 21.14. A gift
in secret pacifieth anger, and a reward in the bosom strong wrath: and it may
be meant both of the man that has an ill cause, who takes it, and gives it
closely, either to the judge, or to his adversaries advocate, or to any one
that is to be a witness in the cause; and likewise of the judge, or any other
that takes it from him that gives it: to pervert the ways of judgment; that
is, any way to obstruct the course of law, or to pervert the proceedings of
justice, and so to procure that any thing be done that is unjust.

Verse. 24. Wisdom is before him that has understanding, etc.] Some give such
an exposition of the first clause as can hardly suit with our translation:
Wisdom is before him that has understanding; that is, it is with him, it is
conspicuous, and easily to be discerned in his countenance, to wit, in the
sobriety, gravity and stayednesse of his countenance and outward behavior. And
if this be owned, then the meaning of the next clause, but the eyes of a fool
are in the ends of the earth, must needs be this, that the inconstancy, the
unsettlednesse and lightness of a fools countenance, the rolling and roving of
his eyes, prying into every corner, and wandering after every vanity, does
manifestly discover his weakness and folly. But now according to our
Translation, the expositions that are commonly given of it are these. 1. Thus:
Wisdom is before him that has understanding, etc. that is, An understanding
man will be still learning some point of wisdom or other, at all times, and in
every place, where for the present he is; whereas the fool, despising what is
before him, has frequently a roving conceit of traveling to the ends of the
earth, the remote parts of the world, for the seeking of wisdom. 2. Thus:
Wisdom is before him that has understanding; that is, it is obvious and easy
to him, he finds and gains it easily; or, it is easy to him to do well, and in
all streights to choose the wisest way; see the Notes chap. 8* 9. and 14.6. and
Deuteronomy. 30.11, etc: but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth; that is,
wisdom is to him as a thing that is far off, and beyond his reach, which he is
no way able to attain; or, he is like a man that has lost his way, or that is
besides himself, not knowing which way to turn himself, nor where to find that
which he looks after. Or 3. thus, which to me seems the best: Wisdom is before
him that has understanding; that is, it is continually in his eye, and he so
minds wisdom, that he overlooks every thing beside; he is still in his
thoughts meditating of the beauty and perfection of it; the will and law of God
is his constant rule and guide; he still considers what that requires of him,
and endeavors to conform him self thereto in all things whatsoever: but the
eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth; that is, as one that never
discerned the glory and excellency of wisdom, he minds any thing more then
that; earthly things, the several pleasures and profits and vanities that are
in the world, are the things that his eyes are still roving after. Yea some
conceive that this phrase, of the fools eyes being in the ends of the earth
implies such a greediness after earthly things, as if they could in a manner
reach after the dominion of the whole world, or at least that any thing that
were for their profit they would fetch from the farthest parts of the earth.

Verse. 25. A foolish son is a grief to his father, etc.] See the Note chap.
10.1.

Verse. 26. Also to punish the just is not good, etc.] That is, it is exceeding
evil: nor to strike princes for equity; that is, either with hand or tongue to
smite magistrates, for doing that in their places, which in justice and equity
they were bound to do: which may be meant either of the sin of the supreme
magistrate, when he shall fall foul upon any inferior judge or magistrate, for
any act of justice which they have done; or else of the sin of private persons,
when they shall offer any violence to any magistrate, for any just act of
theirs, either toward themselves or others. Yea and some by princes here do
understand well-disposed men, the faithful servants of God, who in regard of
their union with Christ, and that free spirit whereby they are preserved from
the bondage and power of Satan and sin, are sometimes in Scripture called
princes; see the Note Psalm. 45.16. The greatest difficulty in this verse is,
whereto this word also should refer, Also to punish the just is not good,
etc. And this is indeed so hard to be resolved, that some Interpreters do
therefore translate the word in the Original surely. But to keep to our
Translation. Some conceive that this word also is here added with reference to
what was said before verse. 23, concerning the wickedness of giving and taking
bribes; and so would have these words to imply, that it is a great fault to
punish the just, though there be no bribe taken; and that therefore the sin is
double, when men are hired by bribes to pervert justice. But this is a very
forced, exposition. Either therefore we must understand this Proverb without
any reference to any thing that went before; or else rather we may take this
word also to be added in relation to the foregoing Proverb, and so that which
is intended thereby to be this: that as it is a very evil thing in children, so
to repay evil for good to their parents, as thereby to be a matter of grief and
vexation to them; so also it is not good, on the other side, either for parents
in their household government, or for the supreme magistrate in his place, who
ought to be as a father to his people, to grieve or punish the just causelessly,
and particularly the inferior magistrates, when they would deal justly with
those that are under their charge.

Verse. 27. He that has knowledge, spares his words, etc.] That is, he will be
silent, unless he sees it requisite that he should speak; and when it is so,
he will not multiply words more then needs, but will be sparing in his speech;
even when he is provoked by injuries, he will forbear all provoking language;
see also the Notes chap. 10.14. and 12.23. and 15.28: and a man of
understanding is of an excellent spirit; to wit, in regard of that which was
expressed in the foregoing clause, because it argues much wisdom, when men are
not rash in speaking, but circumspect, and able to refrain speaking when they
see cause. But this last clause may be rendered, and a man of understanding is
of a cool spirit, that is, of a patient, and so of a quiet still spirit; for
such a spirit is here compared to cold water, in opposition to an angry spirit,
that, like hot water, is continually boiling up with passion, and breaking out
into passionate speeches.

Verse. 28. Even a fool, when be holds his peace, is counted wise, etc.] To
wit, both because by his silence his folly is concealed, which should he speak
would soon be discovered; and likewise because to be sparing of speech is a
point of great wisdom, and to be full of talk is the property of a fool; and
thereupon a fool by his silence may gain to himself the repute of a wise man,
especially if he be silent when any injury is offered him. See also the Note
Job 13.5.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. THrough desire a man having separated himself, etc.] That is, A man
that out of an earnest desire after wisdom or any good literature, has
withdrawn and sequestered himself from his former habitation, at least from the
company he otherwise would converse with, and from all worldly business, or
whatever else may be any let or hinderance to him in his study, seeks and
intermedleth with all wisdom; that is, he will earnestly labor to obtain
that which he so earnestly desires, and will be accordingly busying himself
about all kind of wisdom, and all the means whereby it may be obtained, there
is no wisdom which he will not seek to attain: if he hears of any that are
eminent for any kind of wisdom, he will endeavor to gain what he can from
them; and, as long as there is any thing to be learned, he will never give
over. But now if we read this Proverb, as it is rendered in the margin of our
Bibles, He that separateth himself seeks according to his desire, and
intermedleth in every business, there are diverse other expositions that may be
given of it. As 1. thus: He that separateth himself, to wit, from his friend,
as desiring to break off friendship with him; seeks according to his desire,
that is, he seeks some occasion or other to effect what he desires: and
intermedleth in every business; that is, he will be catching at every word
that is spoken, at every thing that is done, though it be in businesses that no
way concern himself, that he may find some pretense to make a breach, or to
justify the breach he has made, between him and his friend. Or 2. thus: He
that separateth himself, to wit, in the avoiding of all lets and impediments
that may cross his desire; seeks according to his desire, that is, seeks
after that which he desires: and intermedleth in every business; that is, he
will leave no stone unrolled, no course unattempted, whereby he may hope to
effect his desire. Or 3. thus: He that separateth himself, that is, He that out
of self-conceit, and peevish stubbornness, withdraws himself from the company
and conversation of others, as loving to go in a way by himself, though it be
cross to all the world, relying with confidence upon his own judgment, and
despising the judgment of others; seeks according to his desire, that is, he
pursues his own desires, and whatever it is wherein he pleases himself: and
intermedleth in every business; that is, he will be meddling where he lists,
whatever the business be, though it no way concerns him. Or 4. thus: He that
separateth himself, seeks according to his desire; that is, He that upon
causeless pretenses does separate himself from the communion of the Church,
and the assemblies where God is worshipped, does quickly shake off all fear of
God and man, and with an unbridled desire seeks to satisfy his own lusts, in
doing whatever seems good in his own eyes.

Verse. 2. A fool has no delight in understanding, but that his heart may
discover it self.] That is, say some Expositours, he delights in knowledge for
no other reason, but that he may in a vainglorious manner vaunt himself of it.
But I rather take it thus: either 1. that A fool has no delight in knowledge
or piety, or any thing that is good, (though he may do that which simply in it
self is good, yet he never does it with any delight) but that all his delight
is in wicked speeches and actions, whereby he discovers the wickedness that is
in his heart; or 2. that he delights not to hear the wisdom and understanding
of others, as namely their wise instructions and counsels, but that all his
desire is, that he may be heard himself, that he may vent what he has
conceived in his heart, or any thing that comes into his mind, though it be
never so foolish, or that he may follow his own humor against all that can be
said to the contrary, whereby the wickedness of his heart is notably
discovered.

Verse. 3. When the wicked comes, then comes contempt, etc.] See the Note
chap. 11.2. where the same thing is said of the proud man in particular. Yet
some extend this farther, as namely, that the wicked are wont to contemn both
God and man, all laws and admonitions, all dangers and punishments, so that
nothing can restrain them from their wicked ways: and with ignominy, reproach;
to wit, because where the wicked man comes, he is not only wont to contemn
men, but also to cast upon them all the ignominy and disgrace he can, and
therewith also to load them with reproaches. Yet the meaning of this last
clause may be, as well as the former, that both contempt and ignominy and
reproach do, by the just judgment of God, follow the wicked man wherever he
goes.

Verse. 4. The words of a man's mouth are as deep waters, etc.] That is, The
words of a wise man's mouth are as deep waters: to wit, 1. because they are full
of profound wisdom, which every shallow capacity cannot comprehend; at least
there is more wisdom in his words, then one would at first think there is; the
force and weight of his words is not easily discerned: and 2. because such a
man utters such words both continually and plenteously, nor can ever be drawn
dry; see the Note chap. 10.11. And indeed that this is meant peculiarly of the
words of a wise man, is evident by the following clause, and the wel-spring of
wisdom is as a flowing brook: wherein either the same thing is again expressed
in other terms, to wit, that the wise man's mouth, which is here termed the
wel-spring of wisdom, is as an ever-flowing brook; or else, a reason is given
of the former clause, to wit, that because the wisdom of the wise is as a
fountain or spring within him, therefore wise speech does stream forth from him
as a flowing brook.

Verse. 5. It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the
righteous in judgment.] As if he should have said, Though it may seem a point
of wisdom and policy, for gain and favor to do so; yet it will be found to be
in truth a thing both sinful and perilous: see the Note chap. 17.26. And by
the wicked and the righteous here may be meant, only such whose cause is wicked
or righteous. Yet it may be understood generally of men that are wicked or
righteous, because usually such as the man is such is the cause which he
maintains.

Verse. 6. A fools lips enter into contention, etc.] That is, Witless men, void
of natural wisdom, or wicked graceless fools, by the rashness and folly, or
by the wickedness of their speeches, by their slanders and scoffs, and other
injurious insolent speeches, do not only stir up contention, brabling, and
wrangling between themselves and others, but also fighting, as is employed in
the following clause, and his mouth calls for strokes; that is, it provokes
men to strike him, or sets others together by the ears. But yet that
expression in the first clause, of entering into contention, may be meant of
such as will be meddling with the quarrels of others; and then by their folly,
though happily interposing themselves under a pretense of making peace, do
increase the quarrel, and it may be become parties in it, and get some
mischief amongst them.

Verse. 7. A fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his
soul.] To wit, in that they speak those things that bring their very lives in
danger, yea their souls too without repentance. But see the Notes chap. 10.14.
and 12.13. and 13.3.

Verse. 8. The words of a talebearer are as wounds, etc.] Reading this clause,
as it is in the margin of our Bibles, The words of a talebearer are like as
when men are wounded, the meaning seems to be this: that tale-bearers are wont
to whisper softly when they tell tales of their brethren; and withal, that
they use to speak as if they were wounded at the very heart for that which they
report, and were full loath to speak what they do speak, but that they see
there is a necessity that it must be spoken of. And then also the following
words, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly, must
accordingly be understood thus: that by his speaking so hypocritically, as one
that is grieved, the talebearer is the sooner believed, his words go glib
down into the heart of him that hears them, being entertained without any
questioning the truth of them, and so they wound the more deeply him that is
slandered. But now according to our translation the meaning of the words is
clear: The words of a talebearer are as wounds; namely, in that they wound
(see the Note chap. 12.18.) both 1. him to whom he speaks, in that he is
brought to think ill of his brother, and happily to hate and prosecute him, that
has deserved no ill at his hands; and 2. him especially of whom he speaks, in
regard of the infamy and trouble they bring upon him, and that they alienate
the hearts of his dearest friends from him; and hence also that is added, and
they go down into the innermost parts of the belly; whereby is meant, that
they wound the very heart of him that is slandered, yea that the wounds
wherewith he is wounded in his credit, or otherwise, are incurable wounds, as
when a man is wounded in his very entrails.

Verse. 9. He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a
great waster.] That is, The prodigal and the slothful man are cousin germans,
they are like to one another, and the one shall come to poverty as certainly as
the other, because as the one squanders all away through excess and riot, so
the other gets nothing through sloth and idleness. But why is that word also
added? He also that is slothful, etc. With reference to what was said in the
foregoing verse concerning the talebearer, and that to intimate, that as the
talebearer is to be misliked, so also is the slothful person: or, only to set
forth the better the intended comparison between the prodigal and the
sluggard, that as the one, so also the other must needs come to want and misery.

Verse. 10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, etc.] See the Notes Psalm.
20.1, 7: the righteous runs into it, and is safe. In the Hebrew it is, and
is set aloft; that is, he is above the reach of any danger, according to that
Psalm. 91.7. but it shall not come nigh thee.

Verse. 11. The rich man's strength is his strong city, etc.] See the Note chap.
10.15. Some observe that the Name of the Lord in the foregoing verse is
compared only to a strong tower, but the riches of the worldling here to a
strong city; and conceive it is, because there are more that trust in their
riches, then that trust in the Name of the Lord; or because worldlings conceit
that their riches are a far stronger defense to them, then the Name of the Lord
is to the righteous.

Verse. 12. Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, etc.] See the Note
chap. 1^.2: and before honor is humility; see the Note chap. 15.33.

Verse. 13. He that answers a matter before he hears it, etc.] That is,
before a man has fully spoken what he has to say, (which many will do, that
they may seem to be of a nimble and quick apprehension) or, before he well
understands what it is that a man says to him: it is folly and shame to him;
that is, every one will count it an act of great folly in him to do so, and
thus it will be a great disgrace to him; or by his unfit and ridiculous answers
he discovers his folly; and so whilst he would be thought to be very wise, he
proclaims his own folly, and whilst he seeks to be praised, he gets nothing but
shame and dishonor. But yet the Proverb may be meant also of those that will
give sentence in any controversy before they have fully heard both parties; and
likewise of those that, being transported with passion, will not hear a man's
just defense. And observable it is, that this which we translate, He that
answers a matter, etc. is in the Original, He that returns a word, etc.
whereby may be employed, that to interpose so much as a word before a man
understands a business, is an act of folly, and much more to frame a long and
serious discourse about it.

Verse. 14. The spirit of a man, etc.] That is, say some, A manly courageous
spirit; or rather, The spirit of a man, to wit, that is sound and cheerful,
(for this is set against a wounded spirit in the following clause) through the
assurance of Gods favor, and the testimony of a good conscience, will sustain
his infirmity; that is, will enable him to bear with patience and cheerfulness
any sickness or distress wherewith the outward man is afflicted: but a
wounded spirit who can bear? that is, no man can bear that, without the
special grace and supporting comforts of God. Be a man of never so great
strength of body, and in never so comfortable a condition for outward things,
that will not ease the distress of the spirit, as the cheerfulness of the
spirit will refresh a man in his bodily Infirmities.

Verse. 15. The heart of the prudent gets knowledge, etc.] To wit, by
meditation, and by its earnest desire after knowledge: and the ear of the wise
seeks knowledge; to wit, by attending upon instruction. See the Note chap.
1.5.

Verse. 16. A man's gift makes room for him, etc.] To wit, in that it is usually
the means to free men out of prison, or any other great streights they are in;
and especially in that it procures free access into the presence of great men,
and a gracious audience before them, yea many times acquaintance and favor
with them, and places of preferment about them: all which may be comprehended
in the following words, and brings him before great men.

Verse. 17. He that is first in his own cause, seems just, etc.] That is, He
that first pleads his cause before a magistrate or others, seems a while,
both to the judge, and others that hear him, to have a very righteous cause;
not only because men are inclinable to think that no man would begin to
complain except he had a just cause, but also because by the fair gloss which
such a man will set upon his cause, men are usually so prepossessed, that they
are over-ready to prejudge a cause before they have heard the other party: but
his neighbor comes; that is, he that has the controversy with him comes in
the second place to reply upon him; and searches him; that is, he examines
what he has said, and inquires farther into the cause, happily by questioning
him in diverse particulars, and so discovers his falsehood, and the injustice of
his cause. Which is just that which we say in our English Proverb, that One
man's tale or cause is good till another be heard.

Verse. 18. The lot causes contentions to cease, and parts between the
mighty.] That is, it quietly makes a division of any thing about which there is
strife, and that not only amongst the meaner sort of people, but also amongst
princes and great men; who are particularly mentioned, (to show the benefit of
this way of deciding controversies) because such men, by reason of their power
and stoutnesse, are most hardly brought to yield to that which is just in an
ordinary way, and when they are at variance, are hardliest pacified, and most
able to do much mischief, and to hold out long in their suits and quarrels;
and because their contentions do usually spread from them to many others that
have dependence upon them.

Verse. 19. A brother offended is harder to be won then a strong city, etc.]
Which, because of its strength, cannot be taken by force, and because of the
inhabitants confidence in its strength, is scarce ever like to be yielded up:
and their contentions are like the bars of a castle; that is, they are strong
and vehement; they are no more like to be decided and broken off, then such
bars are to be broken or cut asunder.

Verse. 20. A man's belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth, etc.]
The fruit here meant is the good or evil that redounds to men by their
speaking, according as they use their tongues either well or ill. And because
he calls this the fruit of the mouth, therefore the plentiful reward that
shall be given him is accordingly set forth in that figurative expression, that
his belly shall be therewith satisfied.

Verse. 21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue, etc.] That is, By the
ill or well using of their tongues, men may be the means of death or life, both
temporal and eternal, to themselves or others: and they that love it, to wit,
their tongue, say some Expositours, and thereupon do carefully keep it and
watch over it, as men are wont to do over some precious fruit-tree, shall eat
the fruit thereof; or rather, and they that love it, shall eat the fruit
thereof, that is, according as men delight to speak either evil or good, so
they shall eat the fruit of death or life. And indeed the smooth speeches of
hypocrites tend not to life, because they delight not in them; nor shall they
be destroyed that may speak evil, but delight not in it.

Verse. 22. Whosoever finds a wife finds a good thing, etc.] This may be said,
either 1. because it is in it self a good thing to have a wife, according to
that Genesis 2.18. It is not good for man to be alone; or else 2. rather, because
by a wise Solomon means a good wife, (as Eccles. 7.1. in the Original a name
is put for a good name, and Isa. 1.18. wool is put for white wool) such an
one as God created a wife to be, a help to her husband; for such an one is only
a wife indeed; and therefore whosoever finds a wife, that is, whosoever upon
diligent enquiry finds what he sought after, (and which is indeed hardly to
be found) to wit, a good wife, finds a good thing, that is, a very great
blessing: and obtains favor of the Lord; to wit, in that the Lord bestows
one of his own daughters in marriage upon him.

Verse. 23. The poor uses entreaties, but the rich answers roughly.] To wit,
to the poor man's entreaties: or, it may be meant in general, that his language
is usually boisterous and rugged.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. BEtter is the poor that walks in his integrity, etc.] That is, that
endeavors to carry himself uprightly both in word and deed, and thereby
manifests himself to be a wise man: then he that is perverse in his lips; that
is, then the rich man, that makes no conscience of speaking wickedly, (see the
Note chap. 17.20.) nor consequently of doing wickedly, and that happily enricheth
himself by his wicked tongue: and is a fool; that is, and so shows himself to
be a simple graceless wretch. Solomon himself does thus explain this, chap.
28.6. Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that is
perverse in his ways, though he be rich.

Verse. 2. Also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good, etc.] See
the Note chap. 17.26: and he that hastes with his feet, sins; that is, he
that runs rashly, upon the prosecuting of any business. Now this is added
as an effect of the want of knowledge, whereof he had spoken in the foregoing
clause, to wit, that a man that is heady and rash in doing any thing for want
of knowledge, and a wise and prudent considering of things beforehand, must
needs be subject to sin, even as a man when he runs is subject to stumble.
As for that word also in the beginning of this Proverb, some refer it to the
foregoing verse, where having said that he that is perverse in his lips is a
fool, he thereupon adds here, that indeed to be a fool, to be without
knowledge, it is not good. But others conceive that it is added only to imply,
how alike mischievous ignorance and rashness are; as if he had said, As
rashness makes men miscarry in their businesses, so also does want of
knowledge.

Verse. 3. The foolishness of man perverteth his ways, etc.] That is, his
ignorance or wickedness causes him to sin; or, it makes all his enterprises
and affairs successelesse, and brings many miseries and judgments upon him:
and his heart fretteth against the Lord; that is, though with his tongue he
does not openly blaspheme, yet secretly in his heart he murmureth against God,
as if God, and not his own folly, was to be blamed, both for his sin and misery.

Verse. 7. All the brethren of the poor do hate him; how much more do his
friends, go far from him? etc.] That is, his companions that formerly made a
show of friendship to him: he pursues them with words; that is, with many
entreaties, and challenges of former promises, etc: yet they are wanting to
him; that is, they fail him, and will show no friendship to him.

Verse. 8. He that keeps understanding, etc.] That is, that not only hears
the instructions of Gods word, but also pondereth them in his mind, and
retains them in his memory, and practices them with diligence and
perseverance: shall find good; to wit, both in this life, and that which is to
come.

Verse. 9. A false witness shall not be unpunished; and he that speaks lies
shall perish.] The reason why this Proverb, which is the very same with that
before verse. 5. almost word for word, is so presently repeated again, may be
with reference to the foregoing Proverbs: for having spoken verse. 7. how men in
their poverty are forsaken of their friends, because it is usual with men to
profess much love, and to make great promises to men in their prosperous
estate, which if they fall afterward into poverty they never make good,
therefore this may be again here repeated concerning Gods usual severity in
punishing such perfidious liars; and that because such men might have perished
in their poverty for want of relief from their friend, though it may be from
God, by reason of their piety, they may find good, as was employed in the
foregoing verse.

Verse. 10. Delight is not seemly for a fool; much less for a servant to have
rule over princes.] Under that expression, Delight is not seemly for a fool,
some conceive that the contrary is employed, to wit, that not delight, but a rod
rather is fit for a fool, correction rather then recreation, as was said before
chap. 10.13. And those that by delight here do particularly understand pastime
and recreation, to wit, that this is fit only for those that have wearied
themselves in good employments, and is not seemly for fools that never busy
themselves in any such way, they conceive of the comparison that Solomon here
frames thus; that if delight or pleasure, which is but mere vanity, be not
seemly for a fool, much less can authority, and that over princes, which is a
matter of so great consequence, be seemly for a servant, who is usually
foolish, and knows not how to manage so great a preferment. Yea and some,
because of the opposition of a servant in the second clause, do understand both
clauses of servants; that it becomes not a foolish servant to be brought up in
delight and pleasure, much less is it seemly for such an one to have rule over
princes. But commonly by delight Expositours understand a joyful and pleasant
life, together with all things wherein worldly men are wont to delight, as
delicious fare, gorgeous apparel, stately houses, health and wealth, etc. and
this they say is not seemly, to wit, in the eyes of God and good men, for a
fool, that is, a wicked man; and that because such a man will be hardened
hereby in his wickedness, and flatter himself from hence that God delights in
him, and will abuse all that he enjoys to his own and other men's undoing. And
accordingly they understand the last clause also, much less for a servant,
that is, a wicked man, who is always of a servile disposition, to rule over
princes, that is, over good men. And they give the sense of the Proverb thus;
that if all outward contentments are too good for wicked men, much more
authority over Gods righteous servants. But though this exposition is very
right in other regards, yet because I conceive the last clause must be
literally understood of servants and princes, I rather take the drift of this
Proverb to be this; that if delight and prosperity in outward things be not
seemly for a wicked fool, because through his folly he will abuse them to his
own and others hurt, much less can it be seemly for a servant to rule over
princes, because such when they are exalted know not how to carry themselves in
their places, and so are wont to be proud and insolent, and to tyrannize over
them that are under their power.

Verse. 11. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, etc.] That is, it makes
him slow to anger; though the world counts those men fools, that will patiently
suffer injuries, yet it is indeed a high part of wisdom to do so: and it is
his glory to pass over a transgression; that is, to take no notice of it, or
to forgive it, though most men also look upon this as a base and disgraceful
thing: see the Note chap. 16.32.

Verse. 12. The kings wrath is as the roaring of a lion, etc.] To wit, which is
the king of beasts: but his favor is as dew upon the grass; see the Notes
chap. 16.14, 15.

Verse. 13. A foolish son is the calamity of his father, etc.] See the Notes
chap. 10.1. and 17.21: and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping;
to wit, either 1. because even as a stone will be worn away with continual
dropping of water upon it, so the continual quarrels and brawlings of a wife
will wear out the patience, yea the health and strength and life, of the most
stout-hearted men: or 2. because as when rain drops through the roof of a house
upon the walls, timber, boards and household stuff, yea and upon those that
dwell in the house, as they are at their work, or at their meat, or sleeping in
their beds, this must needs soil and mar and ^ot both house and
household stuff, and be tedious to the inhabitants, and make them at last to
leave their dwelling; so the contentions and brawling of an unquiet wife do not
only disturb the whole family, and make them weary of their dwelling, but also
in particular is such a continual vexation to her poor husband, who cannot
turn her out of doors, as he may an ungracious son, that he cannot with any
peace or content abide in the house with her, but is many times forced to go
abroad and leave his house and calling, (whereby their estate also is ruined)
and sometimes utterly to forsake her.

Verse. 14. House and riches are the inheritance of fathers, and a prudent wife
is from the Lord.] That is, say some, Though a father leaves his son never so
great an estate, yet that cannot procure him a prudent wife; that God only can
bestow upon him: or, A good wife is to be esteemed a more divine gift then any
inheritance that can be left a man by his fathers. But rather the ground of
this expression is this, that there is a more especial providence of God in
procuring a man a prudent wife, then a great estate; and that humane wisdom
and industry does usually strike a greater stroke in providing houses and
riches for men, then in providing good wives for them: and that because 1.
Parents are usually more sollicitous to get rich wives for their sons then
prudent wives; 2. a good wife is hardly to be found, and hardly to be known, it
is God only that knows exactly what a wife will prove; and so it is an easier
matter to purchase house and lands, then to procure a good wife; and 3. it is
God only that gives wisdom and knits hearts together; Parents may contrive
marriages for their children, but God disposes of their affections as he
pleases.

Verse. 15. Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, etc.] The meaning may be
either 1. that it makes a man to give up himself to immoderate sleeping,
whereby time is lost and his calling neglected, or 2. that it makes men stupid,
and blockish, and lumpish, even as if they were asleep, yea as if they were
dead men: it makes men careless and negligent in their affairs, and senseless
of the misery they are like to bring upon themselves, which yet will come upon
them, as the next clause shows, and an idle soul shall suffer hunger.

Verse. 16. He that keeps the commandment keeps his own soul, etc.] That
is, He that sincerely desires and endeavors to keep Gods commandments,
does thereby preserve himself from death temporal and eternal: for that this
is the meaning of these words appears by the opposite clause, but he that
despises his ways shall die; that is, that lives carelessly, and walks at
random, not minding what he does; or that takes no care to order his life
according to Gods commandments; see the Note chap. 13.13. But this Proverb may
be understood also of observing or despising the command of the civil
Magistrate.

Verse. 18. Chasten thy son while there is hope; and let not thy soul spare for
his crying.] Or, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, to his destruction; or,
to cause him to die. And the meaning may be, either that the fathers sparing of
his child would tend to his destruction, and, as we use to say, bring him to
the gallows: or, that a father should not forbear, when his sons wickedness so
required, to cause him to be put to death, according to that law made for a
rebellious son Deuteronomy 21.18, 21.

Verse. 19. A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment; for if thou deliver
him, etc.] To wit, whether it be by appeasing his wrath, or by freeing him from
the danger whereinto by his passion he had brought himself: thou must do it
again; and that because he will upon some other occasion be passionate again,
and so by his passion will bring himself again and again into danger.

Verse. 20. Hear counsel and receive instruction, etc.] That is, the counsel
and instruction that is here given in this Book; or rather, the counsel and
instruction of God and all good men in general: that thou may be wise in
thy later end; that is, that though thou have spent the former part of thy time
in vanity and wickedness, yet thou may be wise at last; or, that thou
may be wise when thou come to be old, or when thou come to die, to wit,
that then it may appear that thou art wise, and that then thou may reap the
fruit thereof: for the meaning is not that we should not seek to be wise in our
youth; but therefore it is said that thou may be wise in thy later end,
because then wisdom stands men in most stead, and all their felicity depends
upon their being wise then.

Verse. 21. There are many devices in man's heart, nevertheless the counsel of
the Lord that shall stand.] Some by the counsel of the Lord here do understand
the counsel that he gives unto men in his word, and accordingly they
understand this place thus; that when men are in a demurre what to do, they
have usually many devices in their heads, never regarding the directions of
Gods word, whether or no that which they contrive be agreeable to what is there
enjoined: but it is they only that follow the counsel of Gods word that shall
prosper in what they undertake. But I rather conceive that it is the eternal
purpose and decree of God that is here called the counsel of the Lord: and so
the meaning of the words seems to be this; that men have usually many various
devices in their thoughts for the effecting of what they desire, which in the
conclusion come to nothing; but that Gods counsel is always unchangeably the
same, and sure to be accomplished. See the Notes chap. 16.1, 9.

Verse. 22. The desire of a man is his kindness, etc.] That is, That which a
man does naturally desire, or which he ought to desire, is that he may be able
to show kindness to others, that he may be open-handed and bountiful to those
that stand in need of it: and a poor man is better then a liar; that is, a poor
man that has not to give, and yet happily desires to give if he had it, is
better (see the Note 2 Cor. 12.8.) then a rich man that pretends himself not
able to give, when he has abundance, or that promises to give, and does not,
and that makes a show of kindness, when there is no such thing in his heart,
and so is a liar; or, a poor man is better then a false-dealing rich man. Thus,
I conceive, this Proverb may be best understood. Yet there are many other
expositions given of it that are not altogether improbable: as 1. that men are
usually kind to others with an aim to procure from them the accomplishment of
their desire in some greater matter, and that a poor man that has nothing to
give is better then such an one that makes merchandise of his kindness: or 2.
that there is nothing makes a man more to be desired amongst men then his
kindness, etc: or 3. that it is usual with men to pretend that their desire
of riches is merely that they may be kind and bountiful to others; but that a
poor man, who is contented with his mean estate, is better then a rich man that
falsely seeks to hide his covetousness, under a pretense of intending to do
good unto others: or 4. that men are ambitious to show kindness, and not to
stand in need of the relief of others; but that a poor man, not ashamed of his
poverty, is better then one that will make a show of giving, though he be
fitter to receive alms from others.

Verse. 23. The fear of the Lord tends to life, etc.] See the Notes chap.
10.27, and 14.27: and he that has it shall abide satisfied; to wit, with
abundance of all desirable blessings; or with his interest in God, and his
assurance of Gods provident care over him: he shall not be visited with evil;
that is, with any thing that shall be truly hurtful to him.

Verse. 24. A slothful man hides his hand in his bosom, etc.] To wit, that in
cold weather he may there keep it warm: and will not so much as bring it to his
mouth again; to wit, to feed himself; which is an hyperbolicall expression,
showing that hunger cannot prevail against such men's sloth, and that they will
not do, no not those things that are most easy and most necessary to be done:
see chap. 26.12.

Verse. 25. Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware, etc.] That is, though
it will do no good to the scorner, yet another man that errs out of weakness
and ignorance will take warning by it: and reprove one that has understanding,
and he will understand knowledge; that is, he will understand his error, and
mend what is amiss; there will be no need to smite him, a gentle reproof will
serve the turn. Yet this last clause, and he will understand knowledge, may be
referred to the simple man before mentioned: and then the meaning of the words
is, that as the simple man will reap good by the punishment of the scorner, so
also by the wise man's being reproved; for (thinks he) if such a prudent good
man be reproved, and takes it well, much more were it fit that I should do so.

Verse. 26. He that wastes his father, etc.] To wit, his estate, by his
prodigality, or by purloining his goods from him, or his body, by grief for his
lewd courses: and chaseth away his mother; that is, that barbarously drives
her out of doors; or that causes her to withdraw her self into a corner to
hide her self, or to get abroad out of her house, as not being able to endure
his insolency, or to be where he is, because of his ungracious carriage of
himself; or, that by his wasting her estate when her husband is dead causes
her to sell her house, and to forsake her habitation where for many years she
had lived: is a son that causes shame and brings reproach; see the Note
chap. 10.5.

Verse. 27. Cease, my son, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 34.11: to hear the
instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge; as if he should
have said, Though thou have done it formerly, yet for the time to come hearken
no longer to the instruction of those false teachers, that would draw thee into
errors, or to those evil counselors, that would draw thee from the ways of
true wisdom into the ways of wickedness.

Verse. 28. An ungodly witness scorneth judgment, etc.] That is, he makes a
mock of justice and equity, of the law of God, and of all juridicall
proceedings, which are for the detecting and punishment of offenders; yea he
derides and slights all the punishments which by the laws of God and man are
denounced against false witnesses. And indeed that this last is principally
meant here by judgment seems the more probable, because of that which is added
in the following verse, Judgments are prepared for scorners, etc. As for the
next clause, and the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity, the chief thing
intended thereby is, that wicked men's mouths are full of lies and all evil
language whatsoever, and that they make no bones of it, they speak all manner
of evil without fear or shame, or any remorse whatsoever. But see also the
Notes Job 15.16. and 34.7.

Verse. 29. Judgments are prepared for scorners, etc.] That is, Though
judgment is not always presently executed upon them, yet many heavy
punishments are appointed for them, and are in a readiness to be executed on
them, either by God or man. And the same thing is meant in the following
clause, and stripes for the back of fools; namely, that shameful and
inevitable judgments are stored up for them: see the Note chap. 10.13.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. WIne is a mocker, etc.] The meaning of this may be, that wine does
delude and mock those that drink it, and as it were make fools of them: both in
that it does allure and draw them on by its color and delicious taste to drink
much of it, as if there were no danger, nothing but delight and pleasure in it,
till on a sudden they are ensnared and overcome by it, and then it brings many
inconveniences and miseries upon them; and likewise in that when they are so
overtaken by it, it makes them ridiculous to others, so that men do usually
deride, mock, and make themselves sport with them. And this exposition may seem
the more probable, because it agrees so well with the last words in this
verse, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. But yet because this
suits not so well with the next following words, strong drink is raging, I
rather, as do the most Expositours, understand this Proverb thus: Wine is a
mocker; that is, it makes men mockers and profane scorners, and hence it is
that the Prophet joineth drunkenness and scorning together, Hos. 7.5. In the
day of our king the princes have made him sick with bottles of wine, he
stretched out his hand with scorners, (And thus Solomon, having in the end of
the foregoing chapter spoken of the judgments that are prepared for scorners,
does here make known one particular, which does usually make men scorners:)
strong drink is raging; that is, it makes men outrageous: and whosoever is
deceived thereby; to wit, by being won thereby to take it immoderately, or by
being catched and overcome thereby to his hurt, or by being brought thereby to
do any thing foolishly and unadvisedly, which not being in drink he would not
have done, which is called erring through wine Isa. 28.7: is not wise; that is,
he makes himself thereby a very fool, as we use to say, when the wine is in,
the wit is out; or rather, he thereby shows himself a fool, and reapeth the
fruit of his folly.

Verse. 2. The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion, etc.] See the Note,
chap. 19.12: whosoever provokes him to anger; to wit, by any unwarrantable
disobedience or misdemeanour: sins against his own soul; that is, does by
his sin expose his life to manifest danger. See the Note chap. 16.14.

Verse. 3. It is an honor for a man to cease from strife, etc.] That is, to
avoid all strife by all possible means; or, to give it over, even after he is
engaged in it, which is indeed the hardest task, because men are wont to esteem
this of all other the greatest dishonor to them; but therefore it is also the
greater proof of a man's wisdom to do so: see the Notes chap. 16.32. and
19.11: but every fool will be meddling; that is, intermedling with strife, or
with other men's matters, which is usually the occasion of strife. And this
being an act of great folly, is therefore much to his shame and reproach.

Verse. 4. The sluggard will not plow, by reason of the cold, etc.] Or, the
winter* therefore shall he beg in harvest; to wit, when others have great
plenty, which must needs be an eyesore and hearts-grief unto him: and have
nothing; that is, nothing to reap; or, nothing shall be given him, no not at
that time, when because their store comes in then abundantly, men are most
forward to give, yea even to the brute beasts.

Verse. 5. Counsel in the heart of a man is like deep waters, etc.] That is,
ability to teach and advise men; or, which is all one in effect, wisdom and
prudence, which are the springs of all good counsel, do abound in the heart of
a wise man, even as deep waters or a spring of water, that can never be drawn
dry: but a man of understanding will draw it out; that is, he will use means to
get it out of him; there is nothing that the other knows, but some way or other
he will learn it of him: see the Note chap. 18.4. The thoughts, and intentions,
and designs of men's hearts are like waters that are of a great depth, to the
bottom whereof men cannot easily dive to find what is there, or like waters
that are in a deep pit or well, or far somewhere under ground, which cannot
easily be gotten up; and that because it is in a manner impossible to know what
is in the heart of a man, ( for what man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of a man, which is in him? says the Apostle 1 Cor. 2.11.) especially
when he shall set himself to dissemble and conceal his purposes. And some think
too that man is here mentioned in opposition to women, who are usually more
inclinable to blab forth all that is in their thoughts: but a man of
understanding will draw it out; that is, a wise man will many times by the
prudent observation of men's gestures and actions, the words that fall from
them, and the company that they keep, by propounding questions to them, and
entering discourse with them, as if they minded something else, guess very
right concerning that which is in their hearts.

Verse. 6. Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness; but a faithful
man who can find?] The meaning of this is very easy. But if we read the first
clause as it is in the margin of our Bible, most men will proclaim every one
his own bounty, etc. then the meaning may be, either 1. that it is usual with
men to boast of the great good they have done, or which they intend to do for
others, but that it is rare to find a man that really has done what he says
he has done, or that does faithfully make good his great promises; or 2. that
it is easier to find men that are bountiful to others, then to find faithful
men, that injure no man, or then it is to find one that is a faithful good man
in every regard; or 3. that amongst the many that will boast of their bounty,
there are but few to be found that are faithful therein, that is, that do good
to others sincerely for Gods sake, with a good conscience, and out of unfeigned
love to those to whom it is done.

Verse. 7. The just man walks in his integrity, his children are blessed after
him.] To wit, the rather because he will be sure to leave nothing to his
children but what was well gotten; and because many times such children, by
reason of the good example and education of their parents, are also righteous
themselves. But see the Note also Psalm. 37.26.

Verse. 8. A king that sits in the throne of judgment, scatters away all
evil with his eyes.] Either the meaning is, in general, that where the
magistrate does look to see judgment carefully and constantly executed upon
offenders, wickedness will not there dare to appear: or else it may be meant
particularly of the supreme magistrate, to wit, that when he keeps a watchful
eye over the whole kingdom, this will suppress all vice amongst the people;
or rather, that when he does use to sit in the judgment seat in his own
person, and does not leave all to be done by inferior judges; this his care to
see things, with his own eyes, and accordingly to judge of them, will be a
singular means to restrain the people from much evil, and tha^ because he is
not in such danger to be corrupted, and is wont to punish with greatest
severity, and by reason of the majesty of his person, is most terrible to
offenders. Yet the meaning of this expression may be also, that such a king may
wi^h a frown awe his people from doing evil.

Verse. 10. Diverse weights and diverse measures both of them are alike
abomination to the Lord.] As namely, when men keep a lesser wherewith to sell
to those that are simple and may be easily gulled, and a greater for the wiser
sort. But see the Notes chap. 11.1. and 16.11. and Deuteronomy. 25.13.

Verse. 11. Even a child is known by his doings, etc.] That is, By that which is
commonly and generally done by a young child in his gestures, speeches and
actions, a very probable discovery may be made concerning him: whether his work
be pure, or whether his work be right; that is, whether that which he does for
the present be pure and right as it ought to be, whether there be a work of
saving grace wrought in him, and so whether that which he does proceeds from
an honest upright heart, and consequently whether he be like to take a good
course when he comes to man's estate.

Verse. 12. The hearing ear and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of
them.] Solomon's drift in mentioning this may be to imply, either 1. that
therefore God must needs hear and see whatever is spoken or done by men, for
which see the Note Psalm. 94.9: or, 2. that therefore God can give or withhold
the use of these senses to men as seems good to himself, and consequently
that it is fit that men should be thankful to God for them, and not abuse them
in any sinful way, but use them to his glory, and for those ends for which
they were especially given them of God; as namely their ears to hear the
instruction of wisdom, and their eyes to view Gods works both of creation and
providence, and to look into those holy writings, which God has given men for
the well-ordering of their lives: yea and that when men do thus use them in a
right manner, it is fit that they should acknowledge that this also is the gift
of God, and that it is not of themselves. But then again this may be understood
of a spiritual ability to see and to hear. And indeed several of our best
Expositours do understand it particularly thus: that the seeing eye of the
teacher, or of the magistrate, whereby he looks to the well-ordering of the
people, and the hearing ear of the people, whereby they hearken to the
instruction of their teachers, and the command of their superiors, are both
from God; so that neither are therefore to insult over the other, but that the
welfare of kingdoms and commonwealths procured hereby is wholly to be ascribed
to God.

Verse. 15. There is gold and a multitude of rubies, etc.] As if he should have
said, Many such precious things there are in the world, which worldly men do
highly esteem: but the lips of knowledge, that is, wise and gracious speech,
are a precious jewel, that is, far more precious, then those precious things
beforementioned: see the Note chap. 3.14. And hereby may be meant, both what a
treasure it is for a man to be able to speak wisely and learnedly, and likewise
what a precious privilege it is to be instructed in the word and wisdom of
God by such a man.

Verse. 16. Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, etc.] See the Notes
chap. 6.1. and 11.15. The meaning may be only this, that if a man be so
foolish, as to be surety for strangers whom he knows not, we may be assured
that such a man will in time be brought to such poverty, that sooner or later
his very garments will be taken from him, to satisfy some debt for which he
has engaged himself. Yet some take it as an advice given to the friends of
such a man, that they shall do well to get what they can from him, and reserve
it for his use in a time of need, because otherwise all that he has will he
seized on by the Creditor, to whom he has engaged himself, and then he will
not have a coat to put upon his back. And the most of Expositours take it as
spoken to those that should engage themselves, or lend any thing to a man that
is so ready to be surety for others, even for mere strangers: to wit, either
that they should not do this without taking a sure pawn from him for their
indemnity, and that because such a man will surely come to poverty, and being
so careless of himself, he will much less mind them to whom he is engaged;
or, that if he forfeits his pawn, though it were his garment, they should not
spare to keep it; or, if he paid not the debt, that they should seize upon what
he had, even to his very garments; and that not only thereby to secure
themselves, that they may not be put to look after the stranger they know not
where, but also because it is fit that such a man should smart for his folly,
that he may thereby learn more wit for the time to come. Nor is this, say they,
against the Law Exodus 22.26. If thou at all take thy neighbors raiment to
pledge, thou shall deliver it unto him by that time the sun goes down, etc.
because that law was made only in favor of the poor, that in extreme need
pawned their garments, (as may be seen in the Note there) and not of those that
would pretend to be able to pass their word for others. But the first
exposition I like the best. As for the following clause, and take a pledge of
him, that is, of him that will be surety for a strange woman, that is, a woman
that he knows not, or rather a whorish woman; the drift of this is to show,
that he that will undertake for such a ones debts, or run in debt to gratify
her, is not fit to be trusted without a pledge; both because no faithfulness
can be expected from such, and likewise because men may be assured hat such a
man will come to beggary.

Verse. 17. Bread of deceit is sweet to a man, etc.] That is, men are wont to
take great delight in that which they get by deceitful and unjust ways; see
the Note chap. 9.17: but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel; to
wit, by reason of the terrors of conscience, or the heavy judgments of God
that shall afterward seize upon him. In the expression that Solomon here uses
there seems to be an allusion to gritty bread, made of the grift of corn that
has been thrashed on a gravel-floor, or ground in a mill, immediately after
the stones thereof have been picked, or into which in the making of it some
gravel has accidentally fallen; which may well be called bread of deceit,
because outwardly it seems good bread, but being eaten does exceedingly pain
and hurt a man's teeth. With the like expression the misery of Gods people is
set forth in the Babylonian captivity, Lam. 3.16. He has also broken my teeth
with gravell-stones.

Verse. 18. Every purpose is established by counsel, etc.] See the Note chap.
15.22: and much more therefore ought we to take counsel in our weightiest
affairs, such as war is; whence the following words are added, and with good
advice make war.

Verse. 19. He that goes about as a talebearer, reveals secrets, etc.] See
the Note chap. 11.13. As if he had said, And therefore though it be good to ask
counsel, as was said in the foregoing verse, yet impart not thy secrets to
such men. And this indeed is employed in the following words, therefore meddle
not with him that flattereth with his lips; that is, with him that is a known
flatterer; or whom thou may discern only to pretend friendship, when his
heart is not with thee: and that because such men are wont to cogge and
flatter, merely that they may fish out men's secrets, and then reveal them to
others; or because flatterers, if their counsel be asked, will be sure to say
as they say, be it right or wrong, whom through self-love men are very prone to
believe. It may be also read, meddle not with him that enti^eth with his lips;
and then it may be meant of those that by their flatteries entice men to do
any thing that is evil.

Verse. 20. Whosoever curses his father or his mother, etc.] See the Note Exodus
21.17: his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness; that is, first, he shall
be cut off and die in extreme dishonor and misery, and then afterward also
shall be cast into the utter darkness of hell; (and that this is principally
intended, we may the rather think, because on the contrary long life is
promised to those that honor their father and mother Exodus 20.12.) or 2. he
shall die childlesse, see the Note Psalm. 132.17. and so his name and memory
shall be utterly taken away; as indeed he that honors not his father,
deserves not the honor of being a father; or 3. his prosperity and joy shall
be turned into extreme misery, grief and horror, see the Note Job 29.3. or 4.
he shall not find any favor, counsel or help, either from God or man, in his
greatest calamities, which makes a man's condition just like his, whose candle
is put out when he is in extreme darkness. But see the Notes chap. 13.9. and
Job 18.5, 6. and 21.17.

Verse. 21. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning, etc.] That
is, Men may get a fair estate on a sudden, to wit, when they regard not how
they get it, so they may be speedily rich, and leave their estate as an
inheritance to their children: but the end thereof shall not be blessed; that
is, it shall not prosper in the conclusion, nor prove a blessing to him that
gets it: to wit, because either it may prove a snare to his soul, in making him
profane and wicked, or it may bring some vengeance upon him from God, or fill
his soul with dismal terrors of conscience; or else rather, because being
thus gotten, have usually makes waste, in that it was not more suddenly
gathered then it is squandered away, even as meat that is swallowed down
suddenly does seldom nourish the body, but either is vomited up again, or else
is turned into corrupt humors. This, I conceive, is the plain meaning of this
Proverb. Yet, I know, others do understand this of those to whom some great
estate falls suddenly, and perhaps unexpectedly; who not knowing the labor of
getting it, and not having been inured by little and little to bear so great
prosperity, are wont to be profuse in their spending.

Verse. 22. Say not thou, I will recompense evil, etc.] That is, Do not so much
as threaten it with thy lips, or purpose it in thy heart; to wit, not only
because it is not lawful so much as to think evil, but also because when men
have once said they will do a thing, they are apt to think that then in point
of honor or conscience they are bound to do it: but wait on the Lord, and he
shall save thee; he does not say, and he shall revenge thee, but, and he shall
save thee, intimating, that men should not desire God to take vengeance on
their enemies, but only that he would defend them from their enemies. Men are
apt to think, that if they do not revenge injuries, every one will trample over
them, and so they shall be utterly undone. But the Holy Ghost here assures them
that there shall be no anger herein, because God shall preserve them. And how
much better is it that God should save them, then that they by any wicked means
should save themselves?

Verse. 23. Diverse weights are an abomination to the Lord, etc.] See the Note
above verse. 10. and chap. 11.1. and 16.11. and Deuteronomy. 25.13: and a false balance
is not good; see the Notes chap. 17.26. and 18.5.

Verse. 24. Man's goings are of the Lord, etc.] See the Notes chap. 16.1, 9. and
Psalm. 37.23: how can a man then understand his own way? that is, since all our
actions and the success thereof depend wholly upon Gods providence, therefore
it is not possible that man should know his own way, to wit, what is most
expedient to be done by him, or what the event shall be of what he does.

Verse. 25. It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy, etc.]
That is, It is a sin that brings destruction upon men; see the Note Deuteronomy.
7.16. As birds are destroyed by eating the meat which is laid for them within
the snare, and fishes by swallowing the bait upon the hook; so is it with such
sacrilegious persons. And by devouring that which is holy is meant, not their
eating of Gods holy sacrifices in those times in a heedlesse, rash and profane
manner, without any devotion, as some conceive; but men's alienating to their
own private ends any thing that was consecrated to holy uses, or which they
themselves had vowed to holy uses. And if this last be included, then are the
following words added for the farther illustration thereof: and after vows to
make enquiry; to wit, whether he can do what he has vowed or no; or whether
he be so indispensably obliged by his vow, that there is no way to be
disengaged from it; or if he do break his vow, what satisfaction he may some
other way make unto God. And observable it is, that even this enquiring about
not fulfilling a vow, because it manifests a desire men have to do it, is made
a grievous sin, yea though the vow be never broken.

Verse. 26. A wise king scatters the wicked, etc.] That is, when they are
combined together in any way of wickedness he disperseth them; or, he cuts
them off from amongst the people, see the Note above verse. 8. even as the
husbandman with his fan drives away the chaff from the wheat: for that he
alludeth in these words to the husbandmans fanning or winnowing, is the more
probable, because in the following clause, and brings the wheel over them, he
seems also to allude to the cart-wheels wherewith in those times they were wont
to beat out their corn, whence is that Isa. 28.27, 28. The fitches are not
threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon
the cummin, etc. But yet this may be meant of some kind of engine, called the
wheel, used for the torturing and executing of malefactors, even as it is still
in many countries at this day. Or there may be an allusion in the words to the
chariot-wheels which they used in the wars, wherewith they ran over the bodies
of those that were beaten down before them.

Verse. 27. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, etc.] That is, the
soul of man, because of the reason and understanding wherewith God has endued
it, is as a bright shining lamp which God has set up within man, by the light
whereof men see their ways, and are enabled to order their ways as they ought
to do. And some conceive too, that Solomon does the rather use this
expression, 1. because the soul is in the body of man as a candle in a
lanthorn; 2. because in regard of its remaining light, even since the fall of
man, it is as a lamp shining in the dark night of corrupt nature; and 3.
because the light of it is as easily by death extinguished as a candle is blown
out. And then by those following words, searching all the inward parts of the
belly, is meant either particularly that reflect act of men's understanding,
which we call conscience, whereby men do discern and judge of the most secret
thoughts and affections, and desires of their own hearts, according to that of
the Apostle 1 Cor. 2.11. What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit
of man which is in him? and that especially when the soul is enlightened with
grace, and so does thereby the better discover both his corruptions and graces,
and discern in what state he stands with God; (yea some understand it of men's
discovering that which is in other men's hearts, for which see the Note above
verse. 5.) or rather more generally, that by the light of reason men are able to
search out those deep and hidden things, that are as much hidden from the
outward view of man, as are the entrails in a man's body, and that there is
scarce any thing so secret; either in nature or religion, which men by their
knowledge and wisdom will not discover. And very probably we may think, that
this here is added with reference to the foregoing verse, because it might be
questioned, how a king can scatter the wicked, seeing wicked men are usually so
cunning to hide their wickedness? Solomon answers here, by a man's wisdom and
understanding the secretest things may be discovered.

Verse. 28. Mercy and truth preserve the king, etc.] As if he should have said,
Kings endued with these graces need in a manner no other guard about them; both
because hereby they procure the favor of God and man toward them, and
likewise because they cut off the wicked that are perilous to them and to
their thrones. But see the Notes chap. 3.3. and 16.6. and Psalm. 61.67. As for
the next clause, and his throne is upholden by mercy, that is added to show,
either that however mercy and truth do both tend to a kings preservation, yet
mercy has the chief stroke therein; or else, that as these graces are a great
means of safety to a kings person, so they are also a great support to his
kingdom: for though mercy be only here again expressed, yet together with that
the other may be also employed.

Verse. 29. The glory of young men is their strength, and the beauty of old men
is the gray head.] See the Note chap. 16.31. The drift of this Proverb is to
show, that both young and old have their several ornaments, and so have need
of one another, and ought to respect one another.

Verse. 30. The blewnesse of a wound cleanses away evil; so do stripes the
inward parts of the belly.] Some take this to be spoken by way of similitude,
thus: As by cutting and launcing the body, which does usually leave blew scars
behind it, as in letting blood, or making issues, etc. a great deal of
corruption is usually let out of men's bodies, and by that means they are cured
of very dangerous diseases; so sharp corrections, which pierce, as it were,
even to the very entrails, do purge men from sin; or, so do stripes cleanse
men, even from their inward and secret sins. But I see not but that both
clauses may be understood of the benefit of correction. The blewnesse of a
wound cleanses away evil: sharp reproofs or corrections, whether from God or
man, (which are as blows that make men black and blew, o^ wounds that leave a
blew scar behind them) do make men abandon their evil ways. And then the
following clause, so do stripes the inward parts of the belly, is added to
show, either that such sharp corrections do purge away even the secret evils of
the mind (which are as the inward parts of the belly) as well as the
wickedness of the outward man; or else that then corrections are in this way
profitable to men, when they affect men inwardly, and wound their very hearts
and souls with pain and sorrow: wicked men will not be reformed but by
exceeding sharp corrections.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. THe kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water;
he turns it whethersoever he will.] That is, As husbandmen and others do
carry the water of rivers by trenches, watercourse and pipes, into their
grounds, or elsewhere which way they please; or rather, As God by his
Providence turns the rivers, sometimes one way and sometimes another, and
sometimes causes them to turn backward a quite contrary way to that wherein
they were before going, as seems good in his own eyes; so does he also turn
about the thoughts, affections and desires, even of kings themselves, to will
and nill what he will have them, sometimes for the benefit, sometimes to the
hurt of their subjects, and often contrary to what they had determined. And
this is noted as most remarkable in kings, because by reason of their great
power and pride, they seem able to do almost what they please, and are usually
so violent and headstrong in their resolutions, that there is no diverting
them from what they have purposed or said they will do; being herein indeed
like the heady and violent streams of some great rivers, that carry all before
them with unresistable fury; whereas yet notwithstanding they have not so much
as their own wills at their own disposing, but God overrules them as he
pleases.

Verse. 2. Every way of a man is right in his own eyes, etc.] See the Notes
chap. 14.12. and 16.2.

Verse. 3. To do justice and judgment, etc.] To do unto all men that which is
every way equal and just; and that not out of any carnal affections, but out
of true judgment and approbation of justice: is more acceptable to the Lord
then sacrifice; that is, then any of the services enjoined by the ceremonial
law, and consequently then any outward act of Gods worship enjoined by the
moral law, such as prayer and hearing the word, etc. and that because God does
more delight in the solid and substantial services enjoined by the law, then
in those that are merely external and ceremonial, and because he is better
pleased with those duties that are profitable to men, then with those that seem
more immediately to have respect unto himself.

Verse. 4. An high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked is
sin.] The difficulty of this Proverb lies chiefly in the last clause. Some of
our best Expositours do literally understand by the plowing of the wicked,
their laboring in their particular callings; which they say is sin in them,
because unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, Tit. 1.15.
And thus they make the drift of this Proverb to be, the setting forth of the
misery of wicked men, by showing that in all things they do they sin against
God; not only in those things which are simply evil in themselves, such as are
their proud thoughts and high looks, their ambitious aspiring after things that
are too high for them, but also in all their natural and civil actions, which
not being evil in themselves, yet become sin to them; and that because the men
being evil, nothing can be good that proceeds from them, as a corrupt tree
cannot bring forth good fruit, Matthew 7.18. By the wickedness, the pride and
other filthy corruptions that are in their hearts, all their actions must needs
be defiled. But then by the plowing of the wicked some do understand
figuratively the plots and projects and busy endeavors of wicked men; for
which see the Note Job 4.8: and that these are said to be sin, because they are
all for some sinful practice or other, yea for many and manifold sins and
mischiefs: and indeed it may be rather understood of the mischief they
endeavor to do, because men in their pride care not what mischief they do;
yea and this is elsewhere called plowing, Psalm. 129.3. The plowers plowed upon
my back, they made long their furrows. As for that translation of this clause,
which is set in the margin of our Bibles, and the light of the wicked is sin,
if that be received, then the meaning must be, either 1. that wicked men are
wont to glory in their sin; so far are they from hiding and bewailing their
sins, that they exalt themselves therein, as counting it their only splendor
and glory: or 2. that their wisdom and quick-sightednesse in all affairs,
wherein they are wont proudly to vaunt themselves, tends to sin, and carries
them into many sinful courses: or 3. that their good works, though they make a
splendid show before men, are an abomination to the Lord: or 4. that their
endeavoring to exalt themselves, and to be eminently conspicuous above others,
is sin: or 5. that their great prosperity and pomp and glory in the world,
wherein they much pride themselves, is an occasion of much sin to them.

Verse. 5. The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousnesse, etc.] That
is, when a man does wisely beforehand think and contrive how to manage his
affairs, if he do afterward diligently prosecute what he has contrived, he
must needs grow rich: but of every one that is hasty only to want; that is, the
thoughts of those that are hasty to be rich, see the Note chap. 20.21. or of
those that rashly do what ever comes into their minds, without any counsel or
deliberation about it, must needs bring them to poverty.

Verse. 6. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and
fro, etc.] That is, Treasures gotten by a lying tongue are a vain thing, they
no way do good either to them or theirs, nor ever continue with them, but are
like dust, or chaff, or smoke, that is scattered by the wind this way and that,
till it be brought to nothing; see the Notes chap. 10.2. and 13.11: of them
that seek death; to wit, both temporal and eternal.

Verse. 7. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, etc.] It is in the
Hebrew, shall saw them, or dwell with them, whereby is meant, that their
punishments should be both terrible, and continual: terrible, not only because
of the severity of Gods judgments, but also because terrors of conscience
should, as it were, saw and tear and grate their spirits; and continual,
because, though their wealth gotten by robbery continued not with them, yet the
guilt and punishment of their sin should keep fast hold of them and abide with
them: because they refuse to do judgment; to wit, in the seat of justice (and
if this be taken so, then the robbery of the wicked in the foregoing clause is
the oppression of unjust judges, who are indeed the great robbers) or, because
they will not do that which is just and right; they sin not therein through
ignorance and infirmity, but wittingly and willingly, and being reproved they
will not give it over.

Verse. 8. The way of man is froward, etc.] That is, The way of man in his
natural estate, being left unto himself, is crooked and sinful; see the Notes
chap. 3.32. 2 Samuel 22.27. and Job 5.13: and strange; that is, contrary to all
right reason, and no way agreeable to the word of God; strange from what it
was, in the state of innocence, or what it should be. Or it may be said to be
strange, because in choosing such ways, men choose darkness rather then light,
and death rather then life eternal.

Verse. 9. It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, etc.] That is, It
is better to sit moping all alone upon the top of an house (see the Note Deuteronomy.
22.8.) where a man must needs be exposed to all injuries of the weather, heat
and cold, wind and rain, thunder and lightening, yea upon the battlements
there, or to be penned up in some narrow corner there, so that he can no way
stir to avoid the inconveniences abovesaid: then with a brawling woman in a
wide house, or, as it is in the Hebrew, a house of society; that is, in a fair
goodly house, and where there is a great deal of company, to wit, because
though that be comfortable in it self, yet it is to such a woman an occasion of
the more brawling. So that Solomon's aim herein might be to show, that a
brawling wife does so overturn the end of marriage, that whereas God said at
first, It is not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2.18. yet indeed it is better
for a man to live alone, then to have such a wife. Yea and some conceive, that
hereby also is employed, that though a man gets a wife that brings him a stately
house and land for her portion, or such an estate, as that thereby he is
enabled to live in a fair and spacious house, yet he had better be without it,
if she proves a brawling and contentious woman.

Verse. 10. The soul of the wicked desires evil, etc.] That is, he sins not
ignorantly and through infirmity, but wittingly and advisedly; all his delight
and desire is to do evil. Now if we thus understand this clause, then the
meaning of the next clause may be this, his neighbor finds no favor in his
eyes; that is, though his acquaintance and friends dissuade him from his wicked
courses, he will not mind or regard them, but will rather mischief them, then
be hindered by them. But I rather conceive that the first clause is to be
understood of the wicked man's desiring to do mischief. And so I take the drift
of the whole Proverb to be this: that the wicked man is out of envy or malice
wholly and only bent to desire the hurt of men, or to endeavor to do mischief
to men, insomuch that he will not show any mercy or kindness to his nearest
friends and acquaintances, when they stand in need of it; or, that he is so set
upon mischief, that he will not spare his nearest relations; or, that his
neighbor, though he carries himself never so kindly or friendly to him, shall
yet find no favor in his eyes.

Verse. 11. When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise, etc.] See the
Note chap. 19.25.

Verse. 12. The righteous man wisely considers the house of the wicked, etc.]
This may be understood many several ways. As 1. that he considers in what
danger the wicked man is, together with his family and posterity, and how he
may reclaim them from their evil ways: and then the next clause, but God
overthrows the wicked for their wickedness, implies that all the endeavors
of the righteous man to reclaim them do no good, and that therefore God at
last does utterly destroy them. Or 2. that he marks and observes their horrible
wickedness, and how many are corrupted thereby, and so is careful to keep
himself from being defiled by them, or having any communion with them: but then
the wicked, that mind no such thing, but run on desperately in their wicked
ways, God does overthrow. Or 3. that observing how exceedingly they prosper,
he considers why this should be, and concluding that hereby God hardens them in
their sins, that they have their portion in this life, and that surely God will
destroy them, etc. this keeps him from being offended; and the wicked indeed
are at length destroyed according to his expectation. Or 4. that he observes
and seriously lays to heart the fearful judgments that God at last brings
upon the families of the wicked, and thereby becomes very careful to avoid
their wicked ways: and thus the judgments upon wicked men do much good to
the righteous, whilst the wicked themselves reap no good by them, and so are
at last utterly destroyed.

Verse. 14. A gift in secret pacifyeth anger, etc.] That is, say some, it cools
the zeal of a judge, when he is severely bent to cut off an offender; or
generally it appeaseth the anger of those that were before highly offended: and
that because as gifts are very pleasing to men, so they also testify the
submission of the party that gives them; and being closely given, that takes
away the shame of open receiving. Some apply this also to alms given secretly,
so that a man's left hand knows not what his right hand does, Matthew. 6.3.
that they tend to the appeasing of Gods wrath against men. And a reward in the
bosom great wrath; as if he should have said, a reward in the bosom drives
away wrath out of the bosom. But see the Note chap. 17.23.

Verse. 15. It is joy to the just to do judgment, etc.] To wit, because he
delights in doing that which is just and equal, and withal knows that God
is well-pleased with him, and will reward him for it, and so is herein
comforted; and therefore indeed accordingly he shall obtain salvation: which is
employed by the following opposite clause, but destruction shall be to the
workers of iniquity; to wit, because they rejoice only in working iniquity.

Verse. 16. The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding, etc.] That
is, say some Expositours, out of the way of true doctrine, into the crooked
ways of error and heresy; or, out of the way of Gods commandments, yea
though it be through blindness and ignorance: shall remain in the congregation
of the dead; that is, say some, they are spiritually no better then dead men;
or rather, they shall abide unto all eternity amongst the multitude of the
damned, who only indeed are truly dead men; for the righteous by death have an
entrance into life eternal. As they walked in their ways, and delighted in
the company of such men whilst they lived, so they shall abide amongst them
being dead, without any possibility of being removed into a better condition.
And this is the only rest they shall have; they shall not have the least share
in the rest of the faithful, but their wandering shall end at last in the
restless rest of the damned unto all eternity.

Verse. 17. He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man, etc.] This may be meant
of all kind of sensual pleasure, or particularly of that of feasting, because
of the following words, he that loves wine and oil, that is, dainty and costly
feeding; or, by oil may be meant those exceeding costly ointments, which they
used much in those eastern countries, especially at their feasts.

Verse. 18. The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, etc.] As namely,
when by the punishing of some heinous offenders Gods wrath is appeased, public
judgments are removed, and so the righteous are preserved; as we see in the
case of Achan, and Saul's sons, 2 Sa. 2 1. But see the fuller exposition of this
in the Note chapter 11.8.

Verse. 19. It is better to dwell in the wilderness, etc.] To wit, in a vast
and horrid place, banished as it were from all society with mankind, destitute
of all necessary accommodations, where a man must live amongst venomous
creatures, and wild beasts, and happily be slain and torn in pieces by them: then
with a contentious and an angry woman; which is a misery worse then death; see
the Note above verse. 9.

Verse. 20. There is treasure to be desired, and oil in the dwelling of the
wise, etc.] That is, store of all things requisite both for necessity and
delight, see also the Note verse. 17: but a foolish man spends it up; to wit,
when such treasures and plenty of provisions are left him by his father or
others.

Verse. 21. He that follows after righteousness and mercy, etc.] To wit, with
earnestness and perseverance, see the Note chap. 15.8: finds life; that is,
long life here, and eternal life hereafter; righteousness, that is, a just
reward from God, and as faithful dealing from men as he has observed toward
others; and honor, to wit, both here amongst men, and eternal in the heavens.

Ver. 22. A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, etc.] That is, So much is
wisdom better then strength, that sometimes by the wisdom of one man a city
may be taken, that is kept by many men of great might. Now though by the wise
man may be meant the godly man, yet I rather think that Solomon speaks here of
natural wisdom and policy.

Verse. 23. Whosoever keeps his mouth and his tongue, etc.] To wit, from speaking
any thing which in wisdom and justice he ought not to speak; see the Notes
also chap. 12.13. and 13.3: keeps his soul from troubles; that is, he keeps
himself for his life from many streights and miseries, which otherwise he might
have brought upon himself.

Ver. 24. Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath.]
That is, such he shows himself thereby to be, so he deserves to be called,
and will usually be called: and so whilst he thinks his so dealing to be an
honor to him it will be his reproach.

Verse. 25. The desire of the slothful kills him, etc.] That is, his very
desires, not being satisfied, because he will not work, do vex and torment him,
and are even as death to him; or rather thus, his contenting himself with his
vain slothful desires, whilst in the mean season, as it follows, his hands
refuse to labor, brings him to perish in penury and want.

Verse. 26. He coveteth greedily all the day long, etc.] As if he should have
said, But because like a wicked wretch he will do nothing else, he will not
work, therefore he has nothing for himself, much less to give to others: but
the righteous gives, and spares not; that is, because out of conscience he is
laborious in his calling, he not only has sufficient for himself and his
family, but he is ready also to give to others for their relief, and that
bountifully and for ever: for because he holds on in his labors, therefore he
has still to give to those that are in want.

Verse. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination, etc.] See the Note chap.
15.8: how much more, when he brings it with a wicked mind? as namely 1. when
he thinks any thing good enough for God, and when his sacrifice is not exactly
such as Gods law requires it should be; or 2. when he offers it, that God may
prosper him in any way of wickedness, or that by making such a show of piety,
he may the better effect some cursed design; or 3. when his aim is only to
cheat and deceive men, by making them believe that he is a very pious man, when
his conscience tells him, that for his wickedness God must needs abhor both
him and his service; or 4. when he seems desirous by his sacrifices to make his
peace with God, and yet at the same time has a full purpose and desire to run
on in his sins; or 5. when he hopes by such services, as it were to bribe God,
to give him liberty still to hold on in his lewd ways.

Verse. 28. A false witness shall perish, etc.] To clear the opposition which
is employed betwixt this and the following clause, we must take it thus: He that
in bearing witness does testify what he has neither heard nor seen, but what
himself has devised, (yea though it should be truth that he speaks) shall
certainly perish; that is, either he shall be cut off by the hand of the
magistrate, or by some judgment of God, and that unto eternity; or else he
shall be utterly ruined and undone, to wit, by some other severe sentence
pronounced against him, whereby his mouth shall be judicially stopped, that he
shall never bear witness more, or at least he shall be so discredited, that no
man will hear or regard his testimony; and all this shall be, because his own
tongue will discover him, by reason that such an one scarce ever speaks
constantly the same thing, but will be ever and anon contradicting himself: but
the man that hears, that is, that speaks nothing but that whereof he has
been an ear-witnesse (or an eyewitness) nothing but what he knows to be
certainly truth; speaks constantly; that is, he is always in the same tale,
and affirms still constantly the same thing, and that with confidence and
boldness: and therefore he shall not by death, or by any judicial sentence,
or by his own shame be taken off from bearing witness; yea men will be
desirous to hear his testimony in any cause whatsoever. I know this Proverb is
otherwise expounded by some: as 1. thus; A false witness shall perish; but the
man that hears, that is, that hearkeneth to the law of God, which does
expressly forbid all bearing of false witness against our neighbor; speaks
constantly, to wit, because he shall not perish or be cut off: or 2. thus; He
that hears others, choosing rather to hear, then to speak rashly and falsely,
shall likewise be heard by others; he shall always in time and place have
opportunity enough to speak, and men shall readily hearken to him. But the
first exposition is clearly the best.

Verse. 29. A wicked man hardens his face, etc.] Some understand this Proverb
particularly, with reference to the foregoing verse, of the impudency of wicked
men, and the advisednesse and wariness of the upright, in bearing witness in
any cause. But it is better to understand it generally: A wicked man hardens
his face; that is, he will impudently, without any blushing, yea though it be
against the checks of his own conscience, set his countenance to outface any
man, either in denying and opposing clear truths, or in excusing or defending
manifest evils; and let him be admonished or reproved, he will with a brazen
face maintain his ways, not yielding to, but rather insulting over those that
oppose him, and without the least remorse on he will go, like a traveller that
sets his face against wind and weather, being resolved upon his journey,
whatever he endures in it: But as for the upright, he directs (or
considers) his way; that is, he is watchful over his ways, that he may not
go awry; and when he has done amiss, being reproved, he will acknowledge his
fault, repent, and amend what is amiss. The opposition betwixt the two
branches of this Proverb may be conceived thus: The wicked man is impudent, and
therefore careless how he walks; but the upright is sober and modest, and
therefore careful rightly to order all his ways.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. A Good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, etc.] That is,
a good repute and report amongst men gotten by well-doing: and loving favor
rather then silver and gold; that is, the love and respect of those amongst
whom a man lives, especially of those that are for wisdom and piety and
dignity eminent above others, when it is procured by that which is truly
amiable and commendable in him. Now both these are preferred before great
riches. 1. Because both these spring from virtue and piety, and so are the
peculiar blessings of the faithful, whereas the worst of men do many times
most abound in wealth. 2. Because by these much good may be obtained, which by
riches cannot be gotten. Riches do often bring men into great danger; when men
of good report and well-beloved shall either be free from the malice and envy
and violence of men, or at least they shall find many that will be ready to aid
and secure them. Again, such men usually enjoy much quiet and peace, and are
free from those vexations and troubles and suits at law, wherewith rich men are
continually perplexed: yea and riches and advancement in the world are many
times procured by a man's good report, and the favor that he enjoys amongst
men; whereas, on the other side, no riches can buy off infamy, nor redeem a
man's reputation when it is once lost. 3. Because riches are fading transitory
blessings; whereas a good name continues, and makes a man live as it were
after he is dead, and is a great honor to his children after him. And 4.
because a good name and good esteem amongst men do render a man's speeches and
actions the more acceptable unto men, they enable him to do much the more good
in the places where he lives, and are an encouragement to others in well-doing;
which riches are not.

Verse. 2. The rich and poor meet together, etc.] That is, say some, when the
rich declining in their estate, and the poor by degrees growing in wealth, come
at length to be of equal estates: Or thus; Though in regard of their outward
condition there is a vast difference between the rich and the poor, the rich
being honored, as if they were more then men, the poor despised and abused, as
if they were beasts and not men; yet in many things they meet together, and are
every way alike: they are both of the same nature, made after Gods image, they
have the same Lord and Creator, and in their birth and death are both alike,
etc. And indeed the words will bear both these expositions. But yet the more
obvious and ordinary exposition I take to be the best, to wit, that the rich
and poor, because there are both of the one and the other in all places,
according to that Mat. 26.11. ye have the poor always with you, do often
occasionally meet together, and converse one with another, yea they do usually
seek out one another, as having mutually need one of another: the Lord is the
maker of them all; that is, they are all his creatures, and it is God that
makes the one rich and the other poor; and that in great wisdom, because
without this difference in men's outward condition, humane societies could not
subsist: see the Note chap. 14.31. And this is added to imply, that as the poor
ought not to envy or malign the rich, so neither should the rich grow proud,
despise or oppress the poor.

Verse. 3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, etc.] To wit, the mischief that is
like to befall him in any way he is going, or action he is undertaking; or the
evil which his enemies have plotted to bring upon him, (as indeed wicked men
are usually seeking the ruin of the righteous;) or rather the judgments of
God approaching, whether private or public, which he discovers beforehand by
observing the wickedness committed, and meditating on the judgments
threatened, or by taking notice of some present signs and discoveries of Gods
indignation: and hides himself; to wit, by abandoning such wicked ways and
company, by putting himself through faith and prayer under the shelter of Gods
protection, and by using all lawful means to avoid the evil feared: but the
simple pass on, and are punished; to wit, as not foreseeing or not regarding
the evil they are in danger of; see the Note chap. 14.16. But to all this some
add, that Solomon speaks of a prudent man foreseeing danger, in the singular
number, but of simple ones that only mind present things, in the plural, to
imply, that there are multitudes of these, but few of those that foresee
dangers and hide themselves.

Verse. 5. Thorns and snares, etc.] In the foregoing verse it is said, that By
humility and the fear of the Lord are riches and honor and life: and now in
opposition thereto this is added, Thorns and snares are in the way of the
froward; that is, wicked men do usually meet with many inextricable plagues and
miseries in their ways; see the Notes upon Job 18.8, 9, 10. Or, by the thorns
in the way of the wicked may be particularly meant, the stinging terrors of
conscience they many times undergo; and by the snares in their way may be
meant, that they are continually entangled in the snares and temptations of the
devil and the wicked world, yea that all things, good as well as bad,
prosperity as well as adversity, are as snares and stumbling blocks unto them;
or that they are so entangled in their wickedness, that they cannot leave it,
being herein, as the Apostle speaks, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken
and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. He that does keep his soul, that is, he that does
carefully watch over the safety of his soul; shall be far from them, that is,
will avoid their wicked ways, not so much as coming near the occasions
thereof. Or, He that does keep his soul, to wit, from their wicked ways, shall
be far from them, that is, from the forementioned thorns and snares. Yet the
words of Solomon here are capable of another exposition: as that thorns and
snares are in the way of the froward, because wicked men are prone both to
injure and hurt others, and likewise to lay snares for them, to cheat and
deceive them, and to seduce them into erroneous and sinful ways; which is the
same in effect with that Romans 3.16, 17. Destruction and misery are in their
ways, and the way of peace have they not known: and that therefore he that
does keep his soul shall be far from them; that is, he that is wary for his
own safety will keep out of the reach of such mischievous persons, and will
carefully avoid their plots, flatteries and seducements. And see also the Note
chap. 15.19.

Verse. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, etc.] In the Hebrew it is
in his way; whereby may be meant also, that he must be instructed in such a
manner as is suitable to his years, and according to his capacity, as by giving
him the shortest and the easiest instructions, and seeking to instill knowledge
into him by little and little.

Verse. 7. The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the
lender.] Though it be true, that the rich are commonly chosen into places of
office and magistracy, and that amongst the Jews those that were in debt were
wont to be fold for servants to their Creditors; (see the Note Exodus 21.2.) yet
here Solomon speaks of rich men's insulting and domineering over the poor, and
the bondage they are kept in that are forced to borrow of them. And the drift
of this Proverb is, to warn men to be so wise, as by honest diligence in their
callings to endeavor to be able to live of themselves, that they may never
come to live in such slavery.

Verse. 8. He that sows iniquity shall reap vanity, etc.] That is, though he
may propose diverse ends of advantage to himself by his insolent tyrannizing
over the poor, his expectation therein shall be vain and fruitless, he shall
reap nothing by it, but affliction and misery; see the Note Job 4.8: and the
rod of his anger shall fail; that is, though he may chafe and rage, when he
sees that his iniquity has no success, yet he shall not be able to help
himself, the wasting of his power in vain shall be all his harvest; or, his
persecution and oppression shall cease; or, his authority and power, which in
his wrath he used for the scourging and oppression of others, shall be broken,
even as a rod when one strikes hard with it does break and snap asunder; see
the Note Psalm. 125.3. But now if we read this last clause, as it is in the
margin of our Bibles, and with the rod of his anger he shall be consumed, then
the meaning must be either 1. that the tyrannical abuse of his power should
prove his own ruin; or 2. that he should undergo the same fury, violence and
oppression from others, which he had shew^* to others: as if he had said, that
others should take the rod out of his hand, and beat him with it, or that he
should be threshed with the same rod wherewith he had thres^ed others. For
there may be an allusion in this expression to the rod wherewith they were wont
to thresh out their grain, Isa. 28.27. the fitches are beaten out with a
staff, and the cummin with a rod; and that with respect to the similitude used
in the foregoing clause, He that sows iniquity shall reap vanity.

Verse. 9. He that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he gives of his
bread to the poor.] That is, he will give of that which is justly his own for
the relief of the poor; yea, if need be, he will spare the very meat out of his
own belly to feed them.

Verse. 10. Cast out the scorner, etc.] That is, let him be cast out of men's
company and families, out of the Churches, and commonwealths, and places where
he lives: and contention shall go out; as if he should have said, this, and
this only, will put an end to contention amongst men, because one scorner will
set all on a light flame, besides the danger of his infecting others. Yea
strife and reproach shall cease: where by reproach may be meant all railing and
reviling and reproachful language, which usually follows strife and
contention, and wherewith the scorner is wont to requite those that reprove and
admonish him; or else, the infamy and shame which quarrelling and strife brings
upon those that are given to it, yea and upon those amongst whom they live.

Verse. 11. He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the
king shall be his friend.] This may be read, as in the margin, He that loves
pureness of heart, and has grace in his lips, etc. and then accordingly the
meaning must be, either first, (as taking the words in the most general sense)
that he that loves pureness of heart, that is, he that is of a pure and
undefiled heart and conscience, that abhors all hypocrisy, and loves truth
and holiness, uprightness and sincerity in the inward man, and has grace in
his lips, that is, whose speech is holy and gracious, wise and profitable to
others (see the Note Psalm. 45.3.) the king, when he is such an one as a king
ought to be, shall be his friend: or else, in a more particular sense, that he
that is of a loyal faithtull heart, void of all dissimulation, and so never
goes about for fear, or hope of reward, to frame his speech so as he thinks
will please princes and great men, but will speak the truth from his heart, and
that discreetly and prudently, which may be principally intended to be the
grace of his lips, shall find that God will incline the hearts of princes to
favor him. But now reading it as it is in our Bibles, He that loves pureness
of heart, for the grace of his lips the king shall be his friend, then the
drift of the words is to show, why a man of a gracious, sincere, faithful
heart, shall be sure to find favor with Princes: namely 1. because there will
be grace also in such a man's lips, he will speak graciously and wisely, and
with much content to those that hear him; pureness of heart causing grace in
the lips, as necessarily, as the pureness of silver causes it to yield a
sweet and delightful sound: and 2. because wise men do always abhor
dissembling flatteries. However the drift of the Proverb is, to show, that
faithfulness and plain-dealing is the best way to preferment; and that the
speech of the upright shall be acceptable, when the glosing silken words of
parasites shall be hateful. But see the Note also chap. 16.13.

Verse. 12. The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, The Lord does continue, uphold, and maintain the truth, and the
knowledge of the truth amongst his people; as namely, by preserving the
Scriptures, the spring of saving knowledge, and those that are ordained of God
to teach men knowledge: and he overthrows the words of the transgressour;
that is, he consuteth and brings to naught the false doctrines of ignorant
men and seducers. But because of the opposition of the following clause, I
rather take it thus: The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge; that is, The
watchful and tender providence of the all-seeing God does preserve knowing,
wise and godly men, and does uphold and prosper their counsels and endeavors:
and he overthrows the words (or, the matters) of the transgressors; all the
counsels and enterprises of wicked men; or more particularly, all that they
speak or do against the righteous. And there are some of our best Expositours
that conceive that this is added with reference to what was said in the
foregoing Proverb. Because it might be objected against that which was said
there, that if men out of conscience speak the truth from their hearts to
princes, it may bring them into danger; in answer thereto it is here said, that
God will preserve him that follows his counsel herein, though never so many
eyes do watch over him to hurt him. Though such men may be counted fools, that
cannot dissemble and flatter; yet God esteems this the only true wisdom and
knowledge: and though for a time parasites may seem to prosper, and to have all
the favor; yet God will discover the vanity of their flatteries, and it may be
make those very words of theirs the cause of their disgrace, which they hoped
would have been the means of their advancement.

Verse. 13. The slothful man says, There is a lion without; I shall be slain
in the streets.] To wit, by the lion before mentioned; and hereby the vanity of
this excuse is represented as the more ridiculous, because lions use not to be
in the streets of towns or cities, but only abroad in the woods and fields. Yet
some would have the two clauses here joined together understood disjunctively:
to wit, that if the sluggard be to go forth to his labor in the field, then
he says, There is a lion without, etc. and if he be to go about any business
in the town or city, then he pretends danger of being slain some other way, to
wit, by some quarrelsome cutthroats that are abroad in the streets, or by some
enemies of his that lie there in wait for him. However, observable is the
expression that Solomon uses, The slothful man says, etc. He does not think,
but only say so, even against the light of his own conscience pretending this
by way of excuse. All the lion that endangers the sluggard is that of
idleness, which lies with him in his bed, yea in his bosom; of which he never
complains. But see the Note also chap 15.19.

Verse. 14. The mouth of strange women, etc.] See the Note chap. 2.16: is a deep
pit; to wit, because by their kisses and enticing language, they bring men into
a sin which will hardly ever be left, and into manifold miseries, out of which
men do very hardly and seldom escape, but do usually perish in them; see also
the Notes chapter 2.18, 19. He that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein;
that is, the man that God is highly offended with for some former wickedness
shall, in a way of just vengeance, be delivered up to this sin.

Verse. 15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child.] To wit, because
folly, wantonness and wickedness, being natural to children, it must needs
be a very hard thing to make them leave it.

Verse. 16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, and he that
gives to the rich, shall surely come to want.] Some understand both clauses of
one and the same man, to wit, that he that robs the poor, and then gives bribes
to the magistrates and great men, thereby to secure himself, shall certainly
come to poverty. But I rather understand it of two different persons or sins:
to wit, that he that oppresses poor men, and likewise he that in a
vainglorious humor, or in hope of getting some great matter by them, will be
sumptuously feasting great rich men, and sending them rich presents, so giving
to the rich what he should give to the poor, yea what he has many times
injuriously raked from the poor, shall both alike come to poverty; and that not
only because rich men do often only flout at those that follow them so with
presents, at least they never mind them, nor think of requiting them, but also
because God does often in anger blast their estates.

Verse. 17. Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, etc.] Solomon
uses this general expression, either 1. because he would press his son to
attend to the instruction of all godly wise men, as well as his own; or 2.
because in the close of this book he meant to add the words also of Agur and
Bathsheba; or 3. because these instructions of his, being the very word of God,
were the same with those that were taught by all those that were truly wise:
and apply thine heart unto my knowledge; see the Note chap. 2.2. From the
beginning of the tenth chapter to this place, Solomon has, as by way of
doctrine, given us certain short proverbiall sentences, every verse almost
containing one entire Proverb by it self; but now from hence to the beginning
of the 25. chapter, the manner of his style is changed: for besides that all is
here delivered by way of exhortation, the precepts that are here pressed are
for the most part more largely delivered in several verses, and backed with
reasons, much as before it was in the first nine chapters. And hence I conceive
it is, that in this and the four following verses this new exhortation, to
attend diligently to Solomon's doctrine, is inserted either by way of closing up
the former Proverbs, or rather by way of a new preface to that which follows.

Verse. 18. For it is a pleasant thing, if thou keep them within thee, etc.] As
if he had said, Though the words of the wise may at first seem harsh, and hard
to be learnt, and over-severe, and so be displeasing to thee; yet if thou keep
them within thee, that is, if thou do once understand and believe them, and
so do upon occasion call them to mind, and meditate on them, and obey them
constantly, thou shall find them very delightful and comfortable to thee; see
the Note chap. 3.17. They shall withal be fitted to thy lips; that is, thou
shall be able opportunely to call them to remembrance for the instruction of
others, and to speak fluently, aptly, and to good purpose of every thing, as
any occasion is offered; yea and that with the acceptance and good approbation
of those to whom thou speak. And indeed then only do holy words and
instructions proceed fitly and handsomely from men, when they proceed from the
heart and from good men, according to that of David, Psalm. 37.30, 31. The mouth
of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment; the law
of God is in his heart: for which see the Notes there.

Verse. 19. That thy trust may be in the Lord, etc.] That is, To the end that
knowing and observing what I have taught thee, thy trust may be fixed upon God,
his word and promises, both for what concerns thy welfare in this life, and
that which is to come: I have made known to thee; to wit, all these truths that
I have taught thee: this day; that is, at this time, see Psalm. 95.7. or, in
this book: even to thee; as if he should have said, Even to thee, my son, to
whom I cannot better manifest my fatherly love, then in teaching thee these
things, and whose duty it is to apply these precepts generally delivered to thy
self in particular, and to know them for thine own good. I know some read the
last clause thus, trust thou also, and the drift of it is as if he had said, I
have done my duty in showing thee those things that should bring thee to put
thy trust in the Lord; be thou now as careful to practice this, as I have been
to teach thee.

Verse. 20. Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and
knowledge?] That is, excellent counsels, which I have given thee from God, for
thine advice and direction in all thy ways, and whereby thou may be enabled
to give counsel to others; and excellent precepts appertaining to knowledge,
to inform thee in all things, which it is fit thou should know, for thy
welfare here, or eternal salvation hereafter.

Verse. 21. That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth,
etc.] That is, That I might teach thee, not doubtful conceits, or lying fables,
but truths of unquestionable certainty, even the sure Oracles of God: that thou
might answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee; that is, that
thou may be able to give sound advice to those that send to thee to desire
thy counsel, and to satisfy those that send to be informed in some hard cases
or doubtful questions; or, that thou may be able to give a reason of thy
judgment or doings to any that shall call thee to give an account thereof,
according to that 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. But now if we read this
last clause as it is in the margin of our Bibles, that thou might answer the
words of truth to those that send thee, then the meaning must be this; that
thou may give a fair account to those that have sent thee either to be
instructed, or to manage any great business they have committed to thy trust.

Verse. 22. Rob not the poor, because he is poor, etc.] That is, say some,
because being poor, he is fitter to be pitied and relieved, then to be robbed
and oppressed; or rather, because being poor, he is not able to withstand; let
not that encourage thee: neither oppress the afflicted in the gate; to wit,
under a pretense of justice; see the Notes Job 5.4. and 31.21.

Verse. 25. L^st thou learn his ways, etc.] To wit, the angry man's ways,
mentioned in the foregoing verse, by being infected by his example and company,
as naturally men are prone to imitate those they love; or by being provoked to
anger by his anger, and so through often brawling and contending thou gettest
at last an habit of frowardness: and get a snare to thy soul; that is, and so
be entangled in the same sin, to the endangering of thy soul in eternal
perdition; or, lest thou bring thy life into danger: to wit, either by thy
friends falling suddenly upon thee in his fury some time or other, and taking
away thy life; or by some quarrels whereinto thou may be brought by his
means, wherein by thy provoking of others thy life may be brought in hazard,
at least some great mischief or other may befall thee.

Verse. 26. Be not thou one of them that strike hands, etc.] See the Notes chap.
6.1. and Job 17.3.

Verse. 27. If thou have nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from
under thee?] See the Note chap. 20.16.

Verse. 29. See thou a man diligent in his business? etc.] As if he should
have said, Such a man is deservedly to be noted and observed; and if therefore
thou have taken notice of such a man, observe likewise what the issue of his
diligence is: he shall stand before kings, etc.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. WHen thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is
before thee.] That is, what plenty and variety there is of dainty mea^s and
delicious wines, and how dangerous they are to entangle men unawares, (whence
it is that they are called afterward verse. 3. deceitful meat) and to draw
them to excess in eating and drinking, whilst they will be tasting of every
dish, and sipping at every cup, and so consequently to make them in their
jollity to speak or do something that may turn to their prejudice; and that
the rather, because great men are often wont to make use of their feasts, as
snares to entangle men in this regard, to make them in their drink and heat of
blood to utter those things which they would not otherwise discover. I know
many Expositours extend these words to the consideration of the persons
present, the Ruler and others, and some to the well weighing of any questions
that shall then be propounded; and so take them to be a warning, that he that
is called to be a guest at a great man's table should be careful, that he did
no way carry himself rudely, uncivilly and unmannerly, no otherwise then if he
were at home at his own table; or, that he should take heed, that when any
questions were propounded, he spoke nothing rashly and foolishly. But the first
exposition is clearly the best, as the following words do manifest.

Verse. 2. And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.]
That is, one that naturally love dainties, and art very inclinable to glut
thy self with them. And by those words, put a knife to thy throat, is meant,
that such a man should restrain himself from all excess in eating and
drinking: only this expression seems withal to imply, either first, that he
should force himself to forbear by mortifying his unruly appetite, that he
might be no more able to run on in filling himself, then if there were a knife
stuck in his throat: or 2. that though this bridling of his appetite were never
so troublesome and irksome to him, as grievous in a manner to him as if he were
to cut his own throat, yet he must do it; and that because it were better, if
any such necessity could be conceived, that a man's throat should be cut, then
that he should ^^sh headlong into the miseries which his gluttony and
drunkenness would bring upon him: and so the drift of these words is much the
same with that of our Saviors words, Matthew. 5.29, 30. If thy right eye offend
thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that
one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast
into bell, etc. where the meaning is only, that though the abandoning of any
thing that is an occasion of sin, should be as grievous to us as the pulling
out our eyes, or the cutting off our right hands; yet we must abandon them: or
3. that he should restrain his inordinate appetite, by thinking with himself of
the danger his excess is like to bring him into; partly in regard of the
diverse deadly diseases it is like to bring upon men, partly in regard of the
slipperinesse of their tongues in such a case, to utter those things that may
provoke the ruler to displeasure, or otherwise hazard their lives, and chiefly
because their excess is like to bring their souls to eternal damnation; their
knives upon the table are like to be more mischievous to them then a knife in
their throats would be. And therefore by thinking of these things, as by a
knife put to their throats, it is fit that men should endeavor to keep
themselves from excess.

Verse. 3. Be not desirous of his dainties, for they are deceitful meat.] To
wit, 1. because when great persons do invite meaner men to their tables, they
do it usually with a purpose some way to ensnare or deceive them; they do it
not out of love, as they pretend, but with an aim to bring them to utter those
things, when they have drunk well and are frolic, which at another time they
would never have spoken, or some other way to entrap them, and to bring their
own purposes about: 2. because men are usually therein deceived, that they
think great men are willing they should eat freely of the plentiful provision
that is set before them; whereas indeed they grudge them what they eat, as is
expressed more fully afterward verse. 6.7: 3ly, because the delight men take in
such dainties does unawares draw them into intemperance and excess, which
proves at last the cause of much mischief to them: and 4. because
court-entertainment and familiarity is many times unstable, and so they that
entertain great hopes upon that ground, are usually deceived of their hopes.
But now under this one particular of eating at great men's tables, Solomon
intends to imply the danger of all conversing with great men in any way
whatsoever, and that men had need to be wisely watchful over themselves, and
to bridle their affections, when they have to deal with great personages in any
thing whatsoever: and that because the friendship of such men is deceitful; it
yields not that content usually that men expect in it, but on the other side it
brings many vexations with it, and is many ways dangerous. Many seeking hereby
to advance themselves, have ruinated their estates, and utterly overthrown
their posterity.

Verse. 4. Labor not to be rich, etc.] Riches are the good blessing of God; and
therefore may be desired, if it be only so far as it may be for Gods glory, and
our good: but absolutely to desire to be rich, and to set our heart upon it,
and thereupon to overtoil our bodies, and to afflict and perplex our spirits in
seeking to get riches, this is that which is here forbidden. Men must labor in
their callings, in obedience to Gods command, and that they may have wherewith
to live comfortably, and if God send in abundance, accept it thankfully; but
for men absolutely to make it their aim to be rich, and so thereupon to make
drudges of themselves, and violently to pursue riches, as if they thought by
their toiling suddenly to enrich themselves whether God would or no, that is no
way warrantable. Cease from thine own wisdom; which will persuade thee that a
man's happiness consists in being rich, and will prompt thee to strive after
this by all means, though never so unlawful.

Verse. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not?] That is, Will thou
eagerly look and seek after, and set thine heart upon that which has no solid
substance in it, (however men are wont vainly to call their riches their
substance) that which in true judgment is nothing worth, and for the having
whereof men are nothing the better? or, that which is not, that is, which it
may be will not be had, because those that eagerly seek after riches many times
cannot attain them; whereas God frequently bestows them in abundance upon those
that mind them not? or, that which when a man has gotten, will usually be gone
on a sudden? And if we thus understand this clause, then the following words
are added by way of explaining these ((whereas otherwise they may be taken as a
second reason against their* ordinate desire of riches:) for riches certainly
make themselves wings, they fly away; that is, the man that labors to get them
cannot attain them, or, when a man has gotten them, they will vanish away in
an instant: as an eagle toward heaven, that is, as an eagle flies toward
heaven; or, if these words also be meant of riches, we must understand them
thus, that riches will be gone beyond all possibility of getting them or
recovering them again. The first clause is in the Hebrew, Will thou cause thine
eyes to flee upon that which is not? which expression seems to have reference
to that which follows concerning riches sleeing away as an eagle, and so may
imply, that though in their desires men fly after riches with never so much
eagerness, they will be too swift for them, and how vain a thing it is for men
to gape after riches, even as if a man should with earnest desires look after
some foul, which is upon the wing, and in the twinkling of an eye is gotten
out of his sight: and therefore it is too that the eagle is mentioned, because
no foul flies so high or so swift as an eagle.

Verse. 6. Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil eye.] That is, of an
envious man, according to that Matthew. 20.15. Is thine eye evil, because I am
good? or rather, of a sordid covetous miser, that does envy thee and grudge
thee every bit of meat that thou eatest; for so on the contrary the liberal
man was before said to have a good or a bountiful eye, chap. 22.9.

Verse. 7. For as he thinks in his heart, so is he, etc.] That is, he is not
to be esteemed according to what in his words and his outward deportment he
would pretend himself to be, to wit, one that loves thee, and to whom thou art
truly welcome; but according to what he thinks in his heart, as namely, that
he is a dissembling miserly churl, that grudgeth at thy eating of that which
he sets before thee, as is expressed in the following clause, Eat and drink,
says he to thee, but his heart is not with thee.

Verse. 8. The morsel which thou have eaten shall thou vomit up, etc.] Some
understand this literally, that by reason of some unwholesome meat which the
envious man does often set before his guests, or by reason of his drawing them
with a mischievous intention to overlade their stomachs with his meat or drink,
his guests should vomit up what they had eaten, and so also should be disabled
from speaking so wisely and acceptably to those that were present, as otherwise
they might have done; which they think is intended in the next clause, and lose
thy sweet words. But by the common consent of most Expositours, the meaning is
rather this: The morsel which thou have eaten shall thou vomit up; that is, By
some snare wherewith he will entrap thee, or some mischief he will afterward
do thee, he will make thee pay dearly for what thou have eaten; or rather,
When thou shall perceive either by some distasteful speeches given thee, or by
some other means, that he grudged to see thee eat his meat, thou shall be so
inwardly vexed and grieved, that thy meat shall do thee no good, and in that
regard it shall be all one to thee, as if thou had vomited it up again; or,
thou shall even loath that very meat of his which thou have eaten, and repent
that ever thou did eat it, and wish thou could vomit it up again: And lose
thy sweet words; that is, all the sweet glosing words wherewith he welcomed
thee, etc. all the content thou did take therein shall be then lost, they
shall do thee no good, but rather thou shall be vexed exceedingly, that thou
were so befooled by his dissembling language; or, thou shall lose thy sweet
words, that is, all the flattering language thou gave him, or all the
courteous, sweet, complementall words thou spakest to him, by way of praising
his good cheer, or acknowledging his love, and returning him many thanks for
his kind entertainment, or any good or pleasant discourse wherewith thou
soughtest to delight him or his guests, whilst thou were at his table: all
which shall be as lost, either because the covetous churl took no delight in
them, whilst he grudged at him for eating up his victuals, or because the man
that spoke them, when he comes to discover the sordid dissembling of his host
that entertained him, shall be fretted that ever he spoke them, and shall wish
that he had never spoken them.

Verse. 9. Speak not in the ears of a fool; for he will despise the wisdom of
thy words.] To wit, out of ignorance or profaneness; see the Notes chap. 9.7,
8. But yet this phrase of speaking in the ear, may seem to imply, that this is
meant only of private admonition or reproof.

Verse. 10. Remove not the old landmark, and enter not into the fields of the
fatherless.] To wit, neither by seizing upon their lands and estate unjustly,
nor by any encroachment, through removing their landmarks, nor by breaking
violently into them any other way to do them any damage.

Verse. 11. For their redeemer is mighty, etc.] See the Note Job 19.25: he shall
plead their cause with thee; see the Note chap. 22.23.

Verse. 13. Withhold not correction from the child, etc.] That is, neither omit
it thy self, nor restrain others from doing it, to whom it belongs; see the
Notes also chap. 13.24. and 19.18: for if thou beat him with the rod, he shall
not die; that is, such moderate correction will not be his death, to wit,
neither at the present, (for a rod will break no bones) nor yet by degrees, by
grieving or weakening him, and bringing him into a consumption: or, he shall
not die, that is, this will preserve him both from being cut off by untimely
death, as cocker'd children for their wickedness many times are, and likewise
from eternal death, as is more fully expressed in the following verse.

Verse. 14. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from
hell.] This last clause may be taken not only as a promise, but also as a
precept.

Verse. 15. My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine.]
That is, not only shall this yield joy to thine own heart, but to mine also, by
whose instruction this has been wrought, and who for the love I bear thee
cannot but rejoice in thy good.

Verse. 16. Yea my reins shall rejoice, etc.] That is, All the inward parts of
my body shall be affected with my joy: when thy lips speak right things; that
is, when thou becomest able thereby to instruct others: or, when thy speech is
pious and every way right: which is therefore particularly mentioned, because
this is the highest proof of true wisdom in the heart; If any man offend not
in word, the same is a perfect man, Jam. 3.2.

Verse. 17. Let not thine heart envy sinners, etc.] See the Notes Psalm. 37.1, 3:
but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long; that is, continually and
constantly, even then when it fares best with the wicked, and worst with thy
self and others that live holily and righteously. Now the fear of the Lord is
here required in opposition to the fault of envying sinners, either to show
that in stead of desiring to walk in their ways, that we may be sharers with
them in their prosperous estate, it is our duty to be constant in the ways of
well-doing; or else because the fear of the Lord w^ll cause men to mortify this
base lust of envy, it will curb men from murmuring against the secret
judgments of God, it will pull down men's pride, and make them contented with a
mean condition, it will teach men to put their trust and confidence in God, and
to look upon wicked men in their greatest prosperity as men that are to be
pitied rather then envied.

Verse. 18. For surely there is an end, etc.] To wit, of the prosperity of the
wicked; God has set a period to their flourishing estate, it shall not
always, yet it shall not long continue; see the Note Psalm. 37, 38: or, there
shall be an end of thy oppression, affliction, and misery: or, there shall be
an end of thy patience and hope; thou shall not always in a poor oppressed
estate wait for better days; that which God has promised as the end and
reward of piety, shall be at last made good to thee: which agrees with that of
David, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace; and that of the Apostle Jam. 5.11. Ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. And thence it is that some
do so render this first clause, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, for
surely there is a reward. And if thus we understand these words, then is the
same in effect repeated in the next clause, and thine expectation shall not be
cut off; that is, thou shall be supported with hope to the last, and the hope
which thou have of a reward of thy piety, far above any thing which the wicked
enjoy, shall not be frustrate. Yet it may be understood of the godly man's
expectation, that the prosperity of the wicked shall come to an end, to wit,
that he shall not be deceived in that his expectation.

Verse. 19. Hear thou, my son, etc.] See the Note chap. 1.8: and be wise; that
is, become wise^ or study and endeavor to get wisdom by thy hearing: and
guide thine heart in the way; that is, in all thy courses, or in that right way
wherein thou art taught to go; follow not the guidance of thine own carnal
heart, but cause thine heart to follow the guidance of Gods word, wherein are
the instructions of true wisdom, that so thou may with all thy soul walk in
the right way.

Verse. 21. For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and
drowsinesse shall cloth a man with rags.] That is, idleness, which causes
drowsinesse: see the Note chap. 19.15. Yet I conceive it is here expressed by
drowsinesse, because drunkenness and gluttony do both make men drowsy.

Verse. 22. Hearken to thy father that begat thee, etc.] See the Note chap. 1.8:
and despise not thy mother; that is, neither the person nor the instructions of
thy mother: when she is old; as if he should have said, though happily with age
she may be grown even childish again, or, though being old thou need not
fear her correcting of thee, nor can hope that she should store up for her
children as formerly.

Verse. 23. Buy the truth, etc.] That is, the knowledge and belief and practice
of the truth contained in Gods word, according to that Joh. 17.17. Sanctify
them through thy truth, thy word is truth; use all possible means for the
gaining of it, spare no pains nor cost, yea rather expose thy self to any
peril, and to the loss of all that is dear to thee, then not get it: and sell
it not; as if he should have said, Whereas merchants buy their precious
commodities, that they may sell them again, do not thou so; be not like Esau
that sold his birthright for a mess of pottage; when thou have gotten the
truth, forget it not, for any gain or sinful pleasure; deny thy self in all
things whatsoever, rather then abandon this precious treasure.

Verse. 24. The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice, etc.] See the
Notes chap. 10.1. and 15.20.

Verse. 25. She that bare thee shall rejoice.] As if he had said, and so this
will be some recompense for all the pains and sorrows she endured in bearing
thee in her womb, in bringing thee into the world, in nursing thee up with so
much labor and tender care. And so also there is covertly herein a warning
given to young men to beware, that they did not by their wickedness bring many
bitter after-throes upon their mothers, even in their old age.

Verse. 26. My son, give me thine heart, etc.] That is, Apply thy heart to learn
mine instructions, and to obey my precepts; or, which is all one in effect, set
thine heart upon God only, and upon true wisdom: for Solomon speaks here as in
the name of God, according to that 2 Cor. 5.20. as though God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ's stead. And then it follows, and let thine eyes
observe my ways; that is, apply thy whole mind, diligently to mark and observe
the ways wherein I walk, as a pattern for thee, or, which I prescribe thee,
that thou may heedfully walk in them; lest wandering from these ways, thou
fallest into the ditch or pit mentioned in the following verse.

Verse. 27. For a whore is a deep ditch, etc.] To wit, amongst other reasons,
because whoremongers not only by reason of the nasty diseases to which they are
subject, but also by reason of the detestablenesse of their sin, are as
loathsome amongst men, as a man must needs be that has fallen into some miry
stinking ditch: and a strange woman is a narrow pit; see the Note chap. 22.14.

Verse. 28. She also lies in wait as for a prey, etc.] Or, which is all one in
effect, as a robber. The meaning is, that as a robber does usually lie lurking
in some den or wood, and that commonly in the night, that he may get some
booty, and has for the most his companions as good as himself, to help him,
and is not content with one booty, but seeks to make a prey of many one after
another, sparing none, though he chiefly looks after the richer sort, and does
usually bereave travelers not of their money only, but of their lives too; so
it is with the whorish woman in all these regards: This night-bird does use all
kind of craft, secretly to get many men into her power, and those too for the
most that are of the richer sort, though she spares none, and has her
companions, bawds and panders, to help her; and when she has gotten them into
her power, she makes a prey of their estates, and bereaves them of their
health, good names, graces, reason and understanding, yea their very lives and
souls. There may be also an allusion in these words to the custom of harlots,
who were wont to sit by the highways covered with vails, that they might
entice men to them, as we may see by that which is said of Judah and Thamar,
Genesis 38.14, 15. for which see the Notes there. And increases the
transgressors among men; which is as if he had said, Of which, alas, there was
no need, there being but too many of that crew already. Now this is said of the
whore, partly because she often enticeth other maids and wives into the same
wickedness; but especially because so many men are corrupted by her.

Verse. 29. Who has woe? who has sorrow? etc.] That is, Who is it that at last
comes to undergo manifold miseries, temporal or eternal, and thereupon to
mourn and lament bitterly, with Woe and alas? who has contentions? who has
babbling? who has wounds without cause? that is, wounds and bruises, that were
not gotten upon a just cause, as men are wounded in the war, where they have
hazarded themselves for their prince and country; but merely by their own
folly: as when they have hurt themselves by dangerous falls; when they and
their companions have fallen in their cups into causlesse quarrels about
mistakes or mere trifles; or when they have been beaten for the wrong they have
done to others in their wine causlesly, and sometimes merely in derision, when
they have given no just cause of offense to those that did it; or when for some
evil pranks they have committed in their drunken fits, they have been punished
by the magistrate: who has redness of eyes? and consequently many times
blindness? Now all these questions import as much as if Solomon had said,
Every man knows who these men are, to wit, drunkards; and that these are the
sad effects of their merry meetings.

Verse. 30. They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine.]
See the Note chap. 9.2.

Verse. 31. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his
color in the cup, etc.] To wit, as being clear, and brisk and lively: when it
moves it self aright; that is, when it boyleth and sparkleth, and as it were
danceth in the glass or cup.

Verse. 32. At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.]
Or, a cockatrice. That is, it will fill the body with insufferable pains and
deadly diseases, torture the conscience, disturb the mind, and make men mad,
and bring upon them shame and poverty, etc. yea it will poison and destroy the
soul; evils worse then the venomous biting of a serpent, or stinging of an
adder.

Verse. 33. Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter
perverse things.] That is, Thou shall think, desire, contrive, and resolve upon
within thy self, or, out of the abundance of thy heart thy mouth shall speak,
(as indeed drunkards are usually wont to utter all that is in their hearts)
perverse things, that is, filthy, unclean things; or more generally, thou shall
vomit out all kind of wicked speeches, blasphemies, railings, etc.

Verse. 34. Yea, thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the sea,
etc.] To wit, that lies down to sleep; or as he that lies, to wit, sleeping,
upon the top of a mast. Very probably we may conceive, that as those that in a
ship are tossed by a storm at sea are thereupon compared to a drunken man,
Psalm. 107.27. they reel to and fro, and s^agger like a drunken man, and are at
their wits end; so here the drunkard is compared to a man that is tumbled up
and down in a ship by sea, because being drowned in drink, this makes him
lightheaded and stagger as he goes, and troubles his brains with such
giddiness, that every thing seems to him to swim or turn round. But because
Solomon compares the drunkard to a man that sleeps in the midst of the sea, or
upon the top of a mast, I rather think the meaning of these words to be, either
1. that drunkenness makes men's sleep troublesome and unquiet, so that they
apprehend themselves to be tossed up and down as those are that are in a
tempest in the midst of the sea; or 2. which I like far the best, that
drunkards are in as much danger of perishing, and yet withal as ignorant,
secure and fearlesse of the dangers they are in, as the man is that being in a
ship that is tossed with tempests in the midst of the sea, it may be upon the
top of a mast, is in danger every moment to be cast away, and so far from land,
that there is no hope of escape by swimming, and yet the whilst lies fast
asleep, no way able to do any thing toward the preserving of the ship he is
in from perishing in the waters, and yet never thinking of the least danger.

Verse. 35. They have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick, etc.]
That is, I cared not for it, I was not much hurt: they have beaten me, and I
felt it not; and therefore have no great cause to be troubled for it. Now
though drunkards will sometimes thus slight the blows they have had given them
whilst they were in their drink, thereby to shake off, as it were, the disgrace
of being so basely abused; yet it is clear that Solomon here represents the
speeches of a drunkard, when he is a little come to himself, and awakes in the
night, though not thoroughly, but is still half awake and half asleep, as
appears by the following words, when shall I awake? as if he should say, the
rather because of his drought and thirst, Oh that it were day! when will it be
morning? to wit, that he might return to his cups again, as is expressed in the
last words, I will seek it yet again. Yea we may well think that Solomon
intended these words as the language of their practice rather then their lips,
and that the drift of them is only to set forth the stupid blockishnesse of
drunkards, that no incoveniences which they undergo by their drunkenness will
beat them off from it.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. BE not thou envious against evil men, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 3.7:
neither desire to be with them; to wit, as thinking to join with them in their
wickedness, that thou may share with them in their prosperity.

Verse. 2. For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of
mischief.] As if he should have said, By this means they become great, and thus
they make use of their greatness; and therefore who would share with them in
it? But now some of our best Expositours understand the words thus, that in all
the mischief which wicked men devise and speak against others, they do indeed
study and talk how to destroy themselves; which is not improbable. But however
observable it is, that he says their heart, thereby implying that the wicked
are usually of one heart and of one mind for the working of mischief.

Verse. 3. Through wisdom iS an house builded, etc.] As if he had said, with
reference to what went before verse. 1, 2. This therefore is a better way that
we may thrive and prosper in the world, then to join with the wicked in their
cursed ways, But see the Note chap. 14.1.

Verse. 5. A wise man is strong, etc.] To wit, not only for acts of spiritual
fortitude, see the Note chap. 16.32; but also for the accomplishing of those
external enterprises, which are usually effected by diligence and strength of
body: see the Note chap. 21.22.

Verse. 6. For by wise counsel thou shall make thy war; and in multitude of
counselors there is safety.] See the Notes chap. 15.22. and 20.18.

Verse. 7. Wisdom is too high for a fool, etc.] That is, he apprehends it to
be above his reach, and so will take no pains to get it; or, being wholly
intent upon earthly things, wisdom is above his sight, that he cannot discern
the preciousnesse of it, yea it is above the reach of his natural capacity, 1
Cor. 2.14. the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God; for
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. So it follows, he opens not his mouth in the gate;
that is, he shall not be able to speak a word in his own defense, when he shall
be questioned before the magistrate; as on the contrary it is said of others,
Psalm. 127.5. they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies
in the gate: or rather, such an one shall never be called to any place of
magistracy, which is a place for wise men; or if he be, he will not dare to
offer to speak, or, he will not be able to speak, or at least, not to speak any
thing to the purpose.

Verse. 10. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.] That
is, say some Expositours, it will fail more and more, and will become very
small; if thou do not hearten and encourage thy self, but suffer thy heart
to faint within thee, thy strength will grow less and less: or rather thus,
Though thou seem never so courageous in a prosperous estate, yet if thou
faint when adversity comes, as apprehending that thou shall never be able to
endure it, or that there is no hope of escape, this is a clear sign that thy
strength is small; since it is not so much the quality or the greatness of the
affliction, that makes a man faint, as the cowardlinesse or weakness of his
own spirit.

Verse. 11. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, etc.] To
wit, by unjust violence; if thou do not what might be lawfully done toward
their deliverance: and those that are ready to be slain; that is, those that
are in some danger of death, by reason of some plot that is in hand against
them, or rather, that are in present danger of death, just ready to be slain.

Verse. 12. If thou say, Behold, we knew it not, etc.] To wit, neither did I
know it, nor those that were about me, who otherwise would certainly have
informed me. And the meaning may be, either that they knew not how to deliver
them; or rather, that they knew not the danger he was in, or that he was
unjustly in danger. Does not he that pondereth the heart consider it? that is,
does not he exactly know, whether it be so or no? and he that keeps thy soul,
does not he know it? where Gods keeping and preserving man's soul is mentioned,
to imply, either 1. that he that keeps the soul must needs know the thoughts
of the soul; or 2. that Gods preserving the life of a man might well be an
engagement to make him the more careful to preserve the lives of others when
they were in danger, especially considering that it might be that for that very
end God had preserved him; or 3. that God having every man's life at his
command, every man had cause to be very careful, that they did not by
slighting others in their dangers provoke him to displeasure; or 4. that God
was able to preserve any man, if he should be brought into any danger, by
appearing for those that were unjustly oppressed: and shall not be render to
every man according to his works? and therefore will he not reward thee, if
thou show mercy to the oppressed, or on the other side punish thee, if thou
dissemblest, and neglectest to aid those that are in danger, causing others
likewise to be as pitilesse toward thee?

Verse. 13. My son, eat thou honey, because it is good, etc.] That is, both
wholesome and sweet: and the honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste; see the
Note Psalm. 19.10. It is as if he had said, As men naturally love honey for its
sweetness, so should they love wisdom, as is expressed in the next verse.

Verse. 14. So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul, etc.] To wit, so
profitable and pleasing: when thou have found it; to wit, when with much labor
thou have at last truly attained it, and durst not flatter thy self with a vain
imagination that thou have it, when indeed there is no such thing: then there
shall be a reward, and thine expectation shall not be cut off; and so though at
first thou do not find the benefit of it, yet at last thou shall. But see the
Note chap. 23.18.

Verse. 15. Lay not wait (O wicked man) against the dwelling of the righteous,
etc.] Some would have the meaning hereof to be this; Watch not secretly to
discover any wickedness in the righteous man, that thou may some way to his
hurt charge it upon him. But the following clause, spoil not his resting place,
makes it methinks very clear, that the full scope of these words is to charge
men, that they should not seek to bring any hurt or disquiet upon the righteous
man, his family, or any thing that belongs to him, either by secret fraud, or
open violence.

Verse. 16. For a just man falls seven times, and rises up again, etc.] This
also some would have to be meant of the just man's falling often into sin, and
rising again by repentance. But by the foregoing verse it is clear that the
meaning of this is, either 1. that though the righteous seem often to be much
cast down and overwhelmed with their afflictions, yet they do as often rouse up
and encourage themselves again; or else that though they are often afflicted,
yet they are always again delivered: for which see the Note Psalm. 37.24. But
the wicked shall fall into mischief; to wit, irrecoverably, never rising again.

Verse. 17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, etc.] See the Notes Job 31.29.
and Psalm. 58.10.

Verse. 18. Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his
wrath from him.] That is, say some Expositours, Lest God remove his judgments
from him, and so thine enemy become again able to do thee a mischief, and thy
triumphing over him be turned into confusion, grief and shame; or rather, Lest
God turn away his wrath from him, to wit, upon thee* and so then he shall
insult over thee, as thou did before over him. However, doubtless Solomon
does not by this expression intend, that men should be unwilling that their
enemies should be freed from any judgments that God had brought upon them,
(for this all men ought rather to desire) but only that men should take heed
that by their rejoicing at their enemies miseries, they did not bring their
miseries upon themselves.

Verse. 19. Fret not thy self because of evil men, etc.] See the Notes chap.
24.1. and Psalm. 37.1, 3.

Verse. 20. For there shall be no reward to the evil man, etc.] That is, no good
reward: though he may flourish for a time, yet it shall be seen at last, that
the good things he enjoyed here were not given him in way of a reward, as if
God had approved of his ways, because at last God shall cut him off, and his
plagues and miseries shall be perpetual; though he may flatter himself with
hope, that even after this life he shall fare as well as others, yet it shall
not be so: when the righteous after all their misery shall receive the reward
of their piety, there shall be no happiness nor salvation for him: the candle
of the wicked shall be put out; see the Notes chap. 13.9. and 20.20. Job 18.5,
6. and 21.17.

Verse. 21. My son, fear thou the Lord and the king, etc.] God is first
mentioned, both because in all things our fear of him must have the
preeminence, and we must no farther obey earthly magistrates then may stand
with our obedience to God; and also because we must fear princes for conscience
sake, out of the reverence we bear to God, and as looking upon them as Gods
vicegerents: and meddle not with them that are given to change; that is, to
change and break the laws of God and the king; or, to revolt from their
obedience to God or the king. I conceive it is chiefly meant of seditious
persons, that are given to make changes and alterations in kingdoms and
commonwealths, as by subverting their fundamental laws and customs, by
treasonable practices against their princes, etc.

Verse. 22. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, etc.] That is, it shall come
upon them ere they are aware, when perhaps they think they have carried their
designs so secretly that they cannot be discovered, yea that all things are so
ordered that they shall surely prevail. And indeed Princes are wont to make
quick dispatch of seditious persons and traitors for fear of danger. And who
knows the ruin of them both? that is, say many Expositours, who can foresee
it? It comes upon them usually more swiftly and unexpectedly then is conceived.
And thus if we understand the second clause, it is the same in effect with the
first. But doubtless this expression implies also, that their ruin, the
punishments and torments which they shall undergo, will be more horrible and
insufferable then is usually imagined. And indeed if hell torments, which are
frequently the just reward of such persons, be also included, we may well say
that no man can conceive what they will be. As for the word both, I conceive
thus of it: that no man can well conceive the ruin and destruction either 1.
which both God and the king shall bring upon such men; or 2. which will come
upon both those that are seditious and given to change, and those also that
meddle with them; or 3. both those that fear not God, and those likewise that
fear not the king. But yet some extend the word farther, and say it is meant of
the wicked mentioned verse. 19, 20. and of those seditious persons mentioned
verse. 21.

Verse. 23. These things also belong to the wise, etc.] That is, say some
Expositours, to Judges and Magistrates; and they understand it of those
sentences which follow in this and the next three verses, and that because they
concern matters of judgment: or rather, These following Proverbs are fit to be
minded and observed by those that will carry themselves as becomes wise men.
But because I see no probable reason, why upon any such grounds this preface
should be here prefixed; I rather conceive that this is prefixed, to show that
though the Proverbs and sentences that follow from hence to the end of the
chapter were not Solomon's, yet they were the sayings of other famous wise men,
and therefore inserted in this place with the Proverbs of Solomon.

Verse. 24. He that says unto the wicked, Thou art righteous, etc.] That is,
that in a way of flattery applaudeth the person of a wicked man, or any of his
wicked ways, especially if it be a wicked prince or magistrate (as indeed of
such the Proverbs here joined together seem to speak;) or rather, He that from
the seat of justice shall acquit and justify any guilty party: him shall the
people curse; to wit, some by praying to God to punish him, others by hard
censures, revilings and imprecations, which though they may not be lawful, yet
they are a punishment to them that undergo them; see also the Note chap.
11.26. However the meaning is, that not God only, but all men generally must
needs condemn and abhor such men: (as indeed those that seem to favor them
most do usually detest them in their hearts) and that both because nothing can
be by the very light of nature more odious, then that those, whose place and
business it is to maintain justice, should themselves pervert it; and likewise
because this must needs encourage and harden men in their sins, and does indeed
directly tend to the utter ruin of kingdoms and commonwealths.

Verse. 25. But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, etc.] That is, say
some Expositours, God and man shall delight in such men. But the meaning rather
is, either that those that shall faithfully reprove the wicked, (whether
princes or others) or that being judges shall censure and punish them, shall
enjoy the delight of a good conscience, and of the comfort of knowing that both
God and men do favor them, (as indeed the wicked themselves, if ever they
truly repent of their wickedness, will commend them and pray for them;) or,
that God shall bestow many blessings upon them, which shall yield them much
delight. And then it is the same in effect with the following clause, and a
good blessing shall come upon them; for which see the Notes Job 29.11, 12.
Though faithful reproofs may be better to the wicked, and provoke them to much
anger and rage, yet to them that therein discharge a good conscience they shall
yield much sweet refreshing.

Ver. 26. Every man shall kiss his lips that gives a right answer.] That is,
that from the judgment seat pronounces a just sentence; or more generally,
that in be^ring witness, or in giving advice and counsel, or in any other
way, does always speak that which is true, just and equal, without all
flattery or dissimulation; or, that speaks fitly and to the purpose in any
cause or matter propounded to him. And by every man's kissing such a man's lips
is meant, that every one will dearly love and highly honor him, and will be
ready to do him any service he is able, and that because of the great good
which such a man does by his speaking, and because such faithful lips are so
rarely found; for of these things kissing was a token and pledge: see the Note
1 Samuel 10.1.

Verse. 27. Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thy self in the field,
and afterward build thine house.] The drift of this Proverb is, to teach us,
that we must never undertake any enterprise, till we are sure of the means
whereby to effect it. But indeed the generality of Expositours understand the
words otherwise: Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thy self in the
field; that is, first get grounds, and store them with cattle, and sow and
plant them, and every way husband them so, that they may yield thee much fruit,
and that the fruit thereof may be carefully gathered and inned; and when by
this means (or, which is proportionably the same, when by learning some trade
or calling, and following it diligently) thou have gotten somewhat whereon to
live comfortably, and well to maintain thy self and family, then trim and
enlarge and furnish thy house according to thy estate, or build thee a new
house, fairer then that which thou had before; or, then get thee a wife, and
provide for posterity. And some also conceive Solomon's intent to be, that these
works of husbandry must first be done in their season, because the season being
passed, they cannot be done at any time. But however both the one and the other
conceive the drift of the Proverb to be this, that men must first provide for
things necessary and of greatest importance, and then afterward for those
things that are of less moment.

Verse. 28. Be not a witness against thy neighbor without cause, etc.] That
is, without just ground, as by accusing him of that as a fault which is not a
fault, or by testifying that against him whereof he is guiltless, which thou
do upon mere uncertainties, or against thine own conscience, when he has
given thee no cause so to wrong him, or to raise such a report of him. And if
we thus understand the first clause, the second may be to the same effect, and
deceive not with thy lips; to wit, by misinforming men, and making them believe
that to be truth which is not, or, making show hereby that thou art a faithful
honest man, when indeed it is not so, or, by coloring over a bad cause with a
varnish of fair words, thereby to deceive those that hear thee, and not
speaking the truth simply and plainly. Or else we may understand the first
clause thus, Be not a witness against thy neighbor without cause; to wit, not
being legally cited and called thereunto; offer not thy self herein of thine
own accord, which will imply that thou do it rashly, out of ill will or
envy, or in a way of revenge: and deceive not with thy lips; to wit, by
flattering men, or by deceitful promises and pretenses of love. So the first
clause may forbid deceiving men by false witness, and the second deceiving
them by flatteries. Or if we understand the first clause, as most do, of
backbiters, the meaning of the whole sentence may be briefly this; Do not
slander him secretly, and in the mean season flatter him to his face.

Verse. 29. Say not, I will do so to him as he has done to me, etc.] See the
Note chap. 20.22: I will render to the man according to his works; as if he had
said, thereby proudly speaking of thy self in the very language of God. But now
some understand this particularly, with reference to the foregoing verse, of a
man's resolving to deceive or bear false witness against his neighbor in a way
of revenge, because he had formerly done so to him.

Verse. 34. So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, etc.] See the Note
chap. 6.11.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. THese are also Proverbs of Solomon, etc.] To wit, These that follow
to the end of the 23. chapter, as well as those before from the beginning of
the 10. at least to the 23. of the foregoing chapter: which the men of
Hezekiah, that is, his servants or courtiers, perhaps his secretaries, or, the
men which he had appointed to that service (whether private men, or Priests, or
Levites, or prophets that lived in his time, as did Isaiah amongst others, it
is not expressed) copied out; to wit, out of some writings or fragments of
writings then extant, wherein Solomon, or some other from his mouth, had
written many of his Proverbs; or, it may be, out of some public Records that
were kept of Solomon's Act, and Monuments. It seems Hezekiah, in his zeal to
promote the cause of Religion, appointed some to this service of collecting the
choicest of Solomon's Proverbs that were found at that time in any other book;
which having done, and reduced them into order, and prefixed this Inscription,
they were joined to this book: see the Note chap. 1.1.

Verse. 2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, etc.] God may be said to
conceal a thing, 1. in that he does not communicate his counsels and purposes
unto others, by way of advising concerning any thing which he intends to do,
(for, says the Prophet, Isa. 40.13. Who has directed the spirit of the Lord,
or being his counselor has taught him?) but does, without any such
consultation, what ever seems good in his own eyes: 2. in that he has made
known to his people in his word many truths, which are to them unsearchable
mysteries, the causes whereof, and the manner how they should be, humane reason
is no way able to reach; as the Trinity of persons in the unity of the Godhead,
the eternal generation of the Son, and procession of the holy Ghost, and many
such like: 3. in that there are many things the knowledge whereof God imparteth
not to any, but reserveth it wholly to himself; as the hour of men's natural
death, and the day of judgment; and many things again there are which he
reveals to some, and not to others, according to that Matthew. 11.25. I thank
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes: and 4. in that he
does many things, the causes and reasons whereof the wisest of men are no way
able to comprehend and search out; which as it is true in many natural things,
(for who can exactly demonstrate the reason of the blowing of the winds, Ioh.
3.8. and of the ebbing and flowing of the sea?) so much more in his higher acts
of providence; as when he decrees and brings about the sinful actions of
wicked men, without being in the least degree the author of their sins, when he
punishes infants for the sins of their parents, and many other things of the
like nature, of which we see what the Prophet says, Isa. 45.15. Verily, thou
art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel. Now however God has much
glorified himself by revealing many things to men, especially of his will and
counsel concerning man's salvation; yet by this his concealing things in other
regards from men, he has brought far more glory to himself: and that because
hereby it appears 1. how infinite and incomprehensible the wisdom of God is,
the wisest being forced to cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11.33. O the depth of
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! 2. that God is to be believed in
whatever he says, because he has said it, though man be not able to conceive
how it should be; and 3. that God may do whatever he pleases, and that his
will is the supreme rule of all justice, and that he is no way bound to give an
account of any thing that he says or does, Job 33.13. As for the following
opposite clause, but the honor of kings is to search out a matter, the drift
of that is, to show that the greatest of men must not think to be like God
herein; but that even kings themselves ought to esteem it their honor, to
advise and consult with their friends and counselors in all their great
affairs, and that it is indeed an honor to them, and that for which they shall
be greatly loved and feared and reverenced, when they make diligent enquiry
into the state of their kingdoms, and as far as may be into the secretest
transactions of other neighboring nations, so that no plot shall be so closely
carried on at home or abroad, but that they shall discover it; when they shall
with much pains search into all kind of knowledge, divine and humane,
especially that of their own laws, and whatever may best enable them for their
government, and gain credit thereto; when they can search out the truth in the
most intricate causes that are brought before them, as Solomon did in that of
the two harlots, 1 King. 3. (see the Note also Job 29.16.) and when they are
careful to clear unto the people the justice of all their judicial
proceedings. This, I conceive, is that which Solomon intended in this obscure
Proverb. Yet there are other Expositions given of it, which have likewise some
probability in them. As 1. that it is for the glory of God that the Scripture,
wherein he reveals his will to men, should be in many places obscure and hard
to be understood; because, through the just judgment of God, some profane
persons stumbling hereat, do despise it and cast it away, whilst the godly do
with the greater diligence enquire into it, and reverencing it the more for
this, are the more careful not rashly at any time to meddle with it: but that
it is for the honor of kings, with all diligence to search the Scriptures,
that they may be the better able to carry themselves in all things as Gods
vicegerents. Yea because the following Proverbs in this place are for the most
part the more intricate, because they are expressed under several similitudes
and tropes and allegories, therefore with particular respect to them this may
be premised, that it is for the glory of God thus to conceal things; but that
it will be for the honor of kings to search out the meaning of them. And 2.
that when God sees the wickedness of men, and yet passes it by as if he took
no notice of it, this is for his glory, because hereby it is seen how
infinitely long-suffering and patient he is; but that kings must not with us
wink at the wickedness of men, it being much for their honor to search out
and to punish notorious offenders. But the first exposition is clearly the best.

Verse. 3. The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of
kings is unsearchable.] That is, As no man can exactly search out the height of
the heaven, or the depth of the earth; or, As no man can discover what is in
the heaven above, because of its height, or what is in the earth beneath,
because of its depth; so neither can men search out the hearts of kings, or
discover the designs and counsels that are in their hearts. Now though this be
generally true of all men's hearts, that other men cannot exactly know them,
Jer. 17.9; yet it is here particularly affirmed of kings, as being more
eminently so with them then with others: and that either because dissimulation
is a chief piece of that policy, which they call king-craft; or else rather
because the cares and counsels of kings must needs be so exceeding many, and
their wisdom (when they are such as they ought to be) so exceeding great, and
their aims and designs so high, and their projects so profound, and all these
are usually carried on so closely, that other men are not able to reach them.
And the drift of this Proverb is, either 1. to teach kings how they ought in
this regard to carry themselves; or 2. to show that it is as vain and foolish a
curiosity, (though many be much taken with it,) to go about to search out the
secret designs of kings, as to search out the height of the heaven, or the
depth of the earth; or else 3. to imply (as with reference to the foregoing
verse) how much more impossible it must therefore needs be, to search out the
counsels and judgments of God.

Verse. 4. Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a
vessel for the finer.] That is, The silver being so refined, will be fit to be
made into any vessel of plate by the work of the goldsmiths.

Verse. 5. Take away the wicked from before the king, etc.] That is, let them be
cut off, or banished either out of his kingdom, or out of his Court: and his
throne shall be established in righteousness; to wit, 1. because God is
pleased with such impartial execution of justice upon offenders, and others
will be hereby made the more careful to avoid all such ways of wickedness,
both which will move God to bless and establish both king and kingdom; yea
the more righteous the people are, the more faithful they will be to their
king, even for conscience sake; and 2. because evil counselors and flattering
parasites, when they are the favorites of kings, and familiar with them, do
usually hinder the justice that should be in his government, and by their
oppression of the subjects, do alienate their affections from him, and both
these tend to the ruin both of king and kingdom. See the Note also chap. 20.8.

Verse. 6. Put not forth thy self in the presence of the king, etc.] To wit,
either 1. by way of vaunting and boasting and exalting thy self above others,
for thy knowledge, or wisdom, or any such thing; or 2. by way of slaunting it
out in the bravery of thine attire, the gallantry of thine attendance, thine
horses and chariots, or any thing of that nature, as if thou meantest to vye
with himself or his princes in these regards, (which is indeed perilous,
because princes are wont to look upon such persons with a very malignant and
jealous eye;) or, by way of intruding thy self to be near unto him, or of any
bold carriage of thy self in his presence. And thus it may be much the same
with that which follows, and stand not in the place of great men; that is,
thrust not thy self into those places, wherein Nobles, or at least persons of
greater rank then thy self, should sit or stand; or, do not insinuate thy self
into their company, or to sit cheek by jowle amongst them; or, do not
ambitiously affect to be in offices and places of honor about kings. For
indeed the affectation of being in kings Courts, and the ambitious striving to
be in high places, is that against which this Proverb seems to be intended.

Verse. 7. For better it is that it be said unto thee, Come up hither; then that
thou should be put lower in the presence of the prince, whom thine eyes have
seen.] As if he should have said, into whose presence thou have ambitiously
intruded thy self, even to be near to him, and then at last all that thou
gettest by it is to be disgraced in his presence; or, who has honored thee by
admitting thee into his presence, and now by being present at thy disgrace does
increase thy shame. And it may seem that from hence our Savior took that
parable of his, Luk 1.4.7, etc. concerning men's seating themselves in the
lowest places when they are invited to any feast.

Verse. 8. Go not forth hastily to strive, etc.] That is, without just cause,
or upon every trivial occasion, or rashly, before thou have well considered of
the business, and what the event of it is like to be, or before all fair means
have been used to compose the difference in a peaceable way. As for that
expression here used of going forth to strive, it may be meant either of going
forth before the judgment seat of the magistrate; or, as some would have it,
of running forth in hasty anger, upon any word of displeasure heard, into the
streets, there to chide or quarrel with a neighbor that has so offended him;
or else, it may be used to imply, that men should not meddle with other men's
contentions, or rather, that they should not enter into strife of their own
accord, unless they were forced and as it were drawn to it. Lest thou know not
what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbor has put thee to shame; to
wit, by foiling thee in thy suit, and so discovering the injustice of thy
dealing with him, and happily causing thee to undergo some mulct or punishment;
or, by prevailing against thee some other way to thy disgrace, wherewith thou will be so enraged, that, as a man bereaved of sense and reason, thou will not
know in a manner what thou do; or, whereby thou will be so puzzled, that
thou will not know what to do, either in thine own defense, or against thine
adversary, but may happily be transported to do something that may be
dishonorable and prejudicial to thee.

Verse. 9. Debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself, etc.] That is, Argue the
matter of difference which thou have against thy neighbor between thee and him
alone, and so make an end of it: and discover not a secret to another; that is,
let not others by your open contending, whether before the judge or elsewhere,
be made privy to that secret quarrel that is betwixt thee and thy neighbor:
or, however, if the cause be brought before others, be sure that thou do not
then in the heat of anger upbraid him with any secret fault which thou know
by him; keep close to the cause in hand, and run not out into any opprobrious
terms by way of twitting him with other secret offenses of his, to which thou
only were privy. This I conceive is the meaning of this Proverb. Yet some
understand the last clause more generally, of all blazing abroad the secret
offenses of men, or the secrets which they have been entrusted with, and
accordingly they read it, and discover not the secret of another.

Verse. 10. Lest he that hears it, put thee to shame, etc.] If by discovering
a secret in the foregoing verse, we understand the bringing of a private
difference to a public hearing, then accordingly this may be meant of men's
condemning him for this when it shall come to be heard, or of his being
censured for the injustice of his cause, and the shame he will undergo
thereby, as before verse. 8. But if it be meant of a man's upbraiding his
neighbor with any secret offense formerly known to him, whilst they are
contending about some other matter of difference before a magistrate or
otherwise, then this clause may be understood thus, Lest he that hears it put
thee to shame; that is, Lest those that stand by and hear this, observing thy
furious and revengefull spirit, do think the worse of thee and thy cause, and
condemn thee for it in every place where they come. And last of all, if we
understand the last clause of the foregoing verse of all blazing abroad any
secret imparted to them, then this clause here may be understood two several
ways: Lest he that hears it put thee to shame; that is, Lest those to whom
thou do discover thy neighbors secret, do afterward spread it abroad to
others, and so hereby thou come to be generally talked of as a blab and
talebearer: or, Lest thy neighbor that hears it do upbraid thee for
violating the laws of friendship in this case, and report it abroad to thy
discredit, that thou art a treacherous unfaithful man, and one that cannot
keep counsel. And thine infamy turn not away; that is, and so this will turn
to thy perpetual reproach: and by thy seeking to credit thy self by disgracing
others, thou will at last bring the greatest discredit upon thy self.

Verse. 11. A word fitly spoken, etc.] That is, in season; see the Note chap.
15.23. Yet it may be meant also of that which is spoken to the purpose, and in
a right manner, with all fitting vehemence or softness, elegancy or
perspicuity. It is in the Hebrew, A word spoken upon his wheels, (the ground of
which expression seems to be this, that when men speak in such a manner, their
words are carried as it were with wheels, to wit, roundly and readily, into the
ears and hearts of those that hear them, to affect them with that which is
spoken, and to convince them of the truth of it; whereas without these due
requisites in speaking, they go on heavily as a cart that is drawn without
wheels.) Is like apples of gold in pictures of silver; that is, most precious
and pleasant. Now by these apples of gold in pictures of silver are meant,
either pieces of gold cast or made in the form of apples, and then compassed
about with a kind of silver network curiously wrought, through which the
golden apples might appear; or else rather, pictures that are overlayed with
silver, and then afterward beautified with the gilded figures of oranges,
pomegranats, apples, etc. or pictures engraven on tablets of silver, adorned
with inlayed figures of apples of gold.

Verse. 12. As an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise
reprover upon an obedient ear.] This may be added here as an instance of that
which was said in the foregoing Proverb concerning the good that is done by a
word fitly spoken. But yet it may be understood several ways: as 1. that a
man that reproves others with such wisdom that thereby he wins them to
hearken to his reproof, is a very precious treasure, as an ear-ring of gold,
and an ornament of fine gold: or 2. that a wise reprover, and one that is
willing to hearken to such reproofs, are both in their place very precious; the
one as an ear-ring of gold, the other as an ornament of fine gold: or 3. that
as a golden ear-ring, and some precious jewel of fine gold hanging thereon, do
most fitly agree, and are a mutual beautifying one to the other; so a
faithful reprover, and one that submissively hearkeneth to his reproof, are
not only suitable and well met, but are also mutually an honor each to the
other: or 4. that a wise reprover, when he meets with one that is obedient to
his reproofs (for otherwise a reproof never does good) is an ornament to such a
man, as is an ear-ring of gold to a man, or an ornament of fine gold, or as is
an ear-ring when it has also some precious costly jewel hanging upon it. The
drift of the Proverb is, to show that it is no dishonor, but rather an honor,
to a man to be faithfully reproved: though a reproof may be painful, as is the
boring of the ear to put in an ear-ring, yet a wise reproof is the ears best
ornament, to wit, when the ear is opened, dug or bored (as the word in the
original signifies in that place Psalm. 40.6. mine ears have thou opened;) and
that not only because it is a great honor to a man quietly to submit to a wise
reproof, but also especially because the grace that is wrought in a man, and
the manifold benefits that redound to him thereby, are a most choice and lovely
ornament to him; and therefore every man should rather love then hate such a
wise reprover.

Verse. 13. As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, etc.] That is, As the
cold of snow in harvest (supposing it should then unexpectedly and miraculously
fall,) or, As cold as sharp as that in snowy weather, or that is caused by
winds that come from Northern snowy countries, or the hills and mountains where
the snow lies all the year long, does exceedingly refresh men in the heat of
summer, especially those that labor at harvest-work; or rather, As when men
have cooled their hot wines or any other drink by setting it in the snow, (as
they do in Spain and other hot countries, where they reserve it from winter to
summer, or have it continually brought down to them from the tops of the
mountains) this must needs exceedingly revive and refresh them in their drought
and heat: so is a faithful messenger to them that send him; to wit, both in
regard of that hope and confidence they have in him, which does somewhat
refresh and ease their hearts in the midst of all their cares and fears, as at
the very time when they do send him, so also all the time he is away from them;
and likewise especially in regard of the good account that he is sure to give
at his return, of the faithful dispatch of their business, which after such
eager expectation, such longing and languishing desires, must needs be a great
refreshing to them, and most of all if by his diligent dispatch he returns
before he was expected.

Verse. 14. Who so boasts himself of a false gift, etc.] To wit, by promising
great things, which he never performs: is like clouds and wind without rain;
because as such clouds and winds put men in hope of rain, but yield none, and
so by the disappointment of men's hopes, their grief is the greater; so is it
when a man promises great matters, and fails those that thereupon expected
much from him. But yet some conceive that this may be understood also of those
that boast of gifts and graces and endowments, which indeed they have not.
However such men, in regard of their aerie emptiness and high-flown pride, and
loftiness of carriage, and withal their lightness and inconstancy, may well be
compared to bustling mutable winds, and high-flying clouds, that never yield a
drop of rain. And it may well be also that it is with reference to this place
the Apostle Jude verse. 12. compares false teachers to clouds without water,
carried about with winds: because such men, though they usually make a great
vaunting show of high-flown notions, and much that is in them above other men;
yet indeed they are mere vapors and empty nothings, unstable and changing with
every wind, and all the glorious promises which they make to their disciples of
pardon of sins, peace and liberty, are empty and deceitful. 2. Pet. 2.19.

Verse. 15. By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, etc.] That is, say some
Expositors, When a Prince does for a while forbear pouring forth his rage upon
those with whom he is offended, his anger will cool by degrees, and then he may
be easily persuaded to what is fitting. And if we thus understand this clause,
then the next, and a soft tongue breaks the bone, may be accordingly meant of
a princes prevailing with a stiff, stubborn and tumultuous people, by fair and
gentle language. But I rather understand the first clause of the forbearance of
subjects or servants toward their prince, to wit, that if they can with
patient silence bear whatever the prince says or does to them, forbearing to
manifest the least discontent either by word or gesture, yea a while forbearing
to beg pardon, this is the best way to pacify and persuade them. And to the
same purpose is the following clause, that a soft tongue, that is, a soft
answer, as it is chap. 15.1. mild and lowly language, breaks the bone; that
is, overcomes the stoutest, the most stern and rigid men, that otherwise would
never bend nor yield, and so appeaseth the greatest and hardest anger. There
may be herein an allusion to some precious oil, that will not only supple the
flesh, but also soak to the very bone, and have some operation thereon. But
questionless the drift of Solomon in the expressions here used was to
represent it as a strange thing, that so soft a piece of flesh as the tongue is
should break a hard bone.

Verse. 16. Have thou found honey? eat thou so much as is sufficient for thee;
lest thou be filled, etc.] As if he should have said, Eat not excessively of
the most pleasing meats; or more generally, be moderate in the use of those
things, which for the sweet pleasure and delight they yield, men are naturally
prone with much eagerness to desire, lest exceeding therein, they prove at
last in the effects thereof bitter and distasteful, hurtful and dishonorable
to you. But now many expositors conceive, that the lesson intended hereby is,
that when a man has met with a friend, whose conversation is pleasing and
delightful to him, he must be careful that he be no way burdensome to him:
and so accordingly they hold that the meaning of this similitude is set forth
in the following verse, Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, or, Let
thy foot be seldom in thy neighbors house; lest he be weary of thee and hate
thee.

Verse. 18. A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, etc.] To
wit, either by spreading abroad false reports of him, or by testifying any
thing that is false of him before a magistrate: is a maul, and a sword, and a
sharp arrow; that is, he is by all manner of means mischievous to his
neighbor, both to his person, his estate and good name; or, he is of all
things the most mischievous to men, the wounds he gives are most deadly and
incurable; that which he does is all one as if he should beat out a man's brains
with a club, or cut his throat, or let out his bowels with a sword, or strike
his heart through with an arrow: and that not only because a man's good name is
more precious to him then his life, but also because by false witnesses the
very lives of men are often taken away.

Verse. 19. Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken
tooth, and a foot out of joint.] To wit, because it will both fail a man in a
time of need, and likewise put him to much sorrow and misery, as a broken tooth
will do when a man comes to chew his meat with it, and as a foot out of joint
will do when a man offers to go upon it: and that not only because it must
needs exceedingly vex and fret a man that he did put confidence in such an one;
but also because such faithless men do often in stead of helping their friend
in his misery, become most cruel and deadly enemies to him; at least they are
wont to cast some aspersions or other upon him, whom in his distress they
forsake, as desiring thereby to excuse or justify themselves. Some make the
ground of the similitude to be this, that as a broken tooth and a foot out of
joint use to be full of pain in foul weather; so confidence in an unfaithful
man brings great grief and misery upon men in the hour of affliction. But the
former explication of the similitude is far the clearest.

Verse. 20. As he that takes away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar
upon nitre, so is he that sings songs to a heavy heart.] I know that most of
our best Expositors do own a Translation of the words here in the Original,
that is quite contrary to this in our Bibles, to wit, that As he that puts
on a garment in cold weather, and powers vinegar upon nitre, so is he that
sings songs to a heavy heart. And indeed according to this Translation the
meaning of the Proverb is very plain: to wit, that as the putting on of
garments in winter does keep off cold, and warm the body, and as nitre is
dissolved and wasted by vinegar; so does music and singing and words of
consolation allay or drive away the bitterness of a grieved spirit. But now
according to our Translation, the sense of this Proverb must needs be directly
opposite to that: to wit, that music and singing, and all other things tending
to mirth and cheerfulness, are altogether unfitting and unseasonable for a man
in great heaviness, and do increase the misery of him that was in misery
enough before; even as it must needs be unfitting and unseasonable to strip a
man of his garments in cold weather, and to pour vinegar upon nitre. Indeed
because it is hard to determine certainly what this nitre was, therefore it
must needs be hard to show wherein the similitude consists, betwixt pouring
vinegar upon nitre, and singing songs to a heavy heart. It is usually said,
(and it is gathered from that which Pliny and other ancient Authors have
written hereof) that it was a kind of matter or substance, white in color like
salt, and bitter in taste, usually found in Judea and Egypt, there being a place
in Egypt that was thence called Nitria; that it was by the heat of the Sun made
of some kind of mould, or of rain or river-water in fenny countries, and was
often so compacted by the Suns heat, that it would be as hard as a stone; and
that it was commonly used, as in many physical ways, so also for clearing the
skin of spots and freckles, and especially for the cleansing of woollen or
linen clothes, and the taking out of stains and bloches that were in them,
which is indeed evident by that of the Prophet Jer. 2.22. Though thou wash thee
with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me,
says the Lord God. Now hence we may in part conceive, why the singing of songs
to a heavy heart is compared to vinegar upon nitre: to wit, either 1. because
as vinegar does hinder the cleansing quality of nitre, stains clothes, making
them fowler rather then cleaner, and does also in other respects hinder the
virtue of the nitre; so is the singing of songs rather a trouble and vexation,
then any refreshing to a man overwhelmed with sorrow: or 2. because as vinegar
does dissolve and mar the nitre, and being poured upon it makes it burn and
smoke and crackle, as lime with us will do when water is poured upon it; so
songs and merriment do even melt the grieved soul, and are so far from
allaying, that they rather mightily increase a man's heaviness. Besides that
naturally passions opposed are wont to grow more violent: in the case here
mentioned the heavy heart is apt to be afflicted, because others do not
compassionate him in his miseries, and apt to suspect that they make his misery
the ground of their songs and rejoicing.

Verse. 21. If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat, etc.] That is, any
food that is requisite for him: whence it is that the Apostle Romans 12.20.
renders this in more general terms, Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed
him. And under this is comprehended the doing of any other office of love or
courtesy for an enemy, which he stands in need of; as is evident by that which
the Apostle adds in the forecited place verse. 21. Be not overcome with
evil, but overcome evil with good.

Verse. 22. For thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, etc.] That is, say
some, Hereby thou will cause him presently to cast away all hatred, and all
thoughts of evil intended against thee, out of his heart, as a man, if coals
of fire should be poured upon his head, would immediately strike or shake them
off. And again, others understand it simply thus; that by thus returning good
for evil to enemies, men shall manifest very ardent love to them, which God
will surely requite, as is expressed in the following words, and the Lord shall
reward thee. And others likewise thus; that hereby men shall cause the hearts
of their enemies to burn within them either with terrors of conscience, grief,
vexation or shame, appearing outwardly in the fiery blushing of their faces,
because they have formerly hated and injured those that now have manifested
such wonderful goodness and love to them; or else with fervent love toward
them, whom they have formerly hated with a deadly hatred, and so of enemies
shall become their friends. Yea and the most of Expositors also hold, that this
expression of heaping coals of fire upon an enemies head may imply, that if he
be not overcome by so many multiplied kindnesses heaped one upon another,
feeding him when he is hungry, and giving him drink when he is thirsty, etc.
this will bring the curse of God, yea the more heaps of wrath and punishments
upon him. And thus Solomon, say they, sets down together what the effect of
this would be, 1. upon his enemy, if he proved irreconcilable, to wit, that God
would punish him; and 2. upon himself, and the Lord shall reward thee. But I
rather think that in this figurative expression there is an allusion, either to
a way that ancient Physicians had of curing apoplexies and phrensies, that
proceeded from cold causes, by applying coals of fire to their heads; or else
rather to the custom of founders, who by making great fires upon their metals,
yea though it be the hardest iron or steel, do thereby melt them: and so that
which is hereby employed is, that by showing kindness thus to an enemy, a man
may cure him of all his former rancour; or else, that if an enemy be not wholly
dross, if there be any metal of ingenuity or good nature in him, this would
make him melt, and relent, and of an enemy become a friend. Nor do I see but
that hereby also might be employed, that if with this an enemy were not as
silver and gold melted and purged, then he would be as dross burnt up and
consumed: for though a man ought by no means to make this his aim in doing
good to an enemy, yet that does not hinder but that Solomon might show us that
thus it will be.

Verse. 23. The North Wind drives away rain; so does an angry countenance a
backbiting tongue.] This is plain. But now this may be read, as it is in the
margin of our Bibles, The North Wind brings forth rain (and so the Rabbis
say it does in Judea, because of the watery clouds that are engendered by the
Mid-land Sea that lies on the North-west of that country;) so does a
backbiting tongue, that is sharp and bitter as the North Wind, an angry
countenance, that is, a frowning cloudy discontented countenance: and that
either 1. in those that are slandered and back-bitten by it; or 2. in those who
upon slanderous tales reported to them, look angerly upon those that never
deserved it at their hands; or 3. in those that by their angry looks intend to
discountenance all tale-bearers, and send them packing away.

Verse. 24. It is better to dwell in a corner of the house top, then with a
brawling woman, etc.] See the Note Chap. 21.9.

Verse. 25. As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far
country.] See the Note above verse. 13. It is said here from a far country, 1.
because the businesses are for the most part very weighty about which we send
into far countries; 2. because we hear seldom from thence, and so the longer
we wait, and the greater our fears have been, the more welcome are good tidings
from thence when they come. And this doubtless Solomon knew by experience, by
reason of the navies which he sent forth into countries far remote from
Jerusalem, 1 Kings 9.26, 27, 28. see also the Note above verse. 13.

Verse. 26. A righteous man falling down before the wicked is as a troubled
fountain, and a corrupt spring.] A righteous man in regard of his purity, the
delight that men take in him, and the manifold great benefits that redound to
many by him, may well be compared to some clear and pleasant spring that is for
public use; see the Note Chap. 10.11. And accordingly, if by a righteous man
falling down before the wicked, we should understand (as many do) a righteous
man overcome, banished, imprisoned, or otherwise oppressed by wicked men, he
may well be compared to a troubled fountain, and a corrupt spring, that is, a
fountain or spring that is mudded, or stopped up with mire and filth; and that
because he is thereby unjustly dishonored and disgraced, and kept from doing
much good which otherwise he would do, and that by wicked men who are vile and
base: and it must needs be judged to be against all right and reason, a very
sad and deplorable thing, when men that are such public blessings should be
thus suppressed and oppressed, when such precious fountains shall be thus
mudded by the insultations of such wretches, as by the feet of so many beasts
trampling upon them. Or 2. if by a righteous man falling down before the
wicked, we understand, as others do, a good man so falling into any gross and
scandalous sin, that wicked men take notice of it, it may well be said that he
is as a troubled fountain, and a corrupt spring, that is, a mudded fountain,
or, a spring marred with the mixture of any unwholesome waters, or by the
casting in of any poison or carrion into it: and that both because such a man
does hereby loose his former honor and credit, and is dishonored and
disgraced, (for wicked men will be sure in such a case to insult over him, and
to spread abroad and aggravate his sin by all possible ways;) and likewise
because he becomes hereby either hurtful, poisoning and corrupting others by
his example, or at least useless or unprofitable, in that men will no more
thenceforth hearken to any instruction or advice of his, then they will drink
of mudded or stinking water. But rather the righteous falling down before the
wicked, here intended by Solomon, is a righteous man crouching and bowing
before a wicked man in any way of servile flattery, or yielding by any way of
base compliance to his commands, or that falls from his integrity for fear of
his wrath, or in hope of his favor; either by neglecting to do his duty (as
when he shall not dare to reprove him, or to make profession of the truth,
etc.) or by doing any thing against conscience, which he knows to be evil.
And he is said to be as a troubled fountain, and a corrupt spring, because
those natural corruptions, that lay before in him, as so much mud or gravel at
the bottom of a clear fountain, being stirred up by the seducements of wicked
men, the purity of his soul and life is hereby mudded with carnal respects and
worldly interests; and so he that was before highly honored, and a great
Blessing to the place where he lived, becomes hereby (which is a thing very
lamentable) worthless and base, rather hurtful then profitable to any.

Verse. 27. It is not good to eat much honey, etc.] That is, it is very hurtful,
in that it breeds choler, and so brings men into many dangerous diseases; but
see the Notes chap. 17.26. and 18.5: so for men to search their own glory, is
not glory; that is, for men to seek the praise and applause of men, or any
place of honor and dignity above others, (which are naturally indeed to men as
sweet as honey) is so far from being an honor and glory to men, that it is
rather base and dishonorable. To enjoy any of these upon due cause is a
blessing from God; but ambitiously to hunt after them* and not to seek the
glory of God only, is vainglory, and makes men vile and despicable: the more
men labor for them, the more unworthy they are of them.

Verse. 28. He that has no rule over his own spirit, etc.] See the Note chap.
16.32. is like a city that is broken down and without walls; that is, he is
continually in desperate danger: to wit, because as when a town is dismantled
of her walls, any ^ody may go out and come in at their pleasure, which often
brings ruin to it, and it lies always open to the incursion of enemies; so
when a man has no command of his corrupt affections, many things proceed from
him in word and deed, which bring mischief upon him, and his enemies, evil
spirits and wicked men, may at all times break in upon him, and prevail over
him, and bring him into bondage, and make him do whatever they please. Man
was once in the state of innocence, as a well-walled city: but Satan having
broken down this wall by the sin of our first parents, unless it be repaired
again by renewing grace, every man, by reason of the violence of his corrupt
passions, is continually liable to be made a prey to his spiritual enemies.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 1. AS snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, etc.] See the Note 1 Samuel
12.17: so honor, that is, praise and preferment, is not seemly for a fool; to
wit, 1. because they belong not to him; they should be the reward of wisdom
and virtue; disgrace and dishonor are fitter for him; and therefore it is
against justice and reason that such should be honored: 2. consequently,
because it is unsuitable, it is uncomely, enough to offend those that behold
it; so far it is from being any ornament to him, that it makes his folly the
more to be taken notice of: and 3. because a fool knows not how to make use
of it, but will rather be sure to abuse it, both to his own hurt, being puffed
up thereby, and to the hurt of others. And indeed, as snow in summer and rain
in harvest are the curses and scourges of God upon a land; so are wicked fools
when exalted to places of honor: and as snow in summer would be looked upon as
a kind of ominous thing; so may we look upon the advancement of such men, as
presaging much evil to the places where they live.

Verse. 2. As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse
causeless shall not come.] Many several ways this similitude may be applied,
and that not without good probability. For the meaning may be, 1. that as no
man can appoint the flying bird where it shall light and rest it self, but it
wandreth and roveth up and down where it pleases; so neither can any man by
cursing cause any evil to fall upon him that has not deserved it: 2. that as
the flying and roving of a bird in her flight can no way hurt a man, and is
therefore no way to be feared; so neither can any body be the worse for a
causeless curse: 3. that a causeless curse never comes to any thing, but
passes away with a breath, and as a bird flies away in the air: and 4. that
as birds, when they see the fowler, the nets, snares or pit-falls that are set
for them, do easily by flying get away, and save themselves; so shall a man be
always secured from a causeless curse, it shall never come nigh him, he needs
not fear it.

Verse. 3. A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, etc.] To wit, that the
rider may rule and turn him, which way he pleases, (for Solomon speaks here
after the custom of his own country, where they used horses either only or
chiefly in the war, or for drawing, and asses to ride on:) and a rod for the
fools back; for which see the Note Chap. 10.13.

Verse. 4. Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto
him.] And then it follows in the next verse, Answer a fool according to his
folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit: and yet there is no contradiction
betwixt these two sentences, but they may both be reconciled together; and that
three several ways. For the meaning may be, 1* that men must not answer a
fool according to his folly, to wit, by way of consenting to him, flattering or
encouraging him in his folly and wickedness, lest hereby they become partakers
with him in his folly and wickedness: but that they must answer a fool
according to his folly, to wit, by giving him such an answer as his folly or
wickedness requires, as namely, by reproving him, and discovering his folly
to him, etc. lest by sparing him he be puffed up in his own conceit. Or 2. that
according as the folly of a wicked fool is, sometimes men ought not to
vouchsafe him an answer, and sometimes it is sit on the other side that they
should answer him; circumstances of time, and place, and persons, and things,
must be all duly herein observed. As for instance, if he be known to be an
incorrigible scorner, see Chap. 9.8. or if he be a half-headed man, or one
distempered with drink, that knows not well what he says, or if he be one that
is of a contentious spirit, that will not be convinced nor yield whatever is
said to him, or that he be in the company of profane scoffers, in this case he
that should answer him would thereby become like unto him, seeing it would be
manifest folly to be so far moved with his words, as to vouchsafe him an
answer, or at least to answer him so unseasonably; and it would be to no more
purpose to instruct and admonish or reprove such a one, then it would be to
hold a candle to a blind man, to talk to a deaf man, or to instruct a bruit
beast: yea and besides, by undertaking to answer such an one, a man may be
drawn to break forth into many words (wherein there is usually some folly or
vanity, Eccles. 5.7.) or into passion and anger, and it may be to blows, and so
be as culpable in point of folly as the other was whom he undertook to answer.
But then on the other side, if a man perceives that by his silence the glory of
God may be obscured, or some scandal and offense may be given, or that the
fool be like to conclude from hence that he is in the right, and so to become
thereby the more insolent, and to do the more mischief, then it is fit he
should reprove the fool, and make him know his absurdities and folly, that he
may not grow wise in his own conceit. Or 3. that a man must not answer a fool
according to his folly, that is, he must not answer a fool foolishly, to wit,
neither by conforming himself to his vain jangling, and weak manner of
reasoning, nor by speaking rashly and furiously as he did, nor by returning
scoffs for scoffs, and reviling for reviling; because hereby the answerer
will show himself to be as very a fool as the other: and yet that a man must
likewise answer a fool according to his folly, namely, by confuting his errors,
and reproving his misdemeanors, with all wisdom and gravity, that he may see
his folly, lest otherwise he continue in his ignorance and folly, and be
withal wise in his own conceit. And indeed this last Exposition I like the
best. But withal I may add, that some make the sense of both verses to be
this; that a fool ought not to be answered with words, but with a rod and
correction.

Verse. 6. He that sends a message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the
feet, etc.] That is, he is as one that cutteth off his own feet: to wit, either
1. because he carries himself as if he had no feet, since no man that were
able to go himself, would not rather endure the pains of that journey, then
commit a business of moment and weight to the trust of a fool; or, 2. because
by the folly of his messenger he has brought his affairs into such a desperate
lost condition, that he can no more hope by going afterward himself to bring
his business into a better estate, then he could hope to go, when he had
already cut off his feet; or 3. because he does thereby greatly hurt himself,
or bring great vexations upon himself, yea it may be loses his very life; or
rather, he is as one that should cut off a man's feet, and then send him on a
message, it being as impossible that a fool should well manage any message
committed to him, as that a man should go without feet. As for the following
clause, and drinks damage or violence, the meaning of that must needs be,
either 1. that he must be content to swallow down all the damage that shall
befall him in his estate, his good name, or any other way, by his messengers
folly in the ill-ordering of his business; or, 2. that he must needs be filled
with sorrow and discontent for the damage that redounds to him, by entrusting
such an one with such weighty affairs, the miscarriage thereof being as
grievous to him, as if he had drunk something that agrees not with his
stomach; or 3. that he usually undergoeth trouble thereby, in that through the
folly of his messenger, they to whom he was sent being highly enraged, do often
fall upon him some way or other with a great deal of violence.

Verse. 7. The legs of the lame are not equal, etc.] And consequently by reason
of his halting caused thereby, and the writhing of his body now one way and
then another, his going is very uncomely: so is a parable in the mouth of
fools; that is, it no way becomes them; see the Note chap. 17.7: and that
especially, because the wise and holy sentences, and Scripture-expressions
which such men will often have in their mouths, do not suit well neither 1.
with the wickedness of their hearts; nor 2. with their uneven walking in their
lives and conversation; nor 3. with their other speeches, as when they curse
and swear and lie, etc; nor 4. with those things to which they do usually apply
them: and that because a fool knows not how to frame a comparison or
similitude, but if he undertaketh to do it, as we use to say, it halts most
grossly; and when he would make use of any wise sentence, he does it for the
most part lamely. So that in a word, as sitting is most comely for a lame man,
so is silence most comely for a fool.

Verse. 8. As he that binds a stone in a sling, so is he that gives honor to
a fool.] This may be understood several ways: as 1. that as it is a foolish
thing, and mere lost labor, to bind or fast to tie up a stone in a sling,
because when a man comes to whirle the sling, the stone so fastened in it will
not be thrown out; so it is to no purpose, and mere lost labor, to give honor
to a fool, because he will never be able to make any good use of it: or 2. that
honor by way of praise or preferment given to a fool is as a stone put into a
sling, that is presently cast out and lost; and that because a fool will soon
by his folly forfeit his preferment, and wipe off his praises, and show that
they no way belonged to him. But now this Proverb may be read, as it is in the
margin of our Bibles, As he that puts a precious stone in a heap of stones,
so is he that gives honor to a fool: and then the meaning must needs be, that
as it is an act of great folly to put a precious stone or jewel into an heap
of ordinary stones, that is no place for it, there will no notice be taken of it
there, but it is like to be trampled under feet and lost; so it is an absurd
and foolish thing to bestow honor upon a fool, and that because honor so
disposed no man will esteem, neither is honor there in its proper place; it is
as if a man should hang a smoky kitchen with curious tapestry hangings, or set
a chamber pot upon the cupbords head amongst the plate. See the Note above
verse. 1.

Verse. 9. As a thorn goes up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in
the mouth of fools.] If by the going up of a thorn into the drunkards hand be
meant the running of it into the flesh of his hand, then the meaning of this
proverb may be, either 1. that as a drunkard being besides himself, nor well
seeing or knowing what he does, whilst he thinks to catch at a rose, or any
other flower or fruit, does in stead thereof lay hold on some thorn or briar,
and so sorely pricketh and scratcheth himself, and is exposed to the laughter
and derision of all that are about him; so when a fool void of true wisdom and
understanding, thinks with a great deal of gravity to make use of some wise
parable, he does it so sillily, that he thereby wrongs and shameth himself,
and becomes ridiculous to those that hear him: or 2. that as a thorn runs up
into the hand of a drunkard, and yet he feels it not; so any wise saying in the
mouth of a fool tends to his shame, either because he does foolishly make use
of it, or because it discovers the wickedness of his life not agreeable
thereto, but yet all the while he never perceives it. But now if by the going
up of a thorn into the hand of a drunkard be meant, a thorns happening to come
into a fools hand, or his holding or lifting up a thorn or a goad in his hand,
then the meaning of the Proverb seems to be, that as a drunkard being deprived
of the use of his reason, and having such a thorn or goad in his hand, does
usually abuse it to his own hurt and the hurt of others, pricking and
scratching therewith, sometimes himself, and sometimes others that are about
him; so a senseless wicked fool is so far from well using any wise and holy
sentences, any religious speeches or passages of Scripture, that he does
usually pervert and abuse them, (according to that of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet.
3.16. where speaking of some obscure passages in Paul's Epistles, he says,
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction) and does thereby many ways hurt both
himself and others: himself, both because his perverting and profaning and
abusing of such holy sentences and speeches does notably discover his folly and
wickedness, to his shame, and may perhaps secretly gall his conscience, but
also because such a man's tongue shall condemn him, and his judgment shall be
the greater; and then others, not only because he seeks thereby to jear and
abuse the holy servants of God, but also because it must needs be a vexation to
every good man, to hear a wicked profane fool so basely and mischievously to
abuse sacred things, and because many are brought hereby even to abhor religion
it self. And this, I conceive, is the fairest exposition of the words. Only let
me add, that because by a parable in Scripture sometimes a taunting proverb is
meant, (see the Note Numb. 21.27.) therefore the meaning may be also, that as a
drunkard having got a thorn in his hand, is wont to lay about him therewith,
and does usually hurt both himself and others; so does a fool usually, when he
has gotten a taunting parable in his mouth, he is ready therewith to abuse
every man that comes nigh him, though indeed by reproaching others, he does
chiefly wrong and abuse himself.

Verse. 10. The great God that formed all things both rewards the fool, and
rewards transgressors.] This may be understood three several ways: as
namely, that the great God, who being the Creator, is therefore the Lord of
all the creatures, does 1. punish according to their deserts, both those that
sin through folly and ignorance, and those that sin wittingly and against
conscience; or 2. does reward any good done by such men with temporal
blessings; or 3. does give food and raime^t, and all other necessaries, both to
fools and to wicked ungodly men, as well as to the wise and righteous,
according to that Mat. 5.45. He makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the
good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust; and this he calls
rewarding them, because these outward things are such things as Lords are wont
to give to their bondslaves, as their pay for their labor. But now if we read
this Proverb, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, A great man grieveth all,
and he hireth the fool, he hireth also transgressors, then the meaning must
be, either 1. that usually the great men of the world do vex and oppress all
that live under their power, and to the end they may the better bring their
purposes to pass, are wont to hire for their soldiers, servants and officers,
the worst sort of men, both fools and knaves, both those that are void of all
true wisdom and goodness, and those that are desperately wicked, that will
not stick to aid them in all their detestable designs; or 2. that great men and
tyrants are wont to lay heavy taxes upon the people, and then to bestow what
they wrest thus from their subjects upon fools and parasites.

Verse. 11. As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool returns to his folly.]
This Proverb is cited by Peter, 2 Pet. 2.22. And the drift of it is to show, 1.
how filthy and loathsome a thing sin is, like a dogs vomit; 2. how abominable a
thing it is to return to a forsaken sin; 3. that usually fools forsake their
sins for a time, not because they begin to hate the sin, but merely because of
the terrors of their consciences, or some evil their sins have brought upon
them; as the dog casts up what he has eaten, not because he dislikes the meat,
but because it griped his stomach, and made him sick; and 4. how brutish wicked
fools are, that will return to those very sins, that have perhaps lately
brought such gripings of conscience and other great miseries upon them, even as
a dog licks up his vomit, forgetting the pains which a little before it had
wrought in his bowels.

Verse. 12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a
fool then of him.] That is, of a simple ignorant, or a wicked man: and that
because the one will be instructed, the other will not; the one sins of
ignorance, the other against knowledge: and then besides, God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble, Ja. 4.6.

Verse. 13. The slothful man says, There is a lion in the way, etc.] See the
Note chapter 22.13.

Ver. 14. As the door turns upon his hinges, so does the slothful upon his
bed.] That is, he turns now one way, and then another, but still continues in
his bed; as the door still continues upon the hinges. Which is said, either to
show the vanity of the sluggards good purposes, that though sometimes he may
move himself as intending to rise, yet presently he turns to his rest again;
or else the absurdity of his sloth, that though he be awake, and be weary with
lying, or have slept so exceeding long that his sleeps become short and
troublesome, and that makes him so often toss up and down, yet rise he will
not.

Verse. 15. The slothful hides his hand in his bosom, etc.] See the Note
chap. 19.24.

Verse. 16. The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit then seven men that can
render a reason.] The meaning may be, that 1. he thinks himself wiser then many
wise men dissuading him from his slothfulness, yea though they allege never
such clear and convincing reasons for that which they say, and therefore will
not hearken to them; or, 2. that he thinks he has more knowledge then the
wisest of men, even those that can render a reason of every thing they do or
say, or that can give prudent and fit answers to those that ask their advice,
and that therefore he needs not take pains to get knowledge, or go to these
wise men to be instructed by them, seeing he knows already as much as they;
or 3. that he thinks himself wiser then the wisest of men, because they toil
themselves and break their brains that they may attain to such wisdom, whereas
he the whilst takes his ease and pleasure, which he concludes to be far the
greater wisdom. See the Notes Eccles. 4.5, 6.

Verse. 17. He that passes by and meddleth with strife belonging not to him, is
like one that takes a dog by the ears.] That is, he deals as foolishly and
absurdly, as he that takes a dog by the ears: and that either 1. because, as
he that takes a dog by the ears does thereby unadvisedly and needlessly provoke
the dog, and expose himself to the danger of having the dog fly in his face,
and perhaps of being bitten sorely by him, and that both in regard that dogs
cannot endure to have their ears touched, especially when they are fighting or
otherwise enraged, and likewise in regard that it is a very hard thing to hold
a dog by the ears; so he that intermeddleth with strife that belongs not to
him, does thereby causelessly expose himself to much danger, ill language,
stripes and wounds being all that a man usually gets by such intermeddling: or
2. because, as he that holds a dog by the ears is in danger to be bitten,
whether he holds him fast or whether he lets him go; so he that meddleth in
this kind with other men's quarrels, is in danger to have either the one or the
other of the parties quarrelling to fall upon him; or he is like to suffer by
it, whatever course he takes; in that if he gives over the strife, the party
or parties, whom he had formerly so provoked to contend with him, will be
encouraged thereby to fly the more violently upon him, and if he pursues the
strife, he must then neglect his own affairs, and suffer all to go to wrack,
that he may follow the quarrel that has been causlesly thus raised betwixt
him and others. Now this may be meant of those that intermeddle with composing
of quarrels, if they do it rashly, foolishly, and without a just call to do
it; (for though in a prudent manner to seek to make peace between parties
contending be very commendable; yet it is not so if a man do it rashly, and
with rugged reproofs, men's ears in the heat of their contending being no more
able to endure that, then a dog will endure one to pluck him by the ears) and
therefore in so doing men are only like to bring mischief upon themselves: or
else rather it is meant of those that meddle in strife that belongs not to
them, to wit, by taking part with one against another, or by any way of blowing
the coals of contention between them, whereby men do indeed most causelessly
expose themselves to danger.

Verse. 18. As a mad man who casts firebrarnds, etc.] To wit, to set houses on
fire, or to mischief the persons of those at whom he throws them: arrows and
death; that is, other such like instruments of death.

Verse. 19. So is the man that deceives his neighbor, and says, Am not I in
sport?] That is, The man that does seduce, or in any fraudulent way wrong or
abuse his neighbor, and then thinks to excuse it by pretending sport and
merriment, is no otherwise to be esteemed then as such a madman: to wit,
because he is as mischievous as such an one can be, not caring what mischief he
does; seeing, as no man will punish or be offended with a distracted man when
he does such things, in regard that he knows not what he does, so he thinks
after the same manner to wipe off all blame from himself, by alleging that he
intended no evil, but that all was done in sport, and therefore would still be
accounted as a friend. Some Expositours limit this to such jesting and sporting
companions, as are wont to abuse those with whom they converse by words and
deeds, that pierce them to their very hearts, and then think to excuse
themselves with saying that all was done in merriment. But however the drift of
this Proverb is, to show that these kind of men are of all men the worst and
most unsufferable, and that such mad-merry men are carefully to be avoided as
so many Bedlams.

Verse. 22. The words of a talebearer are as wounds, etc.] See the Note chap.
18.8.

Verse. 23. Burning lips and a wicked heart are like a pot-sheard covered with
silver dross.] Some by burning lips understand lips that utter words full of
fiery hatred and fury, or lips that by slandering and backbiting are wont to
kindle strife amongst men; and by an evil heart, a malicious heart: and
accordingly they conceive that these are compared to a pot-sheard covered with
silver dross, only to imply that they are suitable the one to the other, as
silver dross is suitable to an earthen pot-sheard, both naught; such a man by
his words shows what he is, being stark naught both within and without. But I
question not but that by burning lips are meant glosing, fawning and flattering
lips, that make a show of a great deal of hot fervent love, but hiding under
them a false heart, that thinks otherwise then such lips make show of. And
accordingly these are said to be like a pot-sheard covered with silver dross,
because though such lips may make a fair show, as the silver dross does, which
silly people may take to be true silver; yet 1. in truth they are both
worthless and contemptible, no better then dross upon earth or dirt; and 2.
such counterfeit shows of love will be found to be but a cover of a malicious
heart, in regard that as the dross does not change the pot-sheard, and
therefore, either by the mouldring away of the dross or the breaking of the
pot-sheard, it will be ere long discovered what it is, so neither does such
flattering language change the heart, but it remains full of malice, which
will quickly some way or other discover it self.

Verse. 24. He that hates, dissembleth with his lips, etc.] To wit, as
concealing his hatred, and making perhaps a show of great love: and lays up
deceit within him; that is, he intends thereby to deceive him, and plotteth
to bring some mischief closely and cunningly upon him, waiting his opportunity
that he may the better effect it. Indeed the first clause may be read, as it is
in the margin of our Bibles, He that hates is known by his lips, etc. and then
the meaning must be, that though he has nothing but mischief and deceit in his
heart, yet he will not be able so to conceal it, but that it will be
discovered; either his very flatteries, being so gross and excessive, or at
least somewhat that will slip from him, will betray his malice. But the first
exposition is the best, as appears clearly in the following verse, When he
speaks fair, believe him not, etc.

Verse. 26. Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be showed
before the whole congregation.) Some understand these words thus; that when a
malicious man dissembleth his malice, if the man he hates be in likelihood to
be chosen to any place of honor, or, on the contrary, be called in question
for any thing in any public judicature, then such a dissembler, either to
prevent his advancement, or to hasten his ruin, will be sure to show himself,
and to lay on load upon him, and so his malice will be discovered and abhorred
by all men. But with the current of Expositours, I rather take it thus; that
the wickedness of a malicious dissembler shall be showed before the whole
congregation, that is, it shall be some way openly and plainly discovered, that
all men in a manner shall take notice of it. Or if we will understand it
literally of public assemblies, then the meaning must be, that such a
dissembler shall by some special hand of providence be wound in to vent his
malice in some way of villainy upon him, whom he has so long secretly hated,
for which being questioned, and punished by public order of justice, his
malice shall by that means be discovered before the whole congregation: or else
we must refer it to that great day of Christ's judging the world, when the
Lord will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts, 1 Cor. 4.5. But now if we read this
Proverb, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, whose hatred is covered in
secret, his wickedness shall be showed before the whole congregation, then
clearly the drift of the words is only to imply, that though he keeps it never
so close to himself, yet sooner or later it shall be known to all the people.

Verse. 27. Whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall therein, etc.] In those times
hunters were wont to dig pits, and then to cover them over cunningly, as if
they were firm ground, that so when the wild beasts they pursued were running
over them, they might fall into them and be taken. Now because whilst they were
digging these pits, the earth sometimes fell upon them and overwhelmed them,
and whilst they were pursuing such wild beasts, they did often themselves
unawares fall into these pits; in reference hereto, it is said of those that
fall into that mischief which they have contrived to bring upon others, that
whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall therein. And to the same purpose is that which
follows, and he that rolleth a stone, to wit, up hill, and with a purpose there
to do some mischief with it, it will return upon him; that is, it often falls
back upon him, and so destroies him. See also the Note Psalm. 7.16.

Verse. 28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, etc.] Either
the meaning is, that he that afflicts or hurts any man with a lying tongue, to
wit, by slandering him, or by flattering him, when he intends him mischief, or
by any other way of deceit or falsehood, does indeed, let him pretend what he
will, hate him whom he thus wrongs; or else rather, that he that has injured a
man by his lying tongue, does for ever after hate him whom he has thus
injured, and would be glad to see him utterly destroyed; and that because he
persuades himself that such a man must needs hate him, and fears lest he
should study revenge against him: and a flattering mouth works ruin; to wit,
by drawing men through his flatteries into those ways of wickedness which
prove their ruin, or by bringing his mischievous purposes the better to pass
thereby, the man that is flattered not fearing any thing, or by drawing in
others through his flatteries to promote his wicked designs. The drift
therefore of the Proverb may be, to show, either, that though the man that has
wronged his neighbor with his lying tongue, must needs inwardly hate him whom
he has thus wronged, yet he dares not seek his ruin, but by a way of
flattery; or else, that the flatterer does ruin men by his flatteries, as well
as he that afflicts them by his lies or false witness; only the one does it
openly, and the other secretly.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. BOast not thy self of to morrow, etc.] That is, of any thing thou
intendest to do, or any thing which thou think to have or enjoy to morrow:
for thou know not what a day may bring forth; to wit, either the present
day, or the morrow-day; thou know not what may happen this day to prevent
thine expectations to morrow, or what may come to pass to morrow contrary to
thine expectations this day. As no man knows what is in the womb of a woman
with child, till the child be born; so no man can tell what a day, which is
big, as I may say, with Gods decrees, will bring forth, till it suddenly comes
to pass. Now the drift of this Proverb is, to show the folly of all vain
boasting of future things, and likewise of all delaying to do what it is fit
should be presently done, upon pretense of doing it hereafter.

Verse. 2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, etc.] As if he
should have said, So behave thy self, that other men may praise thee; but
however praise not thy self. And indeed, unless there be a necessity for it,
as when it is for the vindicating of a man's own innocence, or when the not
doing of it is likely to tend to the hinderance of the truth, the hurt of the
Church, or the impairing of Gods glory, it is both an unseemly and an unfitting
thing for men to praise themselves. Besides that such praises may be justly
suspected, it discovers much vainglory and folly in him that does it; whence
it is that the Apostle Paul, being forced in his own defense to praise himself,
does often use that expression 2 Cor. 12. I speak as a fool. And to the same
purpose are the next words, a stranger, and not thine own lips. Yet some would
have it, that the word stranger is here added, because to be praised by a man's
own kindred, or near relations, is all one as if his own mouth should praise
him.

Verse 3. A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fools wrath is heavier
then them both.] Whether a fools wrath be expressed by some great mischief,
which may well be compared to some huge massy ston^e, or by many frequent
quarrellings and lesser wrongs, which may well be compared to a load of sand,
it is heavier the^ either stone or sand, that is, it is more intolerable and
harder to be born; and that because a fools wrath is usually causeless, and
against all reason, it is boundless and endless, there is no dealing with
such men, no pacifying of them: and it is also more mischievous to men, and
that especially because it crusheth and oppresses the minds and souls of men,
whose pressures are most grievous; neither are any indeed but the wiser sort of
men able to bear the burden of it.

Verse. 4. Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous, etc.] In the Hebrew it is,
and anger an overflowing, that is, it will not be kept within bounds, but
breaks out, and is like overflowing waters, that carry all before them with
unresistable violence: but who can stand before envy? or, jealousy? for which
see the Note chap. 6.34. The meaning is, that envy is more dangerous then
either wrath or anger: and that 1. because envy (which hides it self, as being
ashamed of its cause) does secretly seek the ruin of men, and so cannot be
avoided; whereas wrath and anger do presently show themselves: and 2. because,
whereas wrath and anger will of it self soon be over, and come to nothing, at
least they may be appeased, especially with benefits; envy is rather increased
by such means, and can no way be appeased, but is endless and boundless in
its rage. See the Note also chap. 14.30.

Verse. 5. Open rebuke is better then secret love.] By open rebuke is not meant
a public rebuke before many witnesses, (for that in many cases is not fitting)
but a plain and free reproof without any dissimulation, and to a man's face,
rather then behind his back. And this is said to be better then secret love,
that is, good will pretended, but no way expressed; or, not discovered as it
ought to be, by reproving men for their sins. And the reason is, because such
open reproofs discover the reprovers to be faithful friends, and tend to the
good of the reproved, which secret love does not. Yea this may be extended also
to the reproof of an enemy, that cares not how he shames a man by blazing his
faults openly: and thus even such reproofs may be said to be better, that is,
more profitable, then secret love.

Verse. 6. Faithful are the wounds of a friend, etc.] That is, the sharp and
piercing reproofs and chastisements of a friend; to wit, because they proceed
from an upright heart, and a sincere desire of the good of the party reproved,
and because men in so doing do the part of a faithful friend: but the kisses,
that is, the fawnings and flatteries, of an enemy are deceitful; or, as it is
in the margin of our Bibles, earnest, or, frequent; to wit, that under the
pretense of very fervent love, he may the better deceive.

Verse. 8. As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth
from his place.] This is several ways understood by Expositours: as 1. that
as a bird leaves not her nest, but to seek meat for her self and her young
ones; so neither ought a man to leave his calling and family, but upon such
necessary occasions: or 2. that as God by his providence feeds the bird that
thus flies abroad for her provision; so will God provide for the man that
seeks about in a lawful way to get a livelihood for him and his: or 3. that a
man who t^rries not at home, but wanders up and down abroad, not minding his
family, is like a bird that wanders up and down from place to place, and minds
not her young ones. But the truest and most genuine Exposition I take to be
this: that by a man that wandreth from his place is meant, a man that, out of
mere lightness and inconstancy, or out of timorousness, or any such like
cause, not having any just ground or warrant for it, is never contented with
his present state or condition or calling, but loves to be changing, and can
never stay long in one place or way; and that such a one is compared to a bird
that wandreth from her nest, that is, that leaves her nest, and is still
flirting abroad and roving from one place to another, to imply thereby, either
1. that such a man is no wiser, nor better stayed, then such a bird is; or 2.
that he is no more likely of his own accord to settle himself any where, then
such a bird is any where to repose her self; or 3. that as a bird is never so
safe as in her nest, (especially amongst the Jews, where God had provided that
a bird should not be molested in her nest, Deuteronomy. 22.6, 7.) being abroad she is
liable to manifold mischiefs, and does many times come short home; so it is
with those that are still leaping out of one place and calling into another:
whereas at home they lived quietly, and in the good esteem of their neighbors,
being got so abroad, they wander they know not where, and many times some
mischief befalls them. Yea and some think that Solomon spoke this principally
with reference to those birds that are wont to fly away from those regions
where it begins to be cold, into some warmer country; and that because such
birds at those times are wont to be killed in great numbers, and so are the
fitter to represent the danger of those that abide not in their calling, but
are ever seeking to change their condition.

Verse. 9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart; so does the sweetness of a
man's friend by hearty counsel.) See the Note Psalm. 55.14.

Verse. 10. Thine own friend and thy fathers friend forsake not, etc.] To wit,
neither the one nor the other; or, him that has been both the one and the
other: neither go into thy brothers house in the day of thy calamity; as if he
should have said, having such an ancient approved friend, in all thy straits
make use of him rather then any kinsman or brother; and that not only because
such friends do many times (though it be not always so) love more
affectionatly then brothers, but also especially, because such friends do
usually dwell together, (neighborhood being commonly the original of such
firm and faithful friendship) and so are able to help one another sooner, and
oftener, then a brother dwelling far off can possibly do: whence that last
clause is added, for better is a neighbor that is near, then a brother far
off; to wit, when a neighbor is such an ancient approved friend; or, this may
be spoken as arguing from the less to the greater, that if a neighbor, much
more a friend is better then a brother.

Verse. 11. My son, etc.] See the Note Chap. 1.8: be wise, and make my heart
glad; see the Notes Chap. 23.15. and 10.1: that I may have wherewith to answer
him that reproacheth me; that is, that by the discovery of thy wisdom in time
to come, I may be able to show the folly of those that now would reproach me,
for not giving thee good education.

Verse. 12. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, etc.] See the Note Chap. 22.3.

Verse. 13. Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, etc.] See the Note
Chap. 20.16.

Verse. 14. He that blesses his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the
morning, it shall be counted a curse to him.] I conceive that there is in these
expressions an allusion to a practice that was customarily used in those times,
namely, that flattering parasites were wont to go to the doors of great men,
and that very early in the morning before it was day, as affecting to outstrip
others, and to be the first in that service, and there with a loud voice, that
all the neighbors might hear them, to proclaim their goodness and bounty by
some forms of salutation or prayer, which were then used, as, Long live such
or such an illustrious Prince, etc. or, God save my noble worthy bountiful
benefactor or Patron, etc. or such like. And by saying that when a man thus
blesses his friend, it shall be counted a curse to him, Solomon's meaning is,
that as this, so all other unseasonable and immoderate praisings of men to
their faces, and in the hearing of others, are no better, nor can be any better
esteemed or endured by wise men, (and much less is God like to esteem
otherwise of them,) then if they were so many direct imprecations: and that 1.
because such ways of praising men cannot but be discerned to be palpable
flatteries, and that men do it merely to curry favor with such great ones,
whereas indeed they do rather hate and curse them in their hearts; 2. because
if a man should accept of such flatteries, men might have just cause to account
him a vainglorious fool, one that affected to be praised, yet could not
discern betwixt those that praised him, and those that did only delude and
deride him; and 3. because such flatteries do exceeding much hurt to those that
are so flattered in spiritual respects. Yet some understand that last clause,
it shall be counted a curse to him, thus; that such a way of praising a man's
friends shall prove a curse to him that so praises them, in that every one
shall count him a fawning parasite, which shall be much to his reproach.

Verse. 15. A continual dropping in a very rainy day, and a contentious woman,
are alike.) See the Note Chap. 19.13. Yet the meaning may be also, that as the
one will not suffer men to stay abroad, so neither will the other suffer them
to abide within doors.

Verse. 16. Whosoever hides her, etc.] That is, Whosoever goes about to order
her so, that she may not discover her outrage by her chiding and brawling, or
at least that her loud outcries may not be heard, and that so it may not be
known what she is, both to her own and her husbands shame, as namely by using
her with all possible kindness and gentleness, that she may not be angry, or
by not answering her again, or by seeking to pacify her when she begins to be
angry, and to hush her brawling and scolding, or by shutting her up in some
place that neighbors may not hear her: such a one hides the wind, and the
ointment of his right hand, which bewrays it self; that is, he undertakes
that which is as impossible, as if he should undertake to shut up the whistling
wind in any place, or to hold it in his hand, that it should not blow, and that
the noise thereof should not be heard, or to hold some odoriferous ointment so
fast in his hand, as not to suffer so much as the smell thereof to go forth:
for as there is no restraining of the winds blowing, who has gathered the wind
in his fist? says Solomon afterward Chap. 30.4. where it gets into a room, we
see it will get through every cranny, and the more opposition it meets with by
any thing that stands in its way, the more violently it blows; and as there is
no hiding of such an ointment in ones hand, because being pressed by a warm
hand it will slip the sooner through the fingers, and the sweet savor of it
will the more spread it self all about; so neither is there any preventing or
suppressing the clamours of a contentious woman, but the more means is used to
that purpose, the more she will make the house to ring with her loud chiding,
yea the whole neighborhood round about.

Verse. 17. Iron sharpeneth iron, etc.] As namely, when all cutting tools are
sharpened by the file, and when by rubbing one sword or knife against another,
they are mutually made the brighter and sharper, and so do cut the better: so a
man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend; that is, say some Expositors, so
does a man by his rugged and wrathful looks, language and behavior, provoke
the anger of his dear relations, and make his friend look sowrely and sharply
upon him; or rather, so does a man by his presence and conference and
consolation, make the countenance of his friend smooth and quick and lively,
that was before, by reason of some affliction and sorrow that he lay under,
exceeding sour, dull and dejected. Yea it may be extended to all the benefits
that flow from the conversing of friends together: whereas men being alone by
themselves, are usually heavy and dull, and like a tool whose edge is blunted,
good in a manner for nothing; when they come to converse with their friends
face to face, by their mutual conferences, instructions, counsels and
exhortations, and by the good example they have one from another, they are
every way much bettered hereby; it brings them to be of a sharper wit, and a
more vigorous and quicker piercing judgment, their behavior in all things
becomes the more polished and refined, and they are continually provoking and
whetting on one another to good works, Heb. 10.24. For because all the
affections of men do much appear in their countenances, therefore in all the
particulars forementioned it may be well said, that a man sharpeneth the
countenance of his friend.

Verse. 18. Whosoever keeps the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof, etc.] That
is, He that diligently dresseth it, and preserves it from wind and cold and
all other annoiances, shall sooner or later reap the benefit of his labors in
the fruit he shall eat of it: so he that waits on his master; that is, that
constantly and diligently attends upon his person and business, and is
faithful and trusty therein: shall be honored; that is, he shall at last, if
not presently, be well rewarded and preferred, either by his master, or others
that shall observe his commendable qualities, or at least God will do it. The
drift of this Proverb is to show, either 1. that as there are ways and means
for householders to benefit themselves, so also for servants in their places; or
2. that servants must be content to wait for the recompense of their faithful
service, as the husbandman does for the fruit of his trees, after he has
bestowed much pains upon them; or 3. that it is as equal and just that a good
servant should be well rewarded and honored by his master, as that one should
eat of the fruit of that tree which he has carefully dressed and tended.

Verse. 19. As in water face answers to face; so the heart of man to man.]
That which some would have to be the meaning of this Proverb, that men's minds
and fancies differ as much as their faces, so many men so many minds, is
clearly made good in the several Expositions that are given of it, there being
very few that undertake to show the sense of it that agree in one and the same
Exposition. But the most probable Expositions that are given of it are these:
1. that the hearts of all men living are in regard of natural corruption as
like one to another, as the shadow of a man's face in the water is like to the
face whose shadow it is; in the heart of the wickedst men the best of men may
see, as in a mirror, what their own hearts naturally are: 2. that men's minds,
affections and dispositions, are many times as like, as in the water face is to
face; there is no man, but some other may be found that in regard of his inward
temper and disposition does exactly resemble him; if one man be of a cheerful
or sad temper, so are others; if one man does affect learning, or merchandise,
or husbandry, others may be found that are also just the same way inclined; and
the like may be said in many other particulars: 3. that as a man may see the
face of another man, in seeing the shadow of his face in the water, though he
do not directly see the man himself, but yet it is but very imperfectly; so men
may, by observing the outward behavior of men, and by the knowledge and
experience which they have of their own hearts, discover what is in the hearts
of other men, though it be but imperfectly, by guess and conjecture, rather
then by any clear discovery; see the Note Chap. 20.5: 4. that as in water,
natures looking-glass, if it be clear and still, men may truly see their
faces, though but imperfectly; so by reflecting and looking back into their own
hearts and minds, observing diligently wherein they do most frequently busy
themselves, and whereto they are most inclined, men may, as in a
looking-glass, truly, though but imperfectly, see themselves, the conscience
of every man, if it be clear and undisturbed, will truly tell him what he is;
for, says the Apostle 1 Cor. 2.11. what man knows the things of a man, save
the spirit of a man which is in him? and 5. that as the shadow of a man's face
in the water will be proportionable to his face, so men's affections will be
mutually answerable and proportionable to one another; and that because the
inward affections of men will discover themselves in their faces, and hereupon
men will be affected to other men, as they see other men affected to them; a
friendly heart will be answered with a friendly heart, and as men deal with
others, others will deal with them. Each of these Expositions has some good
probability in it: but the two first I like the best.

Verse. 20. Hell and destruction are never full, etc.) That is, hell and death,
or, hell and the grave; see the Note Job 26.6: so the eyes of man are never
satisfied; that is, the eyes of his mind are not satisfied with knowledge; or
rather, the eyes of his body are never satisfied with seeing: either they have
never enough of seeing that which they are delighted to see; or being glutted
with what they have seen, they still desire to see some new thing. But that
which I conceive is chiefly here intended is, that men's covetous desires after
earthly things, (which is called the lust of the eyes, 1 John 2.16. because all
earthly things are chiefly represented unto us by the eye) can never be
satisfied; they are still craving more, and are still disquieted, either
because they cannot have what they desire, or because being glutted with what
they enjoy, they still desire new things. The comparison here used by Solomon
seems to imply as much as if he had said, And why should we not then hate this
insatiable desire of earthly things, even as we would hate destruction and Hell?

Verse. 21. As the fining-pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, etc.] That
is, As these are used for the trying and purifying of silver and gold, see the
Note Chap. 17.3: so is a man to his praise. And this Expositors understand
several ways. For some take the praise given a man to be as the fining-pot
and the furnace, which discovers what a man is, and that either 1. because when
a man is every where commended and extolled, it is a sign that he is a man of
a good life, and one that has done many praiseworthy deeds; see the Note
Chap. 12.8; or 2. because by the men that praise him, it may be judged what he
is: if a man be praised by wise and good men, it is a sign that he is a good
man; but if wicked men praise him, it is a sign that he is also such as they
are. But then again others conceive, (and that methinks the words seem most
clearly to imply) that the man that is praised, is here compared to the
fining-pot and the furnace: and that either 1. because every man in his own
conscience, if he will deal faithfully with himself, is best able to judge
whether those praises be justly due to him, or whether there be a great deal of
the dross of flattery in the praises that are given him, according to that
Gal. 6.4, Let every man prove his own work, and so shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another; or 2. because a man's carriage of himself
when he is so praised will discover whether he be truly praiseworthy or no:
for if he be one that deserves them not, he will be exalted in his mind, and
carry himself vainly and proudly; whereas if he be a good man, he will be no
way puffed up with it, but rather be the more humbled, and even troubled to
hear himself so praised, ascribing all to the free grace of God; yea such a one
will endeavor thereupon to be really such as he is commended to be, and to
purge himself from every thing that is not agreeable to the praises that are
given, and to proceed on and to be more and more abundant in every good work.

Verse. 23. Be diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy
herds.] That is, leave them not wholly to the care of servants, but be thou
thy self careful over them, to see that they be every way provided for and
ordered, as it is fit they should be. And under this particular, a provident
care over men's estates in any other calling is likewise enjoined.

Verse. 24. For riches are not for ever, etc.] That is, If men be idle, and
negligent, and do not provide for the preserving of what they have, if men
continually spend upon the stock, and do not daily add to their estates by
some honest labor, the greatest estates that are will soon be wasted, and come
to nothing: and does the crown endure to every generation? as if he should have
said, Even the treasures of Princes will be exhausted at last, if they be
excessive in their expenses, and do not preserve their estates with care and
diligence; yea men in highest places of honor may be cast down from their
places of dignity, and so may stand in need of something that has been stored
up against future times.

Verse. 25. The hay appears, etc.] To wit, when it is meet and ready for
carriage; or rather, the grass in the meadows sprouteth out, which is to be
reserved for hay against winter: and the tender grass shows it self; to wit,
in the pastures which are for the summer feeding of the cattle: and the herbs
of the mountains are gathered; that is, the grass, and other herbs which the
mountains yield, are gathered for fodder, and other uses for the cattle and
family. And indeed the mountains may be mentioned only with respect to the land
of Israel, that was full of mountains. But now the aim of Solomon in reciting
these particulars is, to show the commodity which the husbandman shall reap by
the provident ordering of his estate; to wit, that being careful seasonably to
gather and store up the plenty which God of his goodness causes the earth to
yield in the summer, he shall not only have his cattle well supplied with food
for that season, but also lay up for them in store against the winter.

Verse. 26. The lambs are for thy clothing, etc.] That is, with the skins and
the wool of thy lambs and sheep, whether sold or made into cloth, thou may
provide all sorts of clothing for thy self and family; wherein also is
employed, that men should be content with such plain attire, and not wast their
estates in bravery above their condition; and the goats are the price of thy
field; that is, with the money which thou make of them, (and the goats some
say are particularly mentioned, because they might be better spared then the
sheep) thou may pay the rent of the ground which thou hirest; or, make full
as much of it, as another man would give for it, if it were thine own; or, hire
land also for tillage, and defray all the charges laid out therein; or, corn
for thy family, as well as if thou did keep tillage in thine own hands; or,
purchase lands for thee and thine heirs after thee.

Verse. 27. And thou shall have goats-milk enough for thy food, for the food of
thy house, and for maintenance for thy maidens.) Under this particular of
goats-milk (which some think is expressed, as that which is most nourishing and
wholesome) all other milk, and that which is made of milk, is comprehended, and
that as the food, wherewith the frugall husbandman shall do well to nourish
both himself and his servants.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. THe wicked flee when no man pursues, etc.) To wit, either merely by
means of the terrors of their own guilty accusing consciences; or it may be by
reason of some pannick fears wherewith they are in an extraordinany manner
stricken by God: but the righteous are bold as a lion; to wit, because they
have a good cause and a good conscience, do contemn all earthly things, are
comforted in Gods favor and protection, and by the spirit of God are usually
strengthened with incredible courage and boldness.

Verse. 2. For the transgression of a land, etc.] That is, For the general
folly and wickedness of a nation or state: many are the princes thereof; that
is, many at the same time striving one against the other for the supreme power,
or many in a short time succeeding one another; and that either because God by
his own immediate hand does quickly cut them off, or else because they are
often cut off by the insurrections and treacheries of others, that thereby get
into their places: which does usually bring great calamity upon the people, and
makes great havoc amongst them; partly by great exactions imposed upon them,
and partly by the shedding of much blood amongst them. But by a man of
understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged; that is, by a
man eminently wise: which may be meant, either of a wise prince, that uses all
good means to suppress or reform the wickedness of the people; or any other
wise man amongst the people, whether near to the Prince or otherwise, that by
persuading the seditious to be still and quiet, or by his counsel any other
way, may do that which may be much for the safety and good of a land. And so
the drift of the Proverb may be, to show, that when a land is endangered by the
general profaneness and folly of a nation, by the wisdom and piety of some
one man amongst them it may be preserved; or, that the welfare of a nation
shall be prolonged by men singularly wise and understanding and pious amongst
the subjects: Or, we may read it, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, by men
of understanding and wisdom shall they likewise be prolonged, that is, the
lives of the princes shall be prolonged.

Verse. 3. A poor man that oppresses the poor, etc.] As namely when a beggarly
judge or officer in some inferior place does abuse his power for the crushing
of some poor man, or when any other poor man does by false accusations, or any
other way of fraud or force, oppress; such an one is like a sweeping rain,
which leaves no food; to wit, because it washes away not only the fatness of
the land, but even the seed it self, and many times tears up by the roots, and
carries away the new-grown corn, and beats the fruit off the trees. Now
though the drift of this similitude may be to imply the unnaturalness of this
sin, in that as the rain, that should make the earth yield her fruit, does in
such a case destroy it; so the poor that should above others commiserate the
poor, do oppress and undo them: yet I conceive it is chiefly to imply how
boundless such men's oppression is; partly because such men are of a base and
sordid spirit, and partly because their own penury makes them insatiably
greedy; (even as we use to say, that a hungry louse will bite sore) where they
oppress a poor man they sweep all away: whereas the rich will not mind small
things; with such beggarly people all is fish that comes to the net, and what
they seize upon is presently swallowed down without all hope of recovery.

Verse. 4. They that forsake the law praise the wicked, etc.] And consequently
also they will reverence and favor them, justify them and take their part upon
all occasions: but such as keep the law contend with them; that is, they will
not only find fault with them, but they will also rebuke them sharply, they
will withstand them in the evil they would do, and cause them to be punished
for the evil they have done. But yet the drift of this Proverb may be to
imply, that though it be enough to prove a man wicked, if he be one that is
wont to praise and applaud wicked men; yet he that will approve himself a good
man, must do more then dispraise the wicked, he must contend with them.

Verse. 5. Evil men understand not judgment, etc.] See the Note Psalm. 37.28,
30. Through their own blindness and wilfulness, and the just judgment of God
upon them, they are not able to discern what is just and equal; and
consequently, whatever knowledge they may have in other respects, they may be
well looked upon as such as understand nothing: but they that seek the Lord; to
wit, by hearing the word and prayer, and by an earnest endeavor to approve
themselves, and to obtain his favor: understand all things; that is, all
things that are necessary to be known for the well-ordering of their lives, and
the attaining of life eternal.

Verse. 6. Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, etc.] That is,
he is a happier and indeed a richer man: then he that is perverse in his ways;
that is, then a wicked false-hearted man; see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.5: though he be
rich; see the Note Chap. 19.1.

Verse. 7. Who so keeps the law, etc.] And so in obedience thereto, and not
merely for worldly respects, avoideth the company of riotous persons; is a wise
son, and so an honor to his father: but he that is a companion of riotous men,
as being one that regards not Gods law; shameth his father, that is, he is a
foolish son, and so dishonors his father. See the Notes Chap. 10.5. and
27.11.

Verse. 8. He that by usury and unjust gain increases his substance, etc.] Or
by usury and increase, as it is in the Original: and then by usury may be meant
the taking of interest for the lending of money; and by increase, the taking of
an overplus for the lending of any other things, according to that Lev. 25.37.
Thou shall not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for
increase. He shall gather it for him that will pity the poor; that is, God
will not let him long enjoy it, but by his providence will some way bring it
into the hands of those that will do good with it.

Verse. 9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, etc.] That is, He
that wittingly and wilfully refuses to hear or obey the word of God: even his
prayer shall be abomination; see the Note Chap. 15.8.

Verse. 10. Who so causes the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall
fall himself into his own pit, etc.] That is, They that allure men to the doing
of any thing, whereby they hope to bring some evil or mischief upon them,
shall, through Gods just judgment, fall into that very mischief which they
hoped to bring upon the righteous: see the Note Chap. 26.27. I know that many
Expositors, by causing the righteous to go astray in an evil way, do
understand the seducing them into some way of error and heresy, or other
wickedness; and that of such it is said, that they shall fall into their own
pit, because those that mislead men out of the right way, into those crooked
ways that lead to the infernal pit, shall themselves also be cast into that
pit whereinto they have caused others to fall, according to that Matthew. 15.14.
if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. But I conceive it
is evident, that the first clause must be understood of misleading men into
some way of mischief, because of that following clause, he shall fall himself
into his own pit: Only in regard that usually men draw the righteous into the
evil of mischief, by seducing them into some evil way of sin, therefore both
may be included. But the upright shall have good things in possession; that is,
the righteous, whom they sought to ensnare, shall not only escape their snares,
and so continue to enjoy those good blessings for which they were maligned, but
they shall also possess the good of those that would have ensnared them; or
rather, they shall be blessed of God with all good blessings, both of this
world, and that which is to come.

Verse. 11. The rich man is wise in his own conceit, etc.] To wit, 1. because
finding how bravely he lives in every respect, and how he is honored and
applauded in the world by reason of his riches, he concludes that it was
wisely done of him to seek after riches, and not foolishly, out of a scrupulous
conscience, to neglect the doing of good to himself; 2. because he apprehends
that it has been merely by his own wisdom that he has gotten so great
riches; and 3. because riches do usually puff up men, and make them highly
conceited of themselves in every regard: but the poor that has understanding
searches him out; that is, he minds not his outward condition, nor is carried
away with the opinion and applause of others, but he weighs and examines
whether his speeches and actions be such, as do according to the rule of Gods
word argue him to be a wise man, or no, and accordingly he judges of him as he
is. The drift of the Proverb may be, to show that God gives riches to some,
and wisdom to others.

Verse. 12. When righteous men do rejoice, etc.] To wit, in the downfall of
wicked men, (as appears by the opposite clause) and because good men do prosper
and are exalted, whether themselves or others, see the Note chap. 11.10: there
is great glory; that is, both the Church and commonwealth in general, and the
estates of private men in particular, are in a prosperous and flourishing
condition; Religion is advanced, justice is executed, peace and plenty abounds,
and the glory of God is every where exalted: but when the wicked rise, a man is
hidden; that is, the good man, that indeed only deserves the name of a man,
lies close and hides himself, to wit, either for fear of oppression, or for
grief, not caring to stir abroad when he sees things in so ill a condition;
or, it may be understood more generally of all men, both good and bad, that in
such a case men are wont to hide themselves, either out of discontent, or for
fear of rapine and oppression. And to the same effect is that other
translation, which is added in the margin of our Bibles, when the wicked rise,
a man is sought for; that is, a good man is sought for, and cannot be found;
or, men are never in safety, but oppressors, whether the prince or others, are
continually hunting after them; the godly are sought for to be slain, and the
rich to be spoiled.

Verse. 13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper, etc.] That is, it shall
do him no good, as he hops it should, for the securing of him either from
shame or punishment; or, God will punish him for it without showing him any
mercy: for this is clearly employed from the following opposite clause, but
whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy, to wit, in every
regard.

Verse. 15. As a roaring lion and a ranging bear, so is a wicked ruler over the
poor people.] That is, in stead of being to them what a shepherd is to his
flock, as by his place he ought to be, he is a terror to the poor miserable
people, and does with insatiable covetousness and cruelty tear and devour
them, being herein like a hungry roaring lion, and a ravening bear. Yet by the
poor people here may be meant the poorer sort of people, whom to oppress is
the greatest cruelty, and who are notwithstanding oftenest devoured by such
tyrants, because they are least able to withstand or revenge their oppressions.

Verse. 16. The prince that wants understanding is also a great oppressor,
etc.] As if he should have said, he is also one of those that are to the poor
people as roaring lions and ranging bears, as was said in the foregoing verse;
or, as he is a fool, so he is also through covetousness a great oppressor,
and therefore shall not prolong his days: which is employed from the following
opposite clause, but he that hates covetousness, and so like a wise man does
not oppress his subjects, shall prolong his days; to wit, through the
blessing of God, and the love of his people.

Verse. 17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to
the pit, etc.] That is, he shall suddenly be brought to the grave, and till
then he shall be in continual terrors and fears: let no man stay him; that
is, let no man undertake to save him; or, no man shall be able to secure him.

Verse. 18. Whosoever walks uprightly shall be saved, etc.] To wit, from all the
evil designs of his enemies; from all dangers and mischiefs here, and from
eternal destruction hereafter: but he that is perverse in his ways shall fall
at once; to wit, so that he shall never rise again; he shall be suddenly,
utterly and irrecoverably destroyed. But see the Note chap. 10.9.

Verse. 19. He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread, etc.] See the
Note chap. 12.11.

Verse. 20. A faithful man, etc.] That is, The man that trusts in God, and is
constantly faithful in word and deed, shall abound with blessings; to wit,
because he is contented with his estate, and will not enrich himself by
unlawful means; see the Note chap. 10.6: but he that hastes to be rich, shall
not be innocent, or, unpunished; to wit, because he is an unfaithful man, and
will not forbear any thing whereby he may enrich himself; see the Notes chap.
20.21. and 6.29.

Verse. 21. To have respect of persons is not good, etc.] See the Note chap.
18.5: for, for a piece of bread that man will transgress; that is, if a man
make no more conscience of being exactly just, or, when a man has once against
conscience judged unjustly, with the least bribe that can be conceived will
such a man be corrupted.

Verse. 22. He that hastes to be rich has an evil eye, etc.] That is, he
grudgeth to part with any thing, and looks with a grudging malignant eye upon
those that receive any thing from him; or, he envieth and coveteth what others
enjoy, (see the Note chap. 23.6.) and consequently he will watch to bereave and
defraud others of what they have, not caring by what evil means he enricheth
himself: and knows not that poverty shall come upon him; that is, that
notwithstanding all his care to slay poverty, and to enrich himself, yet
poverty shall suddenly and unexpectedly surprise him, as well he deserves for
his griping from others, (see the Note chap. 20.21.) And consequently hereby
also is employed, that he little therefore considers, that he shall stand in
need of the compassion of others, and shall have as little shown him as he has
shown to others.

Verse. 24. Who so robs his father or his mother, and says, etc.] To wit,
either openly with his lips, or secretly in his heart, It is no transgression,
to wit, as concluding that children are to live upon the estates of their
parents: the same is the companion of a destroyer; that is, a manslayer and
murderer, (for so the word seems to be taken Exodus 12.23. Ezekiel. 9.1.) or a
thief and highway robber, or a plunderer in war, or a riotous spend-thrift and
waster, as the word is translated chap. 18.9. And the meaning is, that such an
one, under what vain pretenses soever he thinks to justify himself, yea though
it should be of giving that to God which he so steals from his parents, much
like that of the Pharisees Corban, Mat. 15.5, 6. he is no better then a thief
and robber, yea a murderer, and as such deserves to be put to death, according
to those laws Exodus 21.17. and Deuteronomy. 21.18, 21: and that because he robs them
of their livelihood, and breaks their hearts with grief. Yet some hold, that
Solomon by saying that such an one is the companion of a destroyer, intends to
show, either that it is by the persuasion of riotous spend-thrifts, with whom
he keeps company, and the base courses whereinto they draw him, that such an
one is brought to this wickedness of robbing his parents, or that such an one
is like to join himself at last even with cutthroat robbers.

Verse. 25. He that is of a proud heart, stirs up strife, etc.] See the Note
chap. 13.10. 1. because such an one out of pride of heart cannot bear the least
damage or injury done him by others; 2. because he will be prone causelessly to
think himself slighted and injured, if all be not done according to his own
mind; 3. because he will not rest upon God for the righting of him, but will be
his own avenger; 4. because having great thoughts of himself, he is eager still
to seek great things for himself, and in the pursuit hereof is ready to
oppress others, and be offended with those that any way hinder him in his
designs, therefore he will be still quarrelling and contending with others;
which as it must needs tend to the wasting of his estate, and cause him to pine
away with inward vexation of mind, so it often provokes God to pull him down:
which is employed from the following clause, but he that puts his trust in
the Lord; that is, he that being of an humble spirit, can patiently bear
injuries, and will by no means be injurious to others, as reposing himself upon
Gods careful providence over him: shall be made fat; that is, he will live
peaceably with all men, and by that means he shall abound with blessings; see
the Note chap. 11.25.

Verse. 26. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, etc.] That is, He that
relyeth upon his own corrupt wisdom and reason, (see the Note chap. 3.5.) or
upon his own strength and abilities any way, and so despises the counsel of
others, yea never minds the counsel and direction of God in his word, but
does whatever seems good in his own eyes, and confidently, rusheth into any
temptation and danger, he is a proud presumptuous fool, and shall surely fall
into many errors, and desperate inevitable miseries: as is employed from the
following opposite clause, but whosoever walks wisely; that is, warily and
advisedly, and according to the rule of Gods word, and the counsel of wise
men, and that having no confidence in himself, trusts in God, and in all
things seeks to God for a blessing: he shall be delivered; to wit, out of all
those dangers wherein otherwise he might have perished.

Verse. 27. He that gives unto the poor shall not lack, but he that hides his
eyes shall have many a curse.] That is, The poor people shall lade him with
imprecations, and God shall pour forth manifold plagues and miseries upon him.

Verse. 28. When the wicked rise, men hide themselves, etc.] To wit, by flying
their country, or concealing themselves in secret places; and that either to
avoid the tyranny of such Rulers, or else to decline those public judgments
which God is wont to bring upon people in such corrupt times: see the Note
above verse. 12. Yet if we understand the first clause of the righteous only,
then the meaning may be, that in such times there are but few righteous men to
be found, and that because all in a manner follow the example of their wicked
rulers. But when they perish, the righteous increase; to wit, not only because
those that before lay hid, do then appear again; but also because many others
are won into the ways of righteousness by their counsel and example; yea
also by observing the judgments that are fallen upon their wicked rulers, and
by the encouragement and good example they have from those good rulers, that
succeed in their room.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 2. WHen the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice, etc.] It may
be read also, When the righteous are increased: but this is included in the
other; for where the righteous are in authority, the number of the righteous
amongst the people will then increase: see the Notes chap. 11.10. and 28.12,
and 28. But where the wicked bears rule, the people mourn; that is, though it
may be they dare not openly complain, yet at least they secretly sigh and
mourn; to wit, not only because such rulers are usually great oppressors, but
also because the people for want of good order are then fearlesly injurious one
to another, and running into all kind of wickedness do cast themselves
headlong into the pit of destruction, and because the Lord also does usually
then plague such a people with manifold judgments.

Verse. 3. Whosoever loves wisdom, rejoices his father, etc.] See the Notes chap.
10.1. and 15.20. The love of wisdom is here opposed to the love of harlots, as
appears by the following clause, but he that keepth company with harlots,
spends his substance. See the Note chap. 5.9.

Verse. 4. The king by judgment stablisheth the land, etc.] That is, by
administering justice equally to all, he settleth both his kingdom and people
in a safe and flourishing condition: but he that receives gifts; that is, the
king that takes bribes, whether it be for the putting of men into places of
magistracy, or for the perverting of justice, by acquitting the guilty or
condemning the innocent: overthrows it; to wit, 1. because by such hope of
impunity men will be encouraged in their injurious dealings, and in all kind of
wickedness, which often proves the ruin of kingdoms; 2. because the people
do hereupon become mutinous; and 3. because such injustice will however provoke
God to destroy a people. That which is translated, he that receives gifts, is
in the Original, a man of oblations: and accordingly some understand this of
sacrilegious Princes, that seize upon those things which have been given to
God. And some Expositours conceive also, that because Solomon says not, a king
that receives gifts, but he that receives gifts, this is to imply, either
that such an one deserves not the name of a king; or, that bribe-taking
overthrows kingdoms, whether it be done by the king himself, or by his
subordinate officers.

Verse. 5. A man that flattereth his neighbor spreads a net for his feet.]
The meaning is, either 1. that flatterers are so far from being friends, that
they are no better then deadly enemies, in that they do that to those they
flatter, which is all one in effect as if they lay in wait to take away their
lives, to wit, because by flattering them in their vices, for which they should
reprove them, they encourage them to run on in those ways of perdition, and by
extolling them above measure, they puff them up with damnable pride and
self-conceit; or 2. that whatever flatterers may pretend, their aim is always
thereby to beguile and deceive those they flatter, and so to ensnare them, and
bring them into some danger, or to get them into their power, and to make a
prey of them, according to that of the prophet, Mic. 7.2. they all lie in wait
for blood; they hunt every man his brother with a net.

Verse. 6. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare, etc.] That is,
though he may promise himself safety and content in his wicked way, yet it will
bring judgments and terrors of conscience upon him; see the Notes Deuteronomy. 7.16.
and Prove. 5.22. and 11.5, 6. and 12.13. and Job 18.7, 8, 9. and so he shall
mourn and howl: which is employed by the following opposite clause, but the
righteous does sing and rejoice* to wit, because he is at peace with God, and
is free both from such snares and from the fear of them, and knows he has
just cause to rejoice even in his afflictions. But some do otherwise understand
this Proverb, as thus: In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare;
that is, he is ensnared by the evil he intends or does to the righteous: but
the righteous does sing and rejoice; to wit, both for his own deliverance, and
Gods just judgment upon the wicked; see the Notes chap. 11.10. and Psalm.
58.10. Or thus: In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare; because
he labors to draw others to partake with him in his wickedness: but the
righteous is delivered from this snare, and so rejoices.

Verse. 7. The righteous considers the cause of the poor, etc.] That is, If a
man be righteous, whether judge or private person, though he will not respect
the persons of the poor, yet he will carefully search into the justice of their
cause, and will accordingly help and relieve them; see the Notes Job 29.16. and
Psalm. 41.1: but the wicked regards not to know it; to wit, that he may the
more freely slight and oppress them.

Verse. 8. Scornful men, etc.] See the Notes chap. 1.22. and 8.8. and Psalm.
1.1: bring a city into a snare; that is, into desperate dangers, to wit, by
stirring up the wrath of God or the magistrate against the city, with their
obstinate and incorrigible wickedness and rebellion; or by provoking with
scornful and opprobrious words or usage, (as Hanun dealt with David's
ambassadors, 2 Samuel 10.3, 4.) any that may be stirred up thereby to come in a
hostile manner against them to ruin the city. But this may be read also, as it
is in the margin of our Bibles, Scornful men set a city on fire; to wit, by
kindling dissentions, or raising tumults therein; or by drawing down judgments
from God by their wickedness upon the inhabitants. But wise men turn away
wrath; to wit, the wrath of God, or the supreme magistrate, or any other
incensed against the city; as namely by appeasing mutinies, by their wise
counsel, by their prayers and righteous conversation, and opposing the
wickedness of others; and so they deliver the city from danger.

Verse. 9. If a wise man contended with a foolish man, etc.] To wit, as seeking
thereby to pacify him, or to reclaim him from any evil way, or to convince him
of any point of truth or right: whether he rage or laugh; that is, whether he
do it in a severe manner, with much vehemence of spirit, and with discovering
himself to be highly offended at the fools presumption and obstinacy, or
whether he do it with all mildness, in a smiling and jesting way, as pitying
and laughing at his impertinencies and folly: there is no rest; that is, he
shall never be able to quiet or content or satisfy the fool; or, he himself
shall never be quiet, nor shall be ever able to free himself from him. But yet
because the expressions here used of raging and laughing do better fit the
foolish then the wise man, I should rather understand that clause of him; to
wit, that when a wise man contendeth with a fool, whether the fool do rage
against the wise man, or whether he laugh and scoff at him, there is no rest,
that is, there is no quieting of him; or he is as insufferable to the wise man,
when he laughs and is in sport, as when he is furious and rages.

Verse. 10. The bloodthirsty hate the upright, etc.] That is, even the upright
man that is most harmless and innocent in his life; or, they so hate him, that
they will not spare his life: and that because his upright life does condemn
their wickedness; and because upright men are wont to oppose such bloody men,
and to endeavor to have them punished: yea this may imply also, that even in
hating him, they are no better then murderers in Gods sight. But the just seek
his soul, that is, they love the upright, and so seek to save his life, and so
rescue him from the malice of the bloodthirsty; or, they will require his life
of the bloodthirsty that have slain him, by bringing them to suffer for it:
yea and some understand it thus, that whereas the bloodthirsty hate and slay
the upright, the just and upright, on the other side, will seek to preserve the
life of the bloodthirsty man.

Verse. 11. A fool utters all his mind, etc.] See the Notes chap. 10.14. and
12.16, 23. and 14.33. and 15.28. and 17.27.

Verse. 12. If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked.] That is,
say some Expositours, he thinks them all such, because by those liars, to whom
he hearkens, they are reported to be such; or rather, they are usually wicked,
to wit, flatterers and slanderers, and such as will tell him all manner of
lies, as hoping thereby to please him and get his favor: And then besides 1.
Servants are usually such as are their rulers; 2. such rulers will, if it may
be, have no other servants; and 3. God does often in his wrath fit them with
servants suitable to their temper. Some conceive also, that it is not said, all
his servants are liars, but more generally, all his servants are wicked,
because lying is usually a covert for all kind of wickedness.

Verse. 13. The poor and the deceitful man (or, the usurer,) meet together,
etc.] That is, the poor and the rich, for he mentioned the usurer, or the
deceitful man, only, because rich men do usually get their great estates by
usury and deceit: the Lord lighteneth both their eyes; that is, they both live
by him, see the Note Psalm. 13.2. and he causes his sun to shine upon them
both; or, he shows mercy and gives the graces of his spirit equally to both,
without any respect of persons. But see the Note chap. 22.2.

Verse. 15. The rod and reproof, etc.] That is, either of them severally; or,
the rod, when it is accompanied with reproof: give wisdom; (so far is it from
making children fools, as fond parents are wont to say it will do) and
therefore such a child will be an honor to his parents, which is employed from
the following words, but a child left to himself brings his mother to shame;
to wit, through his folly and wickedness: see the Note, chap. 10.1.

Verse. 16. When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increases, etc.] To
wit, not only because there are then the more to transgress Gods laws, but
also because wicked men are wont to solicit others to sin, to encourage and
help one another in their wickedness, yea their very example is infectious;
and especially because the very multitude of the wicked is in it self a ground
of making them bold in all kind of wickedness, in regard that they are prone
to justify themselves in that they do, by the example of a multitude; at least
they become hereby fearlesse of being hindered in the evil they would do, or
of being punished for it when it is done, and may rather hope thereupon to be
countenanced and favored by many. And hence it is that the presumption of the
wicked Israelites is set forth by this, Hos. 4.7. As they were increased, so
they sinned against me. As for the following clause, but the righteous shall
see their fall, see the Note Psalm. 91.8. It is doubtless here added, either to
secure the righteous from being drawn away by the throng of the wicked, to the
increase of their transgressions; or to comfort them both against their fear of
being in danger in such times, and against their sorrow for such abounding
wickedness, and so likewise to beat off wicked men from hoping to escape
punishments because of their multitudes, by giving them to understand, that the
more their transgressions are increased, the more the measure of their sin is
filled up, and so the nearer they are to destruction.

Verse. 17. Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest, etc.] That is, though
it may be irksome and grievous to thee to do it, yet afterward it will free
thee from all those vexations which his former miscarriages had brought upon
thee; yea it will free thee from the fear of future trouble, because coming to
more years, he will be the more easily governed, so that thou may sleep
quietly, and when thy time comes thou may die the more peaceably. Besides it
may be meant of the rest which such a father may take in his old age, because
his son so made good by correction will so manage all his business for him,
that he may then sit still, and never trouble himself; or of the peace of
conscience which he may inwardly enjoy, however it fares with his child,
because he has used the means that God has appointed. As for the following
clause, yea, he shall give delight unto his soul, see the Note chap. 10.1.

Verse. 18. Where there is no vision, etc.] That is, no prophecy and public
preaching: and that, either because those whose office it is to teach, do
wholly neglect their duty; or because the people will not endure teaching, at
least when it is faithfully discharged; or because God, for the former
wickedness of a people, does remove their teachers, (which must needs be a
sign of imminent destruction:) the people perish; to wit, because for want of
instruction they run into all kind of wickedness, and so bring utter
destruction upon themselves; or, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, the
people made naked, for which see the Note Ex. 32.25. As for the following
clause, but he that keeps the law, happy is be, that is added to imply,
either 1. that though a people that enjoy not the public ministry, are for the
generality in great danger of perishing thereby; yet it follows not but that
those amongst them that do conscionably practice what they have formerly
learned, may be truly happy: or 2. that though the want of a teaching ministry
be enough to destroy a people; yet the enjoying of such a ministry is not
enough to make men happy, unless they practice what is thereby taught them.

Verse. 19. A servant will not be corrected by words, etc.] This may be meant
either of one that is indeed a servant, or of one that is of a servile and
stubborn disposition: for though he understand, he will not answer; that is, he
will not do what he is enjoined; or, out of stoutnesse and sullenness, he
will not so much as give an answer when he is spoken to, he will not so much as
say that he will do what he is commanded, and so he carries himself as if he
understood not what was said to him, that he may have that for an excuse for
his not obeying. The meaning is, that such an one does not forbear to answer or
to do what was enjoined him, because he did not understand what was said to
him; but wilfully, out of stubbornness or laziness, and therefore he ought to
be forced by stripes to do his duty.

Ver. 20. See thou a man that is hasty in his words? etc.] To wit, as never
considering beforehand of what he says, and forward to answer men before he
well understands what they say; or, see thou a man that is hasty in his
matters? for which see the Notes chapter 19.2. and 21.5: there is more hope of a
fool then of him; see the Note chapter 26.12.

Verse. 21. He that delicately brings up his servant from a child, etc.] That
is, from a youth, a boy: (or, it may be meant of a bond-slave born in a man's
house,) shall have him become his son at the length; that is, he will at last
carry himself more like a son then a servant; he will no longer do the work of
a servant, he will carry himself insolently and arrogantly toward the rest of
the servants, as if he were their equal. Yea some add, that such an one will
not stick at last to make away the children, and to seize upon their
inheritance.

Verse. 22. An angry man stirs up strife, etc.] See the Notes chapter 15.18. and
26.21: and a furious man; that is, as it were mad with rage: abounds with
transgressions; such an one will curse, swear, revile, slander, shed the blood
of others, and will not stick at any wickedness whatsoever.

Verse. 23. A man's pride shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the humble
in spirit.] That is, it shall raise him up, and keep him up; see the Notes chapter
11.2. and 15.33.

Verse. 24. Whosoever is partner with a thief, etc.] To wit, by counsel, consent,
or any other way: hates his own soul; see the Note chapter 6.32: he hears
cursing, and bewrays it not; that is, say some Expositours, he hears the
thief belch out curses against God or man, (as indeed such profane varlets
thieves usually are) and never makes it known. But by the relation which the
second clause has to the first, it seems clear to me, that those words, and
bewrays it not, must be understood of the thieves theft, thus: he hears
cursing, and bewrays it not; that is, he hears the thief adjure him by a
curse not to reveal his theft, and thereupon accordingly he does conceal it; or
rather thus, he hears those that have lost their goods cursing the thief, and
those that conceal his theft, it may be himself particularly, upon suspicion;
or, he hears the judge adjuring him under a curse, or some other in his
presence, to discover what he knows therein, and yet he concealeth it; for
which see also the Note Lev. 5.1.

Verse. 25. The fear of man brings a snare, etc.] By the fear of man may be
meant any immoderate and inordinate fear in man; as when men lie under such
desperate apprehensions of Gods wrath, that thereupon they cast away all hope
of mercy, and all endeavor of doing any thing that God will be pleased, with;
or when men lie under slavish fears of any evil or mischief whatsoever. But
because in this Proverb there seems to be an opposition betwixt fearing of man
and trusting in God, The fear of man brings a snare, but whosoever puts his
trust in the Lord shall be safe, I rather think that by the fear of man here is
meant men's being afraid of man, and of any evil that man can do them. However,
of either of these fears it may be said, that it brings a snare: either 1.
because such men are usually so continually perplexed and troubled, that they
can seldom or never enjoy any peace or tranquillity of mind; 2. because it
makes others the readier to injure and hurt them; 3. because it consumes men's
bodies, and disables men several ways from doing any thing for their
preservation; and 4. especially, because it makes men neglect their duty, and
puts them oftentimes upon many rash and wicked and ruining resolutions, and so
involveth them in many mischiefs both to soul and body, sometimes those very
mischiefs which by pleasing men they sought to escape. But whosoever puts his
trust in the Lord, and so fears not man, shall be safe, or, as it is in the
Original, shall be set on high; to wit, in that safety that men are on some
high rock, where the waters cannot drown them, or in some inaccessible high
fortress above the reach of danger.

Verse. 26. Many seek the rulers favor, etc.] To wit, in any cause which they
have to be decided by law: but every man's judgment comes from the Lord; who
orders the hearts and tongues of judges to give sentence as he pleases. Yet
this may be understood more generally, of men's seeking the favor of great men
in any respect whatsoever (It is in the Original, the face of the ruler;
because the favor of men is usually seen in the cheerfulness of their
countenance.) And then the meaning of the following clause, but every man's
judgment comes from the Lord, must be, either that great persons can do
nothing to those that seek their favor, whether good or evil, but as God by
his Providence is pleased to order it: or else, that God is the great judge,
that shall at the last day pass sentence of eternal salvation or damnation
upon men, and that in regard thereof his favor was rather to be sought then
the favor of all the great men that are in the world.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. THe words of Agur the son of Iakeh, even the prophecy, etc.] Many of
the Hebrews hold that it is Solomon that is here called Agur: But because the
reasons which they give from the signification of these words, Agur the son of
Iakeh, are extremely forced, and because the style of this chapter is so
different from that of Solomon's Proverbs, and because that which follows verse.
8. Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, is
so unsuitable to Solomon's condition, a Prince so glorious and great, and upon
whom God bestowed such abundance of wealth; there is no question to be made but
that this Agur the son of Iakeh was some other man, that was famous for his
eminent wisdom, and that given him by the special inspiration of Gods spirit,
it may be in the days of Solomon (though that be the more questionable,
because he is not named amongst the wise men of his time, 1 Kings 4.31.) or
rather in the days of Hezekiah, whose servants collected all the last recited
Proverbs from the beginning of the 25. chapter unto this place; and so his
Proverbs are here added together with Solomon's. Nor need it seem strange, that
these sayings of his are called a prophecy; because, as teaching is often in
the Scripture termed prophesying, so any holy doctrine, especially when given
by divine inspiration, may be called a prophecy. The man spoke unto Ithiel,
even unto Ithiel and Vcal; who were certain men in those times to whom he
delivered these following instructions. I know that several of our best
Expositors do hold that by Ithiel and Vcal here Christ is meant, Ithiel being
equivalent to Immanuel, and so signifying the union of two natures, the divine
and humane, in the person of Christ, as likewise Gods gracious presence with us
in and through the Lord Christ; only they say Immanuel signifies God with us,
and Ithiel by a nearer application, God with me; and Vcal importing Christ's
omnipotency, because the word signifies, I shall prevail. But for my part, I
see no clear ground in these words for this great mystery, but do rather
understand the place plainly thus, that this Ithiel and Vcal were the friends
or the disciples of Agur, or it may be his sons, or his scribes, to whom he
dictated all that follows in this chapter.

Verse. 2. Surely I am more brutish then any man, etc.] To wit, in and of my
self; in regard of any knowledge that I have attained by mine own endeavors, I
am the simplest of men; others have more knowledge then I have: and have not
the understanding of a man; that is, the understanding wherewith man was at
first created, or which is requisite for man, or the understanding of any mean
ordinary man. And it may indeed well be, that Agur was some mean unlearned man,
and that the wisdom he had was by the extraordinary revelation of Gods spirit;
as it was also with the prophet Amos, chap. 7.14, 15. I was a herdman and a
gatherer of sycomore fruit; etc. As for the scope of these words, some conceive
that Agur being desired by Ithiel and Vcal to inform them in some matters of
high concernment, or to resolve them concerning some difficult questions, or
generally to impart unto them some of that great wisdom which God had
conferred upon him, he first gave them this modest answer; not unlike to that
of Socrates, Hoc tantum scio, quod nihil scio: as if he should have said, Alas,
why do you seek these things of me, that am the simplest of men, and am
ignorant of many things that it were fit I should know? Again others hold, that
being to propound certain hard questions to them, that were above the reach of
man's understanding, therefore he begins with this acknowledgement of his own
weakness and ignorance; and that to show, that men are not to weary their
minds with a curious enquiry into such high questions, but modestly to keep
themselves within the bounds of the Scripture, contenting themselves with the
knowledge of those things which God has there revealed to them. Or rather
lastly, his drift seems to be, in the beginning of his speech to lay down this
conclusion, that both himself and all other men are naturally ignorant of all
saving knowledge, and can no otherwise attain it but by the revelation of God
in Christ, as he has manifested himself in his holy word. And to the same
purpose is that which follows.

Verse. 3. I neither learned wisdom, etc.] Some understand this first clause of
the knowledge of men in natural and civil things; and so they conceive that
Agurs purpose therein was to show, that as he knew very little by his own
natural understanding, so neither had he been trained up as a scholar, for the
learning of such kind of wisdom by the instruction of others; and that
therefore he was not fit to teach others, that had not been himself formerly
taught by others. And then for the second clause, nor have the knowledge of the
holy, that they understand of the knowledge of the angels, who are called the
Saints or the holy ones, Dan. 4.13, 17, and 8.13. or of the holy prophets in
former times; and so they conceive the drift of these words to be all one as if
he had said, that considering the weightinesse and difficulty of those things
he was to speak of, he could not but acknowledge his own insufficiency, such
things being fitter to be discoursed of by angels, or by the holy inspired
prophets, then by him. But I conceive both clauses are to be understood of true
saving wisdom and knowledge: I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge
of the holy; that is, I have not learned heavenly wisdom by the instruction of
worldly men, nor have I by mine own reason, and understanding, and study,
attained the knowledge of the mysteries of salvation, the knowledge of the
holy, those saving holy truths which are revealed in the holy Scripture, and
which all the saints, and they only, do attain.

Verse. 4. Who has ascended up into heaven, or descended? etc.] That is, Who is
it that does by his Providence govern all things both in heaven above and in
the earth beneath? or rather, Who has been able to go up into heaven, to see
what is done there; or to know what God has there determined concerning the
way and means of man's salvation? and who has then descended again, to tell
what he has seen there, or to make known unto others the counsels of God
concerning man's salvation? It is as if he had said, surely no mere man ever did
this: It is as possible for man with his body to climb into heaven, and then to
come down again, as it is for him to know all the creatures in heaven and
earth, or much more to rule and govern them, or, as it is for him to understand
of himself, or by his own power, the way and means of life eternal: It is
only God that has all the creatures at his beck and command, and that
therefore exactly understands them all; and it is God only that can reveal to
man what he has from all eternity appointed concerning the way of man's
salvation. So that the drift of this passage is, to show how poor and weak and
brutish man's knowledge is, in comparison of Gods; or how impossible it is that
man should understand any thing of true wisdom, unless it be by revelation
from God in Christ. And it may well be that with respect to this place, Christ
used that expression concerning the impossibility of man's attaining the saving
knowledge of heavenly mysteries, unless they were by him, who came out of the
bosom of the father, revealed unto them, Ioh. 3.13. And no man has ascended
up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man, which is
in heaven. Yea and to the same purpose are the following Questions. Who has
gathered the wind in his fist? that is, Who has the winds absolutely at his
disposing, so that he can hold them in or let them loose at his pleasure? Who
has bound the waters in a garment? that is, as in a garment: which may be
meant both of the waters in the clouds, which are as a black mantle, wherewith
the heavens are sometimes covered, and wherein the waters are bound up, that
they may not all fall down together suddenly, but may be distilled down by
little and little, as through a strainer; and likewise of the waters below, as
namely the waters of the sea, which are there held within the sea-shoares by
the special Providence of God, as with a garment, (for which see also the Note
Job 38.9.) or the waters in the earth, which are there covered and bound up as
in a garment, and so are strained out here and there in springs and fountains.
Who has established all the ends of the earth? that is, Who has caused the
whole globe of the earth from end to end every way to stand fast in the midst
of the air, without any thing to support it? or, Who has settled the
sea-shoares so fast and sure, that they are not overborn by the sea,
notwithstanding the raging billows thereof do with such violence beat upon
them? What is his name, and what is his sons name, if thou can tell? As if he
should have said, Tell me who it is; name me the man, if thou art able, that
has done these things: or, if such a man there has been, only he is now dead,
tell me then any of his sons or posterity that are descended from him. And the
question does doubtless imply a vehement negation, that there was never any
but God, and the only-begotten Son of God, that could do these things: whose
name must needs be ineffable, because his offense and being is
incomprehensible, which shows that the scope of all these Quere's is, to imply,
how brutish the knowledge of man is in comparison of the wisdom of God,
whereby he has done, and does daily such wonderful things, and so far above
the reach of our understanding; and that therefore the only way for men to
attain wisdom is, not curiously to search into those things which are above
their reach, but humbly to seek it from God in Christ.

Verse. 5. Every word of God is pure, etc.] See the notes Psalm. 12.6. and
119.140. Having shown in the foregoing verse, that God in Christ is the only
fountain of all true wisdom, this is added to show, that God has in his word,
the unquestionable foundation of faith, revealed this wisdom unto us, and that
here therefore we can only attain the saving knowledge of God and of Christ. He
is a shield unto them that put their trust in him; that is, to them that having
attained the true knowledge of him do thereupon put their trust in him, and in
the sure promises which in his word he has made to them.

Verse. 6. Add thou not unto his words, etc.] As namely, by pretending any
revelation from God, by canonizing any humane writings, or by misinterpreting
the Scriptures, and so affirming that to be the word of God which indeed is
not. And observable it is, that Agur makes no mention here of the sin of
diminishing ought from Gods word, as Moses does Deuteronomy. 4.2. which was doubtless
because men are most prone by false glosses and wresting of it, to add unto
it. Lest he reprove thee; that is, Lest he severely punish thee, to wit, for
thy sauciness and presumption in falsifying his word: and thou be found a
liar; namely, when God shall discover thy forgeries and impostures.

Verse. 7. Two things have I required of thee, etc.] To wit, two things
particularly and principally, as most needful both for Gods glory and his own
good: deny me them not before I dye; that is, as long as I live in this world;
for so it is in the Original, withhold them not from me before I dye.

Verse. 8. Remove far from me vanity and lies, etc.] By vanity may be meant all
vain courses, as Idolatry, (see the Note 2 Kings 17.15.) or pride, or
covetousness, and such other sins as carry men greedily to seek after, or to
glory or delight in the vain things of this world, (see the Notes Psalm. 4.2.
and 24.4.) yea all kind of sin and wickedness whatsoever; see the Note Job
31.5; and by lies, all errors in judgment, and evil thoughts concerning God,
all false dealing either by word or deed, all perjury, craft, cousenage and
hypocrisy. And by desiring that God would remove these far from him may be
meant, that God would pardon him, and not lay these to his charge, and likewise
that he would sanctify him, and purge him from these corruptions, and not
suffer them at any time to prevail against him. And this is the first of those
two things mentioned in the foregoing verse which he had desired of the Lord,
which is concerning the immediate good of his soul. And then the second
follows in the next words, which is concerning his outward estate, yet with
reference to his spiritual welfare, Give me neither poverty nor riches, etc.
And therefore this must be supposed to be desired only conditionally, so far as
might stand with Gods good will and pleasure, and might prevent his sinning
against God. I know some Expositors hold, that the two things which Agur
desired of God are both comprehended in that first clause, Remove far from me
vanity and lies; and that the following words are but added by way of
amplifying his requests herein. But the former Exposition of the words is far
the clearer.

Verse. 9. Lest I be full, etc.] That is, say some Expositours, Lest being rich
I gluttonously fill my self; for this indeed is usually the cause of men's
running out into many enormities; or rather, Lest I come to live in great
abundance of all things: and deny thee; to wit, either 1. by trusting in my
wealth, rather then in thy protection, which would be a manifest denial of
thee, and making my riches my God; or 2. by refusing to obey thee: and say, Who
is the Lord? that is, and so carry my self as if I owned no God, at whose
command I was bound to withstand mine own carnal desires. This first part of
the verse may be read, Lest I be full, and belie thee, etc. that is, Lest being
full I live so wickedly, that thereby implicitly I call false aspersions upon
thee, as if my plenty came not from thee, as if I were not bound to serve thee,
and that there were no comfort in thy work or ways, etc. Or lest I be poor,
and steal, and take the name of my God in vain* that is, lest by my poverty I
be tempted to steal, and by perjury or any other way of wickedness to seek to
help my self; or, lest I steal, and then forswear my self, to conceal my theft;
or, lest by the every, or any other looseness of life, I should cause the name
of my God, that is called upon by me, to be blasphemed.

Verse. 10. Accuse not a servant unto his master, etc.) To wit, wrongfully, out
of hatred, or any other evil intention, rashly, and out of a tatling humor,
or for every light fault and trivial occasion; thereby incensing his master to
deal roughly with him, whereas he ought rather to be pitied for the misery of
his servile condition. Because it cannot be judged evil to make known to
masters the offenses of their servants, when they are very great, and when it
is done with a good intention both to the master and servant, therefore this
precept must be understood with these limitations. Lest he curse thee; that is,
say some Expositors, lest he, by way of revenge and recrimination, speak some
evil of thee, or discover some secret offense of thine: and thou be found
guilty; that is, and so thou art thought to be guilty, yea, it may be, may
be found to be guilty of the evil he lays to thy charge, and so art
accordingly punished for it. Or rather thus, Lest he curse thee; that is, wish
any evil to thee, or pray to God to pour out some curse upon thee: and thou
be found guilty; that is, and so God, judging thee culpable for this thine
accusing of a poor servant, do accordingly inflict some judgment upon thee,
it may be the very curse, which such a servant has wished might fall upon
thee. Now this may be applied to all other inferiors: and the drift of it may
be to teach us, that we should be very tender of adding to the misery of them
that are in an afflicted condition, that we should not encourage our selves to
wrong the poorest, but should endeavor to live peaceably with all, and to
maintain peace amongst all, so far as we are able.

Verse. 11. There is a generation that curses their father, etc.] That is,
There is a company of wicked wretches) a brood (as it were) or race of them,
proceeding from one age to another, (see the Note Psalm. 24.6.) that stick not
to curse their own parents; see the Note Lev. 20.9. In the sequel of this
chapter, the wise man gives us, together with other sentences intermixed, six
Quaternaries, as I may call them, wherein the better to help the memory, and
the more to affect the min^s of those that read them, he joins and compares
together, some four things that are in some common respect very notable: And so
here in the first place he reckons up four sorts of notorious wicked people,
implying, as I conceive, the same that Solomon does elsewhere express chap.
6.16. namely that they are above other sinners, most abominable to God, and
mischievous in the world.

Verse. 14. There is a generation whose teeth are as swords, etc.] This is meant
of those that devour and destroy the poor by their false slanders, or any
other way of cruel oppression; see the Notes chap. 12.18. and Psalm. 57.4. And
these are mentioned in the last place, as the worst of those four sorts of
notorious wicked wretches that are here compared together.

Verse. 15. The horseleach has two daughters, crying, Give, give, etc.] That
is, she has two forkes in her tongue, wherewith she first pricks the flesh,
either in men or beasts, and then sucketh the blood, and is indeed never
satisfied, Some understand this mystically, as that by the horseleach is meant
the devil, or natural concupiscence: and so like wise they interpret in a
spiritual sense all that follows in this and the next verse; wherein they
take liberty to themselves severally, as in such Expositions all men may do,
according to their several fancies. But I conceive the drift of Agur in these
words is only this: Having spoken in the foregoing verse of a generation of men
that were insatiable devourers of the poor, in this and the following verse he
mentions several things in nature, to which for their infatiable greediness
they may be justly compared; as first the horse-leach with her two daughters,
and afterward to four other things mentioned in the following verse, to which
he makes way in the last words of this verse, There are three things that are
never satisfied, yea four things say not, It is enough.

Verse. 19. The grave, etc.) See the Note chap. 1.12: and the barren womb; which
is reckoned amongst those things that are never satisfied, either because
barren women are so exceedingly desirous of children, that nothing else can
quiet their desires, as we see in that of Rachel, Genesis 30.1. Give me children,
or else I dye; or because such are usually most violet and unsatisfiable in
their lust, as we see in common strumpets, that are for the most part barren:
the earth that is not filled with water; that is, that drinks in all that
falls upon it, and is never so full but that within a while it is ready to
receive more; even in an over-wet year, when it is glutted and made drunk with
rain, so that it vomits it up again, yet within a while it will chap and
chawne, and as thirstily gape for water, as if it had had no watering before;
Noah's flood could not satiate this thirst of the earth: or it may be meant of
dry and sandy ground, which will drink up abundance, so that presently no drop
thereof will be to be seen: and the fire that says not, It is enough; to wit,
because it never leaves burning, as long as it has any fuel to feed upon.
Now all these are mentioned, to express the unsatiable desires of covetous
oppressors: see the foregoing Note.

Verse. 17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his
mother, etc.] It is as if he had said, They that can, when they look upon their
parents, deride and mock them for any thing which they judge despicable or
ridiculous in them, yea though it be but with a scornful winking with the eye,
or any other contemptuous look: the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and
the young eagles shall eat it; that is, they shall be brought to the gallows,
or cast forth without burial. And this expression the wise man here uses,
because indeed crows are wont first of all to pick out the eyes of any dead
carcases. As for these words; the ravens of the valley, or, of the brook, as it
is in the margin, either thereby are meant young ravens, agreeable to the
following clause, and the young eagles shall eat it, and that because ravens
are wont to build their nests in valleys and near to brooks and rivers; or else
this phrase is used, because ravens, being of a hot constitution, do usually
frequent valleys where there are brooks and rivers, and therefore we see 1
Kings 17.3, 4, the place where Elijah was sent to be fed by the ravens, was by
the brook Cherith; and it may be also because they used to execute malefactors
in valleys and desolate places. However this seems to be added with reference
to that first generation of vile wretches, mentioned before verse. 11.

Verse. 18. There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea four
which I know not.] That is, they are above my reach, and which I cannot by any
means discover or know.

Verse. 19. The way of an eagle in the air, etc.] To wit, because no sign of
that place in the air through which she has flown can possibly be discerned.
And though this be true of the flying of any bird in the air, yet the eagle is
particularly mentioned, because she flies so high and so swiftly: the way of a
serpent upon a rock; because there she leaves no print behind her, as she does
when she glides away in the dirt or dust, nor any thing else whereby it may be
known which way she went, not so much as any slime as worms and snails do: the
way of a ship in the midst of the sea; because though the ship at first leaves
a kind of path or surrow behind her, yet in the twinkling of an eye the waters
will close together again, so that it cannot be seen where she has gone,
especially by one that stands far off on the shore: and the way of a man
with a maid; to wit, when she is won to be unclean with him; and that because
they are wont to carry it so slily and closely, and afterward to dissemble the
matter with so much cunning and impudence, that many times they are never
suspected, at least it is not possible to convince them of unchastity. Thus I
conceive of the meaning of this place; and that the drift of it is to teach
parents narrowly to watch over their children in this regard. And some conceive
that this, passage is added, with reference to that second generation of wicked
men beforementioned, to wit, those verse. 12. that are pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not washed from their filthiness. I know that by some another
exposition is given of these words: as namely that the many cunning ways and
enticements, whereby young men are wont to obtain their desires upon young
virgins, though never so watchful over themselves, and never so warily kept by
others, are not to be known; no more then how an eagle can fly so high in the
air, or how a serpent can without feet climb up upon a rock, or how a ship can
be so tossed in the seas, and yet ride it out, and not be drowned. But the
first exposition is far the clearest and most generally approved.

Verse. 20. Such is the way of an adulterous woman, etc.] That is, so close and
unknown: she eats, and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done no
wickedness; that is, she satisfyeth her unclean desires, and then looks so
demurely, and carries it away with a brazen face, as if she had done nothing
amiss; being herein like some liquorish filching children or servants, that in
secret eat what they should not, and then wipe their mouths, that nothing of
what they have eaten may appear.

Verse. 21. For three things the earth, etc.] That is, the inhabitants of the
earth: is disquieted; to wit, with anger, grief and fear; they raise great
troubles both in families and commonwealths: and for four, which it cannot
bear; that is, which men are not able to endure, because they are so absurd,
and contrary to all reason, and every way intolerable. Yet it may be spoken of
the earth it self by way of an hyperbole, to wit, that the earth it self may
even tremble and shake because of these things, and as not able to bear such
kind of persons, may be ready to open her mouth and swallow them up. What these
four insufferable things are, he sets down in the two following verses; two
that concern men verse. 22. and two that concern women verse. 23. And because
they are all the effects of pride, that which some have noted may seem the more
probable, namely, that this passage is added with reference to that third
generation of wicked wretches, mentioned before verse. 13. whose eyes are so
exceeding lofty, etc.

Verse. 22. For a servant, when he reigns, etc.] To wit, because such are
unfit to rule, and people are very prone to murmr, and to rise up in mutiny
against such men's government: and a fool, when he is filled with meat; that is,
say some, a wicked man that is given to gluttony and drunkenness; or rather, a
wicked wretch living in a prosperous and plentiful estate, because such are
prone to carry themselves foolishly and insolently, and thereby to stir up many
quarrels and uproars. But see the Note chap. 19.10.

Verse. 23. For an odious woman when she is married, etc.] That is, a woman of
odious qualities, that for her pride and frowardness, or other vile qualities,
is worthily had in detestation in a manner by every body that knows her: for
such an one, if once she be married, will quickly show what metal she is made
of; her husband must do whatever she will have him, and an insufferable
burden she will be to all his relations: especially if once her husband begin
to hate her, and to deal any way roughly with her; for then she will grow
intolerable, and will raise endless and unquenchable quarrels and troubles
amongst them. As for the last of these insufferable evils mentioned in the
following words, and an handmaid that is heir to her mistress, though thereby
might be meant a maidservant, that is by her mistress appointed after her
death to inherit her goods (for such indeed are many times insolent enough;)
yet because she is mentioned in the last place, as the most insufferable of all
the four, it is more probably thought that the wise man intends hereby, either
a handmaid that is taken into her mistresses place, her mistress being cast
out of doors, or at least, neglected and disregarded, (for such a one does
commonly grow so insolent and injurious, that neither children nor servants,
nor at last the husband himself, are able to abide her) or rather a handmaid
that after her mistresses death is married to her master, and so comes to
possess all that before her mistress did enjoy: and that because children and
servants will scorn to be brought into subjection to such an one; and besides,
such wives, raised so suddenly from a servile condition, are usually wont to
swell and grow proud, nor are any commonly more costly, more turbulent and
imperious then they are.

Verse. 24. There be four things which are little upon the earth, but they are
exceeding wise.] The drift of this passage may be, not only to set forth the
wonderful power and wisdom of God, in the strange acts of wisdom that are
done by these little creatures: but also to teach us by them, 1. that we ought
not to be proud of our wisdom and knowledge, since even in many things of this
nature we may find our selves out-stripped by the meanest of the creatures; and
2. that bodily strength tends not so much to the prospering of endeavors, as
wisdom does; and that therefore those that are weak ought not to be despised
by others, nor to be discouraged in themselves, or, under a pretense of
feebleness, to neglect any business that belongs to them.

Verse. 25. The ants are a people not strong; yet they prepare their meat in the
summer.] In these creatures we are taught diligence and providence, and that
especially with respect to those things that concern life eternal. But see the
Note chap. 6.6.

Verse. 26. The conies are but a feeble folk; yet make they their houses in the
rocks.] In these we are taught 1. that the hardest things may be effected by
constant labor; and 2. that wisdom should teach us, as to provide betimes an
habitation for our selves, especially in heaven, against the time we must leave
the world, so also to provide for the safety of our selves and children, and to
secure our selves, as far as we are able, against all wrong and injury, and
that especially by making the Lord our rock of refuge.

Verse. 27. The locusts have no king; yet go they forth all of them by bands.]
To wit, some going one way, and some another, like so many several squadrons
or bands of an army. And hereby men are taught, that needful and good things
ought to be done, though they be not enjoined by authority; and that concord
and unanimity amongst men, yea the association and combination of men in
lawful things, is very useful and commendable.

Verse. 28. The spider takes hold with her hands, etc.] To wit, on the third
she has spun, and therewith she weaves her web, and builds her house: and is
in kings palaces; which is noted, to show the art and industry of this little
creature, in that she builds her house and spreads her nets even in kings
palaces: though their rooms be often high and lofty, yet she makes a shift to
get up to those roofs and battlements, and there takes up her dwelling; and
though their palaces are much frequented, and often swept and cleansed, yet
will she find a time to build her house there. And hereby men are taught,
either 1. not to shrink from doing what belongs to them to do for fear of the
greatest; or 2. not to be discouraged with the difficulty of any undertaking,
and that because by art and industry any enterprise may be effected, though
never so many obstacles lie in the way; or 3. to know that the meanest men may
by diligence and worthy enterprises attain to highest places of honor;
according to that chap. 22.29. See thou a man diligent in his business? he
shall stand before kings, etc.

Verse. 29. There be three things which go well, yea four are comely in going.]
These patterns of comeliness in going are propounded, to teach all sorts of
people to walk orderly and decently, according as is seemly for men in their
places, that their deportment of themselves be with all gravity and
comeliness; and that especially in regard of magnanimity, as the following
instances do import, even that men should not dishonor themselves with any
base cowardice, but proceed on constantly and courageously in every enterprise
they undertake. But yet I conceive that this is principally propounded with
respect to magistrates, because the following instances do most fitly resemble
them, as we may see in the first mentioned verse. 31. which is the lion, that is
usually termed the king of beasts; and so in the rest.

Verse. 31. A greyhound, etc.] Or rather, A horse, as it is in the margin of
our Bibles; for indeed there is no such stateliness in the going of a
greyhound. It is in the Hebrew, girt in the loins, which imports strength and
agility; and this agrees to the horse, as well as to the greyhound. But
besides the warlike horse is fitter to be propounded as a pattern to men in
high place, with respect to whom especially, as I have noted in the foregoing
verse, these examples of courage and stateliness in the creatures are
propounded. And therefore likewise the next mentioned is, an he-goat also, that
uses to go stately before the flock, leading them in the hardest and most
troublesome ways: and then in the close he adds, and a king against whom
there is no rising up; that is, with whom none must compare for the
stateliness and majesty of his gate; or rather, a mighty and magnanimous king,
prosperous in his reign, and of uncontrollable power, and against whom none
have risen, nor dare rise up, and therefore he goes with the more state and
courage.

Verse. 32. If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, etc.] That is,
If thou have foolishly upon any occasion lifted up thy heart with pride; or, if
through the lifting up of thy heart with pride thou have any way behaved thy
self foolishly, or by any proud or contemptuous carriage of thy self, or
breaking forth in anger against others, (for that anger is here also intended
may be very probably gathered from the words of the following verse:) or, if
thou have thought evil; to wit, by entertaining any unjust surmises or evil
purposes against any body whatsoever: lay thine hand upon thy mouth; that is,
be silent, see the Note Job 21.5. utter it not by word or deed; or, as some
would have it, think seriously of the evil done or intended (for the hand upon
the mouth is often the gesture of a man full of sad and serious thoughts) and
go not about to defend it, but give it over. Much is said by many Expositours,
to show how this is added in the close of Agurs speech with respect to that
which went before: as 1. Some hold, that having in this chapter stirred men up
to several virtues, in the close here he warns them, that they should not
hereupon be puffed up with pride, at least that they should not obstinately
persevere in any evil, which out of pride they had fallen into; and 2. some
conceive, that having in the three last verses taught men to be courageous and
magnanimous, and to maintain the dignity of their places, he adds here this
caution, that under pretense hereof they must not grow proud and turbulent, at
least if their spirits began to incline that way, they must be very careful to
restrain themselves; and 3. some think it is added with reference to the last
words in the foregoing verse, and a king against whom there is no rising up,
and that by way of advice, that in case any had foolishly lifted up themselves,
and ^hought any evil against a king, they should do well to make a stop, and
proceed no farther in such a dangerous thing. But I see not why we may not take
this to be here added as a particular precept, without any dependence upon that
which w^nt before.

Verse. 33. Surely the churning of milk brings forth butter, and the wringing
of the nose brings forth blood; so the forcing of wrath brings forth
strife.] That is, the urging of men to wrath, that happily are of themselves of a
calm and gentle spirit; or, the pressing of men to farther wrath that are of a
choleric nature, and in a passion already, by many reiterated provocations,
must needs cause great contentions. Now this may be added as a reason why, as
was said in the foregoing verse, men should beware of such foolish, proud, and
angry carriage of themselves toward others, or of farther enraging those that
are angry already by any provoking language; to wit, because such provocations
do usually produce bitter quarrels, and those do usually end in great mischiefs.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 1. THe words of king Lemuel, etc.] That is, king Solomon. Because there
was no other king of Israel or Judah of this name, and because in the Hebrew
there is much affinity betwixt these two names, Lemuel and Solomon, this I
conceive cannot be questioned. The word Lemuel is by interpretation, of God, or
to God; or, as some would have it, God to him, or, God with him. And therefore
it is probable that this name was given him, to signify, either that he
belonged to God, as his son or servant, or that he was of God or by God
ordained to be king of Israel, or at least that his mother desired it should be
so. But now whether this name was given him by special direction from God,
(the rather because Solomon was to be a type of Christ, the Lords anointed, the
true Immanuel) or whether Solomon speaking of himself here in a third person,
gives himself this name, or whether it was his mother that gave him this name,
when she saw he was to succeed or had succeeded his father in the throne,
(which some are the more inclined to think, because it is his mother here that
calls him Lemuel;) it cannot be certainly determined. However it is clear,
that they are called the words of king Lemuel, because it was king Solomon that
wrote them, and left them upon record; for that they were the words which
Bathsheba his mother spoke to him, is evident by the following clause, the
prophecy that his mother taught him; to wit, either when she first discovered
his natural temper enclining to those sins which here she warns him to avoid;
or rather in his tender years, when her love only made her fear lest he should
dash upon these rocks; or when happily, by the extraordinary guidance of Gods
spirit, she foresaw his danger in these regards, and so labored by these holy
instructions to antidote him against these sins: for which cause it is, as some
think, that these instructions are here called a prophecy. But for that see the
Note chap. 30.1. Before Solomon had told us chap. 4.3, 4. how his father
instructed him; and here now he tells us how his mother also taught him. And
observable it is, that though Bathsheba had sinned so hainously as she had
done; yet upon her repentance, she was so far honored of God, as to be the
mouth of his spirit for the uttering of part of the canonical Scripture.

Verse, 2. What, my son! and what, the son of my womb! and what, the son of my
vows!] That is, for whose being and birth, for whose life and well-doing every
way, for whose advancement to the crown, and praiseworthy carriage of thy self
in that place of honor, and for whose eternal salvation, I have offered up so
many prayers and sacrifices, and made so many vows and promises to God: so that
all these patheticall expressions were but to imply, that he was her
dearly-beloved son, and consequently, that what she now spoke to him, proceeded
from her tender affection to him; and that in these regards he was bound not to
despise her counsel, but rather to hearken the more affectionately to her. As
for that manner of speech which she here uses, What, my son! and what, the son
of my womb! etc. it is an abrupt kind of speech, importing abundance of
affection, even more then could be uttered, and that especially by the frequent
repetition of that word son. Some conceive it is a form of speech tending to
stir up the party spoken to, to mind seriously what is spoken; as if she had
only said, Ah, my dear son, hearken diligently to me. But rather some word is
to be understood that is not expressed, What, my son! etc. as if she had said,
What think thou, my son? or, What affection do thou bear toward me? or
rather, What shall I say to thee, or desire and require from thee? what
counsel or charge shall I give thee, rather then this which I shall now say to
thee?

Verse. 3. Give not thy strength unto women, etc.] That is, the strength of
thine estate, body and mind; see the Notes chap. 5.9, 10. and 7.26: nor thy
ways to that which destroys kings; that is, neither do thou employ thy self
in following that which does commonly destroy, not men of ordinary rank only,
but even princes and kings, to wit, the sin of uncleanness, and haunting the
company of whorish women; by whom and for whose sakes, not the persons only of
kings, but their kingdoms also are many times destroyed.

Verse. 4. It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings, to drink wine,
etc.] That is, to drink it immoderately; not for refreshing and strength, but
for drunkenness, and as taking delight in drinking: for otherwise there is no
question to be made, but that the daintiest of drinks, as well as of meats, was
lawful for kings and princes, rather then for those of an inferior rank and
quality.

Verse. 5. Lest they drink, and forget the law, etc.] This is said, either 1.
because magistrates, when their brains and wits are intoxicated with overmuch
drinking, are not indeed able to tell what is law, nor to discern betwixt right
and wrong in the parties contending; or 2. because by much drinking men,
frequently become stupid, and blockish at all times, Hos. 4.11. whoredom and
wine and new wine take away the heart; or 3. because men given to drunkenness
are wont to be carried away with their corrupt affections, which make them
partial in passing sentence. As for the following clause, and per^ert the
judgment of any of the afflicted, we must know that the afflicted are
particularly mentioned, because in judgment they are most frequently neg^ected
and oppressed; or by the afflicted may be meant any that are wronged, and so
fly to the magistrate to right themselves.

Verse. 6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish; etc.] To wit,
through poverty or any other heartbreaking affliction; as Jacob in that regard
is called, A Syrian ready to perish, Deuteronomy. 26.5. And indeed so it is explained
in the following clause, and wine to those that be of heavy hearts; but
especially in the following verse, where a reason is given why wine and strong
drink was fittest for such, Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember
his misery no more; that is, no more at that time, being cheared up with that
refreshing drink he has taken. I know that some understand by those that are
ready to perish, such as through sickness are ready to faint, or malefactors
condemned to die. And indeed that there was a custom amongst the Jews, to give
wine to men that were condemned to die (which some think to be that which Amos
2.8. is called the wine of the condemned) is methinks very probable by that
which is said of our Savior, as he was going to execution, Mark 15.23. that
they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh. But yet by the context it is
evident, that those words must be understood here in a more general sense.
However, either this must be taken as spoken comparatively, not absolutely, as
if she had said, If it were lawful for any to drink a little more then
ordinary, it would be for those that are in great affliction, that they may
thereby forget their sorrow; and not for kings and princes, that live in great
prosperity and plenty, and are in danger thereby to forget the law: or else,
the drift is, to show that wine and strong drink, though moderately taken, is
fitter for the afflicted, then for kings and princes; and withal to imply,
that such a quantity of wine, as would no way hurt, but rather do good to
those that are in great distress, would utterly overthrow princes, and make
them unfit for their employments: for to be sure excess in drinking is not
here allowed to the afflicted; this would rather increase then abate their
sorrow.

Verse. 8. Open thy mouth for the dumb, etc.] That is, such as dare not, or,
through shamefacednesse or simplicity, or any impediment in their speech, are
not able, or, through oppression are not suffered, to speak for themselves: in
the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction; that is, that in their
estates, body or credit, are in danger to suffer greatly, through the injustice
of men, even to their utter undoing. But see the Note Psalm. 79.11.

Verse. 10. Who can find a virtuous woman? etc.] To wit, that he may take her to
wife? or, where can such a wife be found? From hence to the end of the chapter,
in two and twenty verses, according to the number of the Hebrew letters, we
have an elegant Poem, containing the description of a good wife; and in the
beginning of these verses we have all the Hebrew letters, in order as they are
in the Hebrew Alphabet: for which see the Note Psalm. 25.1. Whether it were
composed by Solomon, as a character of his mother Bathsheba, and that upon
occasion of those holy instructions of hers to him, which are here before
recited, or by Bathsheba, for the direction of Solomon in the choice of a good
wife, it cannot be certainly determined.

Verse. 11. The heart of her husband does safely trust in her, etc.] That is,
Her husband upon just grounds is from his heart confident of her faithfulness
to him, not only in regard of her chastity and secrecy, but also (which is
indeed here chiefly intended) in regard of her well-ordering his household
affairs, which accordingly therefore he leaves wholly to her care: so that he
shall have no need of spoil; that is, he shall not need to go forth to war, to
enrich himself with the spoils of vanquished enemies, nor to use any unlawful
ways to store himself with goods gotten by extortion and oppression, and that
because she by her industry and huswifery will so abundantly furnish her house,
as if she had shared in the spoils of some ransacked city.

Verse. 12. She will do him good, and not evil, etc.] That is, good without any
mixture of evil; not being a good wife in some respects, but a very bad one in
others: all the days of her life; that is, constantly, all the time she lives
with him, and in all conditions and changes, in youth and age, in prosperity
and adversity, in health and sickness, yea even after his death, if she
surviveth him, by speaking honorably of him, and by doing good to his children
and friends.

Verse. 13. She seeks wool and flax, etc.] That is, That her self and family
may not be idle for want of materials to work upon, she provides them
beforehand at the best rate: and works willingly with her hands; that is,
with her own hands; she does not only set others on work. And observable it is,
that the good huswife of whom this is spoken, is withal described to be a
woman of that rank, that verse. 22. her clothing is said to be silk and purple,
and her husband verse. 23. to be known in the gates, that is, in the seat of
magistracy.

Verse. 14. She is like the merchants ships, she brings her food from afar.]
This expression may be used to imply several things: as 1. that by her
continual labor and diligence, like the merchants ship that sails both night
and day, she gets wealth apace; 2. that her house is furnished with as much
variety and plenty of all things that are necessary, yea even of those things
that are brought from foreign countries, as merchants ships are wont to be;
and 3. that it is by the sending forth of her manufactures, that those foreign
commodities are brought home by the merchants, whereof she gets a share.

Verse. 15. She rises also while it is yet night, etc.] That is, before break
of day, that so she and her family may have time to do their work in: and
gives meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens; both which some
understand of a set portion and quantity of meat which she is careful to give
to all in her family, not children only, but servants too; both those that are
to work all day in the field, and so are to carry their meat along with them,
and the rest also that are to work at home. But I rather conceive that by the
portion mentioned in the last clause, which she is said to give to her maidens,
that more especially belong to her charge, is meant the several tasks that she
sets them for their days work. And thus her provident care is set forth in her
early providing both meat and work for her servants.

Verse. 16. She considers a field, and buyeth it, etc.] That is, So far is she
enriched by her industry, that a field being proffered to be sold, she considers
of the convenience of it, whether it be a reasonable price for which it may be
had, and whether the title be good, and whether she be able to buy it, and
accordingly she goes on in the purchase of it: with the fruit of her hands,
that is, by her labor, or rather, with that she has gotten by her labor, by
her handiwork and trading; she planteth a vineyard, to wit, in the field she
had lately purchased, or elsewhere. The meaning is, that she improveth her
ground to the best advantage.

Verse. 17. She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms.]
That which is intended hereby is, 1. that she diligently and courageously
prepares her self for her labors; 2. that she stoutly undertaketh and goes on
with her work, with confidence of going through with what she undertaketh; and
3. that by bestirring her self in her several businesses she preserves and
increases her strength: for as sloth weakens the strength of man's body, so
moderate exercise and labor does tend to the health and strengthening of it.
But now in the expression here used there is doubtless an allusion to women's
tucking up of their garments about their loins, and their sleeves about their
arms, when they mean to buckle themselves lustily to their work, and to bestir
themselves nimbly in it: as likewise to that which is known by experience,
namely, that girding strengthens the loins.

Verse. 18. She perceives that her merchandise is good, etc.] That is, She
tastes the sweet of her labor; besides the good it does her for her health,
she finds that her diligence and good huswifery redounds much to her profit, as
much as if she were employed in some gainful way of merchandise; and herein
she takes great inward complacency, and contentment of mind; which adds much to
her happiness. Or else it may be meant of the manufactures which are made by
her self and her family, and then afterward verse. 24. sold to the merchants,
to wit, that she finds by experience that hereby much is gotten, and that
thereupon she follows her work the closer. Her candle goes not out by night;
to wit, seldom or never; as she rises up early, so she sits up late at her
work.

Verse. 19. She lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the
distaffe.] And thus she not only holds her maids to their work, but she also
takes her turn amongst them her self in the very same work which they do;
which as it promotes the work in hand, so it greatly encourages them. As rich
and great as she is, she is not ashamed neither of the distaffe nor the spindle.

Verse. 20. She stretches out her hand to the poor, yea she reaches forth her
hands to the needy.] To wit, not only in paying the poor that are set on work
by her, but also in lending and giving cheerfully and bountifully, to those
that are very needy, even with both hands where their necessity requires it,
whether they be near hand or farther off; yea in performing any offices of love
for them, according to the need they have of her help in any regard. Now this
is here inserted, either to show how her estate is improved by her industry and
huswifery, in that she is able not only well to provide for her own, but also
liberally to relieve the poor; or else, because giving to the poor is indeed
one of the best pieces of good huswifery, in that through Gods blessing it
brings in to the estates of those that use it a great increase.

Verse. 21. She is not afraid of the snow for her household, etc.] To wit, for
her children and servants: for all her household are clothed with scarlet; that
is, with garments of the best, according to their degree; such as are for
comeliness and ornament, and much more then such as are warm to keep them from
the cold. Indeed, considering that scarlet was far more common in those
countries then it is amongst us, it is no way improper to say, that some
servants and waiting-gentlewomen belonging to such great families were clothed
with scarlet, especially her husband and children, who may be here meant by her
household. But yet this clause may be read also, as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, with double garments; that is, many several garments, to be put one
upon another; or, garments for summer, and garments for winter, thick and
well-lined garments that will keep out the cold.

Verse. 22. She makes her self coverings of tapestry, etc.] To wit, for the bed
and board, yea and for the walls too, coverlets and carpets and hangings: her
clothing is silk and purple; and indeed God disalloweth not rich attire in
women, so that it be not above their degree, and that they continue to be of a
lowly mind, and do not make that their chiefest ornament.

Verse. 23. Her husband is known in the gates, when he sits among the elders
of the land.] Some Expositours conceive that this is here inserted, to show,
that as she was so happy in regard of her own goodness, so also in her husband
too; and that because he was also an honor to her, as being famous amongst his
fellow-rulers for his rare gifts and eminent goodness. But I rather think that
this also; is mentioned by way of commending her, and that by this, that her
husband is known in the gates, etc. (see the Notes Genesis 22.17. and Ruth 4.1.)
is intended, either 1. that he might diligently at all times intend his public
affairs, being by his wives means freed from all care about all things at home;
or 2. that there is special notice taken of him for the handsome and comely
attire wherewith, through her care, he is always clothed; or 3. that he is
observed and much spoken of for his happiness, in regard of the high praises
that are every where given of his wife.

Verse. 24. She makes fine linen, and sells it, and delivers girdles unto
the merchant.] To wit, girdles curiously wrought; for otherwise the merchant
would not buy them, to carry them into foreign countries. And under this one
particular all other curious ornaments of the like nature are comprehended. See
Isa. 3.24.

Verse. 25. Strength and honor are her clothing, etc.] That is, In her life
and outward behavior she manifests her self to be strong and honorable. And
by her strength may be meant that magnanimity whereby she was enabled
cheerfully to undergo all the labor and diligence that belonged to her place
and employments; or more generally that strong measure of grace, whereby she
was established and confirmed in all well-doing, and enabled to do more and
greater things then others in the ways of virtue and piety: And by her honor,
that glory and fame and good report which thereby she has attained; or that
grace and virtue which is an honor to her; or that virtuous and sweet carriage
of her self with all gravity, meekness, modesty and sobriety, which is comely
and honorable in the eyes of those that behold it. So the drift of these words
is, to show, that though she is clothed with silk and purple, as was before
said ver. 22. yet she does not set her affection on such outward bravery, as
vain and foolish women do only delight in, but she has other ornaments, to
wit, these wherewith she is inwardly adorned, wherein she chiefly delights, and
which are a greater glory to her, then any outward decking can possibly be. And
she shall rejoice in time to come; that is, say some, in her old age, because
she may then take her rest, and live comfortably upon that which by her
industry she had gotten in her younger years; or at the hour of her death,
because she has the testimony of her own conscience, that she has not
misspent her time, but has in her place labored to discharge a good
conscience in every regard, and has by her industry gotten a good estate to
leave behind her for her children. But I conceive that the words must be taken
more generally, that whatever happens in time to come, whether it be sickness,
or death, or any great losses, or any other calamity whatsoever, she is not
sollicitous nor troubled, but lives comfortably: she is not like those women,
that having vainly wasted their estates and misspent their time, do weep and
mourn when such changes come upon them; for whatever befalls her, for the
reasons beforementioned, the store she has laid up beforehand, and the
testimony of a good conscience, she enjoys much peace and cheerfulness of
spirit.

Verse. 26. She opens her mouth with wisdom, etc.] As if we should say, She
is not a woman talkative and given to much tatling, as too many women are, but
when she does open her mouth to speak, she does it with much wisdom: her
usual discourse is concerning matters of true wisdom, as when she is
catechizing and instructing her family, and so likewise at other times; being
still ready upon all occasions to teach them, not only the precepts of
providence and good huswifery, but also the mysteries of religion and
godliness. Yea of whatever it be she speaks, she is wont always to speak
advisedly, discreetly, and graciously: and the law of kindness is in her lips;
that is, say some Expositours, she is ever speaking of showing kindness, and
stirring up others thereunto; the law, that is, the doctrine of kindness, and
the manner how men should be kind, is still in her mouth. But I rather conceive
the meaning of this last clause to be, that she always speaks lovingly and
kindly to all with whom she converseth, her husband, children, servants and
others, she is not harsh, pettish and froward in her language, as many women
usually are. And the reason why this is set down by this kind of expression,
and the law of kindness is in her lips, may be, either 1. because in so
speaking she follows the directions of the word and law of God; or 2. because
she lays a law, as it were, upon her self, thus always to speak, unless
there be very just cause to the contrary; or 3. because kindness does lay it
as it were a law upon her thus to speak, and she obeys it; or 4. because this
her kind speaking carries the force of a law or command, to make her husband
and others ready to do in a manner whatever she would have them.

Verse. 27. She looks well to the ways of her household, etc.] To wit,
whether they do well and diligently dispatch their household-affairs, and
whether they behave themselves in all things as becomes Gods people.

Verse. 28. Her children arise up and call her blessed, etc.] That is, they go
forth in public, and there they commend her, to wit, by their commendable
carriage of themselves; or, being stirred up by the observation of those many
good things for which she has been here commended; they cannot contain
themselves, but do carefully address themselves to sound forth her praise. And
indeed this I conceive is the true meaning of this expression, Her children
arise up and call her blessed. For because when men that are sitting would
undertake to do any thing, they must rise up to do it, therefore men's
buckling themselves to do any thing is usually expressed in the Scripture by
this phrase of rising up: see Genesis 37.35. Exodus 2.17. and Jos. 18.4. I know
that many Expositours do otherwise judge of those words, Her children rise up,
etc. as namely that hereby is intended, that when her children grow up in age,
bodily stature, wisdom and understanding, or that when they rise to honor and
preferment by means of the good education which she has given them, then they
highly commend her both living and dead; or else that they rise up by way of
reverence and respect, when they speak of her or to her. But because the
following words seem plainly to imply, that her husband also does the same,
Her husband also, to wit, rises up, and he praises her, and it cannot be
properly said, that the husband rises up according to these later senses that
are given of this phrase, therefore I take the former expositions to be far the
best. However, observable it is, who they are that are here particularly said
to have praised her, to wit, her husband and children. Because they have reaped
most good by her, and because they have been most conversant with her, in
regard that she is one that keeps much within doors, and there her business
chiefly lies, therefore their praises were most to be regarded.

Verse. 29. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.]
This is the commendation given her by her husband and children.

Verse. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, etc.] Whether these words
be to be taken as the words of Bathsheba or Solomon, or the good wives husband,
mentioned before verse. 28. it cannot certainly be determined. However, by
favor here is meant the comeliness of a woman's person, and by beauty a good
color or a good complexion: and these things are said to be deceitful and
vain, 1. because beauty is many times artificial and counterfeit; and 2.
because beautiful and well-favoured women have many times diverse base and
ill-favored qualities, and so husbands are usually deceived when they are
guided thereby in choosing their wives; and 3. because they are subject many
ways to decay and vanish away. And this censure of the vanity of beauty is
here added, either to show the reason why, amongst other commendable qualities
of the good wife, this was not mentioned, that she was beautiful and
well-favoured; or else by way of commending the good wife, in that whereas such
vain things as these other women do most affect, and the common sort of people
do most admire, she seeks that ornament that is far better. But a woman that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised: as if he should have said, That women
are fair it is no praise at all to them, because it is born with them; but when
they have learnt to fear the Lord, as this good wife does, that is truly
praiseworthy in them.

Verse. 31. Give her of the fruit of her hands, etc.] That is, Let her
comfortably enjoy the benefit of all her care and labors; or, let her be used
as all these commendable qualities do deserve: let her husband afford her
bountifully, both whilst he lives and at his death, all the encouragement that
so good a wife does deserve; let her children and servants yield her all due
respect, and let all extol her. Yet it may be meant merely of commending her:
Give her of the fruit of her hands, that is, Praise her according to her works;
yea and that in public, which is added in the next clause, and let her own
works praise her in the gates; though she keeps at home, as becomes a good
huswife, yet let her praise be spread abroad in the public assemblies of the
people. Yea and the expression here used may also imply, that there would be no
need of speaking of her country or parentage, or any such thing, nor of
laboring by many words and by many rhetorical flourishes to set forth her
worth; if they but tell what she had done, that would be abundantly enough to
her praise: yea the very attire and ornaments worn by her husband, and other
Rulers of the city, which were of her making, would sufficiently advance her
praise.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Book of ECCLESIASTES Or the PREACHER.
CHAP. 1.
Verse. 1. THe words of the Preacher, the son of David, King in Jerusalem] That
is, Of Solomon. He was therefore not only the Author, but also the Penman of
this book, as is also somewhat more clearly hinted, Chap. 12.10. The Preacher
sought to find out acceptable words, and that which was written was upright:
And hence it is that he usually speaks of himself in the first person, as ver.
12. I the Preacher was King over Israel, etc. and so in many other places. The
reason why he terms himself the Preacher, (or, as the word in the Original
signifies, the Penitent convert, the soul or person congregated or gathered to
the Church upon his repentance, from whence he was fallen off by his great
sins) was not happily because he was wont to do the work of a Preacher in the
assemblies of Gods people (though we find that sometimes Kings upon
extraordinary occasions have spoken to the people gathered together in their
Church Assemblies concerning matters of Religion, yea and that Solomon in
particular did so, 1 King. 8.1, 12.) but rather, because he does in this book,
as a Preacher, or reconciled penitent, teach the whole Church of God the only
way of true blessedness, and makes known publicly to all Gods people, what by
his own experience he had learnt concerning the vanity and folly of seeking
content and happiness in any thing, save only in the knowledge and fear and
service of God. I know it is questioned by many, whether ever Solomon repented
after that his gross fall by means of his Idolatrous wives, 1 King. 11.4. and
that because it was in his old age that he fell, and because he never pulled
down those Idolatrous Temples, which he had built for his wives, which if he
had repented, say they, he would surely have done. But I conceive these reasons
are too weak to prove that Solomon died in an impenitent condition, for he
might repent toward his latter end, and though he sincerely repented, yet
might he not immediately pull down the high places he had built, no more then
other good Kings afterward did; and that as being overawed with fear of
displeasing his wives and the people: and see also the Note 2 King. 23.13. Much
more may be said for his Repentance, for which see the Note 1 King. 11.41. God
called him Jedidiah, that is, beloved of the Lord; And whom the Lord loves, he
loves to the end, Joh. 13.1. Now if Solomon did repent, it cannot be well
questioned but that he wrote this Book as his public Recantation of his former
folly and madness, and that purposely that he might hereby testify his
Repentance to the whole people of God, and might recover those by his returning
to the Church whom he had scandalized by his fall: and that hence it is that he
does so often call himself The Preacher, as counting this his solemn publishing
of his repentance a greater honor to him then his regal dignity, or the most
glorious works that ever he did, even his building of the Temple. As for those
last words, the son of David, King in Jerusalem, besides what is noted Pro.
1.1. where he gave himself the same Titles, we may well conceive that here he
mentions them as aggravations of his former sins, to wit, that he that was
the son of so pious a father, and so tenderly careful of his education, and
that had been exalted by Gods special appointment to so high an honor, as to
be King of Israel Gods peculiar people, should yet notwithstanding fall into
such gross sins as he had done.

Verse. 2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is
vanity.] The drift of Solomon in this Book being to show, that true happiness
here in this life cannot be attained by the enjoyment of any thing in the
world, or of all that is desirable in the world jointly together, but only by
the enjoyment of Gods love and favor, and consequently by the knowledge and
fear and service of God, which lead thereunto, accordingly, he first here
undertakes to prove the Negative part, to wit, that no worldly thing, nor no
endeavor about worldly things, can render a man truly happy, and that because
they are all extremely vain, and therefore altogether ineffectuall to make a
man happy, which is laid down in this Proposition, Vanity of vanities, says
the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity, that is, they are all most
vain, vanity it self in the abstract; yea extreme vanity, (for thus the
superlative degree in the Hebrew is usually expressed, as where the basest of
servants is called a servant of servants, Genesis 9.25. and the highest heaven,
the heaven of heavens, 1 King 8.27. and the most excellent Song, The Song of
Songs, Cant. 1.1, etc.) Now all the creatures, though very good in themselves,
and in their kind, are said to be thus extremely vain, either comparatively in
regard of God, or else in order unto happiness, in that neither the possession
nor fruition of them can ever make men truly blessed, and that because, 1.
there is no stability nor permanency in them, they are subject to change and
corruption; if those that seek after them do obtain them, they cannot long
enjoy them; 2. they can never yield full satisfaction to the souls of those
that do enjoy them, and in that regard may well be deemed empty, worthless
things, imperfect, and from which no solid profit can be gotten: and 3. they
are deceitful and lying vanities, they seem to promise much content and
happiness to men, but are so far from yielding them that content and good
which they expect from them, that often they bring upon them much grief and
trouble, yea are the occasion of their eternal destruction; And this truth
concerning the vanity of all earthly things is here repeated again and again,
not only to imply the unquestionable certainty and the great importance of it,
but also because men are prone naturally to dote so exceedingly on the things
here below, and are so hardly won either to believe or to mind the vanity of
them, and because Solomon, being upon his repentance wondrously affected with
this truth, was the more earnest to press it upon others, and to take them off
from resting in any thing but in God only.

Verse. 3. What profit has a man of all his labor which he takes under the
sun?] That is, here below; or under the heaven? Only the Sun is mentioned, 1.
Because it is by the light of the sun principally that we are enabled to
follow our labors; as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 104.22, 23 The sun arises --
man goes forth unto his work and to his labor until the evening, and
comfortaby to enjoy the fruit of our labors, Chap. 11.7. And secondly, Because
it is of all the heavenly lights the most conspleuous and best known, and
seems to be in the eye of common people the highest of all visible things. And
the meaning of this question here propounded is, that when men have toyled and
moyled themselves for any worldly thing, they get nothing thereby which truly
deserves the name of profit; that they have their labor for their pains, or
that they weary themselves for very vanity, as the Prophet speaks, Hab. 2.13.
All worldly things being no better; as was said in the foregoing verse; It is
true indeed that in regard of worldly advantages, as Solomon himself tells us
elsewhere, Pro. 14.23. In all labor there is profit. But now because all such
profit is wholly unprofitable in order unto happiness, (which is the only thing
worth the minding) in regard amongst other reasons they do a man no good after
he is dead, (and dye all men must, as it follows in the next verse, One
generation passes away and another comes,) neither can they quiet and
satisfy the souls of men whilst they do enjoy them, therefore Solomon
concludes that there is no true profit to be gotten by them. When men labor
for those things that are above the Sun, to wit, the favor of God, and life
eternal in Gods kingdom of glory, there is true profit to be gotten thereby:
But it is not so in that labor which is spent about worldly things.

Verse 4. One generation passes away, and another generation comes, etc.]
Some conceive that Solomon in these words begins to prove that, which in the
sequel of the Chapter is more fully expressed, to wit, that all the labor of
men's minds in the study of natural things is vanity, and can never make a man
happy, and that because by reason of the brevity of man's life; first, it is but
a very small measure of knowledge in these things that any man can attain; and
secondly, that knowledge, which he does attain must within a while perish
together with himself. But the drift of these words is rather to show, either
that as all other things are mere vanity, so is man also, in that he is
mortal, yea is always flitting and passing away, and thereupon also in
continual fear and danger of death; or else that all earthly things and all
men's labor about them must needs be vanity, because let a man get never so
much of these things, being mortal, he cannot hope long to enjoy them: Neither
can any earthly thing lengthen out a man's days beyond one generation, and
consequently, eternity being the inseparable adjunct of happiness, it is not
possible that such things should make any man happy. But why is that next
clause added, But the earth abides for ever, that is, till the end of all
things, as long as the world continues? I answer; It is added the more to set
forth the vanity of man in regard of his mortality, by showing that man is so
far from being made happy by any of his enjoyments here in this world, that
his condition here is worse and more vain then is the condition of other
creatures, that were made for his use: he is more vain then the earth that he
treads upon, which is as the stage, whereon every man in his generation acts
his part, and then passes away never to be seen again, whilst that continues
still unto the end of the world; yea he is more vain then those creatures that
seem most inconstant, as is shown in the three following verses.

Verse. 5. The Sun also arises, and the Sun goes down, and hastes to the
place where he arose.] It is in the original, and pants to the place where he
arose, that is, it makes have, as if it panted with running. See the Notes
Psalm 19.5, 6. The opinions of Expositors concerning Solomon's aim in adding
this which he says here concerning the Sun, as likewise that which follows
in the two next verses concerning the Wind and the Rivers, do somewhat differ:
1. Some conceive that Solomon mentions these things only as pictures and
resemblances, which do represent and set forth unto men, the changeableness of
their own condition, to wit, that look as these things have their continual
revolutions, and are ever in continual motion, so is it with men and their
affairs: or particularly that the getting of wisdom makes men labor and toil
continually, and so to be in as restless a condition as the Sun, and Wind, and
Waters are: yea, and that the mutability and mortality of man, being as
natural to man as these perpetual motions are to these Creatures, that can no
more be avoided in man to make him happy, than the constant motions of these
creatures can be hindered or changed. Again 2. Others hold, that the drift of
these passages is by showing the instable condition of the creatures to prove
their vanity, especially in regard of making men happy. And hereupon it is,
that having said, That all things under the Sun are vanity, he first begins
here with the Sun it self, the rather because if the Sun, which is under God
the first cause of the generation and corruption of things below, be subject to
vanity, it is no marvel though other things be so too. Now by the Suns
continual wheeling about the earth, Solomon proves the vanity thereof,
especially in regard of making man happy, and that because, 1. If it could
bring any happiness to man in its rising, when it sets at night it would be
lost again. And 2. notwithstanding any benefit that it yields to men by its
heat and light, moving thus year after year in one constant way, no man can
expect any further advantage by it, than others have had in their generation,
who have only enjoyed it for a time, and never received any durable happiness
from it. But thirdly, others say (and that to me seems the most probable) that
the drift of Solomon in this place, is further to show, That man is more vain
than other creatures, that seem to be in the most restless condition, and that
because they keep steadfastly their set course according to the Law of their
creation, whereas men one generation after another, do continually pass away.
And this he first shows in the Sun, which observes its constant course in
its rising and setting, and being set does still rise again in equal glory,
whereas man dies, and is gone, and never returns again, which is just what
the Heathen Poet said, Soles occidere and redire possunt;
Nobis, cum semel occidit brevis lux,
Nox est perpetua una dormienda.


Verse. 6. The Wind goes toward the South, and turns about unto the North,
etc.] Because in the original the Wind is not expressed in the beginning of
this verse, therefore some translate it, He goes toward the South, etc. and so
understand it, as with reference to the foregoing verse, of the Sun, to wit,
that one half of the year, namely in Summer and Autumn, it goes toward the
South, and the other half of the year, namely in the Winter and Spring, it
turns about into the North. But now our Translators take it as spoken with
respect to the last clause of the verse, where the Wind is mentioned, and
accordingly do understand this also of the Wind, that it sometimes blows from
the South, and then it goes about into the opposite part of the heaven, and
blows from the North; It whirleth about continually that is, it suddenly
passes about the heavens, sometimes being in one point of the heaven, and
presently again in another; and the Wind returns again according to his
circuits, that is, it whirls about from one quarter of the heaven to another
again and again, as it has formerly done. As for the drift of Solomon in these
words, it is the same as before in the foregoing verse; for which see the Note
there.

Verse. 7. All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full, etc.] That
is, so as to swell above the earth, and to overflow the Banks and Bounds which
God has set to it: Unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they
return again. Where I conceive the order of Solomon's words makes it clear, that
the Fountains and Springs from whence the waters of the Rivers do flow, are
said here to be the place whither they return again. For first he speaks of the
Rivers running down from thence into the Sea, and notes this as observable,
that notwithstanding, the Sea is not full: and then to show the reason why the
Sea does not overflow its banks by this means, he adds, that unto the place
from whence the Rivers come, thither they return again, to wit, because from
the Sea they go through certain pores and veins and secret passages of the
earth (by which means also being strained, they lose the saltness they had
contracted in the Sea, and become sweet and fresh again) and so return back to
the fountains from whence they came. As for the drift and scope of these words,
it is the same with that which is said before concerning the revolutions of the
Sun, verse. 5. for which see the Note there. Only the vanity of the creatures
in their not satisfying the desires of men, either in point of knowledge, or
otherwise, is here more fully set forth by the Seas not being full,
notwithstanding so many Rivers do continually flow into it.

Verse. 8. All things are full of labor, etc.] Some Expositors understand this,
as that which went before, of the restless motions of the Creatures; as if
Solomon had said, As these particulars before mentioned, so indeed all things
in this world generally, do as it were weary themselves with continual
restless labors, never abiding long in one settled condition, but being all in
their kinds some way or other inconstant, transitory and fleeting; and
accordingly they conceive the drift of these words is likewise, either 1. To
show, that therefore all things here below are representations of man's vanity
and inconstancy, so that where ever we turn our eyes, we may behold our own
vanity, or, 2. to prove that men can never enjoy any stable happiness by
things that are so mutable and unstable. But the generality of Expositors do
otherwise understand these words, to wit, that all things are said to be full
of labor, because men's endeavors about them, either in seeking to attain
them, or in the enjoying and making use of them, or in searching to find out
the nature, the causes and reasons of them (which some think is principally
here intended) do weary them with continual toil and labor: so that this may
be taken as another argument whereby Solomon proves the vanity of all worldly
things, to wit, because all things here below, yea even those things wherein
men take most delight, do weary them with continual toil and labor, and that
which brings so much trouble to men, and is so far from yielding them
perpetual contentment, that they become weary of it, can never make a man
happy, and therefore must needs be vain as to such a purpose. As for the
following words, Man cannot utter it, (That is, no man whatsoever, no not the
wisest of men, the tongue of man is not able to express it) that must needs be
meant, either of the continual restlesnesse and changeableness of the
creatures, (of which some understand the foregoing words,) that this cannot by
any words be set forth, or else rather of the toil and labor wherewith all
earthly things do weary men, to wit, that this is so great, that it is
unutterable; both because the creatures are so innumerable about which they are
exercised, and because there are so many several ways whereby men are wearied
with them. And so this may imply also why in the next words he instanceth only
in men's seeing and hearing, because it is not possible to speak of all things
particularly, The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with
hearing, whereby may be meant either, 1. That they can never hear or see enough
of those things wherewith they are delighted, but that still they would see and
hear them more and more, and are vexed when it cannot be: Or else 2. that when
they have seen or heard some things even to weariness, yet then they are not
satisfied, but would see or hear something more to give them further content.
And hereby Solomon would imply that it is thus also in all other things; men
are continually wearying themselves about them, as having an unwearied desire
to enjoy them, and yet when they have them, they are not satisfied neither with
their enjoying of them: So that the only way for men to be happy, is to look
after spiritual blessings in heavenly places, those things that eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, which though they yield true and full contentment to men,
yet they are never weary of them, but still desire to partake of them more and
more.

Verse. 9. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be, etc.] As if he
should have said, As no man hitherto could attain happiness in any earthly
things, so neither shall any man attain it in time to come, and that because
all natural things continue still the same that they have formerly been,
(according to that unquestionable axiom in Philosophy, Natura nihil molitur
novi, Nature produces no other but the same effects it has formerly done) and
so likewise it is for all humane and voluntary actions, they are still the same
for substance, as formerly, as it follows in the next words, and that which
is done is that which shall be done; and thereupon he concludes, and there is
no new thing under the sun. Now the drift of these word is to prove the
vanity of all things, in regard of making men happy, from the perpetual
impossibility there is, that ever any man should attain to a better condition
of worldly felicity, then others in former times have attained, and that
because all things and all the actions and endeavors of men have been, are and
shall always be the same for substance; former ages have gone as far for the
searching after, and attaining of happiness, in the things of this world, as
the later can do; nor shall the generations following find more, then others
have done before them. It is not therefore to be questioned but that many
things have been done, and may be done in the world, in regard of particular
individual circumstances, which have not been done formerly: We read that
Lamech's sons found out several inventions, that had not been known in former
days, Genesis 4.21, 32. And we know that in later times some discoveries of new
things have been made, as of the Mariners card, the Art of Printing, Gun
powder, etc. To be sure the works of God have been many times strange and new,
such as never were done before, as when the earth swallowed up Korah, Dathan
and Abiram, that was a new thing, Numb. 16.30. and when the only begotten Son
of God was incarnate and made man, The Lord, says the Prophet Jer. 31.22 has
created a new thing, A woman shall compass a man. But, I say, this is not that
which the Prophet here intends; His meaning is that there is no new thing to be
found or discovered, so far exceeding the discoveries of former times, as
that the knowledge of it, or the enjoyment of it can satisfy the heart of man,
and make him truly blessed. As in order to happiness there is no more content
to be found in the creature then formerly there has been; the whole state of
the world and all things therein are as subject to changes and revolutions as
formerly they have been; And so the condition of man's life, his affections and
endeavors are still the same, they yield no more satisfaction, but full as
much vexation to men as formerly they have done. And therefore no new
foundation or means of happiness can ever be found in the things here below.
If we desire to find out those new things, which will make us happy, we must
seek them in the Word of God, where new and wonderful things are still and
still to be found, Psa. 119.18. 1 Cor. 2.9. and where God has discovered to us
that new and living way, Heb. 10.20. which can only bring us into the new
Jerusalem, where there will be still new delights, and that without the least
weariness unto all eternity.

Verse. 11. There is no remembrance of former things, etc.] That is, we know
little or nothing to speak of concerning those things that have been done in
former times, neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to
come, with those that shall come after, that is, of those things that shall be
done hereafter, the succeeding posterity will know as little as we do of those
things, that were done in the ages before us. Now this is here added, either 1.
To imply that the knowledge which men have of things does perish with them, and
that it is at the best but weak, and imperfect, and therefore cannot make them
happy; If some new things be found out, as many old things are forgotten, and
so through the brevity of man's life, and the narrowness of his experience, the
stock of his knowledge must needs be very defective: Or 2. to intimate one
reason amongst many others, why men do earnestly seek for happiness in earthly
things, namely because we know not the things of old, and so do not take notice
how they of former ages have been deceived in seeking happiness in those
things; which if we did, it would caution us, and we would not suffer the
flattering vanity of earthly things to deceive us, as it has done so many
before us. Or rather 3. with reference to the foregoing verse, to give a reason
why many men think those things new, which indeed are not so, and so will think
hereafter, to wit, because men do not know what has been done in former times,
which if they did exactly know, they would find that there is nothing done
which has not had its pattern and parallel, at least something as excellent
as it in foregoing ages.

Verse. 12. I the preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.] See the Note
above, ver. 1. Having spoken concerning the vanity of all things in general,
here Solomon addresses himself to show the vanity of some special and
principal things, wherein most men do seek felicity, and that from his own
experience. And to show that his testimony herein was worthy of all credit, he
prefixeth this which he says here concerning himself, to wit, that as for the
present he was a true convert, and desirous to make known the right way of
happiness to the people of God, so also before, when he made that search and
enquiry into things, whereof he speaks in the following verse, he lived not a
private life in his fathers house, but was actually king, and that over Israel,
who were a wise and understanding people, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Amongst whom were many
holy men, Prophets and teachers of the Law; and in Jerusalem, Gods dwelling
place, and which was in those times far and near esteemed the great Oracle
of wisdom and truth; from whence it must needs follow, that he could not want
any help requisite for the attaining of that which he sought after: for in
regard of his great power and authority, and withal that great measure of
wisdom and riches, which he had at that time obtained from God above all that
were before him, he might have what books, and records money or men could bring
him in, and what help could be had by conference with others, and in a word,
what ever could be desired to promote his endeavors herein: as himself
afterward acknowledges, Chap. 2.12. And therefore his testimony in this
business must needs be of great importance.

Verse. 13. And I gave my heart, etc.] Here Solomon begins with showing the
vanity he had found in all humane knowledge. Nothing seems more likely to make
a man happy and to yield him full content then this does, not only because it
often makes way to great riches and honors, but also especially because
knowledge in it self is such an excellent endowment, and yields so great
delight. And therefore in the first place he undertakes from his own experience
to show the vanity thereof. I gave my heart (says he) that is, I did
cheerfully and resolvedly set my mind upon this, and determined to make it my
only great business, to seek and search out by wisdom, concerning all things
that are done under heaven, that is, wisely, and with all the skill I had,
according to that extraordinary measure of wisdom that God had given me, to
search out by study observation and trial, the knowledge of all things that
are, and are done in the world by God or the creature, all the secrets of
nature, the principles, and properties, the causes and effects, the uses and
reasons of all natural things, as likewise of all humane endeavors and
events. As I wanted not all requisite means and helps for the effecting of such
a design, so neither was I wanting in my desires and endeavors after it; and
therefore even in this regard also what I testify, after such a diligent and
eager enquiry, deserves to be received with all credit. And then for the
following words, This sore labor has God given to the sons of man, to be
exercised therewith; The drift thereof is to show that it was agreeable to the
will of God that he should seek thus to know things, and that because God has
decreed that all the children of Adam should take pains herein, as is evident
in that he has given them the creatures that they may study them, and in that
he has implanted in men's hearts a desire to know them, and has enjoined us in
his word to study them, and to meditate on them, and to seek by all lawful
means to increase our knowledge as much as we may, and that to the end that men
may be exercised therewith, that is, that herein they might have continual
employment, and might not live idly. And whereas this cannot be attained
without sore labor, even this also God has imposed upon men, as a punishment
for their first Apostasy from God; for had it not been for that, there would
have been no need of any such toil for the getting of knowledge: Only now God
has laid this sore labor upon all men in their seeking after knowledge, to be
exercised therewith, or, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, to afflict them,
to wit, that hereby they may see the misery that man has brought upon himself,
and that by discovering their own weakness, they may be kept humble, and in a
constant dependence upon God. However, by calling the labor that is undergone
in seeking after knowledge, sore labor, Solomon does at present imply, what in
the following verse is more fully expressed, namely, that natural knowledge
being accompanied with so much toil and labor, can never make a man happy.

Verse. 14. I have seen all the works that are done under the sun, etc.] As if
he should have said, By this mine exact search into all natural and humane
things, I observed what was to be observed, and obtained the knowledge I sought
after, even as much understanding in these things, as by humane industry could
be attained, and behold, as if he should have said, Mark what I say, for it is
a wonderful thing, and almost incredible to be spoken, and that which I never
expected, all is vanity and vexation of spirit; that is, I found that the
knowledge of all these things, as well as the things themselves, was not only
vain, unable to make me happy, or to yield me full contentation and rest, (I
had my labor for my travel, and that was all) but also the means of much
vexation of spirit to me, and that because 1 It cannot be gotten without much
afflicting toil: 2. Men are vexed with fear of losing what they have gotten: 3.
The knowledge men get, the more ignorance still they discover in themselves;
and 4. Impossible it is ever to gain perfection of knowledge, or fully to
satisfy the desite men have of it.

Verse. 15. That which is crooked, cannot be made strait, and that which is
wanting, cannot be numbered, etc.] This is added to prove the vanity of all
natural knowledge, to wit, because men cannot thereby rectify that which is
amiss in any regard: that which is naturally naught, or contrary to what we
desire, cannot be amended, but by the mighty power of God; and that which is
wanting to make a man happy, cannot be supplied: See the Note, chap. 7.13. But
for the through and clear understanding hereof, it will conduce much to take
notice of the truth of this in the several heads of things that are
comprehended herein: For 1. It is true in point of knowledge it self; for let
men attain never so great an excellency in all humane learning, there are many
things, even in the great book the Creatures, as well as in the book of the
Scriptures, which are as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet 3.16. hard to be understood;
so that the wisest men that are, can never make such a clear discovery of them,
as shall clearly and fully satisfy the minds of men therein. And then again,
the defects that are in the knowledge of the most learned men, are innumerable;
and if they cannot be numbered, much less can they be remedied: there are many
thousand things in nature, which are still unknown, to them that know most;
yea, the things which men know not, are infinitely more then those are which
they know. 2. It is true also in regard of the disposition and manners of men;
The nature and life of man is, as long as he continues in that corrupt estate
wherein he is born, wholly sinful, perverse and crooked, Psalm. 125.5. And so
likewise, the sinful defects of men's lives are innumerable, Wh^ can understand
his errors? says David, Psalm. 19.12. Yea the very nature of man is many ways
defective, both for principles and power to do well, We are not sufficient of
our selves to think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. See also Romans 3.9,
10, 22. Now all the knowledge in natural things, that can possibly be attained,
can never rectify these things that are thus perverse and out of frame, in the
nature and lives of men, and so remove the causes of their infelicity, and make
them happy; it can neither restore man to his original integrity, nor supply
his manifold defects; as is most evident, in that the greatest Philosophers,
and the most eminent Scholars that ever were amongst the Heathens, have been
as vicious as other men, professing themselves wise, they became fools, Romans
1.22. yea such have been found most averse from learning that true saving
knowledge that is taught in the Gospel. See 1 Cor. 1.20.26. Indeed by and
through Christ all this may be remedied; it was that which the Baptist foretold
concerning him, Luke 3.5. Every valley shall be filled, and the crooked shall
be made straight; he will by degrees perfectly reform all the crookedness of
our nature and lives, Ephesians. 4.13. and out of his fullness all our wants shall be
supplied, Psalm. 84.11. But no natural or acquired knowledge can ever do it. 3.
It is true also in regard of man's outward estate, and of all the businesses and
actions of men, their success and events; men's bodies are subject to manifold
diseases; and if an eye or a toe be wanting in a child that is born, it cannot
be supplied: there are many miscarriages, casualties, cross and crooked events
in the best ways that the wisest of men take in any thing that they set
themselves to do; some thing or other they shall find was wanting of what they
should have done, and in many things they still come short of what they hoped
and labored for; all which likewise no natural knowledge of men can possibly
prevent: and 4. It is true in regard of all the creatures, for though God made
them all very good, and they are all strait and right and perfect in
themselves, yet the sin of man has brought much vanity, confusion, corruption
and disorder upon the whole creation, Romans 8.20. the creatures are frail and
changeable, there is an enmity amongst them, and they are subject to many
casualties; and these crookednesses and defects in them, man with all his
knowledge, is no way able to help, but so they will continue, until the times
of restitution of all things, Act 3.21. when God has promised to make a new
heaven and a new earth, 2 Pet. 2.13. and to deliver the creature from the
bondage of corruption, into a glorious liberty, Romans 8.21.

Verse. 16. I communed with mine own heart, etc.] Lest it should be objected
that happiness might be attained by knowledge, though Solomon had not attained
it, here he professes, that upon an impartial conferring with his own heart
about this, he found that he had attained an incomparable measure of knowledge,
far above all others that had been before him, so that if any man could have
attained happiness by knowledge, he should certainly have done it: I communed
with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and have gotten
more wisdom, than all they that have been before me in Jerusalem, that is, by
my studies and endeavors I have much increased that stock of wisdom, which was
at first given me of God; See the Note 1 King. 3.12. Yea my heart had great
experience, (or, had seen much, as it is in the Hebrew) of wisdom and
knowledge, that is, I had got a clear insight into all kind of knowledge and
learning: Or by wisdom may be meant speculative knowledge, and by knowledge,
what he had found by practical experience; or by wisdom, the ability of men to
understand things; and by knowledge, the acquired insight into things that is
gotten thereby.

Verse. 17. And I gave my heart, etc.] See the Note above, ver. 13. To know
wisdom, and to know madness and folly, that is, say some Expositors, to know
the worth of wisdom by experience, and experimentally also to know the worth
and benefit of sensual things, which indeed to do, in a way of seeking
happiness thereby, is no better than madness and folly. But because in the
following verse Solomon concludes with a censure concerning the vanity and
vexation of wisdom and knowledge, I do not think that as yet he is speaking of
his seeking content in sensual things. And again some understand this as well
as that which went before, of Solomon's seeking to attain all kind of
knowledge, even that of natural Philosophy; and so accordingly as by wisdom
they understand truth, so by madness and folly they understand the mad
erroneous opinions of men, the manifold jarring and repugnant tenets of
contentious men, who proudly affecting to be admired, do intrude themselves
into things above their reach, and will however oppose others, that they may
seem to know more then others, and so thereby discover great ignorance, folly
and madness. But the most and best Expositors hold that having before spoken of
the vanity of the knowledge of natural Philosophy, and how this was altogether
ineffectual for the reforming of men's lives, here he shows how he betook
himself to the study of moral Philosophy; And I gave my heart to know wisdom,
that is, the wisdom of moral, political, and practical knowledge, or the
wisdom of virtue; And (because every thing is best known by knowing its
contrary) to know madness and folly, that is, to know what vice is, and to
observe and understand the ways of those that lived wickedly, foolishly and
madly; I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit, to wit, because he
found that all men come short of this wisdom, neither can the greatest
perfection of moral wisdom, so far as it is attainable by humane endeavors,
ever yield any full rest or satisfaction to men; and because he found on the
other side, how generally men gave themselves up to sinful, mad and foolish
courses, the pleasures and delights whereof did rather increase men's misery,
than any way tend to their happiness. And indeed the same censure may be passed
concerning all kind of natural knowledge, as appears by that general conclusion
wherewith Solomon shuts up this discourse in the next verse.

Verse. 18. For in much wisdom is much grief, etc.] To wit, 1 Because it
cannot be attained without much labor and toil, both of body and mind; which
often impaires such men's health, and wastes their spirits, and endangers their
lives; and makes them melancholy, and of a sour and peevish temper. 2. Because
their knowledge will still be found to be imperfect and uncertain, the more
they know, the more they will discover their own ignorance, and how little that
is they know in comparison of that which they know not, and so still they will
be the more eager to search into hidden things, and so put themselves upon more
and more toil and labor. 3. Because the more knowledge a man has, the more
he will discover the corruption of man's nature, his own and other men's vanity,
folly, madness, and misery. 4. Because he will find that with no knowledge he
has attained, he can reform this folly and perverseness of his own or other
men's nature and ways. 5. Because the more knowing men are, the more toilsome
businesses in the way of teaching and government they shall be put upon. 6.
Because they shall find that the most learned men are most envied, and many
times most injuriously dealt with, the silliest fools being usually preferred
before them. 7. Because the most able men for wisdom and learning, do many
times err when they think to do best, and are usually disappointed in those
designs they have best contrived. 8. Because all such learning and knowledge is
of a perishing nature; when old age comes it usually decays, and to be sure
when death seiseth upon men, it passes away, is lost and comes to nothing: and
lastly, and especially, because he shall certainly find at length that true
happiness hereby can never be attained.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. I Said in my heart, etc.] Having found that happiness was not to be
attained by any knowledge of the creature, he resolved in the next place to
make trial whether it might be attained by the plentiful fruition and
enjoyment of the creature; I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee
with mirth, as if he should have said, I did not do this, as being transported
by the power of sudden corrupt passions, but upon mature advising with my
self, I deliberately resolved to give my self to delights and pleasures, to
wit, by way of trial, whether that would yield me true content and happiness
or no; I will prove thee with mirth, says Solomon to himself, that is, with a
merry and voluptuous life; therefore enjoy pleasure, as if he should have said,
Afflict not thy self any longer with the toilesome study and endeavor for
learning and knowledge, but take thy fill of all lawful pleasure and delight
in earthly things. So that for the understanding of this we must consider that
surely Solomon, being so wise and good man as he was, did not intend hereby
that he would give up himself to brutish sensual pleasure, without any regard
of reason, religion or honesty, but only that he would endeavor to give
himself all content in all such delights as might be seemly for a man. It
cannot indeed be denied but that even these might carry him too far, and make
him too much forget both God and himself. But yet by the sequel of the
Chapter it is evident, that he meant to go no further in these things, then
might stand with wisdom and piety. And yet we see that even upon this course
of his, he at last passes this censure, and behold this also is vanity, that
is, there is no true tranquillity nor happiness to be found in these things,
and that because such delights do never satisfy men: usually men are cloyed
with them, or at least there is some mixture of sorrow in them; and besides
they are commonly the cause of much sin and misery, and so are of short
continuance and end in sorrow: see Pro. 14.13. and then a little misery and
sorrow makes men forget all their former pleasures.

Ver. 2. I said of laughter, It is mad, etc.] That is, I said of all excessive
pleasure, when a man gives up himself to it, and makes it his business to
live a merry and voluptuous life, that it made men frantic, or that it is no
better then madness, or that it argues a man to be mad; to wit, 1 because in
such excess of mirth, men are usually transported beyond all bounds of
moderation, even to the doing of those things which are unreasonable, and which
argue much vanity, levity and incomposednesse of judgment in those that do
them: 2 because it is no better then madness, for men to seek for happiness
in such base, such light and foolish things, as carnal pleasures are, things of
such short continuance, and that do so usually end in sin and sorrow: and 3
Because for men to be so merry and joviall, considering the misery of all men
by nature, and the many dangers they are always subject to, may well be deemed
madness. And indeed it is likely that the ground of Solomon's using this
expression was, because distracted men are often given to much laughter; yea even
then when they are in burning fevers, and other dangerous sicknesses. And then
for the next clause, And of mirth, What does it? I conceive it is another way
of expressing the same thing, to wit, that such a merry voluptuous life did
bring to a man no true profit at all; What does it? says Solomon, as if he
should have said, It does a man no good in the world; Or, It does a man hurt
rather then any good; they that live such a kind of life, they do but make
fools of themselves. But now some hold, that the first clause is meant of
immoderate rejoicing, expressed outwardly in laughter and such like jollity,
and the second of a free and frolic temper of heart and spirit.

Ver. 3. I sought in mine heart to give my self unto wine, etc.] Some of our
best Expositors, as far ar I can discern their meaning, do hold that in the
two foregoing verses Solomon related, how at first from the study of wisdom he
betook himself to live wholly in jollity and pleasure, without minding any
thing else, and how he found that to be mere vanity, folly, and madness: and
that now in this and the following verses he relates how hereupon he resolved
upon another course, which was, that seeing neither the alone austere search
after wisdom, nor the alone giving up himself to a voluptuous life, would
yield him that happiness and full contentation in this life which he sought
after; he would now try a middle course, prudentially to temper wisdom and
pleasure together, so to mind the study of wisdom, as withal to allay the
bitterness thereof with a free use of all worldly delights and pleasures, and
so to order himself in the way of his delights and pleasures, according to the
directions of wisdom, as not to be dissolute and excessive therein, but to
keep within the bounds of reason and piety: But I conceive that Solomon does
here only farther amplify what he had begun to say ver. 1. concerning the
trial he had resolved to make, whether that happiness which he sought after
might be attained by taking his fill of worldly pleasures; which he does, not
only by expressing how far he meant to go in the enjoying of such delights
and pleasures, to wit, no farther then might stand with the dictates of
wisdom, but also by reckoning up many of those particular delights, wherewith
he sought to please himself and accordingly he first here begins with that of
feasting; I sought in mine heart, (says he) that is, after long deliberation
within my self about the way of living happily and contentedly in this world,
I did at last determine, to give my self unto wine, that is, to all kind of
delicacies in eating and drinking, in banqueting and feasting: It is in the
Original, To draw my flesh with wine, that is, to allure himself to live
pleasantly in regard of eating and drinking liberally and daintily; Or, to draw
out, and enlarge his flesh, to make it more full, and plump, and tender and
fresh; (for sparing diet and course food does contract the flesh, whereas
plentiful and delicate feeding does loosen and enlarge it) Having contracted
leanenesse by hard study, he meant to draw it forth again into fatness and
fulness by faring deliciously every day. Or, to draw forth, and carry on
himself in a way of continual feasting day after day, and so to spend much
time in it; as upon the same ground, the same phrase is used in another
business, Psalm. 85.5. Will thou draw out thine anger unto all generations? As
for the following words (yet acquainting mine heart with wisdom) the drift
thereof is to show, that in this resolution of his to give himself to feasting
and merriment, it was still with this settled reservation of mind, that he meant
not wholly to abandon the study of wisdom, but to intermix the one with the
other, or rather that he would not in his jollity and feasting suffer himself
to be transported beyond the bounds of wisdom and piety, nor suffer himself
to be made a slave to his pleasures, his aim being only to make trial what
happiness was to be found therein: And to lay hold on folly, that is, to
embrace and use those pleasures, which afterward by experience he found to be
no better then folly, Till I might see what was that good for the sons of
men, which they should do under the heaven, all the days of their life, that
is, that he might by experience discover what it was that would bring men to
live most happily and contentedly, and that not for a while only, but all the
time of their abode here in this world. This Solomon professes was his aim in
giving of himself up to the pleasures of this life; He did it not vitiously,
to drown himself in sensuality, but only by way of experiment, to see how
far a life spent in such pleasures would yield a man content and comfort here
in this world. And yet probable it is that this proved at last the occasion of
his Apostasy from God in his old age. But however observable it is still, that
Solomon's aim was not to search what was the chief happiness of man (for that
he knew consisted in his living for ever with God in heaven) but to try what it
was that would bring men to live contentedly all their days under heaven, that
is, here in this world.

Verse. 4. I made me great works etc.] That is, magnificent works; and though
this may be principally meant of those works that are here immediately
mentioned, his houses, vineyards, gardens and orchards, etc. yet I see not but
that under this general expression, all other the stately works that were made
by him, may be comprehended, such as were his golden targets, and his ivory
throne, 1 King. 10.16, 17, 18, etc. and his princely bed, mentioned, Cant. 3.7.
I builded me houses, to wit, not only those expressed in the Scripture, his own
house, his Queens house, and the house of Lebanon, for which see the Notes 1
King. 7.1, 2, 8, etc. and 2 Chronicles. 8.11. but also several other houses besides,
as appears by that which is said, 1 King. 9.19. that Solomon built whatever he
desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his
dominion: I planted me vineyards, to wit, of the rarest and choicest vines that
could be gotten, one whereof we find mentioned, Cant. 8.11. Solomon had a
vineyard at Baal-hamon, etc.

Verse. 6. I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that brings
forth trees.] Hereby may be meant his parks and groves that yielded him other
trees, besides fruit trees, as Oaks and Cedars; or else his orchards that were
for the spatiousnesse of them like little woods; or rather nurseries of trees,
whether fruit trees or others, which usually indeed have most need of watering.

Verse. 7. I got me servants and maidens, etc.] That is, a great number of both
sorts, as became so great a King. See the Note 1 King. 10.1. and 1 King. 4.22,
23. and had servants born in my house; or, as it is in the Original, Sons of my
house, that is, such as were the children of my bond-servants. As for the
servants of Solomon mentioned, Ezra 2.55. See the Note there: And then for the
last clause, also I had great possessions of great and small cattle, etc. there
by great cattle may be meant, not oxen only, but also deer and camels, and
horses, and mules; for of horses particularly we find that he had great
abundance. See the Note 1 King 4.26.

Verse. 8. I gathered me also silver and gold, etc.] To wit, in great abundance;
partly by the revenues of the Crown, and the taxes he imposed upon his own
people; See the Note 1 King. 12.4. partly by the tributes he received from
other Nations round about him, that were become tributary to him, 1 King.
10.25. partly by the presents that were sent him by other Princes far and
near, by way of honoring him for his wisdom and greatness, 2 Chronicles. 9.9, 14.
and partly by the return of his navies, which he sent forth into remote
countries. See the Notes 1 King. 9.28. and 10.14, 22. by means whereof the King
made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, ver. 27. and the peculiar treasure of
Kings and of the Provinces, that is, the choicest rarities which the Kingdoms
and Countries about him did afford, and whatever those Kings and the Governors
of those Provinces had, which they did most highly esteem, and lay up most
charily amongst their treasures, for these they sent to me for presents; as
happily curious pieces of plate, chains and bracelets, jewels and precious
stones, precious ointments, and spices, and perfumes, etc. I gat me men-singers
and women-singers, and the delights of the sons of men, that is, say some
Expositors, whatever else can be named, wherein men are wont to delight. But I
rather conceive it is meant particularly of that which follows, as namely
musical instruments, and that of all sorts; which is far more probable, then
that which others say, that it is meant of the fair women that were taken
captives in the war, which in those times all sorts of men did much delight
in, according to that, Judge. 5.30. Have they not sped? Have they not divided
the prey, to every man a damsel or two?

Verse. 9. So I was great, etc.] To wit, in wealth, power, glory, and renown;
and accordingly lived in great plenty and magnificent pomp and state; and
increased more then then all that were before me in Jerusalem, to wit, not only
private men, but Kings also; not only the Canaanitish kings, but also those
that formerly reigned over Israel, to wit, Saul and David: yea 1 King. 10.23.
it is said, that King Solomon exceeded all the Kings of the earth for riches,
and for wisdom; And then it follows, also my wisdom remained with me, that is,
I lost not that wisdom which God had bestowed upon me in natural things, nor
did I either in the getting or using of these things transgress the Rules of
wisdom, that so I might without check of conscience take full delight in them:
So that I failed not of doing what I propounded to my self; (for which see the
Note above, verse. 3.) Now this he mentions, not only as a rare and unusual
thing, (because pleasures do usually besot men) but also hereby to manifest,
that whilst he gave himself thus to the pleasures of this life, he did
notwithstanding seriously mind the end which therein he propounded to himself,
namely, by wisdom to observe, what real good and satisfaction these things
would yield to the heart of man, and that therefore the judgment that he
passes here concerning such things was worthy of all credit.

Verse. 10. And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them, etc.] That
is, So far as might stand with wisdom and piety, he labored to give
himself full content in whatever might delight his eyes (and under the eyes, as
the sense which men chiefly desire to satisfy; see Chap. 11.9. and 1 John
2.16. all the other senses are comprehended) he spared for no cost nor labor
herein; I withheld not my heart from any joy: The meaning is, that whereas his
heart was eagerly bent upon jollity and pleasure, he did not restrain it from
any delight, that he might lawfully take, no not so much as by delaying to
satisfy its desires; For my heart rejoiced in all my labor, that is, he was
really and inwardly delighted and pleased with the works that with much labor
he had caused to be made (as indeed men do usually take most content in those
things which they have gotten by their own labor, or which themselves have
caused to be made) and the rather because he was not hindered by war,
sickness, or any other notable affliction or sorrow; And this was my portion
of all my labor; that is, the use of these things, or the delight I took in
them, I resolved was the only fruit I was to reap of my labors, because when
I came to dye, I was sure to leave them; and accordingly I set my self to
enjoy them, which many covetous wretches never do; And thus a little transitory
enjoyment of them was all the fruit I had of these painful pleasures. That
which Solomon says here of his not denying himself any pleasure he desired,
some understand of his sinful excesses beyond his first intentions. But this
does not agree with that which he said in the foregoing verse, that his wisdom
remained with him.

Verse. 11. Then I looked on all the works, that my hands had wrought, and on
the labor that I had labored to do, etc.] That is, I took an impartial
survey of all the works which by my labor I had made, and of all the labor
undergone in the making of them; And behold, all was vanity and vexation of
spirit, that is, the pleasure that was taken in the enjoying of them, was not
answerable to the toil that was undergone about them, but all was mere vanity
and vexation of spirit, not only because the things themselves wherein men take
pleasure, have no permanency in them, but are vain in every regard, see the
Note, Chap. 1.2. but also because such joys are not attained without much
labor and anguish of spirit, and in the enjoying of them there is still a
mixture of sorrow, by reason of many fears, jealousies, interruptions, and
discontentments. Neither is there any permanency in them (even o^^ age it self
will make the most delightful things wearisome) nor can they quiet or satisfy
the mind of man; yea and if there be sin in the enjoying them, the sting of
conscience will certainly follow. And there was no profit under the Sun; see
the Note, Chap. 1.3.

Verse. 12. And I turned my self to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly,
etc.] That is, Having thus discovered the vanity of pleasures, I turned my self
back to take a review of that wisdom, and madness, and folly, whereinto I had
before made enquiry, (See the Note, chap. 1.17.) as determining upon this
review yet once more to consider and see, whether in this wisdom happiness
might be attained or no; and that because second thoughts are many times the
wisest, and upon a serious review of things men do often discover that which
they saw not before. As for the following words, for what can the man do that
comes after the King? even that which has been already done, therein there is
a reason given why Solomon gave over the pursuit of pleasures, and betook
himself again to make enquiry, whether happiness might be attained by wisdom
or no, namely because he had made such a full and exact trial of all the good
that could be found in pleasures, that no man that should after him attempt to
search what content could be found in pleasures, would ever be able to do more
then he had done in that time: What can the man do, that is, any man
whatsoever, that comes after the King? The meaning is, that whosoever should
try to find any more happiness in pleasures then Solomon had done, that was a
King, and so glorious a King in every regard, he would but lose his labor; he
could try nothing, but what Solomon had tried before him, he could do nothing,
but even that which has been already done, to wit, by him and others. The last
clause may be read as it is in the margin, What can the man do that comes
after the King, in those things which have been already done? But then also the
sense is almost fully the same, to wit, that when any man should after Solomon
attempt to find happiness in pleasure, as he would be able to do nothing but
what had been done before him, so neither would he be able, in doing over those
things which had been done before, to discover any new thing tending to man's
happiness, that had not been discovered before.

Verse. 13. Then I saw that wisdom excels folly, as far as light excels
darkness.] As if he should have said, Though I found wisdom and knowledge to
be vanity, as to the making of a man happy, yet I do not thence conclude that
wisdom is no more to be regarded then folly; for this I found withal, that
wisdom does far surpass folly, even as far as light surpasses darkness.
And indeed well is wisdom and knowledge compared to light, and folly and
ignorance to darkness; because, 1. As light discovers things to men, (Ephesians.
5.13. All things are made manifest by the light) and inables men to distinguish
one thing from another, whereas in the dark all things are hidden from men, and
therefore there can no difference appear of one thing from another, so does
wisdom make men understand things, and discern betwixt good and evil, truth and
error; whereas folly makes men to be as blind men that see nothing. 2. As
light is very comfortable, chap. 11.7. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing is it for the eyes to behold the Sun; whereas darkness is dreadful and
full of terror, so is knowledge very delightful, chap. 8.1. A man's wisdom
makes his face to shine, but folly yields a man no comfort at all. 3. Wisdom,
as light, directs men in their way, and shows them dangers that they may avoid
them; whereas folly and ignorance misleade men, and expose them continually to
manifold dangers. And 4. As light wakens men, whereas darkness lulls men
asleep, so wisdom and knowledge wakens those that sleep securely in a sensual
estate, and makes them think of their danger; whereas ignorance makes men in
such an estate to sleep securely without any fear.

Verse. 14. The wise man's eyes are in his head, etc.] As if he should have said,
He is not blind; Or rather; As men by t^eir eyes, being placed as watchmen in
the watchtower of the head, do discern things a far off, and round about
them, so the wise man by his wisdom is circumspect and provident, judicious
and wary in all his undertakings, he marketh all circumstances for the right
ordering of all his undertakings, he forecasts what the issue of things will be
a long time after, and so foreseeth things to come, and minds not only present
things, yea he compares things past, present, and to come, and so is the better
able to judge of things; and by this means he orders his ways aright, he
keeps himself from wandering or stumbling, avoydeth that which is evil, and
follows that which is good, see the Note, Pro. 4.25. But the fool walks in
darkness; that is, He is blind, or, He sees no more then a man that is in the
dark, or, His eyes are in his heels, he minds only things present, and sees
not any evil till it is upon him. The meaning is, that the fool is ignorant,
rash, inconsiderate, inobservant of circumstances, that he foreseeth not either
conveniences or mischiefs, and so he goes stumbling on in a confused blind
manner in all that he does, not knowing which way to choose, and which to
refuse, and so does usually fall into many mischiefs. Some Expositors do
add, that these expressions of a wise man's eyes being in his head, and a
fools walking in darkness, do also imply, 1. That as the sight is an ornament
to the body, and blindness a great deformity, making the body to be to the
soul as a dungeon that has no windows in it, so is wisdom a very great
ornament to the soul, and folly a sore blemish. And 2. That as a man by his
eyesight can discern light, which a blind man cannot do, so by wisdom a man
is enabled to discern the power of reason propounded to him, whereas folly
renders men incapable of receiving counsel. But that which is before given for
the meaning of the words was I conceive chiefly intended. And then that which
follows, And I my self perceived also, that one event happens to them all,
is as if he had said, As I perceived the excellency of wisdom above folly, so
I perceived also that notwithstanding the wisest of men are subject to the same
event in regard of their outward estate here in this world that fools are, to
wit, that which is afterward expressed, ver. 16. that both dye, and both are
at last forgotten, or more generally, the same calamities and sorrows.

Verse. 15. Then said I in my heart, As it happens to the fool, so it
happens even to me; and why was I then more wise? etc.] That is, why did I
labor to get more wisdom then the fool has? Or, What advantage have I of
being wise above the fool? Then I said in my heart, that this also is vanity;
that is, I determined that in regard the same events befall the wise man that
befall the fool, for the making of a man happy here in this world, and for the
giving of full content to the soul, even wisdom it self is no better then
vanity. I know that many take this last clause to be a censure passed upon that
hasty and angry inference of his in the foregoing words, And why was I then
more wise? namely, that it was vanity in him, and so would be in any other thus
to determine, thus to undervalue wisdom, because the wise man and the fool
are subject to the same outward events. But the first exposition seems to me
the best.

Verse. 16. For there is no remembrance of the wise more then of the fool for
ever, etc.] That is, The remembrance of the wise man shall no more remain for
ever, then the remembrance of the fool; though they may be remembered by some
few, yet not by others, though for a time, yet not for ever, seeing that which
now is, in the days to come shall be forgotten, that is, both the men
themselves and all their wisdom and glorious works will be forgotten and
buried in eternal oblivion; New wise men that arise will eclipse the glory of
those that were before them, and time will devour all the monuments which they
leave of themselves behind them; And how dies the wise man? as the fool. This
may be taken as the reason, why there is no more remembrance of the one then of
the other, namely, because they are both at last cut off by death: Or rather it
is another instance, wherein Solomon shows how the same event happens to
them all, as he had said before, ver. 14. to wit, because they fare alike here
in this world in regard of death. And this is expressed by an interrogation, to
intimate that it is in reason a matter of wonder, grief and indignation, that
it should be so, and how dies the wise man? as the fool. But still we must
remember that Solomon did not question but that a different event would befall
the good and the bad after death, God (says he, Chap. 12.14.) shall bring
every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil.

Verse. 17. Therefore I hated life, etc.] That is, though I lived in peace and
honor, and in great abundance of all things that are desirable in this world,
yet I was weary of my life, and looked upon it as having no loveliness nor
desireablenesse in it; and judged thus not in a way of murmuring, out of some
private discontent, but judiciously; Because the work that is wrought under the
Sun, that is, all that is done by men, or that befalls men here in this
world, is grievous unto me, that is, full of grief and disquiet, and that
especially because of this vanity that the wisest do always dye at last as
well as the basest of men; and naturally every man would rather not be, then be
always miserable; For all is vanity and vexation of spirit; see the Note,
Chap. 1.14.

Verse. 18. Yea, I hated all my labor which I had taken under the Sun, etc.]
That is, Here in this life, or in these sublunary things; As if he had said, I
began to be wholly out of love with those glorious and magnificent works, which
with so much labor I had made, even those things, which I had formerly loved
and given my self to delight in them, I then began not to regard, yea to repent
that ever I had taken so much pains for them; Because I should leave it unto
the man that should be after me; As if he should have said, Not only for the
reasons before mentioned, but also because, 1. I must at last part with them
all, and all the comfort I had taken in them, and leave that to another about
which I had taken so much pains, Psalm. 49.10, 17. (and indeed naturally men
are loathest to part with those things which are their own work) and 2. I
cannot know who that man is to whom I shall leave them; see Psalm. 39.6. Because
it might be objected, that though there could be no solid comfort gotten in
earthly things by the wisest of men, in regard that the wise man must dye and
part with all he has as well as the fool, yet there would be much content in
this, that he should have plenty to leave to his child after him, this
objection is covertly prevented, in that Solomon intimates, that no man can
tell whether his estate shall be enjoyed by his child or no: Some man after him
shall enjoy it, but who that man shall be no man can tell.

Verse. 19. And who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? etc.] As
if he had said, Be it a stranger, or be it a man's own Child, that shall come to
enjoy what he leaves behind him, no man can tell but that he may be a fool,
that may not be able to judge of the wisdom of his works, nor know how to use
what falls into his hands, but may profusely wast and squander all away, or by
neglect, or some other way of folly, bring all to nothing that is left him. And
some conceive that Solomon might speak this out of some jealousy that he began
to have, that thus it would be with his son Rehoboam, who was indeed one and
forty years old when his Father died; Yet (says he) shall he have rule over
all my labor, wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self wise
under the Sun, That is, All the estate I had gotten, and the works that I had
made with so much labor and wisdom; He shall enjoy and dispose of it as he
pleases, and Lord it as he lists in scattering that estate, which I had as it
were made my self a servant to gather, this is also vanity, to wit, that a man
has not power ^o leave his goods to those to whom he would desire to leave
them, by means whereof many times a wise man makes himself a drudge to a fool,
and a fool becomes matter of that which was gotten with much labor and wisdom,
and it may be soon brings it all to nothing.

Verse. 20. Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the
labor which I took under the Sun.] That is, after many deliberations, and
several ways taken to seek for content here in the things of this world, I
came about at last to this resolution, to which I did set my self with all my
power, and with all possible diligence, even that I would endeavor to cast off
all hope of attaining happiness by any such ways wherein I had hitherto
labored to attain it, and so to give over that anxious toil wherewith I had so
long afflicted my self in seeking to make my self happy in those outward
Comforts, which are so uncertain and unsatisfactory.

Verse. 21. For there is a man whose labor is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and
in equity, etc.] That is, that has taken pains to get an estate by wise and
skilful and just courses, (though he managed his business with all possible
providence and industry, yet was he withal careful not to hazard his estate by
getting any thing in any unjust ways:) yet to a man that has not labored
therein, shall he leave it for his portion, that is, to one that never took the
least pains in the getting of it; an idle Drone that never knew what belonged
to the managing of his business in any such prudent or conscionable way. This
also is vanity, and a great evil, that is, a sore misery and vexation not to
be avoided by any care or circumspection, to wit, that a man should thus toil
himself to purchase rest and idleness for another man; or that one man by
sitting still and doing nothing, shall get as much, and enjoy as much content,
as another by all his skill, providence, and lawful labors.

Verse. 22. For what has man of all his labor, and of the vexation of his
heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun?] This may be referred to all
that has been here said in the foregoing verses; as 1. That when a man is dead
(as dye every man must) he has then no profit at all of all his labor and
vexing cares, both for the getting and preserving his estate; and 2. That a man
has no profit by such labor, the benefit whereof goes to others he shall
leave behind him. But I rather take it more generally, That no man can take
true contentment in any thing he can get by his labors, according to that
Chap. 1.3. For which see the Note there.

Verse. 23. For all his days are sorrows, etc.] That is, full of vanity, of
bitter sorrows, both in body and mind, nothing in a manner but sorrow, and
his travel, grief, that is, he meets with much discontent and vexation many
ways in all his labors. Now this Solomon here alleges, because if this be
generally true of all men's labors, it must needs be more eminently true of
carnal and worldly covetous men, that toil themselves excessively to get
wealth, and are continually unsatisfied with what they have, and disquieted
with the fear of parting with it; yea his heart takes not rest in the night,
that is, either he cannot sleep, or he is perplexed with unquiet thoughts and
cares in his sleep, and in his dreams: For the heart of a man may wake when his
body sleeps. See Cant. 5.2.

Verse. 24. There is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and
drink, etc.] In this and that which follows to the end of the Chapter,
Solomon undertakes to show that which is the main drift of this whole Book,
namely, wherein the happiness of man in this life does consist, and how far
only the enjoyment of the things below can yield a man full satisfaction and
content, to wit, when a man being good in Gods sight, as it is expressed, verse
26. (which they only are that fear God and walk in his ways) can thereupon
with freedom, quietly, contentedly, and cheerfully enjoy and use that portion
of outward blessings, which God has afforded him, without that anxiety and
vexation of spirit, wherewith the most of men do perplex themselves. There is
nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and drink; As if he should
have said, Seeing there is in all things, and in all the labors and endeavors
of men, so much vanity and vexation of spirit, whereby it is evident, that from
these things happiness and full contentment cannot be attained, the best
remedy therefore that can be prescribed against this vanity, and the best way
that can be taken to become master of the utmost comfort that worldly things
can afford, is for a man contentedly to enjoy the portion which God has
allotted him, and liberally to make use of what he has, not only for the
support of his life, but also for his pleasure and delight; and not to afflict
himself as many do, not daring to enjoy what they have gotten, though withal
they know not to whom they shall leave it: Even these outward things might thus
be used, as conducing to men's comfortable living here in this world, if they
would expect no more from them, then that for which they were created, and for
which they were conferred upon them, (which is not that they should depend upon
them for happiness, and seek for full content in such uncertain things, which
makes some excessive in taking delight in them, and others to afflict
themselves with toiling excessively to get them, and covetous locking them up,
when they have them) but would only, with thankfulness to God, betake
themselves to live freely and comfortably upon those good things which God has
given them. And that he should make his soul enjoy good of his labor; that is,
that he should take as much comfort and content in what he has gotten by his
honest labors, as such outward blessings can afford him. This also I saw that
it was from the hand of God, that is, I plainly perceived that thus to be able
to use and enjoy what God has given men, and to enjoy them contentedly and
cheerfully without any such superfluous and vexing cares as many do afflict
themselves with, is the gift of God, and a special favor it is from God;
though it may seem a very easy ^^ing for a man to make use of what he has in
his power, to eat the fruit of his own labor, yet this no man is able to do
without Gods blessing; (through covetousness men may not have hearts to do
it, and through sickness, grief, and many other ways they may be hindered
from doing it) and much less is any man able of himself to enjoy what he has
with a contented cheerful mind; because this cannot be unless God plants his
fear in men's hearts, and takes off their love from earthly things, and
pitcheth it upon himself.

Verse. 25. For who can eat? etc.] This may be added, as a proof from his own
experience, Either 1. of that which he had said in the first clause of the
foregoing verse, to wit, that there was no better course could be taken for
these outward things, then for a man contentedly and cheerfully, and liberally
to make use of what God has given him for his portion; for, says he, who can
eat? or who else can hasten hereunto more then I? As if he should have said, I
have learnt by full proof from mine own experience, how desirable a thing it is
thus to enjoy these outward things: No man could more freely, nor with more
cheerfulness and readiness of mind make use of these outward things, than I
did, because I enjoyed so great abundance, and might speedily command whatever
I desired; and as I knew that no man was fitter to take the comfort of my
estate, than I my self that had labored for it, so I was also most forward and
willing to do it, and therefore did enjoy what God had bestowed upon me in as
liberal and magnificent a manner as might be. Or 2. of the last clause of the
foregoing verse, This also I saw that it was from the hand of God; for
accordingly the meaning of these words, for who can eat, etc. may be, that if
it had depended upon men's own will to eat and to drink, and to enjoy good of
his labor, Solomon had the means to do this more then any other, as being so
wise and so wealthy a Prince, and so should have been the happiest of men; But
seeing he could not do it, hereby it is manifest, that it is merely from the
hand of God.

Verse. 26. For God gives to a man that is good in his sight, etc.] That is,
that is sincerely good, the man with whom God is well pleased, and who is
acceptable in his sight: wisdom and knowledge, that is, such natural gifts of
understanding, whereby he is enabled well to manage his affairs, and both to
get a competent and comfortable estate, and to use it when he has it, as
likewise such spiritual gifts and graces of the mind, whereby he is enabled to
seek happiness only in God, and in the knowledge and service of God, and
taught to be contented with what God allots him for his portion: and joy; as if
he should have said, And by this means he lives joyfully and comfortably in the
cheerful use of the outward blessings which God in his love has conferred
upon him; according to that, He gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, Act. 14.17. But to the
sinner he gives travel, to gather and to heap, that is, As for wicked men he
gives them over, or leaves them to their insatiable desires, and so like fools
they vex and toil themselves with immoderate cares and restless labors in
heaping up wealth together, esteeming that their happiness, which God lays
upon them for their punishment and vexation: that he may give to him that is
good before God, that is, that God may dispose of it, not to those for whom the
wicked intended it, but to the man to whom God is pleased to afford it, or to
some good righteous man. See Job 27.16. Prove. 13.22. and 28.8. This also is
vanity and vexation of spirit, to wit, for men to toil, and cark and care for
others they never thought of, it may be those they hated, to whom they were
far from intending the least good. Now the drift of all this is, hereby
either to prove, that this power, thus freely, and contentedly, and comfortably
to use the good blessings of God, is the gift of God; or else, to set forth the
excellency of this gift, because he gives it to those he loves, and lays the
contrary as a punishment upon wicked, ungodly men.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. TO every thing there is a season, etc.] That is, A set appointed
time, a time determined by the fore-appointment and decree of God, both for
their beginning, continuance and end: And that this is to be extended to all
things that are, and are done in the world, not only natural and contingent,
but also voluntary, which seem to be most in the power of men, is evident by
the following clause, And a time to every purpose under the heaven, that is, to
every thing which men purpose or perform. It cannot be questioned but that
Solomon does still here prosecute his former discourse, because ver. 9. of this
Chapter, he returns again to what he had said before, Chap. 1.3. concerning
the unprofitablenesse of all men's endeavors. So that the drift of that which
is said here concerning the divine determination of the time wherein all things
are done, may seem to be; 1. to prove the vanity of all worldly things, and
all the labor and endeavors of men about them; He proves all things to be
vain from their transitorinesse, because they have all but their time, and
then pass away, and so there is a continual vicissitude and change of things,
and that by the sure and unchangeable decree of God: as is shown in the
following instances, that must needs be vain, that is born and presently dies,
that is planted, and is eft soon plucked up again, etc. And then he proves
the vanity of all men's endeavors about these things, from the absolute
uncertainty of future events, which do wholly depend upon the predeterminate
counsel and decree of God, and not at all on the purposes and endeavors of
men. 2. To press upon men from hence that counsel formerly given Chap. 2.24.
of enjoying freely and contentedly what God has allotted to men for their
portion in these outward things, and not to vex themselves with sollicitous and
anxious cares, hopes, fears, designs and endeavors about future events, nor
to be disquieted with any thing that befalls them, and that because, if God
have fore-appointed all things that come to pass in their several times and
seasons, and consequently all the changes and vicissitude of things that are in
the world, as it were a folly and madness in men, any way to afflict
themselves about things to come, which must be as God has determined, and it
is not in their power to prevent or alter it, so likewise it must needs be a
vain thing to be troubled when things come not to pass according to their
desires and endeavors, seeing they may be sure that all things are as God has
appointed; That which men have to do is in all their ways to seek for counsel
and direction from God, and then having used all lawful means for the
effecting of what they desire, to refer the event to Gods providence, and
thereon quietly to wait and depend, and then to submit their wills to Gods,
and to be content with whatsoever he shall be pleased to do. And 3. To warn
men, even whilst they do comfortably enjoy their present blessings, not to set
their hearts too much upon them, nor to promise themselves much content in
them, or that they shall always enjoy them; and that because they are variable
and subject to variety of changes and uncertainties, and so may be gone in an
instant, yea that which is quite contrary may come in the room of them.
However evident it is, that Solomon does not speak here of what may lawfully
be done, so it be done in a fit season, as some Expositors would have it, (for
how could this tend to prove the vanity or unprofitablenesse of men's labors
about the creatures?) but only teaches us, that all things, and all the
changes of things that are in the world, are ordered in their several times by
the all-ruling providence of God, yea not only the lawful and serious actions
of men, but even their sins, and those things they do which have most
lightness and vanity in them, as may be seen in the following particulars.

Verse. 2. A time to be borne, and a time to dye, etc.] To wit, When men dye
according to Gods appointment by a natural death, thorough sickness, or old
age, etc. (for of dying by a way of violence Solomon speaks in the following
verse.) Here he undertakes to prove the foregoing general Proposition
concerning Gods fore-appointing all the several changes and vicissitudes that
are in the world by an Induction of many particulars in fourteen pair of
contraries. And observable it is, that whereas in some of these he sets that
which is desirable and delightful in the first place, and that which is
grievous and sad in the last, and so on the contrary in others of them he
begins with that which is sad and irksome, and ends with that which is
delightful and pleasing; this may be to intimate the Lords different dealing
with men, to wit, that sometimes he gives them their sweet, their good days
first, and afterward their days of sorrow and afflictions, and that sometimes
on the contrary he gives them their sour, their days of adversity first, and
afterward their sweet, their days of prosperity.

Verse. 3. A time to kill, and time to heal, etc.] That is, There is a time
when according to the ordering of divine Providence men are slain, sometimes
by the sword of justice, or war, or private revenge, and sometimes by casual
events, see Exodus 25.13. and that sometimes too when the wounds at first seemed
not mortal, (for even evil and casual actions of men are directed by God;) and
there is a time again when though men be wounded never so dangerously, yet
their wounds shall be healed.

Verse. 4. A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn and a time to
dance,] That is, God sometimes gives men occasions of sorrow, yea of bitter
lamention; and sometimes again of joy, yea of leaping and dancing, and of
great triumphing; see 2 Samuel 6.14. and Act. 3.8.

Verse. 5. A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together,
etc.] This may be meant of men casting away stones out of their pastures and
other grounds, and of gathering them together again for building; or of
pulling down fences of stones, houses, or fortresses, and building them up
again; all these things being ordered by the providence of God. And so
likewise the next clause, A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from (or,
as it is in the Hebrew, to be far from) embracing, may be meant of making up or
breaking off marriages, or of the different seasons that God sends, to wit,
such wherein married persons and other dear friends may mutually rejoice
together, and embrace one another; and others again when through alienation of
affection, sickness, or other great sorrows men are far from embracing: See
1 Cor. 7.5. and Joel 2.16.

Verse. 6. A time to keep, and a time to cast away.] To wit, either through
necessity, as when men in a storm cast their goods overboard to save their
lives; see Jon. 1.5. or out of voluntary choice, as when men do cheerfully and
bountifully give what they have for the relief of the poor: see Psalm 112.9.
and Eccles. 11.2. or when men do readily abandon any thing they enjoy, rather
then not keep faith and a good conscience: see Heb. 10.34.

Verse. 7. A time to rent, and a time to sew, etc.] This may be understood as
spoken figuratively of the Rents and Divisions that are often made in Kingdoms,
States and Churches, and of making up such breaches again, or of rending men
from the Church by Ecclesiastical censures, and of reuniting them to the Church
again. But I rather take it to be meant, of men's rending their garments in
times of great sorrow, (for which see the Note, Genesis 37.29.) and so of mending
those garments again. And that the rather, because the following clause, A
time to keep silence, and a time to speak, may very probably be taken in the
same sense, because in times of joy men are wont to use great freedom of
speech, and in times of great sorrow to keep silence, according to those
passages, Lam. 2.10. The Elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground,
and keep silence; and Amos 5.13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in
that time; for it is an evil time; See the Note also, Job 2.13.

Verse. 8. A time to love, and a time to hate.] That is, A time to manifest our
love and charity to men, and a time to do those things that proceed from the
just hatred of sin and wickedness: see the Note, Psalm. 139.21. Or rather; A
time wherein God does those things, which cause and increase love and
friendship amongst men, and a time wherein those things are done which occasion
great variance and hatred amongst men.

Verse. 9. What profit has he that works, in that wherein he labors?] See
the Note, Chap. 1.3. It is as if he had said, Seeing when men have done what
they can, all things must depend upon the determinate counsel of God, and
therefore they cannot help or hinder the vanity and volubility that is in the
things of this world, nor work out any happiness to themselves therein,
therefore all anxious cares about these things are to no purpose, they may keep
men from reaping any comfort in those things God has bestowed upon them, but
they can never frustrate what God has determined; and therefore they may
endeavor that, which they shall never be able to effect, and seek after those
things which they shall never come to enjoy, or which, if they do come to
enjoy them, they shall quickly leave to others.

Verse. 10. I have seen the travel, which God has given to the sons of men to
be exercised in it.] Some would have this to be understood merely of the labor
of seeking the knowledge of all things, as before, Chap. 1.13. where we have in
a manner the same words; for which see the Note in that place. But doubtless
that which Solomon says here, is rather meant of the various and contrary
employments, passions and events that are in the world. Whereas it might be
thought, that it is merely casual that things do thus come to pass, Solomon
here assures us, that all these things are of God, it is God that has given
this travel unto men, to wit, of being employed in different and contrary works
and employments, and that with different and contrary events, according as he
has fore-decreed: And whereas again it might be thought, that if all labor
be unprofitable, and that because let men do what they will, they shall be
able to effect nothing, but according to what God has foredetermined, then men
had as good sit still and do nothing, as to labor and travel to no purpose:
to this likewise Solomon answers, that Gods will is, that men should use all
lawful endeavors in all things they desire to accomplish, (though Gods
providence should work contrary to men's endeavors, yet man in obedience to
Gods command must do what belongs to him to do) to be exercised in it, that
is, that they may be exercised thereby, and kept from idleness and pride, etc.
and all the evil effects thereof; or that they may employ themselves in
observing the providence of God in that variety of changes that is in all
worldly things.

Verse. 11. He has made every thing beautiful in his time, etc.] As if he
should have said, Though in regard of the great uncertainty of all humane
endeavors, and the various and contrary events of things, there may seem to
be a great deal of disorder and confusion in those things that are done in the
world, at which men are apt to stumble and take offense, yet this is because we
are ignorant of the ends that God propounds to himself, and are not able to
put together all the pieces of his Providence, nor to foresee the effects that
he will at last produce, and so cannot comprehend the wise contrivances of all
his works; for the truth is, that if we once discover Gods ends, and how he
brings about that which he determined, whether in regard of judgments that he
executes upon wicked men, or the trial that he makes of the faith and patience
of his people, or other such like holy designs, we shall find that every
thing, even these things that seem so full of confusion, are in their season
admirably beautiful and done in the most exact and comely order; and that as in
the first Creation there was nothing that God made that was not very good, Gen
1.31. so in the works of his providence in governing the world, there is
nothing that God does, but it is exceeding beautiful in its season. Though
things seem to happen never s^ unexpectedly, and crossely, yet when the Lord
has performed his whole work as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 10.12. and that we
come to compare one thing with another, we shall find that God has ordered all
things for the best, even to admiration. As the beauty of pictures and curious
hangings, and so likewise of the bodies of men a^iseth from the orderly mixing
of diverse and contrary colors, so does the beauty of Gods works of providence
arise from his wise causing even of cross and contrary events to work together
for the glory of his name, and for the good of his chosen people. Now the drift
of Solomon's asserting this here, is not only to justify God, by showing that
if there be any vanity and confusion in the things that are done in the world,
the fault is not in the providence of God, but especially also to make it
clear that there is reason why men should be quiet and contented with their
state and condition, whatever it is that befalls them, because all
circumstances duly considered, nothing can be better then as God orders it?
Though men have sometimes occasion of joy, and sometimes of sorrow, these are
as necessary and as comely in their season, as cold and frost is in the winter,
and heat and flowers and fruits are in the summer, God still allowing men to
conform themselves to the various motions of his providence, so they be kept
within the bounds of moderation; As for the following words, Also he has set
the world in their hearts, etc. By Gods setting the world in their hearts may
be meant, either 1. that God has implanted in the hearts of men a desire to
delight themselves with the enjoying and using of the things of this world; or
2. that God has so clearly revealed, both in his works of creation and
providence, his wise and beautiful ordering of them all, and has withal
wrought in the hearts of men such an earnest desire, and so much ability
withal thorough the natural light, reason, and knowledge that he has given
them, to search out the wisdom of God therein, and the beauty that is in his
government of the world, that if men would set themselves to the exact
observation of things, they might in a great measure discover the wise and
beautiful contrivance of them. And so accordingly for the last words; So that
no man can find out the work that God makes from the beginning to the end; the
meaning may be, either that man cannot find out all that God does, there being
many things, which God reserves as secrets to himself, and which are above the
reach of man's understanding, or that man cannot perfectly and thoroughly
understand any work of God, so that nothing from the beginning to the end of it
should be concealed from him, or that many things they can never search out so
long as they live. Laying therefore both these last clauses thus understood
together, Also he has set the world in their hearts, so that no man can find
out the work that God makes from the beginning to the end. The drift of
Solomon therein must needs be, either to show that men might discover so much
of the beauty of Gods works of providence in the governing of the world, though
some things indeed they cannot comprehend, that they might thereby be brought
with quiet and cheerful hearts to rest in the Lords so wise disposing of
things, without that anxiety and discruciating care, wherewith men do usually
afflict themselves; or else rather to show the reason why men are not
contented, and patient and cheerful in all conditions, though all things that
God does are so beautiful in their time, to wit, either because men are
naturally so taken up with the desires, and thoughts, and cares of worldly
things, and are so exercised with the sore travel belonging thereto, that they
seldom or never mind the Lords wise disposing of things, so as thereby to
quiet their hearts, or else because men are not able fully to comprehend the
wisdom of God in his works: Though God has given men an earnest desire to
know them, and good measure of understanding whereby to search into them, yet
many times they cannot find out the end which God intends, it may not be
accomplished in their days, neither can they behold the whole frame of things
together; and so the beauty of Gods works proves to them unsearchable and past
finding out.

Verse. 12. I know that there is no good in them, etc.] That is, I know by proof
and experience, that there is no good in or for men, or that there is no good
in the creatures; but for a man to rejoice, that is, to live cheerfully and
contentedly in every estate wherein God is pleased to dispose of him: See the
Note, chap. 2.24. and to do good in his life, that is, to live piously and
righteously, according to that, Psalm. 34.14. Depart from evil and do good; (and
indeed such as do so may well rejoice, though the things that befall them seem
never so cross and contrary) Or, to be beneficial to others, and to relieve
others, as good men ought to do in the times of their rejoicing, Neh 8.10, 12.
Or, to do good to himself by a cheerful enjoying the good blessings which God
has allotted him for his portion, according to that, Psalm. 49.18. And men will
praise thee, when thou do well to thy self. It is in a word, as if Solomon
had said, Since things by Gods determinate council are thus liable to
unavoidable changes, and yet all things are most sweetly ordered by God, the
best way for men is resting upon Gods providence, to live comfortably in every
estate; or thus, Though men cannot know the counsel of God, yet this to be sure
I know is unquestionable, that the only way for men is without anxious cares,
to live comfortably in their present condition, and to leave all care about
future events to Gods disposing.

Verse. 13. And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of
all his labor, it is the gift of God.] See the Note again, chap. 2.24. As God
gives the blessings themselves, so also the power to use them; neither can any
man merit either the one or the other at Gods hands.

Verse. 14. I know that whatsoever God does it shall be for ever, nothing can be
put to it, nor any thing taken from it, etc.] That is, Gods decrees, and works
of providence are all certain, and unchangeable and perfect: It is as if he had
said, Though men's affections are mutable and changeable, and so are their
works, now they love, and by and by they hate, they build and pull down, etc.
yet still Gods counsel is accompilshed, and there is no resisting of what he
pleases to do: Or, though we cannot comprehend all the works of God, and the
changes that are in the world may seem to imply some imperfection in the
providence of God; yet to be sure, as whatever God has decreed and wills to be
done, is always done, and that exactly in regard of every circumstance, as he
has appointed it, men cannot in the least hinder what he will have done; so
also whatever God does is perfect, there is nothing can be added that is
defective, nor is there any thing superfluous that may be taken away; God
orders all things for the best, both for the good of the righteous, and the
punishment of the wicked; neither can any thing be better then as God does it.
And the drift of this is again from this inevitable course of Gods providence,
to persuade men to be content with whatever God does, and with cheerfulness to
enjoy that which God allots them for their portion. As for the last clause, And
God does it that men should fear before him, therein Solomon shows what Gods
end is in disposing all things that concern the children of men, by his own
unresistable providence, according to his eternal unchangeable decrees (which
does further also discover the perfection thereof) namely, that men should fear
before him, that is, that men considering that all things are swayed by the
overruling power and providence of God, and that they cannot know what will
be, nor are able to do any thing of themselves, they might be brought hereby to
stand in awe of God, and to be afraid to offend him; not to think to carry on
any designments of theirs proudly and presumptuously by their own wisdom and
power, wherein they see men usually crossed, nor yet to grow idle in the
neglect of means, which God has appointed men to use, and wherein he does
usually bless men's endeavors; but to do what God has appointed herein to be
done, and then to fly to God by prayer, as depending wholly upon him, and
afterward quietly to submit to God in all events whatsoever, being patient in
adversity, as submitting to Gods will, and thankful in prosperity, as
acknowledging his bounty in all the good that befalls them. This is not indeed
the use which men are wont to make of Gods unchangeable and irresistible
providence; for they quite contrary are wont to argue, If all must be as God
has decreed, and so all shall be surely beautiful in its season, what need we
then care how we live, or what we do? But herein men pervert this truth
concerning Gods providence, which tends in its own nature, and according to
Gods intention, to teach men to fear the Almighty and all overruling power of
God.

Verse. 15. That which has been is now; and that which is to be, has already
been, etc.] See the Note, chapter 1.9. This is added here by way of explaining that
which was said in the foregoing verse, that whatsoever God does, it shall be
for ever; for to this end he shows, that in all ages past, present, and to
come, he has and will still carry on all the affairs of men with great
stability, and correspondency, and sutablenesse one to another; he has not of
late begun to observe that course in the governing the world, which he observes
for the present; nor will he deal with future ages otherwise then he has dealt
with those that are past, and that which is at present. And this implies, 1.
That in all ages all things are constantly done according to Gods decree. 2.
That there is no withstanding or altering in the least that which God has
decreed: and 3. That all things are done successively, according to what has
been done in former times, even from the beginning. As in Gods disposing of all
other creatures, the revolutions of the heavens, the changes of the winds, etc.
all things are carried on in the same course and order; they have in all ages
the same courses and recourses, so God has provided in his wise administration
of humane affairs, that the same things that have formerly been should return
again, and so according to the instability and change of times, there should be
still the same revolution of things in their several circuits and seasons. And
God requires that which is past; that is, This tenor and manner of his
unchangeable providence God always observes, he restores and brings back
again that which has formerly been; those things that pass away, and are as
it were thrust forward successively the one by the other (for it is in the
Hebrew, and God requires that which is driven away) do often come to pass
again and again in after times. And this likewise is alleged to persuade men
to be contented with that which God allots for their portion, whatever it is:
and that because it implies, 1. That God deals no otherwise with us then he
has dealt with others in former days, and that which is our condition for the
present, will be the condition of others when we are dead and laid in our
graves. 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, says the Apostle,
but such as is common to man. And 2. That God does not always keep men in the
same estate, but does usually give them a mixture of adversity and prosperity:
After sad times of affliction and sorrow, he many times restores comforts again
to them and to their mourners. And on the other side, when men have been raised
from a low condition, and have lived a time in so great prosperity, as if there
were then no fear of a change, he has often brought back their sorrows again:
All which should teach men to walk humbly with God, to fear him, and quietly to
submit to his fatherly providence in all things that befall them.

Verse. 16. And moreover, I saw under the Sun, the place of judgment, that
wickedness was there, etc.] This Solomon mentions as another vanity, further
thereby to prove that happiness and true contentment is not to be found in any
condition here below. Having hitherto shown the vanity of seeking happiness
and full content, either in knowledge, or in worldly pleasures and delights,
here he adds, I say, another vanity, and that is the injustice and oppression
which was usually found in places of Magistracy, and Courts of Justice, and
that not only in the land of Israel, but all the world over. As for the order
of Solomon's proceeding in this place, some conceive, that intending now to fall
upon many particular passages in the lives of men, whereby it may be evidently
seen how impossible it is to find full satisfaction in any condition here
below; he begins first in this place with the hard and unjust dealing that men
usually meet even in Courts of Justice, which should be a means of refuge for
those that are wronged. And again others conceive that here he enters upon
another general Head, to wit, the vanity of Honors; undertaking to show that
these are so far from making men happy, that it proves, through the
corruption of men, an occasion of much wickedness, and consequently of much
misery, both to themselves and others. But however, the dependence of this upon
that which went before, seems to be thus: Having shown in the foregoing verses,
that the only way to enjoy content here in this world, was to depend upon Gods
providence in all things whatsoever, and so enjoy comfortably what God allots
for their portion; whereas it might be objected, that there seems to be no such
providence, because the wicked in power do usually at their pleasure oppress
the righteous, he prevents here this objection, by showing, that though this be
indeed a vanity whereto men are subject, yet even in these things there is an
overruling hand of divine providence, as appears more clearly in the following
verse.

Verse. 17. I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked,
etc.] This is the censure which Solomon passes on that vanity of oppression
that is amongst those that are in place of power, mentioned in the foregoing
verse, to wit, that God will one day judge both good and bad, the oppressor and
the oppressed most righteously; and that therefore the righteous should not be
discouraged, but patiently wait upon Gods providence, nor should wicked men
embolden themselves in their tyranny and oppression, but think beforehand of
the judgment that will be hereafter: for there is a time there, that is, with
God, in the judgment to come; or, before Gods judgment seat, for every
purpose, and for every work, that is, for every thing men have done, or have
designed or intended to do; every thing shall then and there be discovered and
judged, and receive its due recompense. It is as if he had said, As there is a
time here, when men do what they list themselves, so there will be a time
hereafter, when God will judge men for all they have done; Or, Though here
Magistrates neglect to do justice, yet there every good and evil action of
men shall by the Lord be justly judged. But though this be meant chiefly of
the day of the general Judgment; (as indeed the confusion of things here, a
clear proof that there will be a day of Judgment hereafter) yet I conceive
even Gods cutting wicked men off here is also included, to wit, that God has
appointed a time, when such men having filled up the measure of their
wickedness, shall receive their just reward from God.

Verse. 18. I said in mine heart, concerning the estate of the sons of men,
etc.] That is, Concerning the order of men, the distinction of the several
ranks and degrees of superiors and inferiors; or, Concerning the condition and
manner of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they
themselves are beasts; As if he had said, I concluded with my self, that God
suffers that oppression in seats of Justice, mentioned before, ver. 16. that
hereby it might evidently appear, that men in their natural condition are no
better then beasts, namely, in that they tear and devour one another, and
never mind any future estate; Or rather thus, I thought with my self, that
however men in power do not, and indeed cannot, seriously consider the frailty
of their condition, but are as Gods in their own eyes, and do cause men to
humble themselves before them, as if they were more then men, yet God can by
his word or judgments make it manifest to them, that they are, as to their
outward estate, no better then beasts; Or, God will certainly judge them, as is
said in the foregoing verse, to the end he might make it manifest, and cause
them to see, that they are but beasts, as in regard of their brutish and
beastly lives, and their sensual minding of earthly things, so also in regard
of their mortality. But now some read this last clause thus, That they might
clear God, and see that they themselves are beasts, and then the meaning must
be, that when God judges wicked men, they might by the light of nature see,
that in regard of the bruitishnesse of their lives they are no better then
beasts, and so might justify God in his proceedings against them.

Verse. 19. For that which befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts, even
one thing befalls them, etc.] To wit, hunger, thirst, cold, diseases, the
same outward casualties, and at last death; As the one dies, so dies the
other, that is, they are both sure to dye, and in outward regards after the
same manner; death is terrible and painful to both; neither of them know the
hour of death, nor what will be outwardly after death; Yea, they have all one
breath; to wit, in that they breath the same air, which is drawn in and
breathed out by the same vital organs, the breath both of man and beast is in
their nostrils, so that a man has no preeminence above a beast, to wit, in
outward respects; men are taken away from all that is in the world, even the
greatest of men, as well as beasts, so that in regard of their outward estate
they have no preeminence; yea in many outward things there are some beasts
excel men, as in the quickness of their senses, their strength and agility,
etc. for all is vanity, that is, fading and nothing, even man as well as
beasts; and therefore there is no happiness to be found here below.

Verse. 21. Who knows the spirit of a man that g^eth upward, etc.] To wit, to
God above, to be judged by him, Chap. 12.7. or that abides after death, and is
immortal, and capable of being taken up to live for ever with God in heaven;
and the spirit of the beast that goes downward to the earth? that is, that
falls and dies and perishes with the body? It is as if he had said, It will
be objected, and it is indeed true, that whereas the soul of the beast
perishes, the souls of men are immortal, and may come to enjoy eternal
happiness in heaven, which the soul of the beast is no way capable of; But
who knows this? that is, How few are there that do seriously consider or
acknowledge this? Men seek to maintain this life, and follow their sensual
appetites, as the beast does, but their precious souls they generally neglect*
Or rather; No man can know this by any natural inquisition, or by arguing from
the outward events that befall men and beasts: Or, No man can know it by any
sensual experimental knowledge; whoever saw the ascent of the one, or the
descent of the other?

Verse. 22. Therefore I perceive that there is nothing better, then that a man
should rejoice in his own works, etc.] That is, in those things which a man
has gotten by his labor: He concludes again as he had done before, that
since for outward things there was so little difference betwixt the condition
of a man and a beast, therefore the best way was for a man to rejoice in his
own works. See the Notes above, ver. 12, 13. and Chap. 2.24. For that is his
portion; See the Note, Chap. 2.10. For who shall bring him to see what shall be
after him? That is, who can make him to understand what shall be done here in
this world when he is dead? If a man hoard up what he has, it will be for
others, he shall have no benefit by it; neither can he know who shall have it,
or what use shall be made of it.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. SO I returned and considered all the oppressions that are done under
the Sun, etc.] Some conceive, that by these words, I returned and considered,
Solomon intended to show, that withdrawing his mind from all other things, he
set himself seriously to consider of those things which are here now added.
But I rather conceive, that the drift of this expression is only to show, that
having spoken before of several vanities whereto men in this life are subject,
and having in the close thereof showed how men should remedy this by living
comfortably and contentedly in all conditions; he now betook himself to
consider of other vanities; Or, that having spoken before of oppression and
injustice, Chap. 3.16. he now returned again to consider of this vanity, yet
further thereby to show how hard a thing it is to live contentedly, as was
advised in the close of the foregoing Chapter: And the difference may be
conceived to be this, that before he spoke only of the oppression that he found
in seats of Justice, but here now he speaks more generally of all the
oppressions that are done, not only amongst Magistrates, but also amongst all
other sorts of people: And behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and
they had no comforter, that is, no body that did either afford them any help,
or that did so much as speak comfort^bly to them, to wit, either because they
durst not do it, or because through hardheartednesse and inhumanity they would
not do it; And on the side of their oppressors there was power; to wit, in
that they were men of might themselves, and had many potent friends to side
with them, but they had no comforter, which is again repeated, thereby to
imply how great an aggravation of their misery this was; or else with reference
to the foregoing clause, to show how sad their condition was in regard of this
circumstance, that though they were altogether unable to defend themselves
against their oppressors, yet no body did compassionate their condition, and
afford them any comfort. But however the drift of Solomon in mentioning this is
to show the vanity and misery that men in this life are subject to, not only in
regard of such as are thus oppressed, but also in regard of others, that must
needs be troubled and afflicted, at least if they be men that love Justice and
fear God, to see so much injustice and confusion in the world; as we may more
plainly see by that which follows.

Verse. 2. Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead, more then the
living which are yet alive.] Either this must be taken as spoken by Solomon
according to the judgment of flesh and blood, because great miseries and
oppressions make men weary of life, and desirous to dye; Or else as spoken with
reference only to the sufferings of this life, to wit, that the dead are in a
better condition then the living in this regard, that the dead are out of
danger of the misery and sorrow, to which those that live here are continually
subject; for otherwise there is no question to be made, but that life,
considered simply in it self, is better then death, and that to live, though
under great oppressions and miseries, may be in many regards better then death,
seeing so living men may both by patient suffering, and well-doing, bring much
glory to God and do much good to their brethren. But what is intended by these
expressions, The dead which are already dead, and the living which are yet
alive? I answer, that the drift of these expressions may be only to imply the
cause of this assertion, to wit, that the dead are in a better condition then
the living, because they are dead, and so are not liable to such oppressions
and sorrows, and the living are in a worse estate, because living they must
needs be subject to these miseries; Or rather by the dead which are already
dead, may be meant those that are quite dead, and are thereby distinguished
from those, that may be said to be dead men only in regard of mortality, or in
regard of their being in any desperate condition, out of which there seems to
be no hope of recovery, (whence is that of the Prophet concerning the Jews in
Babylon, Isa. 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall
they arise) Or, that are continually dying under the hands of cruel oppressors,
that are still devouring them, and as it were, eating them alive; according to
that, Mic. 3.3. They eat the flesh of my people, and slay their skin from off
them, and they break their bones and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and
as flesh within the Caldron. And by the living which are yet alive, are meant
those that by reason of their oppressors, live in such a languishing condition,
that all that can be said of them is, that they are yet alive, and are not
quite dead. And so that which Solomon aims at in the Emphasis of these
expressions seems to be this, that those that are quite dead, are happier then
those that always live a dying life, because of the cruelty of their
oppressors.

Verse. 3. Yea, better is he then both they, which has not yet been, etc.] To
wit, in regard of this, that he neither does feel, nor ever has felt any
misery: But this also must be taken as spoken according to the judgment of
sense, and merely with relation to the miseries, that men in this life are
liable to; Doubtless not to have been, cannot simply be preferred before a
man's being in this life, though herein he undergo many sore afflictions and
sorrows, and that because if men live in the fear of God, their advancing
Gods glory hereby, their enjoying Gods favor, and the hope they have of
eternal happiness, may well overbalance all their misery. But now if we
compare the man yet unborne, with him that lives, merely with respect to a
suffering condition, then unquestionably it is not so ill not to be at all, as
to live miserably; especially to be miserable as wicked men are, sometimes
here, but always when they come to be cast into hell; which is that our
Savior said of Judas that betrayed him, Matthew. 26.24. It had been good for
that man, if he had not been borne. As for the following words, Who has not
seen the evil work that is done under the Sun, therein the reason is given
why the man that never was in the world, is better then both he that lives
under oppression and he that is dead, and so is freed from all such miseries,
namely, because such a one has never seen the evil work that is done under
the Sun, which may be meant not only of never undergoing the evil of any
such oppressions (for to see evil is often put in the Scripture phrase for
suffering evil) but also of never being afflicted with seeing such confusion
and oppression in the world.

Verse. 4. Again I considered all travel and every right work, etc.] That is,
all that is done by men with much industry and labor, and with much exactness
of skill and cunning and ingenuous invention, all virtuous and commendable
enterprises, all noble endeavors after eminency in any kind whatsoever, that
for this a man is envied of his neighbor; that is, of others whom herein he
excells. Now this is mentioned as another piece of vanity which men in this
life are liable to, that as men are often oppressed by the greater sort, so
they are also usually envied by the meaner, yea indeed by all sorts of people.
And some conceive that this is added here, as an effect of misgovernment,
because then those that became eminent through any excellency in them, or for
any praiseworthy enterprises they undertake, are usually through the jealousy
of superiors, and the malignant eye of others, exposed to much danger; and so
all generous motions are easily nipped. But however this is mentioned as
another vanity, as is expressed in the following words, This is also vanity and
vexation of spirit. And though it is true that envy makes the envious man
miserable (see the Notes, Job 5.2. and Pro, 15.30.) yet here questionless
Solomon intends the vanity and vexation of those that are envied, in that it
must needs be a great vexation to a man, to find himself envied, and hated,
and endangered for that, for which he could not but expect to have been highly
praised and esteemed; yea it often beats men off from endeavoring to do well,
because such endeavors prove so fruitless and vain.

Verse. 5. The fool foldeth his hands together, etc.] To wit, the sloathfull
fool; see Pro. 6.10. And eats his own flesh; which he may be said to do by
way of an hyperbolicall expression, noting that he is brought to such extremity
of want, that he is ready to eat his own flesh; or else because he does indeed
bring himself to be nothing but skin and bones, partly through diseases he
falls into for want of stirring and exercising himself, like standing waters
that are wont to corrupt and putrify for want of motion; but especially
through his wasting of his estate, he comes at last to such extremity of want,
that wanting due nourishment and other necessaries, he pines away; which is
increased by his inward vexing and fretting to see himself brought into such
streights and miseries, and by his envying the plenty and prosperity which he
sees others enjoy. Yea it may be said also that he eats his own flesh, in
that he destroys his own children and family, by his not providing for them,
or his wasting that which should maintain them. Now this Solomon mentions as
another vanity, and that as it were opposite to the former; As the laborious
and industrious man is subject to the vanity of being envied, so the sloathfull
man is also subject to other miseries, as grievous as that. And therefore
though the sluggard may think it a point of great wisdom, that he by his
sloth declines the envy that others undergo, yet indeed he shows himself
herein to be no better then a fool, because he rebelleth against the Law of
God, which enjoynes men to labor, and does wilfully bring himself into a
great deal of misery. To all which may be added, that some conceive that
Solomon begins here to give some instances of vanities, and evils whereto men
are subject, that proceed from themselves, and are not brought upon them by
others, as those before mentioned are.

Verse. 6. Better is an handful with quietness, then both the hands full with
travel and vexation of spirit.] Most Expositors take this to be the sluggards
Apology for himself, wherein he seeks to excuse his idleness, by alleging
that a little with quietness, that is, with ease, sitting still and doing
nothing, a little without that care and toil and labor, that others take, is
better then a far greater estate that is gotten with much toil and travel,
and that does usually expose men to much envy and danger. But I rather take
them to be the words of Solomon, inserted here purposely to show the vanity of
all excessive cares and labors for the gathering of great treasures of wealth;
whereof he has formerly spoken, and of which he intended now to speak again
in the following verse: and withal to imply what is the best remedy for this
vanity, to wit, sweet contentment with his estate, though it be never so
little. See the Notes, Pro. 15.16. and 17.1.

Verse. 7. Then I returned and I saw vanity under the Sun.] That is, Another
vanity, and quite contrary to the former; for having spoken before of the
vanity of sloathfulnesse, ver. 15. in the following verse he speaks again of
the vanity of men's toiling themselves needlessly to heap up riches. As for that
transition, So I returned, See the Note above, ver. 1. and likewise, Chap. 2.12.

Verse. 8. There is one alone, etc.] That is, one that lives alone by himself,
and so has no family to provide for, nor is happily willing that any body should
see what he has, or enjoy any share with him therein; Or rather, One alone,
that is, one that has no known heir to succeed him. And indeed both these may
be included also in that which is added by way of amplification; And there is
not a second, yea he has neither child nor brother; yet is there no end of all
his labor; neither is his eye satisfied with riches; that is, he is not
satisfied; though he should have whatever he sees with his eyes, yet it would
not content him; See the Note, Pro. 27.20. Neither says he, for whom do I
labor, and bereave my soul of good? to wit, of the benefit and comfort I
might enjoy by living comfortably on that which God has bestowed on me, and by
a cheerful and sociable imparting what I have for the good of others.

Verse. 9. Two are better then one, etc.] The better to set forth the vanity of
the loneliness of the covetous drudge (mentioned in the foregoing verse) here
Solomon undertakes to speak in the commendation of society, and to show the
benefit of that mutual helpfulness which thereby one man may afford to another;
Two are better then one, as we see in marriage, Genesis 2.18. and in all other
ways of men's conversing together. Luke 10.1. Because they have a good reward
for their labor; that is, first they reap much benefit mutually one from
another in any labor, which they jointly or severally undertake, to wit, in
that their very being together makes them go on the more cheerfully, and they
are apt to strive who shall do best; and in that they are wont by mutual
comforting, and chearing, and exhorting one another, to stir up each other;
and when there is need the one can assist and help the other. Two eyes we use
to say see more then one, and many hands make light work. Two may do that which
one dares not undertake, and cannot effect; yea two weaker ones thus joining
together, may do that, which one that is stronger then either of them singly
apart by themselves cannot accomplish. And secondly, they have a good reward
for that labor of love which they show one to another, in that they live the
more comfortably together, and do more comfortably enjoy that which they have
gotten by their labors by others friendly partaking with them therein; as
likewise in that they that are helpful to others, are the liker in a time of
need to have help afforded them by others.

Verse. 10. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow.] That is, if
either of them fall, or be ready to fall, the other may stay* or bear him up
from falling, or raise him up when he is fallen: And this must not only be
understood of corporal falls, but also of those that fall into any mistake, or
straight, or danger, into any affliction or sorrow, into any error or sin.

Verse. 12. And if one prevail against him, etc.] That is, against one of the
two; then two shall withstand him; that is, he that was put to the worst, with
the help of his friend or companion, shall be able to resist him: and much more
if there be more then one to help him; which may be employed in the following
Proverb, And a threefold cord is not quickly broken.

Verse. 13. Better is a poor and a wise child, then an old and foolish king,
who will no more be admonished.] Here Solomon proceeds to another Instance of
vanity, and that is the vanity of those that are commonly esteemed the happiest
of men, to wit, Princes and Kings, in that they are many times foolish and
wilful, and so by that means are often deposed from their Kingdoms, yea and
that in their old age, when they had been many years, even from their
childhood, established in their Kingdoms, as is employed in the following
verse, For out of prison he comes to reign, to wit, the wise and poor child,
Whereas also he that is borne in his kingdom, becomes poor. And hereby also
is discovered the vanity of all ambitious men, in seeking to climb up to high
places.

Verse. 15. I considered all the living which walk under the Sun, etc.] Here
another vanity is added, to which Kings are subject; to wit, that though they
be never so prudent and willing to be admonished, yet the people merely out of
fickleness and inconstancy, and affection of novelty and change, are wont to
grow weary of them, and to slight them, and to adore and worship the rising
Sun, the young Prince that is to succeed them; I considered all the living
which walk under the Sun, that is, all the present generation of men living
under a present king or government, with the second child that shall stand up
in his stead, that is, his son and heir, that is to succeed him in the throne;
according to that, Dan. 11.2. Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in
Persia. It is as if he should have said, I have taken notice that the
generality of the common people do still side with the Prince that is to
succeed their old King; If they do not make defection from him, and set up his
son in his stead; yet at least they all close with the heir, their hearts are
set upon him, they run after him, and seek his favor; whilst the father is
laid by and disregarded, as an useless thing. This I conceive is the meaning
of this hard passage. But yet for the more thorough understanding hereof we may
note, 1. that the present generation of a people under their present king is
expressed by these words, all the living; either only to set forth that this is
the humor of all the people; (because he speaks of the generality of men,
therefore he expresses them under this general notion of living men) or else
to imply that thus it is in all nations living upon the face of the earth; or
else, lastly, to intimate the reason of their siding with the young heir,
namely, because the father is grown old, and has not long to live, whereas his
son is now growing up into the world, and so knowing they must live and be
preserved by the living and not by the dead, therefore it is that they all
worship him, who must be to them, as they hope, the breath of their nostrils:
and 2. that those words, which walk under the Sun, may either be another
expression whereby Solomon would set forth that this is the humor of the
generality of the people; or else may have respect to that which follows, and
so are intended to show, that the generality of the people do walk with the
second child that shall stand up in his stead, that is, that they so join
themselves to him, that they favor, flatter, applaud, and honor him, wholly
in a manner neglecting his father.

Verse. 16. There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been before
them, etc.] That is, say some Expositors, before the men of the present age; Or
before the father and the son or other heir that succeeds him in the throne,
mentioned in the foregoing verse. Now that which is said here, that there is no
end of all the people that have been before them, may be understood three
several ways; either 1. that there is no end of the common peoples
fickledesse and inconstancy, of their discontents against the present
Governors, of their restless desires after change, and ambitious endeavor to
creep into the favor of him that is to succeed the present Prince: the people
never put an end or a stop to this vanity, but it is an hereditary disease that
passes from one generation to another; the Prince whom they honored and
adored when he was to reign, the same they dislike and cannot endure when he
comes to reign. Thus it has been in all foregoing ages, thus it is for the
present, and thus it will be in all succeeding generations: Or 2. That there is
no end, that is, no rest or satisfaction to the desires of people concerning
their Prince, no thorough stay or acquiescency of the hearts of the people in
any of their Princes; be they never so wise or well-deserving, they will not
rest satisfied in them, but will grow weary of them, and join themselves to
those that are to succeed them: Or 3. that there has been an infinite number
of people in all foregoing generations that have dealt thus with their Princes.
It has not been an error whereinto some few have fallen, or the error of some
one age, but it has been the general distemper of the common people in all
ages, that how obsequiously soever they have carried themselves to their Kings
at their first rising, yet afterward by degrees they have grown weary of
them, and have been still for the new Kings that were to succeed them: They
also that come after shall not rejoice in him, that is, the new King that is
now so doated on shall be cast off and rejected in future times, as his
predecessors have been; as now they cast off the father to side with the son,
so in the following age, they will for some reason or other cast off the son
to side with the grand child. Surely, this also is vanity and vexation of
spirit; that is this, that people are so unstable in their affections to their
Princes, that by this means the state of Kings and Princes rests upon such
uncertain grounds, and that they are usually thus causelessly cast off by the
people, and live to see another preferred so before them, is a vanity on every
side, and must needs be a trouble, grief and vexation to Princes.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. KEep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, etc.] Two
several ways we may conceive of Solomon's inserting that which here follows
concerning the worship of God; for, 1. His aim might be by teaching men how to
worship God in a right manner; to imply a higher and stranger vanity then any
he had yet spoken of, namely, the vanity that may be in the manner of men's
worshipping God. So true it is, that all things under the Sun are vanity,
that if they look not the more narrowly to themselves, even in their Religion
and worshipping of God, there may be much vanity found: And this Solomon does
here covertly intimate, by giving men this caveat, that they should beware of
this vanity; Or 2. His aim here may be to prescribe the only true remedy for
all the foregoing vanities; Having shown that all things under the Sun are
mere vanity and vexation of spirit, by declaring that neither knowledge, nor
pleasures, nor honors can make a man truly blessed, or yield a man complete
tranquillity of mind, no not the royalty of Kings and Princes, which is the
highest he could go for worldly felicity, he makes here a digression to show,
wherein notwithstanding we may attain happiness and tranquillity of mind, not
only hereafter, but also in this life, and that is by the true fear of God,
one chief part whereof is Gods worship. Only we must then be careful that we
worship God in a right manner; least otherwise our very worshipping of God
proves no better then vanity: To which end he gives us this Caveat, Keep thy
foot when thou go to the house of God, that is, either to the Temple, or
the Synagogues, and by keeping the foot is meant, that because men are apt to
err and offend in duties of Gods worship, therefore when they go to the house
of God, they should watch carefully over themselves, to observe in what manner
they enter upon and perform holy duties, and to look to it that they do no
way offend therein; even as men that go in dangerous ways, are wont to look
very warily to their steps that they do not stumble and fall, so they that
undertake to worship God in the holy assemblyes of his people, must be very
careful that they go thither with due preparation of heart, that they behave
themselves there with all reverence, modesty and sobriety, that they refrain
all worldly and sinful thoughts, and take care that their senses and outward
behavior, their hearts, thoughts, intentions, and affections, be ordered in a
right manner: yea and there may be also in this expression an allusion to that
custom of the Priests washing their feet when they went into the Tabernacle
or Temple, Exodus 30.19, 20. Whereby was signified with what pure hearts and
undefiled consciences, purged from the pollution of sin by faith and
repentance, men should enter upon the holy duties of Gods worship; men of
unclean spirits being as unfit to enter into Gods house, as men with unclean
dirty feet are fit to go into the neatest rooms of a Princes Palace: And be
more ready to hear, that is, to hear and learn and obey the word of God,
then to offer the sacrifice of fools, that is, of wicked men, void of grace
and true understanding; who are said to offer the sacrifices of fools, because
there can be no greater folly, then to think so sillily of God, as that he
minds sacrifices in themselves, or is pleased at any time with the
hypocritical sacrifices of those whose hearts and lives are wicked; yet some
understand this also of those that are not careful to learn from the word of
God, how they ought to worship him, and then to keep close thereto, but think
to please God with their own inventions; for they consider not that they do
evil, to wit, in giving God sacrifices without obedience; so that indeed they
do they know not what, they never think how they displease God with such
hypocritical services, yea think that they do very much please God with their
sacrifices, whereas indeed he loathes and abhorres them.

Verse. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, etc.] To wit, In praying to God in his
house and Sanctuary (for having spoken in the foregoing verse, of hearing and
obeying Gods word, here he gives direction for another part of Gods worship,
which is prayer) Let not thy tongue run before thy wit in praying, do not
speak cursorily and unadvisedly, but prepare thy self before hand, and let
not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, that is, do not only
avoid uttering any thing rashly, which you never thought of before you spoke
it, but beware also of blurting out any thing in prayer so soon as ever it
comes into your thoughts, but with serious and mature deliberation think well
before^hand of what you mean to say to God, and so set your thoughts in order
with trembling and fear; All which is enjoined that men may not beg any thing
of God thorough rashness and unadvisednesse, that is unlawful, inconvenient
or hurtful, nothing but what is according to his will, and in such a manner as
he requires, with faith and fervency of spirit, with all humility, modesty,
sobriety and reverence; For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, that is,
there is an infinite distance and disproportion between God and thee; God is
the most high God, the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, Isa.
57.15. whereas thou art a poor, earthly, vild wretch, a weak frail creature,
made of the dust, and dwelling on the dust. This I say is the chief thing that
is intended in this expression. But yet God being in heaven, may also imply, 1.
that God is omniscient, from above beholding all things that are done here
below, Psalm. 11.4. and therefore see how all men behave themselves in his
presence. 2 that he is Almighty, ruling and governing the whole world and the
fullness thereof, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. and therefore able to punish at his pleasure
all that behave not themselves in his service, as they ought to do; and 3.
that he is infinitely Holy, therefore one that will be served in a pure and holy
manner, Isa. 57.15. In all which respects it is fit therefore that men should
avoid all rashness and unadvisednesse in calling upon God, therefore let thy
words be few; As if he had said, That thou may the better avoid all rash
uttering of any thing that may be offensive to God in thy prayers, be careful
to avoid all tedious prolixity, and all heartlesse and unnecessary repetitions
in praying; Neither often nor long praying, nor yet frequent repetitions in
prayer, so they come from a holy and fervent spirit, are here forbidden; for we
are expressly commanded to pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. And we find
that our Savior did sometimes spend whole nights in prayer; and we find that
the holy servants of God have sometimes pressed the same request again and
again in prayer, as we may see, Dan. 9.18, 19. Even our Savior himself did
so, when he prayed before his passion, that if it were possible that cup might
pass from him, three several times, saying the same words, as the Evangelist
has expressly noted, Matthew. 26.44* See also, Joh 17.14, 16. That which is
here forbidden therefore is only this, that men should not lengthen out their
prayers with a great deal of vain babbling, and with a clamorous and vain
ingeminating of the same thing, as thinking that God is pleased merely with
the length of our prayers, or is moved with the mere pressing of our requests
with many words, which is that our Savior also says, Matthew. 6.7. When ye
pray* use not vain repetitions, as the heathen; for they think that they shall
be heard for their much speaking.

Verse. 3. For a dream comes through the multitude of business, and a fools
voice is known by multitude of words.] As if he had said, As multitude of
business produces usually many vain and foolish dreams, so multitude of
words does as usually produce and discover much folly: see the Note, Pro.
10.19. whereby is employed, that if men endeavor to lengthen out their prayers,
as thinking therewith to please God, being the while ignorant and heartlesse
hypocrites, that pray without understanding and sanctified affections, there
will be much foolish and vain babbling in such prayers.

Verse. 4. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, etc.] See the
Notes, Deuteronomy. 23.21. and Numb. 30.2. For he has no pleasure in fools, that is,
he is highly offended with such men, as thus neglect to make good their
promises to God. And these he terms fools, because it is egregious folly in
men, to be of such a vain fickle spirit, as to be very forward in making vows
to God, and then afterward to be altogether careless of performing what they
have vowed: 2. Because such men do no less then mock and deceive God, and it
is therefore most gross folly by doing thus to hazard Gods displeasure, who is
able every moment to destroy them for it, especially to think to please God
with that which will so highly provoke him; and 3. Because it is sinful and
wicked; their rashness in vowing discovers, that they never thought
reverently enough of God; if they be slack in paying their vows, this shows
their dead-heartedness and cold affections; and if they pay them not at all,
this is an evidence of their deep hypocrisy and contempt of God. Even the
great men of the world will not endure thus to be mocked.

Verse. 5. Better is it that thou should not vow, then that thou should
vow, and not pay.] To wit, Because men are before they have vowed free whether
they will vow or no, and therefore not to vow will be no sin, whereas to vow
and not to pay, will be a great sin. As for that which is said, Psalm. 76.11.
Vow and pay unto the Lord your God (which may seem to imply that vows are
enjoined) the meaning of that is no more then if he had said, If you make any
vows to God, be sure to pay them: even as that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.26. Be
ye angry, and sin not, may be understood thus, If ye be angry, be sure that you
sin not in your anger.

Verse. 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, etc.] That is,
Restrain thy mouth, which of it self is so apt to overflow, and suffer it not
to bring the guilt of sin upon thee, to wit, by rash vowing, or by excusing the
breaking of the vows, which thou had rashly made; for as in the foregoing
verses Solomon urged the careful performance of vows made, so here he presses
the care of avoiding all rashness in vowing, whereby men do often make
unlawful vows, and often repent of what they have vowed, and then think by
some shifts or other, to evade the obligation of the vow, and to excuse
themselves: Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; As if he should
have said, Suffer not so little a member of thy body to bring sin (and so
ruin) upon thy whole man, both body and soul: for flesh is here taken for the
whole man by a Synecdoche; as in that, Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law there
shall no flesh be justified in his sight. And this expression may seem to be
used, to intimate, either 1. that men should not be overhasty to vow, because
men thorough the weakness of their nature are over-apt to break their vows,
though the spirit be ready yet the flesh is weak, and so their vows prove no
better then snares to them; or else that when they have broken their vows,
they must not think to excuse their sin herein by alleging the strength and
prevalency of their fleshly corruptions: or 3. that rash vows are usually
made, not upon serious and spiritual grounds, but for carnal and fleshly
reasons, not that men may advance the glory of God, or that they promote their
own spiritual good, but that they may gratify themselves in some carnal
interest, and carry on some sinful design. As for the following words,
Neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an error, that may be understood
several ways; for 1. By the Angel, may be meant the holy Angels (the singular
number being put for the plural) that are appointed to attend Gods people, and
so observe all our behavior in Gods worship. And then we may conceive thus of
this clause, that as in 1 Cor. 11.10. women are enjoined to have their heads
covered in the public Assemblyes, least they should otherwise give offense to
the Angels, so here all are enjoined to take heed of thinking to excuse the
breaking of the vows they have made, by pretending that they erred in making
those vows, least the holy Angels should be grieved at this their folly. Or 2.
by the Angel, may be meant the Lord Christ, the Angel of the Covenant, Mal.
3.1. See the Note, Exodus 23.20. and then the meaning is this, Say not before
Christ, who is present in all the Assemblyes of his people, and who understands
fully what thy intention in vowing was, that it was an error, that is, think
not to excuse the not performing of thy vow, by saying, I made this vow
unadvisedly, or ignorantly, it was a mistake, I did not think it would have
been so hard a matter to have kept it. Or 3. by the Angel may be meant the
Priest, who is called the Angel, or the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal.
3.7. toward the people; And then we must understand it thus; Because the
Priests were to require of the people the performance of their vows, and
because when men had sworn rashly and unadvisedly, they were by the law of God
to carry a peace offering to the Priest, which for their atonement was to be
offered to the Lord, (for which see the Notes, Lev. 5.4, 5.) therefore men are
here enjoined that when they have made a vow, and then afterward begin to
repent and to grudge at what they have vowed, they should not then think to
salve up the matter by going to the Priest, and confessing that it was an error
that they had so vowed, and so save somewhat by giving a peace offering instead
of some greater matter they had vowed, expecting thereby to be absolved from
their vow; and that because it would be most egregious folly and wickedness
thus to think to delude God, and to abuse his Messenger and Minister. See the
Note also, Pro. 20.25. Wherefore should God be angry at thy voice; that is, at
these thy vain excuses, and destroy the work of thine hands? that is, all that
thou have gotten with the labor of thy hands; and so by withholding a little
thou should bring ruin upon thy whole estate: Or it may be meant of Gods
crossing and disappointing him in all his enterprises and affairs; or
particularly in those his endeavors, for the prospering whereof he had made
those inconsiderate vows.

Verse. 7. For in the multitude of dreams and many words, there are also diverse
vanities, etc.] See the Note before, verse. 3. For as there we are advised to
avoid rashness and forwardness in speaking, lest that produce in prayer much
vain babbling; so here also, that thereby we may avoid rashness in vowing: and
that because in rash vows there is usually much vanity, as that men's vows are
many times sinful, foolish and unprofitable, and that they often repent of
what they have vowed, and keep not faith with God; and so by that means, the
Lord is offended, men are scandalized, and some calamity befalls those that
have thus vowed. As for the last clause, But fear thou God, (which some also
conceive is spoken with reference to the Angel mentioned before, ver. 6. to
wit, the Lord Christ,) this is prescribed as the means whereby men may be
brought rightly to perform all religious worship, and so particularly that of
making vows; for they that truly fear God, will neither vow rashly, nor be
careless of performing what they have so solemnly promised to the Lord.

Verse. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, etc.] Two ways I find
given by Expositors for the connection of these words with that which went
before; and they are both very probable: The first is this, that having in the
foregoing part of the Chapter pressed men to fear God, and to worship God in a
right manner, as the only remedy of that vanity, to which men are subject here
in this world, and the only way wherein true happiness is to be found, because
against this it might be objected, that a man's tranquillity may seem hereby to
be little mended, in regard the poor, especially those that are religious, are
so usually wronged and oppressed by those that are too mighty for them; and if
they fly to the Magistrates and Courts of Justice for remedy, there they shall
find Justice perverted, and their oppressions rather increased then eased, this
objection is here answered, by showing that God does take notice of this, and
therefore will undoubtedly right them in his own due time. The second is this,
that having hitherto in this Chapter taught men to prevent the vanities that
are frequently found in men's performing the duties of Gods worship, so here now
he teaches them to avoid the vanity of being discontented and discouraged with
the oppressions and injustice that are found in the world. If thou see the
oppression if the poor, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a
Province, marvel not at the matter; that is, be not amazed or astonished, as
if it were a strange thing that this should be, or that God should suffer or
order it to be so; marvel not at it, so as to think hardly of God, to be
discontented and discouraged, to distrust his providence, or to grow weary of
his service; For he that is higher then the highest, regards, that is, God,
who is higher then all the Potentates of the world, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, Higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. does from heaven,
his high and holy place, take special notice of all such things, and will in
due time right the poor against their oppressors; And there be higher then
they, to wit, the holy Angels, whom God sets as his subordinate Ministers over
Kings and Kingdoms, to defend the righteous, and to execute his judgments
upon tyrants and oppressors.

Verse. 9. Moreover, the profit of the earth is for all, etc] That is, That
which arises out of the earth by the labors of the husbandman in the tillage
and planting of his grounds, and the breeding of cattle, is for the supply of
all sorts of men, and all things that are necessary for the subsistence of men.
Many nations have been without money, but the fruits of the earth they could
never be without; The King himself is served by the field, that is, he and his
are supported and maintainted by such provisions as arise from the labors of
the husbandman: For the right understanding of Solomon's aim in these words, we
must know, 1. that he does here return to his former discourse concerning the
vanity of all things under the Sun. Having in the foregoing part of the
Chapter inserted a passage concerning the fear and worship of God, as that
which can only render men happy, and remedy the vanities whereto the life of
man is incident; after this Digression he returns again to what he was before
speaking of, and falls upon discovering the vanity of all kind of riches,
wherein very many do look for happiness: Only first by way of transition, he
shows here the excellency of husbandry above all other ways of gain
whatsoever, by showing the benefit that redounds to men by the fruits of the
earth, above all pecuniary possessions whatsoever: and then afterward he
discovers the vanity of both: and 2. that withal there may be in these words
some respect also to that which was said in the foregoing verse, concerning the
oppression and injustice of those that are in high places; this which is said
here in the commendation (...) husbandry, tending to show, that the greatest
that are, stand in need of the meanest amongst the people; as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 12.21. The head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you, so
that when great ones oppress the poor, by whom the earth is tilled, they do
they know not what, because both King and Nobles too must needs want bread, and
other necessaries, if husbandry be destroyed.

Verse. 10. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, etc.]
Diverse learned Expositors hold, that the drift of these words is to prove the
excellency of the fruits of the earth above money, in that these yield a real
benefit to those that take pains for them, whereas silver and gold can never
fill a man's belly nor cloth his back, etc. And accordingly they understand
also the following clause, nor he that loves abundance with increase, that he
that loves abundance of money, can never be satisfied with the increase
thereof; he may starve for hunger and dye for cold in the midst of all his
heaps of gold and silver: But I rather understand this of the insatiablenesse
of covetous men's desires; He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with
silver; that is, he will never think he has enough of it, (that shows the
vanity of that kind of wealth) nor he that loves abundance, with increase;
that is, he that loves abundance of all other things wherein consists the
wealth of rich men, will never be satisfied, though his estate be never so
exceedingly increased: which may also be intended more peculiarly to imply the
vanity of men's seeking to increase their estate by the oppression of others.

Verse. 11. When goods increase, they are increased that eat them, etc.] To
wit, because the greater estates men have in their hands, the more servants,
and the greater families they must needs have, the greater resort there will be
to their houses of friends and others that will hang upon them; and indeed no
man had greater experience of this then Solomon had, concerning whose numerous
family and huge expenses, see 1 King. 4.22, 23, 26, 27, 28. And what good is
there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes?
Which may be understood two several ways; either first that the owners
thereof have no other benefit by their estates, but the seeing of them spent by
others; himself enjoys the least part of them, only he sees others consume
them; which as it may be some comfort to him, if he be of a free and generous
spirit, it being a more blessed thing to give then to receive, Act. 20.35. so
on the other side, if he be of a base and sordid spirit, it must needs be a
vexation to him, to see his goods so wasted and consumed; Or secondly, that
they enjoy no other good by their abundance, but only the beholding of them, to
wit, as their own, that they can look upon their houses, and lands, and goods,
and say in their hearts, All this is mine; for otherwise a servant or stranger
may please himself with looking on his houses and gardens, and all other his
possessions as well as he.

Verse. 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or
much, etc.] To wit, Because if he eat little, yet being wearied with hard
labor, that will make him sleep soundly, and if he eat much, by reason of his
healthfulnesse and labor his stomach will digest it, and so his sleep will not
be broken with crude and hurtful humors, fuming up from his stomach into his
brain. And besides, his labor does so take up his thoughts, th^^by this
means his mind is much freed from those earking thoughts and coveting desires,
which render other men's sleep less sweet unto them, as it follows in the next
words, But the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep; to wit, the
abundance of his wealth, which, through much business, anxious cares and
fears, and gripes of conscience, when they have been gotten unjustly, does
break his sleep; or, as may seem by the former clause, to which this is
opposed, the abundance that he eats, wherewith overcharging his stomach, he is
much distempered thereby, and either cannot sleep at all, or at least sleeps
very unquietly.

Verse. 13. There is a sore evil, which I have seen under the Sun, etc.] As if
he should have said, Amongst the many evils and miseries incident to men in
regard of their riches, this is above others an evil disease, or a sore evil, a
very grievous and bitter evil, namely riches kept for the owners thereof to
their hurt, to wit, either because they prove an occasion of much sin to them,
making them proud, idle, luxurious, etc. or, because they are much vexed and
afflicted with cares and fears concerning their riches; or because they expose
them to envy and violence and rapine, insomuch that many times they lose their
lives by ^eason of their riches, to wit, by thieves and robbers, by tyrants,
and sometime by the treacherous violence of their own children and servants.
Now when a man shall hoard up and with much care keep his riches, as expecting
much happiness thereby, and to live joyfully without any fear of want for
himself, or for his children, and quite contrary to his expectation they shall
prove the occasion of his ruin, this must needs be esteemed a sore evil.

Verse. 14. But those riches perish by evil travel, etc.] As if he had said, But
besides this forementioned evil, that riches are usually kept to the owners
hurt, there is another vanity whereto riches are subject, and that is, that
many times too they cannot be kept, but they perish by evil travel; the meaning
whereof is, either that they perish and come to nothing, though a man does
extremely afflict himself with sore travel and toil both to increase and
advance his estate and to preserve what he has gotten; or else that they
perish by his own folly and improvident courses, or by his successeless
travels, and the losses that befall him in his trading and dealing in the
world, when nothing that he undertakes thrives in his hands, or by the fraud
and violence of others: And he begets a son, and there is nothing in his
hand, that is, the father when he dies has nothing to leave his son, (and
this must needs be very grievous to him, fathers being usually more sollicitous
for their children then for themselves) or, the son has nothing to live upon,
when his father is dead, which indeed is most grievous to the sons of rich men,
because they are seldom brought up to labor, or to any way or trade of living,
whereby they may know how to sustain themselves.

Verse. 15. As he came forth of his mothers womb, naked shall be return to go as
he came, etc.] This is added as another vanity in riches, to wit, that though
men do not lose their wealth whilst they live, yet to be sure they must part
withal they have when they die: they shall carry nothing with them of that
which they have gotten by their hard labor.

Verse. 16. And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so
shall he go; etc] As if he had said, Though those before mentioned verse. 13, 14
be the greater evils, to wit, when a man's riches are kept for his hurt, or when
he lives to see them all lost and gone, yet it is a sore evil also, (to wit to
a covetous man, that loves and trusts in his riches) that when he dies he
must part with all he has, that his riches will not keep him from death, nor
can be any advantage to him in death: And what profit has he, that has
labored for the wind? that is, for that which is nothing, or that which soon
comes to nothing; As he that catches at the wind, he grasps the air that will
be found to be nothing, so he that labors for riches, wearieth himself for
that which has no substance of true felicity in it; And as it is not possible
for a man to keep or hold the wind, so neither can a man keep his riches, when
he has gotten them: Or he that heapeth up riches may be said to have labored
for the wind, because he has labored for those things, that will be gone in
an instant, as if they were blown away with the wind. See the Notes Prove.
11.29. and Job. 15.2.

Verse. 17. All his days also he eats in darkness. etc.] That is, even whilst
he lives he does not enjoy himself or his estate with any comfort, but lives
sordidly and miserably in the midst of his abundance, basely and wretchedly,
like one that is a true prisoner and slave to his riches: insomuch that whereas
at meat men love however to be cheerful, it is not so with him, but even then
he eats in darkness, that is, in secret, alone by himself, as being ashamed
that any body should see how mean and miserable his provision is, and loath
that any body should have any share with him; and so lives like a poor man,
that he may die a rich man; Or, he eats with continual solicitous care,
vexation and fretting; grudging at the very meat which himself is forced to
eat, though it be as course and little as may be, and many ways disquieting
himself about his estate; And he has much sorrow and wrath with his sickness,
where if by his sickness we understand, as some do, only his coveteousness,
then the meaning is only this, that this spiritual distemper does bring upon
him a great deal of sorrow and anguish of spirit, a great deal of wrath and
anger, fretting and discontent, as namely at his losses and crosses, his
expenses and miscariage of businesses; But if by his sickness be meant bodily
sickness, then we must thus understand this clause, either that his
coveteousness does not only work in him much grief and anger and vexation, but
also by this means much weakness and sickness; or else, that when he comes to
be sick, he is grieved, and angered and disquieted with himself, because he
cannot toil to increase his wealth, as he used to do; or rather, because he
sees he must die, and part with his wealth which he so dearly loves, and it
even vexes him to see his children and friends stand gaping for what he must
leave behind him, and it may be to think how he has punished himself to
increase that, which now will be lavished away by others.

Verse. 18. It is good and comely for one to eat, etc.] For this and the next
verse, See the Notes, Chap. 2.24. and 3.12, 13, 22.

Verse. 20. For he shall not much remember the days of his life, etc.] This may
be read, according as it is in the Margin of our Bibles, Though he gives not
much, yet he remembers the days of his life, because God answers him in the
joy of his heart; and the meaning then is, that though God gives the man
before mentioned in the foregoing verse, that makes use of what he ^^th, but a
small portion of these outward things yet he remembers that he has but a few
days to live, and so a little will serve his turn, and that, as he finds by
experience, God can give gladness with a little food, as well as with a great
deal, Act. 14.17. and so he cheerfully take; his part of that little he has;
Or, he remembers that all his days God gives him comfort and joy in that
little he has, which sweetneth his small pittance to him, Psalm. 37.15. and
Prove. 17.1. and so he with a glad and contented mind makes use of that which
God has given him. But if we read it, as it is in our Translation, then we
must understand it thus, for he shall not much remember the days of his life;
that is, He that does in this manner cheerfully enjoy the estate that God has
conferred upon him, he shall not be overmuch troubled; first with remembering
the labors, and sorrows, and afflictions of his life, either what he has gone
through in the time past, or what he does for the present endure, or what may
befall him hereafter; it cannot be but he must needs be in some degree sensible
of these things, but he shall not be much perplexed nor disquieted with these
things, not so far as to make the days of his life seem tedious and irksome,
and wearisom to him; Or secondly, with remembering the shortness of his days,
and consequently with the fear of his approaching end; because God answers
him in the joy of his heart; that is, because God fully satisfies his desires
in the joy and cheerfulness that he affords him, in making use of what he has
to his own and others good, and to Gods glory; or, because God answers all
his labors with contentment and joy proportionable thereunto, and which are a
full compensation of all the pains he has taken, and sorrows he has gone
through; So that the meaning of this passage is briefly this, that the man to
whom God gives power to make use of his estate, as occasion requires, is so
intent upon the delight he takes in his present enjoyments, that this expels
all such sour thoughts, as are before mentioned, out of his mind; His joy and
hearty contentment in his present estate makes him forget the trouble of his
travels past or present, and freeth him from all vexations, cares and fears
about what is to come.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. THere is an evil which I have seen under the sun, etc.] Some
Expositors conceive that Solomon here proceeds to speak of another vanity,
besides what he has spoken of before, that does commonly attend riches to wit,
that rich men many times do not only make no use of what they have, but
besides that they gather their estates, as it proves in the conclusion, for
those that are mere strangers to them, as is expressed in the following verse.
But I rather think that he does here further declare what he had said before
chap. 5.19. to wit, that it is not in man's power with comfort to enjoy what God
has given him, but that this also is the free gift of God, namely by showing
that it is a common ordinary thing in the world for men to have abundance of
these outward things, and never to take any comfort in them, as is largly set
forth in the following words.

Verse. 2. A man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, etc.] That
is, substance and goods of all sorts, together with honor and great place in
the world; So that he wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires;
that is, he has abundantly enough of all things that his soul can desire;
though through coveteousness he may never think he has enough, yet the truth
is he has store of all things that he can reasonably and justly desire, yet
God gives him not power to eat thereof; that is, God in his just wrath and
displeasure against him gives him not a heart to enjoy any part of what he has
for his comfort and delight, but out of a base niggardly mind, incessant cares
and labors, and jealousies and fears, and disquiet in his family, he cannot
eat his bread in quiet, or at least he will not take any pleasure in any thing
he has, but a stranger eats it, that is, whereas he has not power
comfortably to make use of some part of what he has, a stranger comes and
devours, and wastes and swalloweth it up all; which may be meant of some enemy
or man of violence that spoileth him of his estate, or rather of one that was
no way allied to him, nor ever known by him, and so one that never labored for
it, that after his death comes by some means to possess all his wealth, which
he with so much penuriousness had scraped together, This is vanity and it is an
evil disease, that is, thus to do is not only a vain and fruitless thing, but
it also brings upon a man much woe and misery. See the Notes also chap. 5.17.

Verse. 3. If a man beget an hundred children, etc.] Having spoken of covetous
men, that having no children leave their estates to strangers, here he shows
that in case such men have never so many children and live never so long, yet
this renders their condition never a whit the better, but rather the worse. So
(...) indeed conceive that Solomon's aim here is to show the vanity of many
children, and long life; when men are so poor, that they have not wherewith to
sustain them and theirs whilst they live, nor to provide for a decent burial
when they are dead. But I think it is clear that Solomon goes still on in
setting forth the misery of the covetous miser, that has enough, but cannot
find in his heart to spend any thing in a manner of it. If a man beget an
hundred children, that is, if he have never so many children; In those days
when men had many wives, they had oftentimes exceeding many children; as we
read that Ahab had threescore and ten Sons. 2 King. 10.1. and Gideon as many,
besides Abimelech. Judge. 8, 30, 31. and that Rehoboam had fourscore and eight
Sons and daughters. 2 Chro. 11.21. But here a definite number is put for an
indefinite, as Pro. 17.10. A reproof enters more into a wise man, then a
hundred stripes into a fool. A covetous man's having many children yields him no
comfort, but only increases his cares; and live many years, so that the days
of his years be many, that is, suppose also that such a man live to be a very
old man (in the expression that Solomon here uses, he seems by way of
correcting himself to call long life many days rather then many years;) and
his soul be not filled with good, that is, if notwithstanding such a man out of
the insatiablenesse of his covetousness thinks he has never enough, or by
reason of his penurious pinching of himself or some curse of God upon his
estate, he never enjoys any comfortable satisfying portion of what he has;
and also that he have no burial, that is, no decent burial; to wit, either
because out of base covetousness he neither living nor dying provided for it,
and being a hated man, his heirs, that only gaped after his goods, do wholly
neglect it; or because falling into the hands of thieves and robbers he is by
them drowned, or slain and cast into a ditch, as was foretold concerning
Jehoiakim, that in regard his eyes and his heart were not but for his
covetousness, he should therefore be buried with the burial of an ass, See
Jer. 22, 17, 18, 19. or because for some crime he is sentenced thereto, or it
may be through covetousness does make away himself, or some other such like
reason; I say, that an untimely birth, that is dead born or dies as soon as
ever it is born, is better then he, that is, in a better condition to wit, in
regard of outward respects, and that because such a man enjoys not the
comforts of this life any more then the abortive, but then on the other side he
endures a great deal of misery in the world which the other does not, and it
is better to be born and die at once, then to live long in vexation and misery,
and to die without an honorable burial, as is more fully explained in the
following verses.

Verse. 4. For he comes in with vanity, etc.] Here the reason is shown why an
untimely birth is in a better condition, then a covetous muck-worm that takes
no comfort in what he enjoys, and is obscurely buried, yea though he have
many children and live many years, namely because the abortive untimely birth,
though he enjoys not the benefit of this life, yet he is not withal troubled
with the miseries of this life, and so as Solomon concludes in the end of the
next verse, he enjoys more rest then the other does, for he, that is, the
abortive, comes in with vanity, to wit, in that he seems in man's judgment to
have been conceived and born in vain and to no purpose, because he reapes no
good of his being conceived and born, but is as nothing, and as if he had never
been, See the Note, Job 3.16 and departs in darkness, to wit, as dying in
the womb, or presently after it is born, and so passing from the darkness of
the womb to the darkness of the grave, is privately put into the earth and
buried, no body in a manner taking any notice of it, and his name shall be
covered with darkness, that is, he is presently quite forgotten, as if he had
never been.

Verse. 5. Moreover, he has not seen the Sun, etc.] This also is spoken of the
abortive, to wit, that never living to behold the light, he never felt in
himself, nor saw in others the corruptions and miseries, that all men under the
Sun are liable to; as he never enjoyed any good in the world, so neither did he
endure any evil, at least his misery began and ended together; nor known any
thing, to wit, in that he never had use either of sense or reason, and so as he
never experimentally knew what was good, so neither likewise what was evil; and
as he never enjoyed good, so he never desired it, and consequently was never
afflicted because he had not what he desired. See the Notes, Chap. 4.2, 3. this
has more rest then the other, as if he had said, In these regards, the
untimely birth is in a better condition then the covetous man before mentioned
verse. 3. to wit, because the untimely birth has more rest then he: seeing he
is at rest from the very womb, whereas the covetous man lives a toilsome,
unquiet life all his days.

Verse. 6. Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, etc.] Because it
might be objected, that long life is in it self a blessing, and that therefore
the covetous man is at least in this regard in a better condition then the
abortive child, because he out-lives him so many years, to this Solomon answers
here; yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, that is, suppose a man
could live so long; yet has he seen no good that is, such a man does never
live one cheerful hour in all that time, nor never takes any true delight or
content in any thing, but his whole life is spent in continual vexation and
misery; and consequently therefore his life is no advantage to him, but the
lengthening of his days does only lengthen out his misery; do not all go to
one place? as if he should have said, And besides to the grave he must at last
come as well as the abortive, and then, considering that his riches cannot
secure him from death, and that he can carry nothing with him of all that he
has gotten, there is no difference betwixt him and the abortive; or if there
be any difference, the covetous man that lived so long is in the worst
condition, because it is such a vexation to him, when he goes to the grave,
that he must part with his wealth, upon which for so many years together his
heart has been set. And why then should men toil and pine themselves to heap
up riches? were it not much better with content and comfort to make use of that
estate which God has bestowed upon them?

Verse. 7. All the labor of man is for his mouth, etc.] That is, All that man
gets by his labor, or all that man aims at in his labor, is for his bodily
sustenance and the support of his life by providing things necessary and
convenient for him: For all things requisite for the necessary maintenance of
man's life, which the Apostle distributeth into those two particulars of food
and raiment, 1 Timothy 6.8. are here comprehended under this one expression, that
all is for his mouth, and that because food convenient, meat and drink is of
all things most necessary a man will sell the very house he dwells in and the
clothes upon his ^k to get bread to eat. See the Note, Pro. 16.26. yet the
appetite (or, as it is in the Hebrew, the soul) is not filled, the meaning
whereof is, either, 1. that man's appetite can never be so satisfied with meat
and drink, but that within a while his hunger and thirst will return again, nor
will it be so satisfied, but that still it will be affecting new variety of
dainties. And then the drift of the words may be to imply the vanity of man's
labor here in this world, or the vanity of riches even then when the owners
thereof do make use of them, in that all being for the mouth, there is no end
of man's labor, nor of men's seeking to satisfy their appetite with what they
have, in that it will be only satisfied for a while: Or secondly, that man's
covetous desire after the things of this world is insatiable, though he has
abundantly enough to supply all his necessities, yet his inordinate desire
after riches is never satisfied, but that still he is toiling for more, and is
so greedy to advance his estate that he cannot find in his heart to spend any
thing in a manner of what he has. See the Note, Cha. 4.8. And if we thus
understand the words, then Solomon's aim therein may be to show the folly of
man, in that all being for the mouth, for the support of men's present life,
they should so eagerly toil for so much, where so little would serve; being
still so greedy after abundance, that they even defraud their mouths, for
which they should labor, and the more they have, the more still they desire:
Or thirdly, that however, the rational soul of man cannot be satisfied with
such things: they may supply the body with food and clothing and other such
like natural comforts, but they can never satisfy the soul; and a great vanity
it is, that the divine and immortal soul should only be intent upon sensual
and transitory things.

Verse. 8. For what has the wise more then the fool? etc.] This is added as a
proof of what he had said in the foregoing verse, that riches cannot satisfy
the desires of man: because wise men, that are most likely to find it out if it
were there to be had, do enjoy no more good by their wealth then fools do; what
has the wise more then the food? as if he should said, nothing at all; wisdom
does far excel folly in regard of internal worth, See the Note, Chap. 2, 13.
But in regard of the outward use of riches, in regard of the common events of
this life and the discommodities thereof, the wise man has no privilege above
the fool: and that because the fool may have all sorts of riches as well as the
wise man, and he may live as comfortably and plentifully, he may eat as good
meat and wear as good clothes as the wise man can; and in all this he does but
provide for back and belly and such other necessities of nature, and so may the
fool do that is rich as well as he: As the wise man is subject to hunger and
thirst as well as the fool, so the fool may have wherewith to supply, and may
as readily supply, these and other the like necessities of nature, as the wise
man: The wise man cannot prevent death by his riches, nor carry any thing with
him when he dies nor satisfy the desires of his immortal soul with his wealth,
no more then the fool can: What has the poor that knows to walk before the
living? that is, that knows how to get a livelihood amongst men, as being
industrious and prudent, and one that understands how to carry himself toward
all men with whom he converseth both in public and private fairly and
discreetly, so as to be well esteemed amongst them, and to gain their favor,
by all which means he makes a shift to gather some competency of estate, though
it be but little, and so he is reputed still but a poor man; what has this
poor man? that is, say some Expositors, what has he less then the rich man
has, whither wise or foolish? He has as much profit by his little as the rich
man has by all his abundance, in that he has wherewithal to preserve life
and lives comfortably thereon and the rich can do no more. But I rather think
that the word more, which is in the first clause of this verse, must be again
repeated here, thus, what has the poor man, that knows how to live amongst
men, more then the rich covetous churl, that lives retired by himself, and
enjoys not the society of men? as if he should have said, Both do but live
and both must die, the one as well as the other. Or rather thus, what has this
poor man, that by his industry and discreet carriage of himself amongst men
gets a competent livelihood, more then a poor simple man that has not so good
abilities to provide for himsel, seeing even this man also does some way get
bread to eat, and makes a shift to rub through and to live in the world, and
the other can do no more.

Verse. 9. Better is the sight of the eyes, then the wandering of the desire,
etc.] Diverse of our best Expositors do take this to be the covetous churles
answer to that Question before propounded by Solomon, What has the wise more
then the fool, etc. Yes, says the covetous man, It is better for a man to
have an estate in his possession, in his eye, (see the Note, Chap. 5.11.) as
the rich man always has, then to be in continual want of those necessaries,
which the body naturally calls for, and so to be always wishing and craving
this and that for the supply of his necessities. And then they take the
following words to be the censure which Solomon passes concerning this answer;
This is also vanity and vexation of spirit; that is, to have riches, only to
look upon them, and not to use them; to wit, because this yields the owner no
profit, neither can it settle or satisfy the desires of the soul, but must
needs be accompanied with great cares and disquiet of mind; see the Note, Chap.
2.11. But I rather conceive that this is likewise added to show the folly of
the covetous man's eager pursuit after earthly things: Better is the sight of
the eyes, then the wandering of the desire, or, as it is in the Hebrew, then the
walking of the soul, that is* Better it is comfortably and contentedly to
enjoy and make use of what a man has in his possession, then to be still
desiring and seeking after more and more; sometimes one thing and sometimes
another which he has not. Since the poor man enjoys as much substantial
benefit by his small portion of these outward things, as the rich man does by
his abundance, in that he has food convenient, and thereby lives and enjoys
health, and since the wisest can fetch no more real good from their riches
then fools, it is therefore doubtless far more comfortable with
contentation of mind to enjoy the estate a man has, then when a man's mind is
still going out and wandering this way and that, in the pursuit of that which he
has not, when he is still longing, and wishing and plotting for several
things which he has not, and still hopes to attain, which if he do not
attain, he is discontented, and if he do attain them, he is for all that
unsatisfied, and still desires more and more: This is also vanity and vexation
of spirit; that is, this neglecting to make use of what a man enjoys, and to
have his soul still wandering in the affecting and seeking after greater
things, is to no purpose in the world, but does rather increase his labor and
misery.

Verse. 10. That which has been, is named already, etc.] This is added to make
good the foregoing censure, namely, to prove the vanity of the endless
wandering of men's desires and endeavors after greater things then what at
present God has afforded them; which is done by showing, that nothing that men
can attain, in regard of these outward things, can exempt or secure them from
those manifold miseries whereto the humane nature is generally subject; and
that by the unresistable decree of God; and likewise (as many of our best
Expositors conceive) that every man's condition is pre-assigned him by the
eternal decree of God, and that therefore all sollicitousness about their
future estate is needless and vain. That which has been, is named already;
that is, Whatever the condition of any man has been, or is, whether he be rich
or poor; honorable or base, it is that which God has purposed and decreed
concerning him; As that which belongs to his nature and being, so that which
concerns his outward estate, even every thing that therein befalls him, has
been determined by Gods immutable and unresistable counsel; and therefore he
cannot change his condition, he cannot make himself rich, when God has
determined he shall be poor, he cannot add the least to that which God has
determined shall be his portion; so that it were far better for every man
contentedly to enjoy what God has given him, resting upon his providence, who
from eternity has known him by name, then anxiously and greedily to strive for
that, which if it be contrary to what God has decreed, he shall never attain:
Or rather thus; That which has been, is named already; As if he should have
said, Whatever the man be that has been, or is, whether he be wise or foolish,
rich and honorable, or of a mean and low condition, and however it has been
with him both in regard of the possession and making use of riches, yet the
name that God has already given him, even from his first creation, Adam,
shows what he is, a lump of clay, made of the earth, and therefore a poor
frail creature, that must return to the earth out of which he was taken, and
that from his birth to his death is subject to many and manifold miseries; And
it is known that it is man; that is, What ever he be in other respects it
matters not much, this to be sure is known by proof and experience, that what
ever he is, he is but a man, a poor, frail, mortal creature, subject to
variety of vanities, as has been showed already; every man may feel this in
himself, and observe it in others; and though therefore in other respects,
there is a great deal of difference betwixt the rich and the poor, the wise
man that makes use of his wealth, and the fool that pincheth himself in these
things, yet in this they are alike, that they are but men, poor, weak,
perishing creatures, that have their whole dependence upon God; Let men advance
themselves to never so high and great an estate, yet as they were men before,
so they are men still; their riches and honors cannot secure them from those
evils and infirmities whereto the humane nature is subject; such as sickness
and grief, sin, and the wrath of God as the punishment of sin; from the
earth they came, and to the earth they must go: Neither may he contend with
him that is mightier then he; that is, with God. And the meaning is either 1.
that it is not for man to murmr against God, or to argue with and implead God
for subjecting man to so much misery; and that both because God is blameless
herein; he made man happy, and it is man that by his sin has brought these
miseries upon himself, and likewise because when God undertakes to punish men
for this their boldness in contending with him, he will be found too strong
for the proudest and stoutest of men; or rather, 2. that it is in vain for men
by laboring to heap up wealth in abundance, to think to free themselves from
that vanity and misery whereto God has adjudged man; all men's endeavors this
way will be but lost labor, and a striving against the stream; by such greedy
covetousness they will but provoke God to punish them, who will be then found
too strong for them, and will soon make them feel they are but mortal
creatures; but to free themselves in the least from the vanities and miseries
of man, they will never be able.

Verse. 11. Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the
better?] This may be taken as a further prosecution of his former arguing
against men's greedy pursuing after abundance of these earthly things, namely,
by showing that abundance of these things does but increase men's vanity; the
more men have, the more trouble they have many several ways, the more are
their fears of loosing them, the more their cares for keeping them, and for
conveying them to their posterity, yea the more is their greedy desire still to
be getting more and more, in that abundance does not extinguish but increase
covetousness, even as the laying on of more and more wood, does not quench but
increase the fire; and therefore in true judgment men are nothing the better
for them; when they dye they can carry nothing away with them of all their
abundance, and whilst they live, they have no real advantage by their riches
more then they had before; then they had food and clothing, and the greatest
abundance they can get, can yield them no more. Yea and if men go about to
cast the blame upon God for subjecting them to such variety of vanities and
miseries, to be sure, thereby they will no way better themselves, but rather
provoke God to lay his hand the heavier upon them. But I rather conceive, as in
the Annotations of our Divines the learned Author of those upon this Book has
singularly well observed, that here Solomon gives us the conclusion of all that
hitherto he has said to prove the vanity of all things under the Sun, which
was the proposition he undertook to demonstrate in the beginning of this Book,
Chap. 1, 2, 3. namely, that seeing there are so many things that do increase
vanity, knowledge, wisdom, and folly, pleasures, honors, and riches, as has
been severally shown, in regard of real happiness and true contentment man
is never a whit the better, either for any of these severally, or for all of
them jointly together.

Verse 12. For who knows what is good for man in this life, etc?] Two reasons
are added in this verse to prove that men are no whit the better, for those
vain things, wherein they are naturally prone to seek for happiness; The
first is in this first clause; For who knows what is good for man in this
life? The meaning whereof is, that no man knows by himself, nor can any man
tell him, what of these outward things, which he desires may be for his good,
when he does possess them, nor whether this or that which he does, in the
disposing of any thing he enjoys, or in the managing of any of his affairs,
will prove advantageous or hurtful to him: No man knows whether it will be
best for him to be poor or rich, to be in place of public employment, or to
live a close or retired life, to have children or to dye childless, etc. Those
things from which men have expected much benefit and comfort, and those
undertakings and actions which they judged likely to produce much good to them,
have often proved the occasion and means of much sorrow, and vexation, and
misery to them; and on the other side, those things which men do most fear
and decline, do many times prove blessings to them, and occasions of great
rejoicing. As for those following words, All the days of his vain life, which
he spends as a shadow; Either they are added, 1. to imply that one reason
amongst many others why men do not know what is good for them, is the
shortness and the sicklenesse of man's life, by reason whereof they have not
time enough experimentally to understand wherein their good consists, and how
to order all they do for the best: or 2. the folly and vanity of man, that
having so little a while to live, knows not how to spend that little parcel
of time for his own best advantage; or 3. to imply, that though a man should
enjoy what his heart could desire in these outward things, yet because of the
many other vanities and miseries, whereto the poor life of man is subject, and
particularly because of the mutability, the shortness and transitorinesse
thereof, and that men are therefore so suddenly taken away from what they
enjoy, it must needs be but a s^ow of good, which he can reap by any of his
enjoyments in this life, which is so vain and which passes away as a shadow;
for which last expression, see the Notes, Psalm. 102.11. and 109.23. and 144.4.
The second Reason is in the last clause; For who can tell a man what shall be
after him under the Sun? The meaning whereof is, that as men have themselves
little good by these outward things whilst they do enjoy them, so they can
take as little comfort in thinking of any good that they shall yield to those,
to whom they shall leave them, and that because they cannot know what will be
in aftertimes when they are gone; which if they did they might the better know
how to dispose of them. See the Notes, Chap. 2.18, 19. and 3.22.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. A Good name, etc.] Some learned Expositors conceive that Solomon
having hitherto spoken of the vanity of sundry conditions of the creature, is
considered in themselves, does here undertake further to discover their vanity
by comparing them one with another; thereby withal intimating the vanity of
men's minds and imaginations in that they do so grossly mis-judge of things,
esteeming those things better, that are indeed worse, and those things worse,
that are indeed better: And again others think, that having in the foregoing
chapter shown the vanity of riches in themselves, whether men make use of them
or not, here now he proceeds to show their vanity likewise by comparing them
with other things, and showing how much better other things are then they. But
I rather conceive with others that the scope of the Wise man in this place is
this, that having shown hitherto the vanity of all things here below, and how
vain it is for men to seek for happiness and satisfaction there, where they
are sure to meet with nothing but disappointment and vexation of spirit, here
he undertakes to prescribe remedies against these vanities. Though in the
foregoing discourse he had here and there inserted some general remedies, as
for men to fear God, and comfortably to enjoy that portion of these outward
things, which God has been pleased to bestow upon them; yet here now he
prescribes more particularly several means for the healing, at least for the
allaying of the vanities and miseries whereto man is subject, and for the
procuring of the happiness of a peaceable and contented mind, so far as it
is attainable in this life. And it is not improbable that from that which he
had said in the end of the foregoing chapter, he takes occasion here to insert
these Rules of direction; for having said there, that no man knows what is
good for him, here thereupon he undertakes to teach men what is good for them,
and by what means they may come to live with as much content and comfort, as
in this world can reasonably be expected; And the two first Directions he gives
is concerning men's care for the procuring and preserving of a good name, and
for learning not to fear death, which is the common end of all mankind. A good
name is better then precious ointment; that is, then the choicest of all riches
and outward delights. See the Notes, Pro. 15.30. and 22.1. for because precious
aromatical ointments were very highly esteemed amongst the Israelites, (and
thence it is that they are reckoned amongst Hezekiahs treasures. 2 King.
20.13.) therefore a precious ointment may be figuratively put here for all kind
of riches and bodily delights. But yet they may be preferred before a precious
ointment particularly, with respect to the qualities of such precious
ointments, as 1. Because whereas sweet ointments are very delightful, and do
exceedingly cheer and refresh the spirits of men, so the fragancy of a good
name does much revive and comfort the heart of those that are highly extolled
for their goodness and piety, and of those that hear the good report that is
given of them: yea the sweet savor of a man's good name will spread farther and
continue longer, then the smell of the best ointment can do; this may fill the
house, as it is said of the ointment wherewith Mary anointed the feet of
Christ, Joh. 12.3. but the other may fill both town and country. Romans 1.8.
Your faith is spoken of thorowout the world; this may leave a sweet sent behind
it for some few hours, but the other will continue fresh many years, yea even
after the party himself is deceased; so that as ointments by embalming do help
to preserve for a time the dead bodies of men, so a good name does in this
regard make men live as it were after they are dead, Pro. 10.7. The memory of
the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. 2. Because as
ointment does cause a man's face to shine, and to appear the more beautiful in
the eyes of others: so when men are renowned for their wisdom and piety and
good works, it makes their face to shine, chap. 8.1. it causes others highly
to esteem and reverence and admire them. 3. Because as such ointments do supple
the flesh and sinews, and make men nimble and fit for any exercise or service,
so a good name does much quicken and enliven men and makes men active and
vigorous both for all public and private employments, and 4. Because as such
ointments are of a healing nature so a good name is very effectual to heal the
venom of backbiting tongues, and the heart of a man when it is broken and
wounded with diverse other sorrows. As for the following clause, some join it
with the former thus; As a good name is better then precious ointment, so the
day of death is better then the day of ones birth. And others also understand
the second in a limited sense, with respect unto the former, to wit, that the
day of death is in this regard better then the day of ones birth, because after
death a good man's name does especially flourish; whilst they live their name
may be overclouded with envy, but when they die, the general applause of those
that survive them does dispel those clouds, and their name spreads abroad like
the spices when they are broken, or the sweet perfume of some precious
ointment. But it is better to understand it more generally, that the day of
death is better then the day of ones birth, because death freeth men from all
the sins, miseries and vexations of this life, whereinto men's birth gives
them their first entrance; men are born to trouble, Job 5.7. but death puts an
end to all the troubles of this life. And so the drift of this clause may be
either to discover the vanity of riches, by showing that the day, whereon a man
is taken from all his wealth, is better then that day whereon he first enters
upon the enjoying of these outward things; or else to arm men against that
great vanity of this life, the fear of death, by showing that the day of death
is, to good men especially, men of a good name, that have an entrance thereby
to eternal glory, where all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes, a far
greater advantage then the day of their birth, whereon there uses to be so
much rejoicing.

Verse. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the house
of feasting: etc.] That is, to a house where there is mourning for some near
relation that is there deceased, as appears by the following words; and so
likewise by the house of feasting may be peculiarly meant the houses, where
there are birthday feasts kept, that so this clause may fully answer that in
the close of the foregoing verse, the day of death is better then the day of
ones birth; though I conceive it may well enough be extended to all houses of
feasting whatsoever. It is true indeed that at feasts many occasions may be
taken for holy and good Meditations; But yet because at feasts there are
usually all sorts of vanity and provocations to vanity, and when men's spirits
are disposed to cheerfulness, they are then most exposed to lightness, and
sad objects make deeper impression upon our spirits, and particularly because
at feasts, men are apt, either to put far away the evill-day, as it is said
of those profane feasters, Amos 6.3. to keep the thought of death out of their
minds (the meditation whereof is most useful for men) or else to slight it,
and make a jest of it, as those, Isa. 22.13. Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye; therefore it is better to go to the house of mourning,
then to go to the house of feasting. And this is indeed the reason that is
here given, for that is the end of all men, to wit, death; and the living will
lay it to heart; that is, in all probability, because the sight of a dead
corpse, together with the lamentation and tears of the mourners, do naturally
soften the hearts of men, and fit them for holy meditations, they that are
present at such meetings will be seriously and sadly affected with it, and will
diligently ponder with themselves of the mighty power of God, and the frailty
and vanity of man, that they also must dye, and give an account of their lives
before Gods tribunal, and that therefore it behooves them to prepare
themselves against their change comes.

Verse. 3. Sorrow is better then laughter, etc.] It may be read, as it is in the
margin of our Bibles, Anger is better then laughter; and then the meaning must
be, that the anger of one that will frown upon a man that does evil, and
freely reprove him for his faults, is better then the smiles and flatteries of
clawbacks and parasites; and so likewise we must understand the following
clause; For by the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better; that
is, by the austere and frowning look of such a reprover, the heart of the
reproved is made better; both in regard of amendment and the comfort that will
afterward follow thereupon. But both that which went before, and that which
follows in the next verse shows, that Solomon is here speaking of sorrow
not of anger, and proves what he said before, that, It is better to go to the
house of mourning, then to go to the house of feasting; because sorrow is
better then laughter; that is, A sad, sober and composed frame of spirit,
whether wrought in a man upon the remembrance of his sins, or some affliction
that is befallen him, or by the serious meditation of death at funerals
(whereto indeed the words may seem to have particular respect,) is better then
light, frolic and profuse mirth; when men swim in sensual delights, and never
mind their sins, or their own approaching end, or other judgments of God;
For by the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better; that is, by
sorrow, manifested in the countenance, the heart, the better part of a man is
made better; to wit, because hereby men are weaned from the world, vain, and
light, and foolish lusts and affections in them are checked and suppressed, and
they become seriously sensible of those things that concern their peace and
eternal good, whereby way is made also to true cheerfulness and joy. This I
conceive is the meaning of this divine Paradox. But yet it may be understood of
sorrow in others; Sorrow is better then laughter; that is, It is better to be
amongst those that mourn, then amongst those that laugh, and that because sad
objects are to the heart of man like ballast to the Ship that makes it go
steady, the sad countenance of mourners does keep those that behold it from
those vanities whereinto at feasts men are prone to run out. In the Hebrew it
is very elegantly expressed, for by the badnesse of the countenance the heart
is made better.

Verse. 4. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of
fools is in the house of mirth.] This may be understood two several ways;
either 1. that the thoughts of wise men are still upon those things that belong
to the house of mourning, those things for which men are there afflicted and
grieved, they are still thinking of death, and such mournful things, of the
hunger and thirst, the wants and miseries that others endure, as remembering
that they also may come to be in the same condition, yea when their bodies are
not in such places, even in the midst of their greatest joy and feasting, their
hearts will be still musing on such things as these, and by that means are
fore-armed against such calamities come to be their portion, and do live
always as those that must presently dye; whereas on the other side, fools
cast off all such thoughts, and put far away the evil day, Amos 6.3. their
minds run altogether upon good cheer, and laughter, and revellings, yea though
they are called to mourning, yet then they will be all for merriment, and so
being wholly taken up with worldly pleasures, thorough unpreparednesse of heart
they are overwhelmed when any miseries or sorrows come upon them: or else
secondly, that wise men desire to be amongst mourners, there they would be when
they are by some occasions kept away; whereas fools desire and seek to be only
in frolic company, at feasts, and tavernes, and such like places; their heart
is there, when they cannot be there, if they could they would have their share
at every merry meeting. And thus does Solomon prove, that sorrow is better then
laughter; as he had said in the foregoing verse, because that which wise men
choose is like to be better then that which fools choose.

Verse. 5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, then for a man to hear
the song of fools.] That is, the jeasts and merry discourses, or rather the
flattering speeches of Claw-backs and Parasites, which as so many Siren songs,
do please and delight the corrupt and depraved nature of foolish men, as much
as the sweetest and most pleasant music and singing does tickle and delight
the ears of those that hear it. The meaning therefore of this sentence is,
that one wise reprover is better then many flattering fools, and that it is
better to hearken to the sharp reproves of a prudent friend, that will
seasonably and wisely tell us of our faults, then to hearken to the flatteries
of fools, that will sooth us up in our vices. See the Notes, Psalm. 141.5. and
Pro. 15.31, 32. and 27.6. And thus flatteries may be called the song of fools,
with respect to the folly both of the flatterer, and of those that delight to
be flattered. But whence is this inserted in this place? I answer, Some
conceive that this is spoken only by way of comparison, as if Solomon had said,
As the severe reproves of wise men are to be preferred before the jeasts and
flatteries of fools, so an humbling, reproving and reforming sorrow is more
desirable then alluring and bewitching pleasures. But others do far better
give this account of the joining of this sentence with that which went before,
to wit, that because reproves do usually cause sorrow at first in the parties
reproved, therefore this is also added to prove sorrow to be better then mirth.

Verse. 6. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of
the fool, etc.] To wit, because as thorns being set on fire, do make a great
noise, (which yet is harsh and unpleasant to the ear) and are suddenly kindled
and give a great blaze, but presently they are burnt out, and so they do no
good at all, there is much noise but little fire, much light but little heat,
and so the meat continues raw in the pot, yea the standers by, though at first
they may be scorched a little, yet are not thereby thoroughly warmed; see the
Notes, Psalm. 58.9. and 118.12. so the laughter of these fools, that is, the
light and profuse mirth, the base flatteries, the lewd jesting and sport,
wherewith they seek to please men, though it make a loud noise (which yet is
irksome and distasteful in the ears of wise men) and carries with it a fair
show of yielding wonderful delight and joy, and indeed for the time men may be
mightily transported herewith (they that are flattered may be much raised and
cheared with self-conceit and admiration of themselves, and such mirth and
jollity may warm men's hearts for the present) yet alas they are but light
flashes of joy, which have no solidity nor permanency in them: as there is no
just cause for their mirth, so there is little true comfort in it: see the
Note, Pro. 14.13. and the flatteries of fools may destroy men, but they can
do them no good at all. I know that some understand this sentence of the mirth
and jollity of wicked men in their prosperous estate, to wit, that though such
men, when things go well with them, are wont to talk bigly, and make a great
deal of bussle, and boasting, and bragging of what they have done, and what
they will do, and to give up themselves to mirth and pleasure, yet all this is
but as the crackling of thorns under the pot, all this their jollity, together
with their prosperity, is gone in an instant, and leaves no solid benefit or
comfort behind it. But in regard of the manifest dependence, which this verse
has upon that which went before, the former exposition is clearly the better.
And then for the following words, this also is vanity, it is best to refer it
to that which immediately goes before it, to wit, that flattery, or all the
delight which men take in flattery, all the mirth and joy of men in such things
is mere vanity.

Verse. 7. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad; etc.] Expositors are much
troubled to find out what respect these words can have to that which went
before. Some hold that Solomon does here prove what he had said before verse. 5.
that it is better to hear, that is, quietly to hearken to, the rebuke of the
wise, then for a man to hear the song of fools, to wit, because when a man that
is reproved cannot bear a reproof but does fly out against and oppress him
that wisely reproved him, this makes a wise man mad; which may be understood,
either of him that does so oppress his reprover; namely, that such an one will
in his rage do those things, which one would think none but a mad man should
do, as it was with Asa, when he imprisoned the Prophet that reproved him, etc.
2 Chro. 16.10. or of him that is oppressed for his faithful reproving of those
that did evil, who in such a case, though otherwise a wise man, is apt to be
distempered with discontent and rage, and to speak and do what is not seemly,
as we may see in the Prophet Jeremy, who hereupon was ready in rage to give
over the work that God had set him about. See Jer. 20.7, 8, 9. And accordingly
also they understand the following clause, and a gift destroys the heart, to
wit, that gifts do hinder men from reproving those that do amiss, which wise
men should impartially do. Again some conceive that this is added to prove what
he had said verse. 1. that death is better then life, because in this life even
wise men are subject to be made mad by oppression, and to be perverted by
bribes, or to be wronged by the injustice of Judges, that are corrupted by
bribes. But to me that seems far more probable which others say, to wit, that
Solomon intending here to prescribe some other remedies for the curing or
allaying of the vanities and miseries, that men are subject to here in this
life, as namely, Moderation of mind and patience, he first sets down the
miseries and evils that men are subject to for want of these graces. And taking
this to be the scope of the words, they may be two several ways understood, to
wit, first, that oppression, or wealth gotten by oppression, makes not fools
only but even wise men mad, because when wise men turn oppressors, finding how
fast gain comes in thereby, this makes them excessively covetous, and
desperately wicked; not caring by what unjust ways they increase their store;
like men void of all understanding, yea like bruit beasts, they care not how
they mischief those that are under their power; like frantic men they run the
high way to ruin themselves and their posterity by their unjust courses and
yet think the whilst thereby to establish themselves and their families; and a
gift destroys the heart, that is, corrupts the heart, See Deuteronomy. 16.19. or
secondly, that when wise men see oppressors grow rich and great by oppression,
when they see the innocent and well-deserving oppressed, especially when they
themselves are unjustly overborn and crushed, this does exceedingly discompose
their spirits, at least till they have recollected themselves; it makes them
murmr against God, and in their rage and discontent, to carry themselves many
ways very unseemly; But if we take it thus, then the following clause as it is
in our Translation, can be no otherwise understood then of the fainting of the
heart of the oppressed, when they see justice perverted by bribery. But some
would have the whole verse expressed by way of similitude; As oppression makes
the wise man mad, so a gift destroys the heart; and that so the intent of
these words should be to show, that men may receive as much hurt by fraudulent
gifts, as by rapine and violence.

Verse. 8. Better is the end of a thing, then the beginning thereof, etc.] The
meaning is that it is frequently so, and that therefore it is good to wait to
see the issue of things; as 1. It is thus in regard of this life, the end
thereof is better then the beginning of it; and therefore some would have this
added with reference to what he had said verse. 1. that the day of death is
better then the day of ones birth: And so taking in the next clause, and the
patient in spirit, is better then the proud in spirit, they make the sense of
the whole verse to be this, that to die a desired death is best, and the next
to this is for men to bear patiently what ever befalls them here in this world:
2. It is thus also in regard of reproves (of which Solomon had spoken before
verse. 5, 6. and therefore diverse learned Expositors conceive, that this is
added with particular respect to the words there:) Reproves may be at first
harsh and unpleasing to the parties reproved, and the faithful reprover may
for a while suffer much thereby; but in the end, like bitter Physic, they
often prove wholesome and medicinable to those that are reproved, and yield a
great deal of joy and comfort to the reprover. See Pro 28.23. And indeed the
following clause, and the patient in spirit is better, then the proud in
spirit, if understood of patience in bearing reproves, does well suite with
this Exposition. 3. It is thus also in regard of the commendable ways and
endeavors of men; The end there is better then the beginning both because
perseverance is that which crowns every good action; It is an easy matter to
begin well, but all is to no purpose, except men hold out unto the end; and
likewise because the beginnings in such cases may be difficult and painful, and
encountered with many discouragements, as it is in the study of learning, in all
noble and virtuous enterprises, in the bearing of afflictions, and such like,
but then the end is fruitful and pleasing, and makes abundant amends for all
that was at first endured. But the main scope of Solomon in these words is to
prescribe Moderation of mind and patience to men as the best remedies against
those evils hinted in the foregoing verse. As namely 1. the madness of
oppressors; and 2. the rage and fury of those that are oppressed: for 1.
whereas men that cannot contentedly rely upon Gods provision, but resolving
that they will enlarge and better their estates, do thereupon fall to
oppressing of others, if they would consider the end and issue of things, to
wit, that though God gives but little to men at first, yet when they quietly
wait upon him, he does many times at last advance them to great estates; and
that on the other side, he does always severely punish oppressors, and deliver
those at last that are oppressed by them, this would cure the madness of
oppressors, and make them moderate their greedy desires after outward things,
and teach them quietly to submit to the providence of God; and secondly, If men
that are impatient because of oppressors, would consider, that God does always
order the confusions and miseries wherewith such men fill the world to end in
the glory of his name, and the good of his poor oppressed people, so that
frequently oppressors do at last pay dearly for their cruelties, and they on
the other side, that sow in tears do reap in joy, this would make men patient
in times of greatest oppression; and hereto agrees the following clause, where
in stead of saying, and the patient in spirit is better then the hasty in
spirit, he says, and the patient in spirit is better then the proud in spirit,
because pride is the root whence all impatience does spring, both that when men
cannot endure any wrong or injury, and that also when men cannot stay Gods
leisure, nor quietly expect the issue of things, but if all goes not with them
presently according to their desires, they will bribe or oppress, or do any
other evil, wherewith they can hope to bring about their purposes.

Verse. 9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, etc.] To wit, because of the
oppression and injustice that thou see in the world, or because of any
injuries that are done thee: or the prosperity of those that are oppressors and
injurious; for anger rests in the bosom of fools, that is, such angry
persons are certainly fools; and that not only because such anger bereaves men
of reason and wisdom, and makes them behave themselves foolishly many several
ways, but also because it is a sure evidence of fools; See the Notes, Pro.
14.17.29. and 27, 3. The fools heart is the proper and peculiar place, where
anger is to be found; yea constantly dwells there, that is, the habit of
anger abides there, though the passions it puts men into may be transient and
pass away; the fool could not else at all times have it so ready at hand to
enrage and inflame him. This I conceive is chiefly here intended, yet withal
this expression of angers resting in the bosom of fools may besides imply, that
such men are wont to love and cherish and defend their anger, or that it is
especially the long continuance of anger that proves men to be fools, when they
suffer the Sun to set upon their wrath, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.26.

Verse. 10. Say not thou, what is the cause that the former days were better
thou these? etc.] As if he should have said, Do not pretend this for thy
impatience? Do not vex and afflict thy self, grumbling within thy self, and by
way of repining and murmuring against God, complaining continually, that things
went better and men were better formerly then now; for thou do not enquire
wisely concerning this, that is, It is an act of most egregious folly to
trouble thy self about this, to wit, 1. Because it is not simply the times that
make men either good or bad; A good man will be good in the worst times, as a
rose will be a rose though it grow upon a dunghill, and a wicked man would have
been as he is, had he lived in the best times. Mat. 23.30.2. Because such
querulous persons are usually wont to mind only the evil of the present times,
but not the good they enjoy, and only the good of former times and not the
evil that did afflict them; and this comparing of times together may be well
charged with folly; The world always was and always will be like it self,
full of sin and misery, and therefore in all ages there have been sad
complaints of the evil of their times: and thirdly and especially because God
governs and orders all things in all times by his providence, and men may be
sure that God disposes of all things for the best; And therefore when things
go ill in men's days, for them to murmr, not considering that the sins of the
times are the cause of it, is no other but to challenge God for not dispensing
things aright, and such an expostulation must needs proceed from intolerable
foolish pride. As therefore it is unquestionable that some ages are worse then
others both for the abundance of sins and manifold calamities, so also it
cannot be denied, but that men may lawfully with Godly sorrow and holy zeal
bewail the sins and judgments of the times wherein they live; only they must
not do it in a way of murmuring and impatience, but leaving the government of
all things to God, must quietly submit to the will of God concerning the
present times wherein they live; and the worse the times are, the more careful
they must be to walk holily with God, and faithfully to serve him in that their
generation.

Verse. 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance, etc.] Here Solomon enters upon
another remedy against the vanities and miseries, whereto men are subject here
in this life, or particularly against the vanity of riches, or the vanity of
murmuring against the evil of the present times, and that is wisdom, whereof
patience and moderation of mind is a part, or at least a necessary effect;
taking an occasion, as it may seem, to speak hereof from the last clause of the
foregoing verse, for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this; wisdom is
good, says he, with an inheritance; which must be understood comparatively.
There is no question to be made but that wisdom is good without wealth, or
without an inheritanc^, (which is mentioned here as the chiefest, because the
most stable riches) But his meaning is, that both are good, but that wisdom
does the better, when a wise man has wealth too, wisdom is then most
profitable and beneficial both to a man's self, and to others also; wisdom
without wealth is despised, Eccles. 9.16. the poor man's wisdom is despised and
his words are not heard; and wealth without wisdom does hurt rather then good;
Both together do best of all; and by it there is profit to them that set the
Sun, that is, by wisdom with an inheritance, there is much profit and
advantage to men here in this life. See the Note, Pro. 14.24. And it may well
be that this clause, to them that see the Sun is added to imply that it is but
only here in this world that riches yield any profit; after this life there
will be no need of them.

Verse. 12. For wisdom is a defense, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 2.11. It is in
the Original, wisdom is a shadow, for which see the Notes, Numb. 14.9. Psalm.
91.1. and 121.5, 6. And money is a defense, see the Notes, Pro. 10.15. and.
13.8. Both may defend a man from hunger, thirst, cold, the injuries of wicked
men, and many other evils, whereto men are liable; but the excellency of
knowledge is, that wisdom gives life to them that have it; that is, true
wisdom, which is always joined with the fear of God, is the means of
bringing men to live a true spiritual life here, and to live eternally with
God in heaven; which money can never do. This I conceive is chiefly intended;
Yet withal understanding by wisdom, prudence and discretion, under which
moderation of mind and patience may also be included, it is most true that
wisdom does many times conduce more to the preservation of men's lives, and the
lengthening out of their days, then riches can do; see the Notes, Pro. 3.2,
18. and 4.22. Nay many times riches do bring men into dangers, out of which
wisdom delivers them; at least it teaches men to be patient and contented,
and so preserves their hearts in peace and comfort, even when evils are
unavoydable, which is the surest remedy and defense of all; and that which
money can never do.

Verse. 13. Consider the work of God, etc.] This is prescribed as another branch
of that wisdom, whereby men may be enabled not to be overmuch disquieted with
the confusions and distempers which they see in their times, (of which he had
spoken before, ver. 10.) and that is an humble acquiescency, when things go so
ill, in the good providence of God. I know that some understand this first
clause more generally, of men's taking notice of the various works of Gods
providence, both in times of prosperity and times of adversity, that
accordingly they might conform thereto either in joy or sorrow, as is
expressed in the following verse, In the day of prosperity be joyful, etc. But
the following clause here makes it more probable, that Solomon speaks here
only of considering the work of God in bad times: Having in the foregoing
verses prescribed wisdom (or wisdom with an inheritance) as a defense against
oppression and violence, and other evils, for which we are wont to complain
of the days wherein we live, as evil times; because such may be the evil of
the times, and such in particular the over-bearing prevalency of oppression and
violence therein, that no wisdom of man can secure them therein, or remedy
those things that are therein evil, therefore he directs here to another act
of wisdom, which is of all the surest remedy in evil times, and that is
quietly and contentedly to submit to Gods good will and pleasure. Consider the
work of God; that is, take notice and diligently consider, that in all times
all things are ordered by the all-ruling providence of God; when thou see the
greatest oppression and confusion amongst men, in stead of murmuring, remember
that how cross and crooked soever things seem to be, they are thus ordered by
the providence of God, whose works are always perfect, (see the Note, Deuteronomy.
32.4.) neither can any thing therefore be better done, then as he does it; Even
by crooked things God can work out that, which shall be much for his own glory,
and the good of his people; and therefore it is our duty quietly to stoop and
submit to his will, and to be content with that which he does, though we
understand not the reason of it, and that because to be sure we cannot alter
nor mend that which he is pleased to have done; which is the meaning of that
which follows; For who can make that straight, which he has made crooked?
namely, that no man can change or rectify any thing that is, or that he
apprehends to be crooked or amiss, either in things natural, or in civil
affairs, or in the moral actions of men, but that they must be and are best
as God would have them: Only we must still remember that God makes not the
ways and conversation of men to be crooked and perverse, but only by
withdrawing his grace from wicked men, and leaving them to the power of Satan,
and to the swinge of their own corrupt hearts. But see the Note, Chap. 1.15.

Verse. 14. In the day of prosperity be joyful.] That is, Enjoy comfortably the
good blessings that God is then pleased to afford thee, and with thankfulness
cheer and delight thy self therein; that so being refreshed with the
sweetness thereof, thou may the better endure the bitterness of any
affliction that may afterward follow, according to that of Job, chap. 2.10.
What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

But in the day of adversity consider.] That is, as in the foregoing verse,
consider that it is the work of God, the just Judge of heaven and earth, whose
work, though it may seem crooked to thee, yet thou can not alter nor mend.
This I conceive is chiefly intended; yet it may also include whatever may tend
to keep Gods children from fainting under afflictions, and from murmuring
against the good hand of God therein: as that we should consider, first, that
God is not wont always to afflict his people, and that therefore we know not
how soon God may send us better days. 2. What prosperity God has formerly
afforded us. 3. To what end God bath brought these afflictions upon us, and to
what issue they tend, that we may reap that benefit by them that God intends
us; and 4. how we ought to behave our selves under the afflicting hand of God,
that we take great heed to our selves, that we do not by murmuring, and
seeking to extricate our selves out of our troubles in any sinful way, or by
any other undecent and unbeseeming carriage of our selves, provoke God to
further displeasure against us, but that we carry our selves wisely and meekly
in the day of adversity.

God also has set the one over against the other, etc.] That is, God has
established an intercourse and vicissitude of prosperity and adversity in the
lives of men, the one opposite to the other, that so the one might allay the
other, having respect therein to the frailty of man in general, and to the
spiritual good of his faithful servants in particular. The meaning is, that
as in the ordering of the times and seasons of the year, God has settled an
intercourse of day and night, winter and summer, one over against the other;
and as in a pair of scales, when the balance stands in aequilibrio, not
turning the one way or the other, the weights in the one scale do fully poise
and answer the wares in the other; so does the Lord usually measure out unto
men days of comfort and days of sorrow, prosperity and adversity,
proportioning the one to the other; And why does God do this? That follows
in the next words, To the end that man should find nothing after him; which may
be understood two several ways, as 1. that God does so intermingle good and
evil days, that no man may be able to find out or foresee what will
afterward be, that by discerning the footsteps of Gods former proceedings, men
may not be able to infer from thence, that thus or thus God will hereafter
do, and consequently that discovering hereby, how unsearchable Gods counsels
are, and how unable they are to search into the reasons of his present
proceedings, and how impossible it is that they should by any care or
providence of theirs prevent that which they cannot foresee, and that all
things must be as he has determined, what ever they desire, resolve, or
endeavor, they may learn quietly to submit to the providence of God in all
the changes that befall them, and in all that God does unto them; and likewise
to walk humbly before God, and in the fear of his all-ruling power, waiting
and depending upon him in all conditions whatever, not being puffed up in
prosperity, as remembering that they may soon come to be in an afflicted
estate, nor yet fainting in the days of adversity, as considering that God may
soon turn their sorrow into joy: and secondly, that God does thus temper the
changes of prosperity and adversity, to the end that no man should come after
God, and find any thing in that which God has done, which he could have
mended, and have ordered better, no not for his own advantage, then as God has
ordered it, any thing that is superfluous, defective, or irregular in any work
of his, for which they may justly complain of God, but that on the contrary,
observing how God does with infinite wisdom and fatherly goodness dispose of
all things, they may acknowledge every thing to be best that God does, and so
may without any fretting or discontent against God, quietly submit to his will,
and rest contentedly in that which he does.

Verse. 15. All things have I seen in the days of my vanity, etc.] That is, All
these things before mentioned concerning the strange and secret proceedings of
Gods providence, I have observed to be so by mine own experience in the time of
my vain short life, see the Note, chap. 6.12. yet it may well be that Solomon
expresses this in such general terms, All things have I seen, because there
was indeed nothing that could be known by the reason of man, but he had
attained the knowledge and observation thereof; and therefore he must needs
have experience of those things before mentioned concerning the seeming strange
dispensations of divine providence; one particular instance whereof he adds in
the following words; There is a just man that perishes in his righteousness;
that is, that is oppressed and sometimes brought to an untimely end,
notwithstanding that he is a truly righteous man, yea it may be even because of
his righteousness; and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his
wickedness; that is, notwithstanding he is a wicked man, yea it may be by
means of his wickedness.

Verse. 16. Be not righteous overmuch, etc.] Some learned Expositors conceive,
that Solomon, having laid down in the foregoing verse his Observation
concerning the sad sufferings that many times befall the righteous, whilst
wicked men flourish and prolong their days in their wickedness, does here in
this verse tell us in the first place what the judgment of corrupt Reason is
in this case, and what the advice is, which natural and carnal men would give
for the avoiding of this inconvenience, tending to a politic indifferency and
neutrality in the ways of religion and righteousness. Be not righttous
overmuch, that is, Seeing righteousness does thus expose men to danger; be
not so forward and precise in matters of religion, piety, and righteousness,
as many men are, be discreet and wary, and stand not always so strictly and
inflexibly upon grounds of conscience and justice, but that thou may, as
occasion serves, for thine own safety and advantage, remit a little of thy
strictness, and comply with the times, and thine own necessary interests;
Neither make thy self over-wise; that is, be not too nice and scrupulous, make
not thy self wiser then other men, by refusing to do as others do; why
should thou destroy thy self? that is, why should thou unnecessarily
expose thy self to so great danger, as many men by such needless preciseness
do often bring upon themselves? But the general current of Expositors go
another way, taking this to be the advice of the Spirit of God by the pen of
Solomon. And indeed it seems very unsafe where Solomon goes on in one
continued tenor of prescribing directions to men for the well-ordering of their
lives, to make any one passage therein to be spoken, as in the person of
carnal men, unless Solomon himself do give some hint unto us, either by
some censure that he afterward passes thereon, or some other way, that it
must be so understood; or unless the words will not bear any other
interpretation. Now here nothing can be alleged to the contrary, but that this
may be several ways understood as the counsel of the holy Spirit of God by
the pen of Solomon; as 1. that men must take heed of being so over-righteous
and over-wise, as to murmr against, and to question the justice of any such
dispensations of Gods providence, as that mentioned in the foregoing verse,
when the wicked live long in a prosperous estate, and the righteous are sorely
afflicted and soon cut off; they may well be judged righteous overmuch, that
will take upon them to be more righteous then God, and to be over-wise, that
will apprehend that they could order things better then as God has ordered
them; And by such bold searching into the secret and incomprehensible counsels
of God, they take the ready way to provoke God to destroy them: Or secondly,
that men must not under a pretense of justice, and out of an overweening
opinion of their own wisdom, be over-rigid in being inquisitive into the
faults of others, in censuring and judging others, or in prosecuting the Law
against them; Extreme justice may be extreme injustice; And they that will
therefore stand always upon such strict terms of justice, as never to remit
in the least of their right, nor wink at any thing that is amiss, but think to
correct all, and to mend all, that is not as it should be; or always to urge
the letter of the Law, and to be more severe in punishing offenses, then either
reason or equity requires, may well be counted over-wise, and righteous
overmuch: And to these it may well be said, Why should thou destroy thy
self? to wit, because by this means men do usually expose themselves to the
envy and hatred of people, and so many times bring themselves to some miserable
end. Or thirdly, that men must take heed of being too highly conceited of their
own righteousness or wisdom; They that are ready in a vain way of
ostentation to vaunt and brag of their own righteousness, and to despise
others in comparison of themselves; or that will think to be justified before
God by their own righteousness, may well be said to be over-wise, and
righteous overmuch; and are indeed in danger to be destroyed by him that
resists the proud, Jam. 4.6. Or fourthly, that men must beware that they do
not out of an overweening conceit of their own judgment, make more sins and
more duties, then God has made in his word; for as they are over-wise, that
are wise above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. so they are righteous
overmuch, that will needs be righteous above the written rule of the word; by
which means men may under a pretense of zeal, be unjust and cruel, and under
a pretense of piety, they may fall into superstition. In conforming to the
righteousness and holiness enjoined in Gods word, men cannot be too strict
and precise; But when men out of an opiniative confidence in their own
judgment, shall be violently bent upon the doing of any thing, which by the
word of God they are no way bound to do, or shall scruple that which the word
of God does no where forbid, though they may do it conscientiously, and upon
opinion of duty, then they are over-wise, and righteous overmuch. That which
therefore Solomon here enjoynes Gods people, is a prudent and pious moderation
of their behavior in all things, that they should be wise unto sobriety, not
resting too much upon their own understanding and judgment, but advising with
others, Romans 12.3. and that they should temper their zeal with godly wisdom
and prudence; according to that, Phil. 4.5. Let your moderation be known unto
all men; And the reason whereby this is pressed is, lest by doing otherwise men
should involve themselves in desperate dangers; as by such courses men often
do; Why should thou destroy thy self? And this seems to be inferred from
that which was said before, ver. 15. that seeing just men do often perish in
their righteousness, it is extreme madness by affecting a righteousness
above that which God has enjoined, causelessly to expose our selves to
destroying troubles and perils. Now this last Exposition seems to me the
best, because of that which is added by way of opposition hereto in the
following verse.

Verse. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, etc.] To wit, by running on impenitently in
ways of wickedness, and so continually adding sin unto sin, or by giving up
our selves to any gross enormities, to any excess of wickedness, boldness
and impudency in sinning great and presumptuous sins. But yet we must not so
understand this, as if there were allowance hereby given to some less degrees
of wickedness; for all wickedness is abominable before God; and therefore he
that is in the least degree wicked, is overmuch wicked; Only having
forewarned men in the foregoing verse of being righteous overmuch; to wit, by
putting themselves upon any duty above that which God has enjoined them in his
word, here he adds that on the other side men must take heed that they do not
under a pretense of avoiding this, run into another extremity, of slighting all
strictness of conversation prescribed in the word, and laying the raines upon
the neek of their lusts, to commit sin with greediness. And this likewise may
seem to be inferred from that which was said before, ver. 15. concerning
wicked men's prolonging their days in their wickedness, that men should not
from thence encourage themselves to grow impudently wicked; And then for the
following words, Neither be thou foolish; either the word over much is here
again to be understood, and so the meaning is the same as in the foregoing
clause, that as men must not be so over-wise, as to make duties and sins
where God has made none, so they must not on the other hand be so extremely
foolish, as not to mind at all what God enjoynes or forbids, but without any
scruple of conscience to break out into all licentiousness and looseness of
life; because hereby they must needs provoke God to displeasure, and draw down
Gods judgments upon them; which is chiefly intended in the following clause,
Why should thou dye before thy time? or, as it is in the Hebrew, not in thy
time? that is, why should thou provoke God to cut thee off by an untimely
death? for which see the Notes, Job 16.32. and 22.16. Psalm. 55.23. and Pro.
10.27. Though indeed this may also include wicked men's exposing themselves to
an untimely end, by being cut off by the sentence of the civil Magistrate, or
by wasting and consuming their own bodies with their ways of luxury and
wickedness. And besides, this may be added to imply the folly of men's
encouraging themselves in wickedness, from that mentioned ver. 15. that such
men do often prolong their lives in their wickedness, by showing that quite
contrary wickedness does usually cut short their days. This I conceive is the
full meaning of this place; But yet as there are other different expositions
given of the foregoing verse, so also of this, as 1. They that take that to be
delivered as the judgment of carnal reason, that men should not be so
strictly religious, as thereby to expose themselves to danger, do take this to
be the contrary advice of the Spirit of God, implying that to go about thus to
temper and qualify righteousness and wisdom with carnal policy, is to be
indeed wicked overmuch, and gross folly, this being the ready way to expose
men to Gods wrath, and so to death, yea to an untimely and unseasonable death.
2. They that understand that of being so overwise, and overjust, as to question
the wisdom and justice of the dispensation of Divine Providence, they
accordingly conceive that here Solomon affirms, that for men to be thus
arrogantly bold, or because they cannot satisfy their own carnal reason
herein, therefore to deny or slight the Providence of God* and so to grow loose
and profane in their lives, is indeed the ready way to provoke God to cut them
off in the midst of their days. 3. They that take that to be meant of being
overjust and wise in censuring and judging and prosecuting the Law against
others, they hold that here on the contrary, men are advised not hereupon to
cast off all care of reproving and punishing those that do offend, and to leave
all to do what they please themselves: and 4. They that understand that of men's
having an over-high conceit of their own righteousness and wisdom, they say
that here an other extremity is forbidden: namely, that men, should not make
themselves worse then they are, nor be over-base and wicked and foolish in
their own eyes, as by being over ready to judge all that they do to be
foolishly and wickedly done, and to aggravate their sins above the rule of Gods
word, as by being prone ever and anon causelessly to conclude, that they have
quenched God; spirit, and committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, and that
they are excluded from all hope of mercy.

Verse. 18. It is good that thou should take hold of this, yea, also from
this withdraw not thine hand, etc.] That is, that thou should observe this
doctrine withal possible care and zeal, not being slack in a business of such
weight nor declining from it in the least degree at any time, namely, to hold
and keep constantly to this golden mean prescribed in the two foregoing verses,
walking accurately by line and by rule, and not turning aside to the right hand
or to the left and so neither to be over-righteous and over-wise, nor
over-wicked and foolish, but to labor after righteousness and wisdom, and
yet withal to avoid such extremes; yea this men should do constantly at all
times, what ever befalls them; Some I know do refer this to that which is added
in the following clause, to wit, that the fear of God is that which we should
take hold of, and from which we should not withdraw our hand. But according to
our Translation that is added as a reason of this precept, for he that fears
God shall come forth of them all, that is, He will be careful to keep close to
the rule of Gods word, and so shall not run into any of these extremes, and
consequently shall not fall into any of those miseries before mentioned verse.
16, 17. which those extremes do bring men into. And though his righteousness
may seem to expose him for a time to many troubles and dangers, yet he shall at
last have an happy issue out of all such trials.

Verse. 19. Wisdom strengthens the wise, more then ten mighty men which are in
the city] That is, many mighty men, See the Note, Genesis 31.7. and by mighty men
is meant gallant soldiers, or wise and valiant Captains and Commanders, to
whom the defense of a city is committed. And so the meaning is, that the fear
of God, that wisdom whereby men observe that holy mean and moderation before
prescribed, and avoid the extremes before mentioned, will better defend a man
from sin, and Satan's temptations, and all the evils whereto men by such
extremes do expose themselves, or from those evils mentioned before verse. 15.
which even the righteous do sometimes undergo, then such mighty men can defend
a city committed to their charge against the assaults of an enemy: and that
because God and his holy angels will be to such as a wall of fire about them,
and will make them invincible, which no city can possibly be, yea many other
ways wisdom is a great defense to men, for which see the Notes, Pro. 16.32.
and 21.22. and 24.5. I know that some Expositors do understand this somewhat
otherwise, namely that the wisdom of keeping a mean and avoiding the
forementioned extremes will better support and deliver a man from dangers,
then many great and potent friends in Court or City can possibly do. But the
former Exposition is me thinks the clearest.

Verse. 20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins
not] That is, that never sins; It is only in heaven that the righteous
shall live without all sin; Some also extend this farther to wit, that there is
not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not, even in the good
that he does, by reason of the imperfection of his doing of it. But how is this
inferred upon that which went before, as the particle ( for) shows it is? I
answer, with reference to the foregoing verse, and that either 1. by way of
explaining that, as if he had said, wisdom does indeed exceedingly strengthen
a man, though withal we must know there is no man but does sometimes out of
frailty offend; or rather by way of giving a reason why men should endeavor to
strengthen themselves by wisdom, namely because the justest man that lives is
sometimes overtaken with sin, which may expose him to danger; if he have not
this spiritual wisdom, to do what may be done to prevent offense, and to
behave himself prudently, in a fair accommodation of himself to others.

Verse. 21. Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken, etc.] Charity and
meekness in passing by the injuries of others is here prescribed, under that
one particular instance of the injuries of the tongue, wherein offense is most
frequently given, and that as a principal act of that true wisdom, whereby men's
lives may be made the more comfortable and happy to them, yet withal this
exhortation seems to be inferred from the foregoing sentence verse. 20. that
seeing the best men that are do sometimes sin, therefore men should bear with
those that offend. And there are three particular directions included in these
words, Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy
servant curse thee: 1. that men should not be over-ready to give credit to all
the evil reports that are brought to them of others, lest God should punish
them for this, by suffering others, it may be their own servants, to curse and
speak evil of them. Secondly, that men should not be curious and eager to know
what others say of them, and so closely to stand listening and hearkening what
others speak, lest by this means, to their great discontent, they happen to
hear base and abject men, perhaps their own servants, reproaching and speaking
evil of them; and Thirdly, that men should not mind the evil speeches of
others, but pass them by, as if they heard them not; at least they should not
so far lay them to heart, as to be troubled with them, to be ever thinking of
them, and to plot to be revenged on those that speak them; and that because
those may do this, against whom men are most apt to be enraged, whereas in
truth their ill words are least to be regarded, and that is their own servants.

Verse. 22. For oftentimes also thine own heart knows, that thou thy self have
cursed others] That is, reproached and spoken evil of others. And therefore as
thou would have others to bear with thine infirmities, so resolve thou to
bear with the infirmities of others.

Verse. 23. All this have I proved by wisdom, etc.] Solomon's drift in this and
the following verse is from his own proof and experience, first to assert the
certainty of those precepts he had hitherto given for the remedying of those
vanities, as much as may be, whereto men are subject here in this world, and
particularly of that which he had said concerning the singular protection,
which wisdom affords to men against their own corruptions, and the dangers
ensuing thereupon; and Secondly, to set forth the difficulty of attaining this
wisdom, thereby to teach men, not to be over ready to think upon some progress
they have made in their endeavors after wisdom and knowledge, that they know
as much as is to be known, and that because the more they know, the more they
will discover their want of knowledge; and yet withal to content themselves
with such a measure of knowledge, as is attainable in this life, and not to
aspire after the knowledge of those things that are above their reach. All this
have I proved by wisdom; that is, by means of that wisdom which God was
pleased in an extraordinary measure to confer upon me, and wherein I labored
by all possible means daily to grow and increase: I did experimentally find the
truth of all that which I have hitherto taught, either concerning the vanity of
all things here below, or concerning the means prescribed, whereby men may come
to live with as much comfort and content, as is attainable in the midst of so
much vanity; or particularly concerning the great advantage which true wisdom
yields to men in this; And yet withal he adds that after all his endeavors
he came far short of that degree of wisdom which he sought to attain, as is
expressed in the following words, I said, I will be wise, that is, I fully
determined with my self to use all means that I might atttain to perfection of
wisdom, and persuaded my self that by those endeavors of mine I should attain
it; but it was far from me, that is, I was still far from attaining that
perfection of wisdom, which I labored for; I found it still far above my
reach; and that because the more he searched into Gods works of creation and
providence, the more unsearchable depths he found therein; the more knowledge
he attained, the clearer discovery he still made of his own wants herein; and
after the diligence he used in tracing all the several ways, which men take
for the attaining of true happiness, he found himself still far from attaining
that wisdom thereby which he sought for.

Verse. 24. That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?] As
if he had said, As men cannot discern those things that are very far distant
from them, nor dive into those things that are exceeding deep, so neither can
they fully comprehend the works of God and the reason thereof, and that because
they are so exceeding mysterious and profound, and so far beyond the reach of
the eye of man's reason And therefore no marvel it is though wisdom be so hard
to be attained.

Verse. 25. I applied mine heart to know, etc.] In the Hebrew it is, I and mine
heart compassed to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom; But the
meaning is this, that though he found wisdom so hard to be attained, yet this
did not discourage him, but rather made him more eager in the pursuit of it;
in so much that he did seriously, and with all possible diligence turn himself
every way, and made curious search into every thing wherein any knowledge was
to be gotten, leaving no means unattempted, whereby he might hope to attain the
wisdom he sought for: and the reason of things, that is, the nature and causes
of things, why things are thus and thus, and why men did that which he observed
they did; that weighing diligently the true principles and causes of all
things, and comparing them with others, he might be able to give a clear and
distinct judgment concerning all things whatsoever; and to know the
wickedness of folly, even of foolishness and madness, that is, the exceeding
wickedness, folly and madness that is in the ways of ungodly men. And
observable it is, that first he buckled himself to search out wisdom, and then
afterward to discover the folly of wickedness, that so the first might be an
Antidote against the second. But see the Notes, Chap. 1.13, 17. Some conceive
that Solomon's drift in this verse is to show, that having found the reason of
Gods works to be above his reach, he addressed himself in the next place to
observe the ordinary passages of men's lives. But I rather conceive that Solomon
intending in the following verses to set forth some other vanities observed by
him, besides those formerly mentioned in this book, he premiseth by way of
introduction thereunto, that which he says here concerning the diligent search
that he had made after knowledge, in the exact discovery both of good and evil.

Verse. 26. And I find more bitter then death, the woman, whose heart is snares
and nets, etc.] That is, the harlot, or whorish woman; whose heart is said to
be snares and nets, because her heart is continually intent upon the design of
intangling men's affections, and is always full of manifold cunning frauds and
devices, whereby to deceive, ensnare and destroy men; and her hands as bands,
because by her wanton dalliances, her cogging gifts and lascivious embraces,
she binds those to her, whom she has once ensnared, and holds them in bondage
as her slaves, triumphing and insulting over them at her pleasure; Now this
woman, Solomon says, he had found more bitter then death, because though she
seems in her words and outward carriage to be sweeter then honey, and softer
then oil, yet indeed in regard of the miseries she brings upon men, she is
more bitter then death; and it were better for a man to dye, then to be
entangled by her; see the Notes, Pro. 5.3, 4. even in regard of the miseries
she brings upon a man in this life, the terrors of his conscience, the ruining
of his estate, the scorn and reproach he endures, the rotting and consuming of
his body by noisome and filthy diseases, he is in a worse condition, then that
of men that dye by an ordinary death. But then besides, whereas death does only
deprive men of this bodily and momentany life, the harlot deprives men of life
eternal, and separates betwixt them and God, whose favor is better then life,
Psalm. 63.3. Death in some ways and cases may be an honor to men; yea it may
be so sanctified and sweetened, as that it may be to men a most welcome and
desirable mercy; But a man's being overcome by a harlot, can tend to nothing but
misery, shame, and eternal destruction: Who so pleases God, (in the Hebrew it
is, who so is good before God, for which see the Note, Chap. 2.26.) shall
escape from her; that is, shall either be preserved from being entangled by
her, or at least shall be delivered out of her snares; And indeed, which is
here employed, nothing but the supernatural grace of God, no wisdom nor
strength of their own, can ever deliver men from the power of a harlots
temptations; But the sinner shall be taken by her; see the Note, Pro. 22.14.
But, may some say, How comes Solomon to speak here of the danger of harlots? I
answer, that having spoken in the foregoing verse of the diligent search he had
made to discover the folly and madness of the wickedness of men, he
instanceth here in this one particular discovery that he had made, concerning
the subtlety and danger of harlots; the rather adding this to the Catalogue of
the vanities he had formerly mentioned, that hereby he might testify his
unfeigned repentance for all those gross miscarriages, whereinto by means of
that sort of women he had formerly fallen.

Verse. 27. Behold, this have I found (says the Preacher,) counting one by one,
to find out the account.] This particle Behold, may be prefixed by way of
admiration, to imply how strange and wonderful that might well seem which he
meant now to say, or by way of persuading men to attend diligently to that,
which he now assures them he had by a serious and careful search found to be
most certainly true. And this now may be, either that which he had said before,
ver. 26. concerning the harlot, that such a woman is more bitter then death,
that her heart is snares and nets, etc. or rather that which he adds
afterward, ver. 28. One man among a thousand have I found, etc. And to
challenge the more credit to his Testimony herein, he again here styles
himself, The Preacher; thereby covertly intimating of how great importance his
Testimony was, both in regard of that eminent measure of wisdom wherewith God
had endued him, and in regard that he testified this after his repentance, when
having been before ensnared in the nets and bands of seducing women, he was
through Gods mercy dis-intangled from those snares, and as a true penitent was
returned again to the Congregation of the Saints; for which see the Note,
Chap. 1.1. And to the same purpose, I conceive, is that also added which
follows in the next words, Counting one by one to find out the account, or, as
it is in the margin of our Bibles, weighing one thing after another to find out
the reason; for hereby he implies how considerable also this his testimony was
in regard of the diligent and exact search that he had made to find out the
truth of things, weighing or counting them one by one severally, that he might
not be confounded with many things together, but might the better conceive of
every thing, whilst he considered of it singly and apart by it self: Only
indeed the things of which he here says, that he counted or weighed them one
by one, or one after another, may be several ways understood; as 1. It may be
meant of men and women, and their several ways and courses, to wit, that
whilst he made diligent search and enquiry into the conversation and doings of
men and women severally one by one, that he might find out the reason thereof,
and might give a clear account and certain determination therein, he found
that which he delivers here for an approved truth. And therefore some take the
drift of these words to be all one as if he had said, That you may know that
such ensnaring women, and such foolish men that are ensnared by them, are every
where to be found, mark what I have observed, whilst I did severally consider
the temper and behavior of all men and women whatsoever: Or secondly, It may
be meant of the manifold subtilties and devices of harlots, and the mischiefs
that follow thereon, to wit, that whilst he made diligent search and enquiry
into these, counting them severally one by one, that he might find out the
number of them, he discovered that which here he declares, namely, that they
are very dangerous snares, or that their subtilties are infinite, and not to be
discovered; for so some understand the following verse: Or rather thirdly, It
may be meant of all things in general, to wit, that whilst he did in the
pursuit of wisdom make a diligent search into the knowledge of all things,
considering each thing singly apart by it self, and then comparing them one
with another, that he might find out the reason of them, and discover how men
might live wisely and happily, and the folly and madness of those ways that
disturb the life of man, he found out the truth of that which here he declares
concerning women.

Verse. 28. Which yet my soul seeks, but I find not, etc.] That is, Which
full information concerning the ways and courses of men and women, and the
reason thereof, or which discovery of all the manifold and perplexed subtleties
and devices of harlots for the intangling of men; or which satisfaction
concerning the nature and causes of all things, I do still with all diligence
and earnestness make inquiry for, but cannot perfectly attain it. As for the
following words, One man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all
those have I not found, therein Solomon tells us what it was that he had
discovered, though in other respects what he had made most diligent search
after he could not find. And the most usual interpretations that are given of
those words are, either 1. that though there be very few men to be found, that
are prudent, wise and good, and that truly deserve the name of men, yet women
that are pious, and wise, and prudent, and such as they ought to be, are far
more rarely to be found; A few such men he had found, one amongst a thousand;
but such a woman amongst a thousand women he had not found; And indeed the
Scripture tells us that women are the weaker vessels; and so by reason of their
weakness, and the fickleness of their spirits, they are more prone to err,
and less able to resist temptations: whence it is that Solomon speaks
elsewhere of a wise and virtuous woman, as of such a rare Jewel, Who can find a
virtuous woman? etc. Pro. 31.10. Or secondly, that though Solomon had taken
notice of some few men that were wise and good, or that had avoided the snares
of enticing women, yet amongst those wanton women that he had conversed with,
he had not found one good. And upon this ground some conceive that he
expresses this number of a thousand, as having respect to his seven hundred
wives, and three hundred concubines, 1 Kings 11.3. Or thirdly, that the temper
and disposition, the counsels and devices of men, even when they set themselves
to delude and ensnare others, are far more easily discovered, then the
disposition, the intentions, and plots of women, that is, of whorish women,
(for of these Solomon is here speaking) Amongst these he tells us that he had
not found one of a thousand whose heart could be discovered, their cunning
fetches and secret devices were so innumerably many. Doubtless Solomon's
purpose in this place is not to condemn one sex rather then the other; that
which he says in several places in the high commendation of good wives, is an
evident proof that he had known several wise and gracious women; But his aim
is only to show how unsearchable the subtleties of harlots are, wherewith they
do infatuate and beguile men.

Verse. 29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man upright; but they
have sought out many inventions.] As if he should have said, This chiefly and
most eminently I have discovered, as that which is a most manifest and
undeniable truth; though I could not find out all the streams of wickedness
and folly amongst men and women, yet the original and fountain of them all I
have clearly found out; namely, that God is no way to be blamed because there
are so few either men or women, that are good and wise, and that take the right
way to be happy, or because the subtleties of women are so numberless, and
there are so exceeding few of them such as they should be; but the fault of
this rests wholly upon man himself; and that because God created our first
parents upright, that is, void of that subtlety and craft, whereof he had
before spoken, and truly and perfectly wise, holy and just, so that they were
in their understanding, will and affections, yea in the whole man, according to
the holy will of God; man's body being subject to his soul, his inferior
faculties to his reason, and both soul and body subject to God; and in a word,
they were then every way able to have made themselves eternally happy: But our
first Parents soon fell from this their original righteousness, in that
hearkening to the temptations of Satan, they contented not themselves with that
way to happiness which God had prescribed, but yielded to follow those new
devised ways for the attaining a higher degree of blessedness, which Satan and
their own deceived hearts did suggest to them, and so they, (and their
posterity in them and with them) falling from that primitive honor and
perfection, wherein they were created, became depraved and corrupted, and
desperately deceitful, Jer. 17.9. and now following the counsel of their own
hearts, men do continually run into many crooked and sinful ways to their
own ruin. So that by many inventions, here is meant, both the many false ways
wherein men seek to attain happiness, being fallen from God, in whose favor
true happiness is only to be found; and likewise the many crooked counsels and
devices, whereinto by their own corrupt hearts they are carried, when once they
have forsaken the straight rule of Gods word, for the practicing, excusing and
defending of their evil courses.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. WHo is as the wise man? etc.] Solomon in this Chapter proceeds to
give us other precepts of wisdom, by the observing whereof men may attain to
as much tranquillity and content of mind, as in this vain life they are capable
of. Only by way of introduction thereto, he premiseth this which is said here
in this first verse in the commendation of wisdom; for having told us, Chap.
7.25. that he had set his heart to search into wisdom and folly; and having
shown us in the latter part of that chapter, what he had found upon his search
into the ways of folly and madness, here now he tells us, what he had found
upon his search into the ways of wisdom, namely, the difficulty and the
rarity, or rather the transcendent excellency thereof, (for either of these
ways the words may be understood) Who is as the wise man? That is, As some
say, How hard a thing is it to find a man that is truly wise; Or, A man that is
thus perfectly wise is not alas to be found; And who knows the interpretation
of a thing? that is, where is a man amongst many to be found, that is able to
teach others, or that can rightly discern and judge of all things whatsoever.
Or rather, Who is as the wise man? that is, Who is like to him? or, there is no
man to be compared to him; And who knows the interpretation of a thing? That
is, Who but the wise man can do this? or, who is to be so highly esteemed, as
he that can interpret divine Oracles, that can explain and unfold doubtful
things, and so can satisfy questions propounded, and give good counsel
therein? or, that can truly judge of all affairs, and the circumstances
thereof, and so can discern with respect to persons, places, times and seasons,
what is fit to be done, and what to be avoided? Yea, It may be understood as
added with particular relation to that which went before, as if he had said,
Seeing men have found so many inventions, so many crooked and false ways, Who
is as the wise man, that being able to understand and rightly to judge of
things, does not do so, but keeps close to the rule of Gods word?

A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, etc.] That is, 1. It makes men
lovely, amiable and beautiful, awful and reverend in the eyes of others; See
the Notes, Pro. 1.9. and 4.8, 9. Secondly, It works in men peace and
tranquillity, and joy of heart, and so likewise it makes them meek and gentle
and loving to others, and by that means their countenances become cheerful,
and courteous, contrary to the sad and fierce looks of those that are
possessed with turbulent passions; even in affliction, as well as in prosperity
they walk comfortably thorough faith, and do not through discontent put on a
lowering and frowning countenance, as others do. Before, chap. 7.2, 3, etc.
Solomon had told us that sometimes wisdom fenceth men against the vanities of
this life, by mourning, sadness and anger, etc. and here now, it seems with
respect thereto, he shows us that sometimes on the contrary, it does the same
by making their countenances chearely and serene, without any sadness and
displeasure; see Psalm. 34.5. Thirdly, It enlightens men, so that they
understand in all things what to do, and what to avoid: and fourthly, It
teaches men to behave themselves gravely, prudently, modestly, soberly and
holily, and so causes them to shine as lights in the world; and the boldness
(or, the strength) of his face shall be changed; to wit, say some Expositors,
by increasing, that is, he shall still become more and more bold and confident;
though he be otherwise despicable, yet his wisdom shall make him every day
more and more bold and courageous, in that thereby he becomes careful to avoid
every evil way, and to live holily and righteously, and so is never ashamed;
as likewise because thereby he foresees evil before it comes, and so is
enabled to prepare for it. Or rather, the boldness of his face shall be
changed; to wit, from presumptuous, over-daring and fool-hardinesse, to a true
security, confidence and courage; or from impudency, fierceness, obstinacy and
arrogance, into modesty, meekness, gentleness and humility; the more a man
increases in wisdom, though he be never so much admired for it by others, the
more lowly he will be, and the more mild to others.

V. 2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, etc.] Here Solomon again
prescribes certain particular precepts of wisdom, tending much to the content,
comfort and tranquillity of men's lives; beginning first with that of being
obedient to the command of the Supreme Magistrate, this being one special act
of prudence in order to men's living quietly and peaceably: I counsel thee, as
if he should have said, If my counsel may seem worth the regarding, I advise
thee, to keep the Kings commandment, that is, readily to observe and obey his
commands, and that in regard of the oath of God, which may be understood two
ways, either 1. Because thou have covenanted and sworn to obey the
commandments of God, (and indeed we read that sometimes both the Kings and
people of Judah did by a solemn covenant and oath oblige themselves to obey
Gods Laws. 2 Chro. 15.12, 14. and 34.31, 32.) and so this being one of Gods
Laws, that subjects should obey the Supreme Magistrate, thou art therefore
bound even out of conscience to God to obey the command of the civil
Magistrate. Or 2. Because of thine oath of Allegiance to the King, of which God
is a witness and will be a revenger: which may the rather seem to be the
meaning of the place, because we find that amongst the Israelites from the
beginning there used to pass a covenant betwixt the King and people: for so it
is said to have been, when David took the Kingdom upon him. 1 Chro. 11.3. and
it is most like that this covenant was confirmed by oath. Yet some Expositors
conceive also that this clause is added by way of limitation, I counsel thee to
keep the Kings commandment, yet always with regard had to the oath of God,
that is, not to obey the King any farther then may stand with that fealty which
thou owe to God.

Verse. 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight, etc.] That is, Do not rashly
fling away in a chafe out of his presence, as proud and angry persons are wont
to do; and as desiring to intimate thereby thy refusal to do something that he
has enjoined thee, or thy discontent against him for something he has spoken
or done. But yet because the serving of Kings is sometimes in the Scripture
expressed by their standing in their presence, as where it is said of Solomon's
servants, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, 1
Kings 10.8. and of the seven chief Princes of Persia and Media that they saw
the Kings face, Esth. 1.14. therefore some Expositors by this hasty going out
of the Kings sight here forbidden, understand men's hasty withdrawing themselves
in anger from any place of household service which they held under him, or their
casting off their obedience, and flinging from their Allegiance in a way of
defection or rebellion against him, or a rash retiring and hiding themselves
from his sight, where they may secretly plot some mischief against him. But the
first Exposition is the clearest. And accordingly the following words are to be
understood: stand not in an evil thing, that is, if thou have done any thing
that evil is, do not persist in it, so as in the defense thereof to break out
into any unseemly carriage against thy Prince; or if through unadvised passion
thou have forgotten thy self, do not proceed on in any stubborn way, but rather
yield, and in an humble way seek to pacify his displeasure; See the Notes,
Pro. 25.15. and 30.32. For he does whatsoever pleases him, that is, there is
no thinking to stand out or rise up against him; he will be easily able by his
power to quell thee, and by way of punishment or revenge to do to thee, whether
justly or unjustly, whatsoever he pleases, and usually there is no dissuading
Kings from doing whatsoever they have a mind to do. This therefore does not
give allowance to Princes to do what they please, but only discovers the folly
of resisting those, that have such power to do what they please.

Verse. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power, etc.] That is, He is
able by his command to do what he pleases, what he commands, will be presently
done; so that there is no withstanding his displeasure, nor flying from his
wrath; wherever his command comes it will be obeyed, there will be those found
that will surprise thee and do to thee whatever he has enjoined; and who may
say unto him, what do thou? that is, No man can resist him, no man dares
mutter against him, or call him into question: Not that Kings may not be
reproved, so it be done with wisdom and humility; but that his power is such
that usually there is no man that will dare to oppose him.

Verse. 5. Whosoever keeps the commandment shall feel no evil thing; etc.] That
is, say some Expositors, who so fears God and keeps his commands, shall
thereby be endued with such wisdom from God, that he shall keep himself from
the committing of any evil, that should provoke the Kings wrath and indignation
against him, or that should expose him to any danger; yea, though such a man
disobeyeth the King to obey God, the Lord God will preserve him. But
questionless the commandment here intended is that before mentioned verse. 2.
to wit, the Kings commandment; and the meaning is, that he that is obedient to
the command of his King shall be free from all those evils, which disobedience
against Princes does usually bring upon men, yea he shall lack no good
encouragement. See Romans 13.3, 4, at least if men neglect him, God will reward
him: and a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, that is, a wise
man knows, 1. When Kings are to be obeyed, and when not, when their commands
must be obeyed, and when it is fitter to dissemble, or to do something that is
enjoined and not all; he is discreetly able to judge of these things, and will
not in hope of reward or for fear of the Kings displeasure, do whatever he
enjoins, though never so unlawful and unfit to be done. 2. The fit season and
the right way to deal with Kings, either for the preventing or appeasing of
their displeasure, or the gaining of their favor, or dissuading them from
pressing their commands, when they are any way grievous to him; and 3. The
fittest seasons and oportunities and the best means and ways for the
accomplishing of those things that are enjoined him.

Verse. 6. Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, etc.] That is,
Because to every business that men undertake and purpose to do, there is a fit
and seasonable opportunity to be taken, and a right manner to be observed for
the doing of it, therefore the misery of man is great upon him, that is, men
are commonly exposed to manifold miseries and calamities, by reason that they
know not, or mind not the doing of things thus in a fit time and a right
manner; Now this which is thus generally delivered concerning the miseries that
befall men for want of observing judiciously the fittest seasons and right way
for the doing of those things they undertake, Solomon adds with respect to
that which he had said in the foregoing verse, concerning the wisdom of
observing this time and judgment in dealing with Kings, showing that subjects
do usually bring much misery upon themselves, because they want this wisdom,
of ordering themselves in their dealing with Kings seasonably and judiciously
in all they do for the preventing or appeasing of their displeasure. Or else he
does here make way to another point of wisdom, which may conduce much to the
tranquillity of men's lives, so far as it is attainable here in this world, and
that is a heedfull prevention of or preparation for those evils, which may come
upon us we know not when nor how soon? which is employed by showing, that the
best way to prevent these evils is by a circumspect care to do all things
seasonably and with discretion and judgment for the manner of doing them (as
he had said before in his precept concerning obeying of Kings) and withal that
for want of this wisdom men do commonly bring many miseries upon themselves,
which not being able to avoid, there is no remedy against them, but a patient
bearing of them.

Verse. 7. For he knows not that which shall be, etc.] That is, No man can
foreknow what will be hereafter, and so he cannot tell what the issue will be
of any enterprise that he undertakes; for who can tell him when (or how) it
shall be? that is no man can possibly inform him of things to come, or of the
manner how, or the time when they shall be. Now this is added to show, that
seeing therefore men cannot foresee nor prevent the evil that is coming upon
them, and so can hardly know how to do things in the fittest season and manner,
the misery of man must needs be great, both in regard of the continual
disquiet of his mind by his fears of the evil that may befall him, and also in
regard of the evils themselves that are like to come upon him. Men may flatter
themselves, that thus and thus things will come to pass, as they have
suggested to themselves, where as alas they know not what the event will be, or
how or when it will be; the evils which God has appointed, shall come upon
them, and the more unexpectedly they come upon them, the more heavily they will
crush them.

Verse. 8. There is no man that has power over the spirit, to retain the
spirit; etc.] That is, when death comes no man is able to retain or hold his
soul or breath of life from departing out of his body, see the Notes, Genesis 2.7.
Job 10.12. and 34.14. It is as impossible for any man thus to retain his own
spirit, as it is to withhold the wind from blowing: neither has he power in
the day of death, to wit, to secure himself from dying; the mightiest men, that
have most power in the world, are as unable to withstand death; as the meanest
and weakest amongst the people; and there is no discharge, (or, casting off
weapons) in that war, that is, in that terrible conflict, when death, man's
great enemy, as he is called, 1 Cor. 15.26. shall assault men, and nature is
wont to resist his assaults with all its strength, there is no possibility of
being discharged or freed from fighting it out, or of avoiding this combat,
neither is there any weapon of war, wherewith any man can assault this
adversary, there is no arrow, spear or javelin which men can let fly against
him; so that as there is no evading this war, so it is impossible also to beat
off this enemy: before this all-conquering Champion sooner or later all men
must fall, who then as a Conqueror will carry them away to the grave; (only
indeed spiritually the Saints shall through the death of Christ even in death
it self be more then Conquerors) neither shall wickedness deliver those that
are given to it, that is, say some Expositors, their wealth and great estates
gotten by wickedness; see the Note, Pro. 10.2. or the pride, insolency and
tyranny of those that are in great places; But I rather think that this is
meant of those many base and unwarrantable practices, wherewith wicked men,
when they have plunged themselves into danger, are wont to endeavor to deliver
themselves; to wit, that all such shifts, and sinful crafty devices will be to
no purpose, shall they escape by iniquity? says David, Psalm. 56.7. Doubtless
wickedness is more likely to hasten men's ruin, then to deliver them from
ruin. And this is here added, either, 1. with reference to that foregoing
precept verse. 2. concerning the obeying of Kings; therefore ought subjects to
be very wary of provoking their King to displeasure, because it is in his power
to condemn them to death that disobey his commands, and when he does so, it is
not in the subjects power to retain his spirit; the wickedness of rebellion can
never deliver them. Or else 2. with respect to what he had said in the
foregoing verse concerning man's not heing able to foreknow future things;
whereto here he adds, that as men cannot foresee evils coming upon them, so
neither can he withstand the greatest of worldly evils, namely death; thereby
implying, as I conceive, that when men have been careful to do all things
seasonably and with judgment, that they may not rashly expose themselves or
their lives to danger, for those evils which cannot be foreseen nor prevented,
the best way is, wisely to prepare and set themselves to bear them cheerfully,
and patiently to submit to the Providence of God.

Verse. 9. All this have I seen, and applied mine heart unto every work that is
done under the Sun, etc.] With this Transition, much like to those he has
formerly often used (see the Notes, Chap. 7.15, 23, 25.) he passes to the
observation of further vanities. But the drift of the words seems to be this,
that whilst he was considering of these observations of his, whereof he had
spoken, concerning Magistrates and people in a way of civil government, and of
the good means that might be used to live quietly under Kings by a wise
obeying their commands, he took notice of this likewise further, to wit, that
sometimes God, though in justice to punish the sins of a nation, does suffer
tyrants intolerably to crush and afflict the poor people; adding yet this
withal, that Gods advancing such men to these places of dignity, tends usually
to their own hurt; There is a time, says he, wherein one man rules over
another to his own hurt; to wit, not only because they grow the worse by their
honor, and the bolder in all kind of wickedness, but also because the wrath
of God falls at last the more heavily upon them for the abuse of the power that
God had put into their hands, in their oppressions, and tyranny, and other
wickedness they have committed; sometimes the people rise up against them and
destroy them, and sometimes God himself powers forth his judgments upon them.
Now the observation of this course of Gods Providence Solomon here mentions,
thereby to teach men with wisdom and meekness quietly and contentedly to
submit thereto, and to study to make good use of it.

Verse. 10. And so I saw the wicked buried, etc.] This place is very obscure in
the Original, and is accordingly translated several ways by Interpreters. And
hence it is that some understand the first clause only of the prosperous life
and death of wicked men, I saw them highly honored in life and death, who had
come and gone from the place of the holy; that is, who had long peaceably
enjoyed the power and honor of supreme Magistracy; or who being desperately
wicked wretches, had yet covered their wickedness with a show of religion,
coming and going frequently from the house of God; And then the second clause
they understand of the neglect and contempt of the godly, and they were
forgotten in the City, where they had so done; that is, those that were truly
godly, and had really and sincerely done that, which the other did only make a
show of, were driven into corners, at least they were slighted, and no notice
in a manner taken of them, and so they were buried in forgetfulness. And of
this it is, they say, that Solomon passes that censure, this is also vanity;
to wit, that wicked men and hypocrites should have so much honor done to them,
whilst the righteous live and dye in so great obscurity. But according to our
Translation the whole verse is to be understood of wicked Rulers, thus; And so
I saw the wicked buried; As if he had said, Though I observed that the power,
which God suffered tyrants to exercise for the oppression of others, tended at
last to their own hurt (as was said in the foregoing verse) yet withal I saw,
that many times they have lived in high esteem to the last, dying peaceably,
and being buried honorably, with great pomp and solemnity, with funeral
Orations, statues and monuments erected for them, Who had come and gone from
the place of the holy; that is, who had all their lives time, with great state
and majesty in the sight of the people come and gone from the royal throne, or
seat of judicature, which is the seat of the holy God; see the Notes, Deuteronomy.
1.17. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. and Psalm. 82.1. (The expression here used is much like
that, which we often meet with in the Scripture, of the Magistrates going in
and out before the people, Numb. 27.17. and is used to imply, that they lived
and dyed peaceably in the place of Magistracy; as likewise the great state
wherein they had lived amongst the people;) And then for the following words,
And they were forgotten in the City where they had so done; Some take them to
be added for the further setting forth of their seeming happiness, in that
there was after their death no talk of their wickedness in the place where
they acted so much villainy, so that not only in life and death, but even after
death also they seemed to be happy; But I rather take this to be added by way
of discovering the vanity of their prosperous estate, in that though they lived
and dyed in peace and honor, and with a show of great applause, yet within a
while they were forgotten; they lived like Gods, but they dyed like men; yea
indeed as they had lived like beasts, so being laid in their graves, they were
forgotten like beasts, those that before flattered them being then silent, if
not exclaiming against them, and so their name and memory rotted together with
their dead carcases. And accordingly Solomon closes what he had here said of
these wicked tyrannical Rulers with this censure, this is also vanity; to wit,
to live in such pomp and power, and honor, and to be buried with such
magnificent solemnity, and yet within a while to be quite forgotten; this being
also no advantage to them in regard of their eternal condition, because in the
midst of all their pomp and glory amongst men, the Lord abhorres them, and the
more they have flourished here, the greater will their punishments be hereafter.

Verse. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.]
Hereby the reason is hinted, why such wicked Governors and Tyrants, as Solomon
had now spoken of, do live and dye in their wickedness, and both in life and
death are applauded amongst men; it is because God does usually forbear wicked
men a long time, and it is the guise of all wicked men from hence to embolden
themselves in their evil ways.

Verse. 12. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, etc.] That is, never so
often, see the Note, Chap. 6.3. and so happily he commit the same sin never so
often, and his days be prolonged; to wit, through Gods forbearing to punish
him; which he abuses to the afflicting of the righteous; and consequently (for
that this is employed the following words show) though a godly man suffer evil
many and many times, and his days be shortened, yet surely I know; as if he had
said, What ever dreaming sinners may vainly imagine, yet this I know of a
certainty, that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before
him; that is, it shall be in the end well with them that fear God truly and
sincerely, God himself bearing them witness, that sees their hearts, or that
fear him merely out of an awful respect to his presence and all-seeing eye,
that avoid evil, and do good, not for fear of man, or for fear of shame or
punishment, but sincerely, out of respect to God, and as desiring to approve
themselves to him whose eye is upon them in all their ways.

Verse* 13. But it shall not be w^ with the wicked, etc.] In true judgment it
is never well with wicked men, because their very prosperity ripens their
sins, and fits them for judgment. But that which Solomon intends here is,
that even in regard of his outward prosperity, it shall not be always well
with the wicked, he shall not always escape, the judgment of God will at last
fall upon him, and so in the end it shall not be well with him, but on the
contrary exceeding ill; Neither shall he prolong his days; to wit, not
always, nor according to his desire and expectation, see the Note, Psalm.
55.23. God in his wrath will at the last sooner or later cut short his days,
which are as a shadow, so that his life, when his days are most prolonged, is
but a short life, see the Notes, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. Psalm. 102.11. and 109.23. and
144.4. Because he fears not before God, see the foregoing Note, ver. 12.

Verse. 14. There is a vanity which is done upon the earth, that there be just
men, unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked, etc.] That is,
there are some just men that fare as ill for outward things as if they had
lived wickedly; Again there be wicked men to whom it happens according to
the work of the righteous; that is, there are some wicked men, that do not
only a long time go unpunished, (which he had said before, ver. 11.) but which
is far more strange, fare as well for outward things as if they had lived most
righteously. I said that this also is vanity; that is, another and indeed a
greater vanity. But now for the understanding of this we must know, that
Solomon does not intend to charge the Providence of God with vanity, for thus
ordering and disposing things, both in regard of the righteous and wicked; for
he knew well enough that God disposes these things thus with admirable wisdom
and justice, for the good of the righteous, and the ruin of the wicked. His
meaning, I conceive, is, either 1. that it is a vanity in men to judge, that
because of the sad afflctions of the righteous, and the outward prosperity of
the wicked, therefore it is ill with the righteous, and well with the wicked;
or secondly, that this is a vanity which men in their judgment are subject to,
that they are ready vainly to conceive, that it should be always well with
the righteous, and ill with the wicked for these outward things, and so finding
themselves often miserably deceived in their hopes, are thereupon disquieted
and vexed; Or rather thirdly, that this shows the vanity of all things here
below, in that in regard of them the state of humane affairs is so uncertain
and inconstant, so full of seeming confusion and disorder, the good things of
this life being usually here conferred upon those that seem in reason most
unworthy of them, and the miseries of this life being usually the portion of
those that must needs be best in Gods sight. And thus Solomon shows how God
disposes of things upon earth; that is, here below, (for after this life he
would have us know it shall be otherwise) thereby to persuade men quietly to
submit hereto. I know that some understand this of the vanity that is in the
government of Princes, in that they many times deal with righteous men as if
they were wicked, and with wicked men, as if they were righteous.

Verse. 15. Then I commended mirth, because a man has no better thing under the
Sun, then to eat, and to drink, and to be merry, etc.] This must be
understood, as those former passages, Chap. 2.24. and 3.12, 13, 22. for which
see the Notes there. Seeing there are so many evils and vanities, that even by
the disposing Providence of God, men are liable to, and which no man can
comprehend or redress, thence Solomon concludes, that the best way for men to
live comfortably here in this world, is with cheerfulness and thankfulness,
and in a holy manner to enjoy the blessings which God has been pleased to
confer upon them, quietly resting upon Gods fatherly providence for the time to
come, without any overcurious searching into the secrets of his providence,
without any vexing at those things we understand not, or troubling our selves
about what shall be hereafter; For that shall abide with him of his labor, the
days of his life which God gives him under the Sun; that is, this
comfortable enjoying of these outward things, without vexation and anxiety of
mind, is all the fruit that men can reap of their labors. See the Note* Chap.
2.10.

Verse. 16. When I applied my heart to know wisdom, etc.] That is, say some
Expositors, all kind of wisdom, (or rather, as we may see by the dependence
this has upon that which went before) the wisdom of God in the administration
of things here below, and the reason hereof, and to see the business that is
done upon the earth; to wit, say some, the businesses wherein men do severally
toil and moil themselves here in this world, together with the reason and the
vanity thereof, or rather, the business that God does upon the earth in the
government of the world, even the whole frame of Gods providence in the
ordering of all humane affairs; ( for also there is that neither day nor night
sees sleep with his eyes;) to wit, either by reason of their continual
carking and caring, and eager busying themselves about earthly things, see the
Note, Chap. 2.23. or else by reason of their eagerness in studying to find out
the reason of all things that are done in the world; And indeed therefore many
good Expositors do hold, that Solomon speaks this with reference to himself,
thereby to imply that though he was so intent upon searching out the reason of
Gods works, that he scarce took any rest either by day or by night, yet he
could not find it out: which is that he adds in the next verse.

Verse. 17. Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the
work that is done under the Sun, etc.] That is, that no man can perfectly
discover or comprehend the counsel of God in his works of Providence, not only
those that concern the Angels and things in heaven, but even those also which
are done here below, as namely those beforementioned, ver. 14. concerning Gods
afflicting the righteous, and his prospering the wicked. See the Note, Chap.
3.11. Because though a man labor to seek it out, yea further; though a wise
man think to know it; that is, though a man of eminent understanding, and
withal a good and gracious man thinks he does know it, or that he shall by
much labor and searching attain the knowledge of it, yet shall he not be able
to find it; that is, to discover and comprehend the counsel of God therein.
And thus has Solomon in these two verses proved, that the best way for men is
quietly and cheerfully to enjoy the present comforts, which God in this life
affords them, and not to vex and disquiet themselves about the works of Gods
Providence in his disposing of humane affairs, because the inquiring into this
will be labor endless and fruitless; we may be sure that God orders all
things for the best; but the reason of all his ways we cannot comprehend.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. FOr all this I considered in my heart, etc.] That is, All this
concerning the seeming, strange and unsearchable providence of God in the
ordering of humane affairs, I diligently weighed in my mind, making use of
that singular measure of wisdom wherewith God had endued me, even to declare
all this, that is, that I might make all these clear and perspicuous to mine
own understanding, and discover them clearly to others, that the righteous and
the wise and their works are in the hand of God, that is, that the persons and
ways and works of the best and wisest of men, (and much more the persons and
ways of others) are wholly ordered by the sure and secret guidance of divine
Providence; Though men cannot discover nor search into the seeming unequal
dispensing of things, yet this I found to be certain, that the most righteous
and wise amongst men cannot dispose of themselves and their ways as they
please, but are wholly ordered by a divine hand, I know that in other regards
the righteous and the wise and their works may be said to be in the hand of
God, as 1. Because God does protect their persons from evil, and does keep them
in the way of truth and holiness, that they may not fall away, they are kept
by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. see Joh. 10.28,
29. and 2. Because God does accept of them and their services, and will
certainly in due time reward them; though as they come from them, their works
seem to pass away and to be no more, and are usually forgotten amongst men,
yet they are still with God, he keeps an exact account of them, and will
undoubtedly recompense them into their bosoms; Heb. 6.10. But here doubtless
they are said to be in the hand of God, because they are ordered and disposed
by the secret hand of Gods all-ruling Providence; as indeed this expression of
things being in the hand of God and of Christ, does in the Scripture note that
things are subject to the power of God, Joh. 3.35. The Father loves the Son
and has given all things into his hand, and that they are ruled and governed
by the Providence of God, Acts 4.28. And this is premised here to comfort the
righteous, by letting them know that even their afflictions are from God, and
to keep them from stumbling at the Lords dispensing of outward things
promiscuously to all sorts of people, of which he speaks in the following
words, no man knows either love or hatred by all that is before them, that
is, no man knows by their present state in this life, by those things that
befall them that are evident to the outward sense, whether God loves or hates
them, and that because the same outward things befall good and bad, those that
God esteems his friends, and those that he esteems his enemies. I confess that
this last clause is likewise otherwise understood by some Expositors, as that
no man knows what they shall love, and what they shall hate for the future,
their affections not being at their own, but at Gods disposing; or that no men
know whether that which they love, or that which they hate shall befall them,
judging of future events by their present ordering of their affairs. But the
first Exposition is most generally received.

Verse. 2. All things come alike to all; etc.] To wit, in regard of outward
things. And this is the reason why no man can judge by such things whether he
be loved or hated of God, as was said in the foregoing verse; there is one
event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to
the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifieth not, that is,
to those that are godly and religious, and those that are irreligious and
profane; as is the good, so is the sinner, that is, they are usually both in
the same outward condition, and he that swears, to wit, without fear, and so
is an ordinary swearer, and thereupon often swears vainly and rashly and
falsely, and so profanes the name of God, as he that fears an oath, that is,
that is afraid of swearing vainly and falsely, and therefore is very wary of
swearing, and when he does swear he does it reverently and religiously. Now
from hence to the 13. verse some conceive that Solomon speaks in the person
of Athiests and Epicures, and tells us what carnal reason is prone to judge in
the case before mentioned, to wit, that the righteous and the wicked fare every
way alike both in life and death; But because Solomon speaks only of outward
events, that from thence he may encourage men to live comfortably in every
condition whereinto God is pleased to bring them, I see no reason why we may
not take all this as spoken by Solomon himself.

Verse. 3. This is an evil among all things that are done under the Sun, that
there is one event unto all; etc.] That is, Amongst the many evils, vanities
and miseries that men are subject to here in this world, I found this to be one
sore affliction, a temptation very grievous and vexatious to men, Or, Among all
humane miseries, I found this to be the sorest and grievous above all to be
born, that the same equal events happen to the just and to the unjust, and so
the worst of wicked men do many times live in as flourishing a condition as the
best of Gods servants, and the holiest of men do usually undergo the same
outward miseries with fools and ungodly wretches. Solomon does not in these
words condemn the Providence of God for ordering things thus; (for he knew well
that God does with admirable wisdom and justice thus dispose of humane
affairs;) but he only notes this to be a sore temptation and very grievous to
the holiest of men when they take notice of it; Or else, as some think, this
may be called evil, because it is occasionally the cause of much evil, in that
wicked men do hereupon take occasion to break forth into all kind of
wickedness; so that the evil here intended, is that which Solomon expresses
in the following words, yea also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil,
and madness is in their heart while they live; But I rather think that by evil
here is meant, that it is a thing very bitter and irksome to men; and that the
following words do set forth a farther degree of man's vanity and misery, to
wit, that even those men that spend their whole lives in all kind of
wickedness, and that run headlong boldly and presumptously into all kind of
desperate madness and abominable courses, (happily the rather because they see
good and bad fare all alike here,) do only at last die just as other men do,
madness is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead;
and there they rot in their graves as all the sons of men must do. Yet this
last clause may be added only to imply the folly of those men that from all
men's faring a like here in this world, do embolden themselves in all kind of
wickedness, in that after they have thus run madding after their own lusts, at
last (which they never minded) they fall into the pit, and then they receive
the reward of their impiety.

Verse. 4. For to him that is joined to all the living, there is hope; etc.]
That is, As long as life lasts, there is hope of his still enjoying his present
comforts, yea of improving his condition for the better, both in regard of his
spiritual and his outward estate, at least some of the benefits of the living
he is sure to enjoy: for a living dog is better then a dead lion, that is, the
basest and most contemptible person that is, whilst he lives, is in a better
condition, then he that has been of greatest account, when once he is laid in
the dust, to wit, in regard of the things of this life, and the actions and
employments thereof. And thus Solomon sets forth the different estate of the
living and the dead, thereby to make way to that following exhortation verse. 7.
wherein again he persuades men to that forementioned remedy of the vanities of
this life, namely, to enjoy comfortably the benefits of this life whilst life
lasts, because when death comes that will deprive us of them all.

Verse. 5. For the living know that they shall die, etc*] Here a reason is given
to prove what is said in the foregoing verse, that the living are in a better
estate then the dead, namely, in regard of the enjoyment of the things of this
life. And some Expositors do understand the words, as if he had said, It is
true, the living know they must die, and that may somewhat afflict them, but
yet as long as they live, they may enjoy the good things of this life, which
the dead can in no wise do, because they know nothing of the things of this
world; But I rather think that these words, for the living know that they shall
die, are only to imply the benefits of this present life; they know they shall
die, this is a truth unquestionably certain, yea they find and feel it
experimentally in the decays of their bodies, and the uncertainty of their
health, and consequently they may stir up themselves hereby, to provide that
they may both live comfortly and die happily: the knowledge of this is an
advantage to make them take off their affections from the perishing things of
this world, to prepare themselves for death, and by faith and repentance to
make sure of life eternal; and withal (which I conceive is here chiefly
intended) to set themselves comfortably and thankfully to enjoy present
mercies, which when death once comes they can no longer hope to enjoy. And
therefore he adds, but the dead know not any thing: which must not be
understood absolutely, as if the souls departed had no knowledge, but as with
respect to those things, whereof Solomon is in this place speaking, that the
dead know not any thing, to wit, of what is done here in the Land of the
living; see the Note, Job. 14.21. Or, they have no sense or experimental
knowledge, nor are capable of taking any delight in the knowledge or enjoyment
of the things of this life; neither have they any more a reward, that is, they
can no more have any benefit or content by the enjoyment of the things here
below, which is the only reward of men's labors in this life: Solomon does not
deny that men will be rewarded after this life according to their works: for
this he had before asserted; see the Notes, Chap. 3.17. and 8.12, 13. And it is
likewise true, that the dead can no more do any thing whereby they should
expect a reward hereafter. But that which is meant here is, that being dead
they can no longer advantage themselves any way by the things of this life, for
which they have labored: for the memory of them is forgotten, to wit, in
regard of the things of this life, or of any thing they have done here; no man
thinks of doing them any good, etc. See the Notes, Chap. 2.16. Psalm. 9.5 and
31.12. and 88.7, 13.

Verse. 6. Also their love and their hatred, and their envy is now perished;
etc.] That is, say some Expositors, there is no more remembrance of their love
and hatred and envy, when they are once dead; which indeed agrees well with
the last clause of the foregoing verse, the memory of them is forgotten. But I
rather conceive the meaning to be, that being dead there is no person or thing
which they love or hate or envy any longer; And to this some add also that on
the other side no body neither does any longer love or hate or envy them.
Questionless Solomon speaks not of the love, hatred or envy that may be in
souls departed, but with respect to the things of this life, and to men's
affections here, to wit, that when men are dead, they mind no more the riches,
honors and pleasures of this world, nor can any longer enjoy any thing that is
here below, which is more fully expressed in the following words, neither have
they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun; and
therefore if we expect any comfort in the things of this world, we must make
use of them, whilst this life lasts.

Verse. 7. Go thy way, etc.] Some Expositors conceive that this which is said
here and in the three following verses cannot be well understood otherwise,
then as spoken in the person of sensual, brutish Epicures; But such kind of men
are not wont to express themselves in such religious terms, as are here used,
verse. 9. where this life is again and again termed vanity, and the lengthening
out of men's days is said to be the gift of God, and men are advised to be
constant in loving and delighting in their own wives, without ever looking
after strange women. And therefore this and that which follows is rather to
be taken still as the holy advice of the spirit of God by the pen of Solomon,
Go thy way, as if he should have said, laying aside all vain endeavors to
search into Gods secrets, and all vexatious disquiet of mind about the hidden
works of Gods providence, as why he many times afflicts the righteous and
prospers the wicked, betake thy self diligently and speedily to do what I now
say to thee; eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart,
that is, casting thy care upon God, enjoy the fruit of thy labor, and live
comfortably upon that which thou have, see the Notes, Chap. 2, 24. and 3.12,
13. and 8.15. By those words thy bread and thy wine, there is an intimation
given, that men must be careful that they live only upon that which is justly
their own, and that their enjoyments, must be according to what is necessary
and convenient, and neither above nor beneath their estate and condition: For
God now accepts thy works, that is, when thou do thus enjoy what thou have
gotten by thy honest labor and is truly thine own, in a moderate and decent
manner; without any anxious and distrustful fears, God is well-pleased that
thou should so do. And indeed then only can we use the creatures with joy
and comforts, when we know that both our persons and works are well pleasing to
God.

Verse. 8. Let thy garments be always white, etc.] That is, When ever in other
regards it is fitting and seasonable, let thy garments be clean, handsome, and
decent, yea and when thy condition will allow it, rich and gorgeous. Yet
because it is generally said, that in ancient times in those Eastern Countries
white garments were used, as expressions of honor and dignity, (whence the
royal apparel wherewith Mordecaj was clothed upon his advancement, is said
to have been of blue and white, Esth. 8.15.) as likewise in times of feasting
and rejoicing, therefore this may be also literally meant of white garments;
And let thy head lack no ointment; that is, anoint thy self plentifully with
sweet and precious ointments; for this pouring forth of ointments upon the head
was another thing, which they used much at their times of feasting and
rejoicing. See the Note, Psalm. 23.5. The meaning of the whole is this, that the
servants of God should take the comfort of the bounty of God toward them in
the things of this life, keeping themselves within the bounds of religion and
piety, and not out of a sordid disposition, or any other evil humor, deprive
themselves of that cheerful content in the use of these blessings, which God
allows them to enjoy.

Verse. 9. Live joyfully with the wife whom thou love, etc.] Therefore is the
love of the husband here mentioned, because it is indeed only the love of
married persons that makes their cohabiting and conversing together comfortable
to them. As for those following words, All the days of the life of thy vanity,
which he has given thee under the Sun, all the days of thy vanity; see the
Note, Chap. 6.12. It is true indeed that those words, which he has given thee
under the Sun, are by some understood to be meant of the wife, who is indeed
elsewhere termed the gift of God, Pro. 19.14. But if Solomon had intended this
of the wife, he would only have said, which he has given thee, and not, which
he has given thee under the Sun, which is not a proper expression. And
therefore that clause is to be referred to the foregoing words, All the days
of the life of thy vanity, which he has given thee under the Sun, because it
is God alone that does in this world lengthen out the days of men's lives to
them: and therefore concerning the days of men's lives, the very same
expression is used before, Chap. 8.15. For that is thy portion in this life,
and in thy labor, which thou take under the Sun; to wit, this comfortable
enjoying the good blessings of God, of which he had spoken from the beginning
of the seventh verse; though some indeed think that men's living cheerfully with
their wives in the fear of God is here principally at least intended, this
being the best of comforts to men in all their troubles, and travels and
sorrows here in this life. But see the Notes, Chap. 2.10. and 8.15.

Verse. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, etc.] That is, Whatsoever thine
abilities can reach to do, and which thou have a fair occasion and opportunity
to do, if it be also a thing lawful to be done, do it with thy might; that is,
do it carefully, diligently, vigorously, and speedily, with all the powers of
thy soul, and without any delay; for that all this may be well intended by
this expression, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, is evident by other
places, where in the Original the like phrase is used, as Lev. 12.8. Numb.
6.21. 1 Samuel 10.7. and Genesis 16.6. Some conceive that the thing here enjoined
is, that men should with all possible zeal and diligence take all the
opportunities they can to do all the good they are able, either in their
general or particular calling, by way of being serviceable in their places to
God, or to their brethren; and that this is enjoined, either, 1. To clear what
was said in the foregoing verses from being mis-understood; That it might not
be thought that therein there was any encouragement given to a voluptuous life,
Solomon adds here, that withal men must endeavor with all their might to do
all the good that possibly they are able: Or 2. as another means whereby men
may come to live comfortably and happily. And indeed when men are earnest and
diligent to do all the good they can, as it is a means to prevent manifold
crosses and miseries, so also it yields a quiet and peaceable conscience, which
tends much to the happiness and comfort of men's lives. But the whole Context
in this place shows, that the advice here given is, that men should freely
and with all their might, do whatever may lawfully be done whilst they live
here in this world, as occasion serves, for their comfort and delight. Having
before instanced in those chief outward comforts, of meat, and clothes, and
marriage, he now adds this general advice, that in all other things, wherein
an opportunity was given for refreshing themselves in an honest way, they
should embrace it, if it lay in their power, and that because this present life
is the only time for the enjoying of these comforts; For (says he) there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go;
to wit, in regard of the things of this life. He does not deny the knowledge
that is in the souls of men departed; But he exhorts men whilst they live,
freely to enjoy the commodities that are here given of God for the comfort of
men's lives, because in the grave, or in the state of death, whither men are
continually going, they can no more make any use of their skill, or knowledge,
or wisdom, for the doing of any good either to themselves or others. And very
observable indeed it is, what kind of contentments and delights Solomon does
here advise men to enjoy, namely, not such as are brutish and sensual, but
such as arise from our honest labors, and wherein we are guided by skill, and
wisdom, and knowledge.

Verse. 11. I returned and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, etc.] This
passage may be added to that which went before upon several respects; for 1. It
may be added as another vanity, which upon farther observation of humane
affairs Solomon had taken notice of, to wit, that the event and success of
men in their affairs and undertakings, are not according to the abilities that
are in men, but quite contrary, so that the less nimble in running do many
times win the race, etc. Or 2. it may be taken as a farther discovery of that
which he had said before, ver. 2. that all things come alike to all, in that
the race and the victory is sometimes gotten by the weaker party as well as by
the stronger, and that the simpler sort of people get a competent livelihood,
yea many times great estates, as well as those that are men of great wisdom
and understanding, etc. Or 3. It may be conceived as a farther illustration of
what he said before, ver. 1. that all things are in the hands of God, so that
it is not in the power of man to order or accomplish his affairs as he
pleases, but that all things are disposed of by the powerful, the secret and
unsearchable providence of God. And thence some conceive it is, that Solomon
says, entering upon this passage, I returned and saw under the Sun, that the
race is not to the swift, etc. As if he had said, I betook my self again to
consider of the event of things, as formerly, or, I turned my self from
considering how the persons of men are in the hands of God, to consider how the
works of men are also in the hand of God, and I observed that in every thing
those that are of mean parts, do many times thrive better, and have better
success, then those that are of far greater abilities: Or 4. It may be added
with reference to that which was said in the foregoing verse; for having there
exhorted men to do whatsoever their hand finds to do, with their might,
lest men should hereupon trust to their own sufficiency, and take it for
granted that in all undertakings, things are still carried on according to men's
abilities, and that godliness or holiness make no great difference in the
success of men's actions, here he shows that this was not so, but that he had
observed the quite contrary, namely, that the race is not to the swift, etc,
but time and chance happens to them all; that is, they all meet with such
success as the seasons and casual occurrences in those times, happening
according to Gods all ruling Providence, do produce; which counsel and
governing hand of God being hidden from us, therefore the events seem to us to
come by chance, though it be not so in regard of God. All which should teach
us, not in any thing to trust to our own abilities, or to ascribe our success
to our own strength, but to look above second causes to God the supreme
disposer of all, to implore his blessing, to give him the praise of all good
success, and quietly to submit to his will, when things fall not out, as we
would have them.

Verse. 12. For man also knows not his time, etc.] This is added to prove the
last clause of the foregoing verse, that time and chance happens to all; for,
says Solomon, man also knows not his time; that is, the time of his death,
or the time of any calamity that comes upon him. Now if he knows not what
shall befall him the next day or hour, much less can he effect what he
desires or resolves upon by his own counsels, wisdom and industry, but things
must needs befall him casually in that they were not effected by his own
foresight and providence; As the fishes that are taken in an evil net; that
is, a net that is craftily laid for them, and that proves destructive to them,
and as the birds that are caught in the snare, where they expected only to feed
themselves; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls
suddenly upon them, when it comes unexpectedly and unavoydably upon them, by
the disposing providence of God from above; according to that of our Savior,
Luke 21.35. As a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the
whole earth.

Verse. 13. This wisdom have I seen also under the Sun, and it seemed great
unto me.] To wit, that wisdom related in the two following verses, of a poor
man who by his wisdom delivered a little weak City, that had few men in it to
defend it, when a great and mighty King had besieged it round about, and had
built great bulwarks against it, of which he passes this sentence, that to him
it seemed great and wonderful, though by the inhabitants of that City it was
so little minded. Several opinions there are concerning the drift of this
passage also. But three particulars are mentioned that seem most probable;
neither do I see, but that they may be all jointly intended; for 1. this
following Relation may seem to be an instance given to make good what he had
said in the foregoing verse; as namely, that by the poverty and neglect of this
man of great wisdom, he proves that bread is not always to the wise, and by
this poor man's delivering a little weak City that was besieged so straightly by
a mighty King, he proves that the battle is not always to the strong. 2. The
drift of it may be to set forth the excellency and profitablenesse of wisdom;
for having shown in the foregoing verses the insufficiency of humane wisdom in
it self for the effecting of any thing intended, lest men should hereupon
slight it, here he shows the excellency of it, and proves, that though it
does not always produce its proper effects, when God is pleased to disappoint
it, yet many times it is a means of effecting great things, even beyond all
humane expectation; Or 3. The aim hereof may be to discover a farther vanity,
which Solomon had observed, to wit, that wisdom in men of mean and low
condition is usually slighted and dis-esteemed; To which end he first extolls
the wisdom of a poor man that delivered a City from a desperate danger by his
wisdom, and then adds how little the wisdom of this poor man was regarded.

Verse. 14. There was a little City, etc.] This may be taken, either as a true
story, or as a Parable only; and it matters not much which we conceive it to be.

Verse. 15. Now there was found in it a poor wise man; and he by his wisdom
delivered the City; yet no man remembered that same poor man.] This last clause
may intend both, 1. that before this noble exployt of his, there was no notice
taken of him or of his wisdom, nor any account made of him, and so being a
poor obscure person, he was not thought of as a man likely to help them in this
extremity; (all which notwithstanding he was never a whit the less solicitous
for the public good, nor did neglect to do for the City what he was able;) and
2. that after he had thus strangely saved the City, there was nothing done to
him by way of thankfulness, nor was he ever a whit the more honored or minded
amongst them for that which he had done for them.

Verse. 16. Then said I, Wisdom is better then strength, etc.] To wit, any kind
of strength, as of body, courage, wealth or military forces. See the Notes,
Chap. 7.19. and Pro. 21.22.

Verse. 17. The words of wise men are heard in quiet, more then the cry of him
that rules among fools.] That is, they ought so to be heard, as when it is
said, Mal. 1.6. A son honors his father; the meaning is, that he ought to
honor him; Or, they are usually so heard; for having spoken of the contempt of
wisdom in the words immediately foregoing, ver. 16. Nevertheless, the poor
man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard; lest this should be
taken to be any disparagement to wisdom, here he shows that wisdom is of
great efficacy to work upon men's affections, and that usually the words of wise
men do mightily prevail with those that hear them, though there may be many
obstinate fools, that never mind nor regard them. As for that phrase of being
heard in quiet, it may have respect both to the quiet stillnes, the lowliness,
gentleness and mildness of the wise man's speaking, to wit, that such men's
words will be much regarded, though they speak in a very calm, humble, and
meek way, and do not deliver themselves with that loudness and contention of
voice, as some others do; as likewise to that silent attention, that calm,
pliable and submissive spirit, wherewith their hearers do hearken to their
words; And then for the cry of him that rules among fools; thereby is meant,
either the loud and clamorous imperious commands of men in place of authority
and power, amongst a stubborn, rude, tumultuous people, or amongst their
Parasites, that for fear or flattery may seem to hear and admire what they
say, when indeed they do not seriously at all regard them: Or else the cry of
those who are esteemed all in all, and bear all the sway amongst a company of
silly people, merely because of their loud speaking. Some explain the words
thus, that wise men's words are heard in quiet, that is, by men of a quiet,
composed, undisturbed spirit, more then the cry of him that rules amongst a
tumultuous foolish people. And so they think that hereby there is covertly a
reason hinted, why the wise man's words are usually disregarded, as he had said
in the foregoing verse, to wit, because commonly men are inwardly distempered
with some passion or other, and the wisest of men shall never be regarded,
unless it be by those that are inwardly quiet and free from turbulent
passions. But the former Exposition is more generally approved.

Verse. 18. Wisdom is better then weapons of war, etc.] That is, Policy
joined with piety, (for that this is included is clear, by that which is said
on the contrary in the following clause concerning a sinners destroying much
good) is not only better then strength alone, but it is also better then armed
strength; which is inferred from the foregoing relation of the poor wise man's
defending a City against the numerous army of a mighty King, furnished with all
kind of ammunition and military provision for the besieging of it, and raising
of forts and bulwarks against it; But one sinner destroys much good; that is,
As one wise man may save a multitude of people, and that which belongs to them,
so one sinful fool, erring through folly and ungodliness, may by his foolish
counsel, treachery and wickedness, many several ways, destroy whole Cities
and Commonwealths, and bring to nothing many provisions made, and many good
counsels and enterprises undertaken for their benefit and advancement. And thus
by showing how mischievous folly is, he still goes on in setting forth the
necessity and excellency of wisdom.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. DEad flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a
stinking savor, etc.] That is, say some Expositors, They mar it and make it
noisome and loathsome, as if it stanke. But I see not why the words may not be
understood according to the letter. For though with us a dead fly or two does
not work this effect in a box or pot of odoriferous ointment, yet it might well
be so in those Eastern Countries, where their ointments were far more pure and
precious, and they had flies far more venomous and noisome then ours; so does a
little folly, him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor. As if he had
said, As dead flies, though little contemptible creatures, will taint and
corrupt the most precious ointments, and make them unsavory; so does a little
mixture of folly, indiscretion and wickedness, stain and blemish the
reputation of men, and bring reproach upon their good name (which is indeed
elsewhere compared to precious ointment, Chap. 7.1.) causing them to stink in
the nostrils of others, though they be in place^ of highest honor, and were
before justly respected for their wisdom and virtue; and that partly because
men are naturally more prone to take notice of, and to censure a little folly
that is in men, then to see and esteem of much good that is in them, and are
wont for some smaller miscarriage to forget all their former good deservings;
and partly because a little folly and miscarriage will be soonest discerned in
men of greatest eminency for wisdom and honor, as a small spot is soonest
discerned in the whitest and finest garments. And thus Solomon proceeds, as in
the former Chapter, to set forth the excellency of wisdom, and the evil of
folly, that so men might see how much wisdom may confer toward the comfort,
tranquillity and happiness of men's lives. And having said in the last words of
the foregoing chapter, that one sinful fool does often destroy much good, he
does here further illustrate that, showing how much prejudice a little folly
may bring upon a man, that was before deservedly had in high esteem.

Verse. 2. A wise man's heart is at his right hand; etc.] This expression
implies, 1. That the wise man does not do things rashly, but that he is wont
seriously to ponder of all things before hand, and then after mature
deliberation and consideration to undertake that he resolves upon. See the
Notes, Cha. 2.14. and Pro. 16.23. 2. That he has his wisdom ready at hand to
counsel, guide and direct him in all things, he is not long to seek what to
do, but his heart is ready and prepared to every good work; and does constantly
suggest how he should order himself and his affairs wisely and judiciously upon
all occasions. 3. That he has his heart at command, so that he can strongly
over rule himself in his natural desires, and reine in his corrupt passions
and affections: and 4. That he does all things well and in a right manner, he
dispatcheth all his affairs, as with prudence and judgment, so with strength,
dexterity, expedition and good success: but a fools heart is at his left, that
is, he sets himself about his businesses rashly and inconsiderately, and
accordingly he bungles in all he does; he is many times at his wits end, not
knowing what to do or which way to turn himself; and is many times carried away
with his strong passions; and when he sets himself to work, he does all things
foolishly and preposterously, awkwardly and unhandsomely; he does not carry on
his affairs with nimblenesse and dexterity, and even then when he does that
which is simply good in it self, yet he mars it in the doing of it, because he
does it with some sinister ends, or some way fails grossly in the manner of
doing it. Because naturally we are readier to use our right hand then our left,
and find more strength and nimblenesse therein, and can do any thing more
surely and handsomely and quickly therewith, then with the left (which makes us
also most to esteem of that hand, Mat. 5.29, 30.) thence are both these
expressions of the wise man's heart being at his right hand, and the fools at
his left.

Verse. 3. Yea also when he that is a fool walks by the way, his wisdom
fails him, and he says to every one that he is a fool] That is, say some
Expositors, Even when he is abroad in public, he cannot hide his folly, but
through want of wit and grace, he some way or other discovers it to all men;
Or; Not only in his undertakings of greater moment, but even in all the common
and ordinary actions of his life, by his talk, his looks, his gate, his
gestures, or some other thing observable in his deportment of himself, he
proclaims his folly so palpably, that he does as it were say unto every one
that he is a fool. I know that some Expositors do otherwise understand the
words (and indeed the words will bear that sense) namely that when a fool does
those things that clearly discover his folly, yet by reason of this folly, he
is withal highly conceited of himself, so that he is ready to condemn all
others of folly and to say unto every man that he is a fool. But the former
Exposition is I think, far the clearest.

V. 4. If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, etc.] That is, If the
anger of the Prince, or any Magistrate in place of power, do rise up in high
displeasure and indignation against thee, as a storm or flame of fire suddenly
arising in his breast, See the Note, Pro. 16.32. leave not thy place, that is,
be not transported in mind or moved inwardly herewith; or bussle not up and
down from place to place, as angry persons are wont to do; Or, keep still
within the bounds of thy condition, calling and duty; do not for fear of his
anger neglect to do what thy place or duty requires thee to do, be constant
herein; and on the other side, do not in anger cast off thine Allegiance, cease
not to carry thy self as becomes a subject, but by patience, forbearance and
submission yield unto him, See the Note, Chap. 8.3. for yielding pacifieth
great offenses, as if he had said, Thou may happily think that a Princes wrath
is always implacable; but fear not that; such a yielding carriage will allay
the greatest discontent thy Prince can take up against thee, whether
causelessely or justly. See the Note, Pro. 25.15. And this is here prescribed,
as one particular precept of wisdom, which may tend much to the quiet and
comfort of men's lives.

Verse. 5. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, etc.] That is, a
common evil, which I have observed in humane affairs, to wit, that which
follows in the next verses, concerning the advancement of unworthy persons,
etc. as an error, which proceeds from the face of the ruler, that is, from
his looking favorably or with neglect or displeasure upon men, which though it
may seem a small error, yet it is indeed a great fault; or rather, which is
indeed a fault in Princes, they being the cause of it, though usually it
proceeds from ignorance or inadvertency in them, because they may be
over-carelesse in choosing men for places of honor, and power, and not being
able to know of themselves what men are, they must necessarily depend upon the
information of others, and so may easily fall into mistakes being deceived by
the flatteries, and false reports that are made to them by those that are about
them. Now this is mentioned here as an evil, which may occasion men's falling
off from the respect, Allegiance, and obedience which they should yield unto
their Princes (of which Solomon had spoken in the foregoing verse) and
therefore wisdom should teach men to take care that they stumble not at it.

Verse. 6. Folly is set in great dignity, etc.] That is, very fools, weak men,
that are of no abilities for government and wicked in their lives, are advanced
by Princes; The abstract is here put for the concrete, as in Ps. 5.9. their
inward part is very wickedness. And the rich sit in low place, that is, men
rich in wisdom and other precious endowments, men of great eminency for gifts
and grace. Yet some understand this of the great changes that often happen in
Commonwealths, when silly mean people are advanced to high places, and noble
persons and great men are brought to a low condition. And so they do likewise
that which follows.

Verse. 7. I have seen servants upon horses, etc.] To wit, like Princes; And by
servants is meant unworthy, contemptible persons, men base born, and of a low
sordid condition, and especially men of base and servile spirits, that are very
slaves to their lusts; and Princes walking like servants, upon the earth, that
is men of noble birth and condition, or, men of Princely qualities, of free,
noble, prudent and pious spirits; learned, wise, grave and godly men.

Verse. 8. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it, etc] Both this and the
following Proverbial expressions do all tend to show, that by doing evil to
others, men do usually bring mischief upon themselves; And so Solomon's drift in
alleging them here may be, either 1. To discover the folly of Princes in
advancing unworthy persons, and casting down or disregarding those that are fit
to be in high places, by showing that whilst Princes do by these disorders in
government oppress the Commonwealth in general, or wrong any particular
persons, it redounds usually in the conclusion to the bringing of troubles,
misery and ruin upon themselves; Or 2. To show the reason why great persons
are many times brought down, and base persons are exalted, to wit, because
ambitious persons do many times climb up to high places by undermining and
supplanting others, and so the like is afterward done to them; or being in
places of power they contrive mischief against others, and the evil intended
against them falls at last upon themselves. Or 3. To clear it to be a great
folly in subjects upon any discontent against their Prince, to break out into
any act of disloyalty, or seek to be revenged on him by any secret treachery,
because such attempts do usually prove pernicious to the Authors of them; or 4.
To hint unto all men in general a point of wisdom, which will much conduce to
the comfort and quiet of men's lives, and that is, to avoid all injurious
dealing with others; whereby fools do usually bring much terror upon their
consciences, and many other evils and miseries. See also the Note, Pro. 26.27.
and whosoever breaks an hedge, a serpent shall bite him; which is said, because
serpents and adders are wont to lie lurking in hedges: And accordingly it may
be applied to the particulars above mentioned, that they that injustly invade
the estates and rights of other men, that break the hedge of Fundamental Laws,
and good customs, the well established government and discipline of a
Kingdom, and that by any acts of disloyalty, shall break the fence that God
has made about his own Ordinance of Magistracy, and shall violate the limits
and bounds that God has set to Sovereignty and subjection, some great evil
shall unawares light upon him.

Verse. 9. Whosoever removes stones shall be hurt therewith; etc.] That is, He that
undertaketh to break down and remove the stones of another man's wall, to wit,
with an intent of doing him some injury, may hurt himself thereby; in that the
other stones may by that means unexpectedly fall upon him, and bruise him; Or
he that will undertake to remove huge massy stones, that are too heavy for him
to wield, may by over straining himself and many other ways do himself a
mischief. We have the like expression, Pro. 26.27. for which see the Note
there, as likewise Zach. 12.3. and Mat. 21.44. But that which is intended by
this Proverb seems to be, either 1. That by the seeking the hurt of others, men
usually bring some greater hurt upon themselves; Or 2, That they that go about
to change the ancient customs and Fundamental Laws of Nations, or to make
innovations in Religion, or any way to disjoynt a well settled government, do
usually thereby bring mischief upon themselves; or 3. That subjects contending
with princes that are too mighty for them, take the ready way to ruin
themselves. And so likewise the next Proverb, and he that cleaves wood shall
be endangered thereby, may seem to intend the same things, or more especially
the danger of endeavoring to make division between persons firmly and closely
united together.

Verse. 10. If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, etc.] That is, If
the man that cleaves wood do not whet the edge of his hatchet (for these words
seem clearly to refer to the last clause of the foregoing verse,) then must he
put to more strength, that is, he must strike the harder, and all for want of
wisdom, in not whetting his tools seasonably as he should do. And that which
is employed hereby is, that such a man puts himself to do that with a great deal
of toil, which a weaker man, that was careful to whet his tools might have
done with a great deal more ease; yea many times besides, by striving to strike
with so great violence, he may several ways come to mischief himself; but
wisdom is profitable to direct, that is, that will teach and direct men to do
all things well and with good success; even in the meanest and most ordinary
employments, as in cleaving and hewing of wood, wisdom is a great help to men,
as is evident in the present instance, of the laborers whetting his axe that
it may do his work the better; And so it is in all things whatsoever: Though
industry and force may do much, yet wisdom is more profitable then either of
them, in that it directs men to do things with less toil and hazard, see the
Note, Chap 9.16. But the main thing here intended is to show, that thus it is
in the present case, that Solomon is now treating of, to wit, that by a wise
carriage of themselves subjects may pacify the wrath of Princes. See the Note,
Pro, 16.14. whereas if through folly they carry themselves stubbornly and
passionately and rebelliously against them, by their violence and wilfulness
they usually ruin themselves.

Verse. 11. Surely, the serpent will bite without enchantment, etc.] This may
seem to be added with respect to that which was said before, ver. 8. Who so
breaks an hedge, a serpent shall bite him. But the drift of the words is
still to show how necessary wisdom is to direct men how to carry themselves
toward Princes. Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment; that is, if
he be not charmed before he bites; see the Note, Psalm. 58.4. And a babbler is no
better; the meaning is, either, first, that a foolish man that knows not how
to rule and order his tongue, betimes to charm and pacify the displeasure of
his Prince with yielding and submissive language, if he thinks to appease him
afterward, is no better then the inchanter, that neglects to charm the
serpent, till he has bitten him, and then attempts it, when it is too late; or
secondly, that a vain babbler, that knows not how to charm his tongue with
meekness and discretion, and so does by his froward, discontented and disloyal
speeches provoke his Prince to displeasure, is no better then an uncharmed
serpent, and does bite as a serpent.

Verse. 12. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious, etc.] Or grace; as it
is in the Hebrew; see the Note, Pro. 22.11. The meaning is, that as they are
comely and gracious in themselves, so they are pleasing and acceptable unto
others, and so do procure grace and favor from men; see the Note, Pro. 10.32.
They do not only charm the displeasure of a King, but also gain upon him so
far, that thereby the wise man does screw himself into his love and favor;
But the lips of a fool will swallow up himself; that is, they will destroy
not others only but himself too; such a man by his froward, unadvised and
disloyal speeches, does provoke his Prince to his own utter undoing; see the
Note, Pro. 12.13. Thus he proves what he had said, ver. 10. that wisdom is
profitable to direct, and how much mischief foolish men may bring upon
themselves by their disloyal speeches against their Princes.

Verse. 13. The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the end
of his talk is mischievous madness.] As if he should have said, His whole
discourse is frivolous and foolish; only indeed the more he speaks, the more
usually he discovers his folly, proceeding still from evil to worse, from
weakness to wilfulness and intolerable wickedness; as a man that is once out
of his way, the farther he goes, the farther still he goes out of his way;
and that because if he be but in the least interrupted, contradicted, or
admonished, he is wont then to bluster and to break forth into furious passion,
and lays about him like a distracted man.

Verse. 14. A fool also is full of words, etc.] This is mentioned as another
evil that is found in the speech of men, that do not order their speech
according to the direction of wisdom, to wit, that they multiply words to no
purpose; whereas wisdom directs the wise to observe a measure and moderation
in their discourse, and not to speak more then is needful, and useful to be
spoken, fools on the other side are always talkative, so that there is scarce
any end of their babbling. And this also may be added, as all that went before
seems to be, with respect particularly to the folly of subjects in speaking to
the discontent of their Princes. The greatest difficulty of this verse is,
concerning the dependence which the following words, A man cannot tell what
shall be, etc. have upon this first clause, A fool is full of words; for 1.
Some conceive that these last words are mentioned as the words of the fool,
and that either, first, as in imitation of his vain tautologies, and speaking
the same thing over and over; A man cannot tell what shall be, and what shall
be after him, who can tell him? Or else secondly, as the plea wherewith he is
wont to embolden himself in his foolish sinful ways, to wit, that no man can
tell what shall be hereafter, especially what shall be the estate of men after
this life; whereas men talk of the punishments which God will sooner or later
bring upon men for their sinful ways, or foolish wicked talking, and of a day
of Judgment that will be at the end of the world, the truth is, that no man
knows whether there will be any such thing or no; and therefore the best way
for men is to take their pleasure in all things as far as they man; Or thirdly,
as the defense whereby he seeks to justify his foolish, and wilful
undertakings and enterprises, taken from the possibility of them, and that
either by way of arguing for them, when he first undertakes them, A man cannot
tell what shall be, etc. As if he should have said, I do not see but my
undertakings are fesible enough; who can tell what the issue may be? or else by
way of excusing his enterprises, when they have not sped well, by alleging,
that the best counsels may be successeless, because no man can tell what the
event of things will be. And again, secondly, Some conceive that the last
words are added, by way of discovering the folly of the fools multiplying many
words; whereof Solomon speaks in the first clause; A fool also is full of
words; to wit, in that he will be talking of things to come, boasting of his
resolutions and purposes for the time to come, what he will do, and what he
shall have, whereas no man can know future things, nor can any man inform him
therein; A man cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him, who can
tell him? See the like expressions, Chap. 3.22. and 6.12. and 8.7. This last
exposition I like the best; And indeed that which Solomon intends here is very
fully set forth by the Apostle James, Chap. 4.13, 14. etc. No man knows how
little a time he has to live; and therefore when men boast of what they will
do hereafter, their boasting must needs be vain, because no man can know what
will be after him, that is, when he is dead and gone.

Verse. 15. The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them; because he
knows not the way to the City.] The drift of these words is to show the
necessity of wisdom, by showing the vanity and fruitlessenesse of all the
endeavors of men, when they want wisdom to guide and direct them in their
endeavors. Some conceive that this is spoken with reference to that which was
said immediately before, ver. 14. and that the drift of it is to tax the folly
of such men, who are wont to toil themselves in searching into the knowledge
of future things, or things that are most above the reach of reason, or that
are most hard to be discovered; or that will be talking much of such things,
when in the mean season they know not how to go to the City, (which because it
is a common broad and beaten road, children and blind men will not miss their
way in it,) that is, they are ignorant of those things, which every ordinary
man, yea every child almost knows. But I conceive the intent of the words is
more general, namely, to show that when men want wisdom to direct them, first
they toil themselves in seeking to dispatch their affairs well and
successefully, but all in vain, and to no purpose, because as a man cannot go
to a City when he knows not the way thither, but missing of his way goes up
and down, sometimes one way, and sometimes another; and many times falls into
deep and rugged ways, far more troublesome, then the right way would have
been, and so is toiled and wearied in vain and to no purpose, so they that are
void of wisdom, and so know not how to do things in a right manner, must needs
weary themselves in their foolish ways, and fail of effecting what they
intend; and so all their vaunting undertakings come to nothing; yea even in
those things that are most easy, for want of wisdom they many times miscarry:
and secondly, they weary themselves with the evils and miseries, which by
their own folly and wickedness they bring upon themselves, and that because
they know not the way of true wisdom and piety, that royal high way which God
has so fairly and clearly revealed unto us in his word, that thereto that may
well be applied which the Prophet says, Isa. 35.8. The wayfaring men, though
fools, shall not err therein; Yea and it may be also understood, (consonantly
to all the other passages of this chapter, which treat of the matters of a
civil State) as spoken with particular respect to those fools, that by their
undiscreet carriage of themselves toward Princes, do weary themselves in those
many troubles and miseries which hereby they entangle themselves in, and that
because they know not how to go to the City; that is, they are ignorant of the
plainest principles of civil government, and how to converse with men; or, they
know not those easiest rules of discretion, which one would think every child
should understand.

Verse. 16. Woe to thee, O land, when thy King is a child, etc.] Some Expositors
take this and the three following verses to be the words of discontented
subjects, murmuring against the folly and riot of their Princes. But I suppose
Solomon does here proceed to set forth the necessity of wisdom, and the great
evil of folly, by showing how great a mischief it proves to kingdoms, when
their Princes want wisdom to direct them in their government: and as hitherto
in this chapter he has directed subjects to avoid all disloyal carriage of
themselves toward their Princes; so here on the other side he advises Kings
and Princes to carry themselves as becomes men in such places, lest otherwise
by their folly and misdemeanors they ruin their kingdoms. Woe to thee, O
land, when thy King is a child; to wit, in understanding, and behavior:
according to that, Isa. 3.4. And I will give children to be their Princes, and
babes shall rule over them: and again, ver. 12. As for my people, children are
their oppressors, and women rule over them; As namely, first, when they are
void of judgment and understanding, and unexperienced in matters of State,
unable to keep any secret, not knowing how to govern themselves, and much less
to govern others; secondly, when they are sensual, wholly given to play, sport
and pastime, to please their appetite, and pamper themselves, but altogether
careless and unmindfull of those things that most concern them: Thirdly, when
they are inconstant and fickle, easily drawn away with any evil counsel that
is given them. Fourthly, When they are impatient and soon angry, pettish,
froward, and such as cannot endure to be crossed in their wills: and fifthly,
when they love to be praised and flattered, and so are easily gulled and
deceived by those that will speak them fair and fawn upon them; And thy
Princes eat in the morning; that is, when, after the example usually of their
foolish King, they do wholly give up themselves to pleasure and sensuality,
gluttony and drunkenness; for this is intended, by eating in the morning, and
that either, 1. because this implies that they spend their whole time, night
and day, in sleeping, riot and excess; or 2. because to do a thing in the
morning, is in the Scripture phrase, to do it with men's utmost endeavors;
according to that, Isa. 5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning,
that they may follow strong drink; see the Note also, Psalm. 5.3. Or 3. because
the morning is the best part of the day, and fittest for our weightiest
employments; whereupon it seems Princes were wont in the morning to sit in
judgment and in counsel; whence is that, Jer. 23.12. Oh house of David, thus
says the Lord, Execute judgment in the morning, etc. and therefore when
Princes do feast themselves at that time, it is a sign they prefer their
pleasure, their glutting and pampering of themselves before their affairs of
greatest importance; And this must needs tend to the ruin of a land. Though a
King be a child, yet if his Princes and Counselors be prudent and sober men,
things may go the better, but if they also mind nothing but their pleasure,
all things must then needs run to ruin.

Verse. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, etc.]
Though descent from noble and royal progenitors may be here included, (because
such men's education does usually render them the fitter for the royal dignity,
and their high descent does often engage them to tread in the steps of their
noble progenitors, and withal because when Princes are so nobly borne, and
come to the throne by lawful succession, the people are commonly the more
ready to reverence and obey them) yet doubtless by the son of Nobles, is
chiefly meant a person nobly qualified, generous, wise and virtuous, not given
to pleasure, but of a public and heroical spirit, and minding princely and
public employments. As Saul by calling Jonathan the son of the perverse
rebellious woman, intended that he was a perverse, rebellious son, 1 Samuel
20.30. so here Solomon by the son of Nobles, intends a Prince seasoned with
noble and honorable endowments, regarding his honor above life, and much more
above pleasure and gain. And so likewise for the following words, When thy
Princes eat in due season; the meaning is, that a land is happy, when the
Princes are temperate and moderate in eating and drinking, not feasting all
night till the break of the next day, not preferring their bellies before
their weightiest affairs, but first dispatching their business, and then
refreshing themselves with meat and drink; for strength, and not for
drunkenness; that is, so as to repair and uphold health and strength, and not
merely to satisfy their lust, and make themselves drunk, whereby strength is
usually rather impaired then preserved.

Verse. 18. By much sloathfulnesse the building decays, etc.] This Proverbial
expression is inserted here, with respect to what was said before, ver. 16.
concerning the misery of a land where the Governors are childish and
voluptuous; and the drift of it is to show, that as a house will by degrees
decay and at last fall to the ground, if the owner does thorough carelessnesse
and sloth neglect to repair it in time; the wind and weather will make
breaches in the roof of it, thorough which the rain dropping in, will rot the
timber and walls, and so at last down it will come; so likewise the strongest
Kingdoms and Commonwealths will by degrees be weakened, and at last utterly
ruined, if Princes, who by their places are to be amongst the people, healers,
Isa. 3.7. and repairers of the breaches, Chap. 58.12. do thorough their
childishness, or their sloth and luxury, disregard the great work of
government, and neglect in time to make up the breaches, and to cure the
distempers that are in their Countries.

Verse. 19. A feast is made for laughter, and wine makes merry; but money
answers all things.] If this verse be taken as an entire sentence a part by
it self, then the drift of it is, only to show the usefulness or the command
of money above other things in all outward affairs. In all outward blessings
every thing has its limited use, one thing is good for this, and another thing
for that; feasts are made to procure laughter, and wine is good to make the
heart cheerful and merry, but money is good for the procuring of all things
whatsoever; that will command not only feasts and wine, but also clothing and
houses, and whatsoever man can want or desire. Let men call for what they will,
money will help them to it, so that a man that has money needs not want any
thing the world can afford. But rather it seems to be added with respect to
that which went before; as namely, either, first, with respect to the foregoing
verse, to show why by sloathfulnesse men's houses come to ruin, to wit, because
such sloathfull persons do give themselves to feasting, drinking, mirth, and
jollity, and so never mind the supporting of their houses, families and
estates, but do continually wast what they have, till all be ruined; their
money still going out for the defraying of these their riotous expenses. Or
else secondly, (which I conceive most probable) with respect to that which was
said before, ver. 16. concerning the misery of a land where the Princes are
foolish and riotous, showing that thus it must needs be, because such childish
and voluptuous Princes are all for feasting and merriment, and for the
procuring of these things their treasure is day after day exhausted. A feast is
made for laughter, and wine makes merry; As if he had said, Thus such Princes
do spend their days in making feasts and drinking wine, that they may laugh
and be merry; but money answers all things; that is, it is their money that
procures these, and what ever else they desire for the satisfying of their
lusts; and that they may not therefore want supplies thereof, they are wont to
oppress their subjects with heavy exactions, and to set all to sale, justice,
and offices, and all for money.

V. 20. Curse not the King, etc.] They that conceive the four foregoing verses
to be the complaint of murmuring subjects concerning their Princes, do
accordingly also hold that in this verse, there is an answer returned to those
their murmurings. But rather I conceive, that Solomon, having now spoken of the
misgovernment of riotous and foolish Princes, does hereupon take occasion to
warn subjects* that they must not because of this, take liberty to revile them,
to think, much less to speak otherwise of them then as may stand with the
loyalty of subjects. Curse not the King, See the Note, Exodus 22.28. no, not in
thy thought; some read it, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, no, not in thy
conscience, and so the meaning may be, no not when thou art alone by thy self,
and so no man, but thy self, is conscious to what thou have spoken. But reading
it as it is in our Translation, no, not in thy thought, either it may be taken
as an expression setting forth a forbearance from speaking evil of Princes even
in men's greatest privacy, when they are alone by themselves, far from the
hearing of any body, so that they would think, that it is as impossible that
any body should know what they have said, as that they should know their
thoughts; or else it may be taken according to the letter, that men must not so
much as think evil of, or wish evil to their Princes; and that both because if
any such evil thoughts against Princes be nourished in the heart, it will at
some time or other break out at the lips, or discover it self in some
expressions of discontent and displeasure; as likewise because even such
thoughts are sinful, and being known to God, he has many wonderful ways both
to discover and punish them: and curse not the rich, that is, neither the King,
nor his Nobles and Peers; or none that are of great estate and of high place,
in thy bedchamber, that is, not to thy most intimate friends, no not to thy
wife that lies in thy bosom; or do it not where thou art alone by thy self, or
where thou think thy self most secret and retired, and far from any ear that
can hear thee; for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter, as if he should have said, It will out at some
chink or other; some body will over-hear thee, some way or other it will be
speedily discovered to those whom thou have so cursed, it may be by some
unlikely persons, or unlikely means, which no man would have suspected; and so
that which thou spakest in such secret, will be every where spread abroad
openly by tatling talebearers, and some mischief or other it will bring upon
thee. The expression is much like that Habak. 2.11. the stone shall cry out of
the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, and the drift of it
is only to show, that Kings have many ears and eyes, as we use to say, and
therefore some body or other will inform them of it; or else that however God,
from whom it cannot be concealed, will certainly punish them for it.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 1. CAst thy bread, etc.] Some Expositors give this account of the
dependence of that which is here said upon that which went before, That Solomon
having often formerly prescribed this, as a cure of the vanities of all things
here below, that men should quietly and comfortably enjoy the good blessings,
which God has afforded them, for the refreshing of themselves; here now he
shows, how they ought likewise to make use of them for the relieving and
refreshing of others: But then again others conceive of it thus, that having in
the former Chapter shown, how available true wisdom is toward men's living with
much comfort and tranquillity of mind, in the midst of all the vanities of this
life, in that it teaches men how to avoid the displeasure of Princes; here he
shows how available charity is to the same end; or, having there shown how
wisdom directs men to carry themselves toward superiors, here he shows
likewise how it directs men to carry themselves* as they ought to do, toward
their inferiors, as namely to those that are in want; Cast thy bread upon the
waters. By bread may be meant men's provision for food, and under that may be
comprehended all other necessaries fot the support of men's lives; and then by
men's casting their bread, is meant their giving freely of that which they have
for the relief of the poor; See the Note, Pro. 22.9. Or, by bread may be meant
seed, and then cast thy bread, is, sow thy seed. Either therefore in these
words, Cast thy bread upon the waters, Solomon intends that men should
liberally give alms to the poor, because that which is so given, will be as
seed that is sown in fruitful grounds, lands that have been lately moistened
with abundance of rain from heaven, or grounds that lie close upon rivers,
which do usually yield a great increase; and then according the following
words, are to be understood; for thou shall find it after many days, to wit,
that the seed of alms thus sown, shall at last yield them a plentiful harvest,
because God will certainly sooner or later abundantly reward them: Or else
rather his aim is, so to enjoin the giving of alms, as withal covertly to
answer an objection, which men's corrupt hearts are wont to make against it,
Cast thy bread upon the waters, that is, Do good to those, from whom thou have
not the least hope of receiving any recompense; Though the alms thou give may
seem to be as clearly lost and cast away, as if they were cast into the sea:
Though it may seem as unlikely to yield thee any profit, as if a husbandman
should cast his seed into a river, in hope of reaping from thence a plentiful
harvest, and that because those to whom thou give are no way able to requite
thee, or because they are unthankful, such as will never remember the good thou
have done them, or vile wretches altogether unworthy of relief; yet withhold
not thy hand from giving; for thou shall find it after many days, that is,
thine alms shall be returned with increase to thee; Though the reward do not
come presently, yet wait for it, it will certainly come at last; As that which
the ebbing waters carry away, will be brought back again; Or, as the seed which
being sown seems to be lost, does after many days bring in a plentiful
harvest; So that which thou give in this kind thou shall unexpectedly sooner
or later find recompensed to thee; God may make those very men able and willing
to requite thee; Or how ever, he will be sure to recompense it, if not to thee,
yet it may be to thy children or childrens children; At least in heaven thou
shall be sure of an abundant reward.

Verse. 2. Give a portion to seven and also to eight: etc.] That is, As God has
enabled thee, give of thy provision and estate to many and many, distributing
to every one according to their necessities, and according to the rules of
right judgment. Be not weary of well doing, be still giving, when thou have
given to seven, give also to eight more, which is that our Savior says, Luke
6.30. give to every one that asks of thee. In this expression, Give a
portion, he seems to allude to the manner of their feasts in ancient times,
where every guest had their several portions assigned them, and certain
portions also were sent to the poor. See the Note, Genesis 43.34^ and see also
Neh. 8.10, 12. and Esth. 9.22. and in the following words, to seven and also to
eight, there is a definite number put for an indefinite, as in Mic. 5.5. when
the Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our palaces,
then shall we raise against him, seven shepherds and eight principal men. See
the Note also, 1 Samuel 2.5. for thou know not what evil shall be upon the
earth, that is, men know not what sad times may come, from the evil whereof
they may be in a great measure secured by their bounty to the poor, according
to that, Dan. 4.27. break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity,
and least any evil should therein befall them or their estate, therefore it
were wisdom for them to embrace the present opportunity, and to do good whilst
they may. Men know not how soon they may die, and after death there will be no
time for doing good, and their estates must then be left, (the thought whereof
may happily grieve them when they are dying) it may be to unthrifty heirs that
may waste all, or to unworthy persons, that may shut up their bowels of
compassion against the poor. And again men may many several ways lose their
estates and be stripped of all that they have, they know not how soon, and then
besides the trouble it may be to them, that they did so little good with their
estates formerly, (for which they may think Gods hand is then upon them) even
they themselves will stand in need of the charity of others; and therefore
whilst they have to give, it is fit that they should do to others, as they
would desire others should do to them; And indeed usually the same measure,
that men mete to others, is measured to them again; they that have been
bountiful to others, find others bountiful to them; those that they have
relieved do many times help and relieve them; and on the other side they that
have been hard-hearted to others, find others averse from relieving them. And
thus the covetous man's excuse is retorted against himself; such men are wont to
plead, that they dare not give, because they know not what may hereafter befall
them, Nay but, says Solomon, therefore give and give bountifully, because thou
know not what evil shall be upon the earth.

Verse. 3. If the clouds be full of rain, etc.] By several elegant similitudes
the wise man does here answer the objections, which carnal men are wont to
allege, by way of excusing themselves for giving to the poor; If the clouds be
full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth; the meaning is, that as
such clouds do not retain their waters to themselves but shower them down
plentifully upon the earth, and that not on certain men's grounds only, but on
every place whether the wind carries them, and do therewith refresh and make
fruitful the dry parched and thirsty earth, so rich men that have full estates,
must not keep all to themselves, (as indeed covetous men are wont to pretend,
that they must have respect to their own supplies) but they must give liberally
to the relieving and refreshing of the hungry and thirsty poor, and that not to
some only, but to all as they have oppottunity and ability; And indeed when
rich men do not thus make use of their wealth, they are no way useful in their
places, but are like clouds without water, that do only darken the face of the
sky, but yield no moisture at all to the earth, and do always deceive the
hopes of the poor that expect succor from them. Some I know do press this
similitude farther, namely, to show that bountiful men loose nothing by their
bounty, because as the clouds do regain the waters which they pour forth upon
the earth in the vapors, which after the rain, do again ascend up into the
air, so the alms which is given to the poor is retained with increase unto
those that give them, according to that Pro. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be
made fat, and he that waters shall be watered also himself: And so likewise
for the next clause, And if the tree fall toward the South, or toward the
North; in the place where the tree falls, there it shall be; the meaning
thereof likewise is, either, 1. that it becomes men to do good whilst they may,
because as when a tree falls, there it lies where it falls, fall it Southward
or Northward, there is no setting it up again to bear fruit any more; so when
men are once cut down by death, there will be no more time, for the doing of
that good which they should have done before; but in that condition wherein
they dye, whether as merciful, or unmercifull men, in that they must for ever
continue; they shall be set at the right or left hand of the Judge, according
as they have carried themselves toward Christ's poor members, Matthew. 25. Or
rather, 2. that men must not withhold their hands from giving, under a pretense
that the persons will be unthankful, or are in any other regard unworthy of
relief, and that because, as when a tree falls, it is all one to the owner,
whether it falls Southward or Northward, where it falls, there it rests, and
there the owner shall find it to make his use and benefit of it; so whether
they be good or bad, thankful or unthankful to whom a man gives, so he gives
it with a good intention of glorifying God, and relieving the wants of his poor
brother, his alms shall not be lost, he shall have his reward; where he
disposes his charity, there it shall be found again, kept and laid up by God,
and shall redound to the good and benefit of the charitable donor.

Verse. 4. He that observes the wind, shall not sow; and he that regards the
clouds, shall not reap.] That is, As the husbandman shall overslip seed time,
if he do overscrupulously observe the wind, as fearing to sow in the wind, lest
the wind should blow away his seed, or as waiting for such a wind as should
bring fair and warm weather, or should bring rain before or after he has sown
his seed, thereby to further the well-growing of his seed; and so likewise he
shall loose his harvest, and never reap his corn, if upon every rising of a
cloud in the sky, he fears there will be rain; so that man shall never do
good to the poor, and so never obtain the reward which God has promised to
those that do liberally sow this seed, that is, still out of covetousness or
distrust, pretending, that it is not yet a fit season to give, and suggesting
to himself many needless fears of what may be hereafter, thereby to justify
himself herein, as that he may come to have many children, that in old age, or
in long and tedious sickness, or times of trouble, he and his may want what
they now give. Wind and clouds are uncertain signs of what weather will be,
and may blow over, and so are the fears of covetous men.

Verse. 5. As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, etc.] That is, say
some Expositors, the way of the wind, to wit, whence it comes, and whether it
goes, Joh. 3.8. when, and from what point of the heavens it will blow, and
whether with a violent or a gentle gale; Or rather, the way how the soul does
at first enter into the body of every child in its first conception; which
indeed is the more probable, because the next clause that is joined with it
does clearly agree hereto, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that
is with child; that is, how the body of a child is made and grows up in the
womb of the mother (for the bones are only mentioned figuratively in stead of
the whole body, because the figure and frame of the whole body is chiefly from
them,) how all the several kinds of substance in the body, skin, and flesh,
and sinews, and bones, should be made of the same seed, and how so many, and
so many several sorts of bones should be formed, and hardened and knit together
in the womb; even so thou know not the works of God, who makes all; that
is, thou know not what God will do in future times, who as he is the maker
of all things, so accordingly he does with all things whatsoever he pleases.
Some Expositors do comprehend other incomprehensible things in that which is
said here of the way of the Spirit, as namely, how the Spirit, that is, the
soul does fashion the several organs of the child's first conception; according
to that old saying, that anima est sui domicilij architectrix, how the child
breathes and is not stifled in the mothers womb, or how it lives, if it
breathes not; and which way the soul goes out of the body, when a man dies.
But howsoever the meaning is clear, that if we know not these ordinary things,
that are daily done amongst us, much less can we know the future works of Gods
providence; so that as the husbandman must not forbear sowing or reaping for
fear of this or that, because they know not how God may order the wind or the
weather, and how he may turn it to good; so neither ought men to forbear or
delay relieving the poor, out of vain and idle pretenses and fears, because
they know not what God may do to them or theirs, or others in time to come;
Though men know not how their bounty should tend to their advantage, yet God
can bring it about many several ways; And again because they know not how
soon God may cut them off by death, or strip them of their estates, and
therefore it is not good to put off their charity, lest they should be
surprised.

Verse. 6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine
hand, etc.] Some conceive this to be an exhortation, inferred from that which
is said in the foregoing verse, concerning the uncertainty of future events,
pressing men to an assiduous diligence in all things in general, which in their
several callings God requires at their hands. And indeed all works of
righteousness, whereto men are bound by their general or particular calling,
are in the Scripture sometimes compared to seed sown, as in Pro. 11.18. To him
that sows righteousness, shall be a sure reward, for which see the Note
there: so that if we thus understand the words here, then by men's sowing their
own seed is meant, that they should intend their own calling, without
intermedling with other men's business. But because Solomon has been all this
Chapter hitherto pressing men to be charitable to the poor, comparing alms to
the sowing of seed, I conceive it to be unquestionable that these words
likewise intend the same thing: In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withhold not thine hand; that is, Be always doing good, begin betimes and
never give over; be not weary of well-doing; begin in the morning of thy youth,
and hold on to the evening of thine old age, or, as soon as thou beginnest to
have an estate, begin presently to give, and so hold out unto thine end;
whilst the day of man's life continues, there will be seasons for good works,
but when the night of death once comes, there will be no more time of working
then: For thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or
whether they both shall be alike good; that is, As the husbandman knows not
whether the seed he sows in the morning, or in the evening, shall spring up
best, and yield the fairest crop; so neither know thou which of thine alms
shall be best bestowed, whether of them will be most advantageous and welcome
to the poor, and received with most thankfulness, nor whether of them will be
most acceptable to God, and procure from him the greatest reward; nay thou
know not but that both may in these respects be alike good for thee.

Verse. 7. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to
behold the Sun.] That is, It is a sweet and delightful thing to live in this
world, and to enjoy the benefits and comforts of this life, especially to live
in the Sunshine of prosperity; see the Notes, Chap. 7.11. and Psalm. 49.19. and
Esth. 8.16. There is herein a transition to a new direction or advice, which he
prosecutes in the remainder of this book. Hitherto Solomon has set forth the
vanity of all things here in this world, and withal has given many excellent
Directions, to teach men how they may in a great measure remedy these vanities,
and live with as much comfort, peace and tranquillity of mind, as here in this
world men are capable of. But now because men must dye, and after this life is
ended must pass into an eternal condition, either of bliss or misery, and so
the happiness of man, after which he has all this while made enquiry, cannot
be complete and perfect, unless he can assure to himself a share in the
bliss of that eternal condition, therefore in the next place he directs men
how they may, after a life spent contentedly and comfortably here, attain to
this eternal bliss in the life that is to come; which is indeed that
happiness that can only fully satisfy men's immortal souls, and perfectly free
them from the fear of death, and all other miseries they are liable to, and
that is by fearing God and keeping his commandments, and (to the end they may
be very serious herein,) by thinking often of death and judgment. This is
that, I say, to which Solomon in the next place passes; And accordingly, first
to make way thereto in this verse he premiseth, that it is indeed a very
comfortable and delightful thing, to enjoy the benefits of this present life,
especially when men have learnt to free themselves from the vanities here
below, according to the directions formerly given; And then in the next he
proceeds to show that though life be thus sweet, yet they must remember that
this life will have an end, and death and judgment will follow, and that
therefore they cannot be completely happy, unless by the due consideration of
this, they provide to secure unto themselves that happiness which is to follow
after this life is ended.

Verse. 8. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all, etc.] As if
he should have said, Suppose this should be so, which is indeed very unlikely;
yet let him remember the days of darkness; that is, of death and the grave
(for it is opposed to the light and the beholding of the Sun, mentioned in the
foregoing verse) for they shall be many; that is, truly many indeed, many more
then the days of the man that lives longest can be, because in the grave, the
house of darkness, the dead must continue till the day of the general
resurrection; and if men dye in their sins they must continue in outer
darkness unto all eternity. All that comes is vanity; that is, This shows
that all men that come into the world, and all that befalls men here in this
world, is no better then mere vanity, because they must all pass away; man
must dye, and no man knows how little a while his life and prosperity shall
continue. So that the drift of the whole verse is to show, that though men live
never so long, and in never so great prosperity, yet it is mere folly over much
to delight herein, because these things will not last always, the days of
darkness will come, and when they come, then it will be seen how vain and
transitory this life, and the pleasures thereof were; yea if men would
seriously think of those days, comparing them with the short time of man's
abode here, they must needs yield that this life and the delights thereof, are
mere vanity, and even as nothing.

Verse. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth, etc.] Because young men are most apt only to mind the
pleasures of this present life, and to put off the thoughts of death unto old
age, therefore Solomon gives this warning particularly to them. Some conceive
that this is spoken by way of serious advice, Rejoice, O young man, etc. As if
he had said, I would not restrain thee from the lawful delights and comforts
of thy youth; Be joyful, and live cheerfully, so thou do it with moderation
and sobriety, as still remembering thy latter end, and the judgment that will
follow. But rather this is spoken ironically by way of scorn and derision (as
indeed many expressions of that kind we find elsewhere in the Scripture, as 1
Kings 18.27. and 22.15. and Matthew. 26.45.) As if he had said, Thou have heard
that the days of man's living here are nothing in comparison of the days of
darkness that will follow; Now if thou will not be admonished hereby, but
hereupon resolvest, that because thou must dye, therefore thou will take thy
fill of pleasure, whilst thou live, Do so, take thy course, live as young
men use to do in all jollity and pleasure, and walk in the ways of thy heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes; that is, Do what ever thou have a mind and
desire to do, follow after every thing thou see and is pleasing in thine
eyes; deny not thy self any thing, which thine heart can desire, or thine eyes
look after; see the Note, Chap. 2.10. but know thou, that is, be thou
unquestionably assured of this, that for all these things, that is, for thy
misspent youth, and all those vain and sinful courses, wherein now thou
take such content and delight, God will bring thee into judgment; that is,
Dye thou must, thou know not how soon, and after death God will bring thee,
whether thou will or no, to stand before his tribunal at the last and great
day of judgment there to answer for all that thou have done, and to receive
the just reward of all thine evil ways, and there will be no avoiding it.

Verse. 10. Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, etc.] Or, as it is in the
margin of our Bibles, remove anger from thy heart; and then the warning is,
that young men should beware of rash and unadvised anger, (because young men
are naturally thorough heat of blood prone to be furious herein and violent
upon revenge) and especially of being enraged against those that reprove them,
and would take them off from their sinful pleasures; yea and under this all
other sinful passions and perturbations of mind may be comprehended. But if we
read it, as it is in our Translation, Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart,
then the advice is, that young men should avoid all sins and sinful
pleasures, which though they may be pleasing for a time, yet they will stir
up Gods indignation against them, and so will at last overwhelm their hearts
with sorrow; And put away evil from thy flesh; that is, abandon all fleshly
lusts, and pleasures, let not the members of thy body be employed as weapons of
unrighteousness in the service of sin, (And so as in the former clause the
inward distempers of the heart, so here likewise the sins of the outward man
are forbidden) Or, avoid those sinful pleasures which will at last wast thy
strength, and ruin thy body, or bring the wrath of God upon thee. For
childhood and youth are vanity; that is, foolish, violently carried after
pleasures that end in destruction, and subject to many corruptions; and
besides, that age does soon vanish and pass away.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. REmember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, etc.] Having in
the latter end of the foregoing Chapter diswaded young men from youthful lusts,
here he exhorts them to a constant fixing of their minds upon God, as a
powerful means not only to restrain them from evil but also to quicken them in
the doing of that, which God requires of them; and the argument that he uses
to press them hereto is covertly couched in those words, thy Creator; for 1.
Because God made us, and we received our being from him, and so are wholly his;
and 2. Because he has given us such an excellent being, making us after his
own image, enduing us with reason and understanding, that so we might know him
and have a special interest in him; 3. Because he made all the creatures for
our sake, and so all that we enjoy in the creatures we have from him, 4.
Because by the same power whereby we were created, we are continually
preserved, and 5. Because consequently he is able every moment to destroy us;
therefore it is most equal that we should love, and fear and obey him, and
consecrate our whole lives to his service, especially out youth, which is the
first fruits of our years, the flower and beauty of our time, wherein we are
able to do him the best service, all the faculties both of soul and body being
then in their prime; And the rather also should men be mindful of doing this,
because in youth, men are most apt to forget God, and as they then begin to
frame their lives, so they are like to continue, in regard that being once
accustomed to sin, they will hardly afterward be brought to leave it, while
the evil days come not, to wit, the days of old age, wherein men are subject
to many and manifold miseries and sorrows, nor the years draw nigh, when thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them, that is, wherein men grow weary of their
lives, and are ever full of complaints. The drift of all that is here said is
to show, that it is not fit that young men should put off the care of their
eternal good till they come to be old, because old age being so full of
infirmities and miseries, they will not then be able to do the good they have
neglected in their youth, nor will scarce find freedom of spirit enough
seriously and sincerely to mind the great work of repentance, and of making
their peace with God; Nor is it fitting to over-burthen that age with the
bitter sorrow of repenting for the sins of youth, which is already unable to
bear the heavy load of so many weaknesses and sorrows as it lies under; but
rather that men should by the early piety of their youth, store up those graces
and comforts that may allay the bitterness of their old age.

Verse. 2. While the Sun or the light, or the Moon or the Stars be not darkened;
etc.] Some Expositors conceive that by the light here is meant any artificial
light, as the light of a torch or candle; But doubtless it is the light of the
Sun that is here intended; and this I conceive is particularly mentioned,
either the more fully to express how the Sun is darkened to old men, to wit,
because they cannot discern the light thereof; or else because the light of the
Sun is to be seen, when the body of the Sun cannot be seen, as in the twilight
both of morning and evening, and when the Sun is covered over with clouds. And
many Expositors do understand this of the blindness or dim-sightednesse of old
men, to wit, that when old age comes that does so darken men's eyes, that they
can scarcely discern the light either of the Sun, Moon or Stars, it is dark
with them even at noon day. And so also accordingly they understand the
following clause, nor the clouds return after rain, that is, even when the
heavens are clear (as they use to be after rain,) yet they are still cloudy to
old men by reason of the darkness of their eyes, even the clearest air to aged
men being duskish and misty; young men may have some distemper in their eyes
and and yet recover their sight again, but old men's eyes are clouded without
hope of ever seeing clearly again. But because the dimnesse of the eyes is
mentioned in the following verse, therefore I rather think that by the darkning
of the Sun and the light of the Moon and the Stars is meant, either 1. The
weakening of the vigor of the superior and rational faculties of the soul, the
understanding, judgment, memory and fancy, which do in old age become more
dark and dull, then they were in men's youth; or else 2. The darkness of many
and manifold miseries and sorrows that do constantly attend old age, to wit,
that the prosperity and joy of their former days is then turned into affliction
and sorrow, all their former comforts, both greater and less, do then fail
them, they take no delight in those things wherein others do cheer and refresh
themselves, but both by day and by night, they are in continual anguish and
sorrow; which may seem the more probable, because usually in the Scripture
prosperity and joy are compared to the Sun and to the light; see the Notes,
Judge. 5.31. and 2 Samuel 23.4. and on the other side grievous afflictions, such
as do swallow up all former joy and prosperity, are compared to the darkening
of the Sun, Moon and Stars, as in Joel 2.10. The earth shall quake before them,
the heavens shall tremble, the Sun and Moon shall be dark, and the Stars shall
withdraw their shining, and so also, Isa. 13, 9, 10, 11. and in many other
places. And accordingly also we may understand the following clause, nor the
clouds return after rain, either 1. Of the vapors that do continually in old
men ascend from the stomach to the head and brain, and the defluxions of rhewme
and phlegm by the eyes, nostrils and mouth, which are as the showers of rain
that fall from the head, to wit, that as in winter, though it rain very much,
yet the sky is still overcast with clouds, the very rain that falls returning
back vapors into the air, that do again fill the sky with fresh clouds, so in
old men though there be a continual voyding of phlegm and rhewme, yet the
defluxions that fall upon the breast and stomach do still send back to the
brain matter enough to breed more; in young men after colds taken, rhewmes may
be dried up, and so the brain may become dryer and clearer again; but in old
men they continue always, and are never dried up; Or 2. As a Proverbial speech
setting forth the continual succession of several diseases, pains, and miseries
that come thick and threefold upon old men, without any intermission of
trouble, even as in winter no sooner does it leave raining, but presently the
clouds gather again, whereas in summer after some showers of rain are fallen,
the heavens are usually clear and bright again.

V. 3. In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, etc,] That is,
The hands and arms shall shake with palsies; for these they are that are here
called the keepers of the house, because therewith men keep off all hurt from
the body and provide meat and clothing and all things necessary for the
upholding and preservation of it. I know that by the keepers of the house, some
understand the ribs, wherewith the vital parts within the body are fenced and
secured from danger; and others the outward senses, or the head, where the
senses are, as watchmen in a tower, and which do watch over the body for its
safety, and give timely notice of any danger approaching; and others the inward
faculties of memory, wisdom and understanding, which do indeed contribute much
to the safe guarding of the body; and all these in old men may be said to
tremble, because by old age they are much weakened and shaken. But the first
Exposition is most proper; and the strong men shall bow themselves, that is,
the legs and thighs, which are as the two strong pillars that bear the whole
weight of the house of the body, according to that, Cant. 5.15. His legs are as
pillars of marble, shall then fail them through feebleness; and shall stagger,
crinkle and buckle under them; whence it is, that old men use to go with
staves, that therewith they may help to uphold themselves. This also some
understand of the back, which is indeed the strongest part of the body for the
bearing of burdens, and does usually bow in old age; But because Solomon
speaks of the strong men in the plural number, and the legs do indeed bear up
both the back and its burdens, I question not but it is meant of the legs and
thighs, wherein very much of the strength of men does lie; according to that
of the Psalmist, He delights not in the strength of an horse, he takes not
pleasure in the legs of a man, Psalm. 147.10. and the grinders, that is, the
teeth, or more particularly those teeth which we more especially call the
grinders, dentes mol^res, the great jaw-teeth, shall cease to chew their meat,
because they are few, because they rot and fall out, and when the teeth in one
jaw are gone, those in the other jaw that were right against them are of no
use; Or, if we read this clause as it is in the margin of our Bibles, and the
grinders fail, because they grind little, then the meaning is, that the teeth
are not employed as formerly they have been, both because being worn out, and
becoming weak and loose, they are of little or no use, as likewise because in
old age men have but little appetite to their meat: and those that look out of
the windows be darkened, that is, the eyes that look out through the eyelids
wax dim. Some by the windows through which the eyes look out understand the
spectacles, which aged men because of the weakness of their eyes are wont to
use; and others that christalline humor that is in the eyes; But the most
understand thereby the eyelids, or the holes of the scull through which the
eyes look forth, of which the Prophet makes mention, Zach. 14.12. and their
eyes shall consume away in their holes.

Verse. 4. And the doors shall be shut in the streets, etc.] Very many
Expositors understand this first clause literally, (...) wit, that in old age
men are wont to shut up themselves within doors because of their many
infirmities, not stirring forth into the streets or into any place of public
meeting, where the younger sort delight to be; yea and some conceive that in
the following clause, when the sound of the grinding is low, there is a reason
given why old men stir so little abroad, but keep themselves still within
doors, namely, because eating so little through weakness of appetite and
digestion, their strength is so far impaired thereby, that they are not able to
go forth to follow their business as in former times, nor are fit to eat at
other men's tables, but only at home where such meat may be provided for them,
as they are able to master. But because all the other expressions in this
description of old age are understood allegorically, as allusions to some
decays in the house of the body, it cannot be with any probability thought,
but that this must be understood so likewise. And therefore indeed the most
understand this also figuratively; though in applying the particulars they are
very various; for some by the doors shut in the streets, understand all the
outward senses and the organs thereof, by which the good that is in all outward
objects is conveyed unto the soul; which in old age are obstructed and decayed:
others more particularly the eyelids, which in old men will through weakness
be shriveld and hang down over the eyes; and others the ears, which in old age
are stopped and grow deaf; and this they judge the more probable, because in
the following words, when the sound of the grinding is low, they conceive there
is also an allusion to two bones in the inside of the ear, that are the cause
of hearing, whereof the one stands still, and the other moves like the two
stones of a mill. But most ordinarily this clause is understood of the
difficulty of old men's speaking or swallowing their meat; And accordingly by
the streets, they conceive are meant those passages, whereby the air is
conveyed to the lungs, and returned back again by men in their breathing, and
whereby the meat is conveyed to the stomach, the throat, and the windpipe, and
so also by the doors in the streets, the mouth or the jaw-bones without, or the
two lips, which David indeed calls the door of his mouth, Psalm. 141.3. Set a
watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, by which both
meat and air enters that is conveyed inward; as likewise within, that
epiglossis in the larinx, which does open and shut seasonably to cover the wind
pipe; and these are said to be shut in old men, either because through
weakness they eat so little, being scarce able to open their jaws to receive
their food, and much less to chew any harder meat being also forced to keep
their lips close, lest for want of teeth, as they roll it to and fro, it should
slip out of their mouths; or because old men, by reason of the decay of the
lungs, the shortness of their breath, and the stopping and weakening of the
instruments of speech are not able to speak so loud, so clearly, readily and
plainly, as when they were young. And this last Exposition many Expositors do
the rather follow, because the teeth do contribute so much both to the speech
and the swallowing of the meat, of whose grinding Solomon seems clearly to
speak in the following clause, when the sound of the grinding is low, to wit,
because the teeth stand thin and loose in old men, and for the most part they
chew their meat with their gums, and so the grinding can hardly be heard, and
he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, that is, the old man, being weary of
his bed through infirmities and aches, shall rise with the Lark, being up as soon
as the earliest of birds are singing: or, he shall scarce ever sleep so
soundly, but that the crowing of a cock, the chirping of a sparrow, the
chattering of a swallow, or the singing of any small bird early in the morning
will presently waken him, and so he shall rise out of his bed, or at least rise
up in his bed some way to ease himself, and all the daughters of music shall
be brought low; and the meaning is, either 1. That old men are not affected
with music, as not being able to discern and to judge of the distinction and
harmony of sounds, as old Barzillai said of himself, 2 Samuel 19.35. can I hear
any more the voice of singing men and singing women? (and if we understand this
clause so, then by the daughters of music are meant, either the ears that
delight in music naturally as children delight in their parents, which are
said to be brought low, because they grow deaf, or at least lose much of their
exquisite sense in judging of music: or else all kind of music whether of
voices or instruments, which may be said to be brought low, or abased, because
old men regard them not;) Or 2. That old men are not able to sing, as formerly
they have done. And then by all the daughters of music are meant all the
natural organs and instruments of singing, as the lips, the teeth, the wind
pipe, the lungs, etc. which are said to be brought low, because they fail old
men, some being weak and some wanting, as in an old untunable instrument.

Verse. 5. Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, etc.] That is,
say some, they shall go stooping downward, as if they were afraid, lest
something on high should hit them. But rather the meaning is, that in old age
men are afraid, either, first, to go up any high steep hills, stairs, or
ladders, because of the faintness and unweild^nesse of their bodies, the
stiffnesse of their joints, and the shortness of their breath; or, secondly,
to go or stand upon the top of any high places, when young men are venturous
and bold, yea or so much as to look upward toward such high places, because of
the giddiness of their heads; yea, and thirdly, they are wont to be afraid of
every knobby hillock, or stone, or clod that lies in their way, lest they
should stumble at it. Which is farther amplified in the following clause, and
fears shall be in the way; that is, they shall go slowly, and tremblingly, as
if they were afraid; or rather, where ever they go they shall go in fear;
Being through age feeble and unwieldy, and unable to help themselves, they are
afraid of stumbling, slipping and falling, or they are afraid lest any dog or
other creature should run against them and cast them down, or lest they should
be justled down or hurt by people that go up and down hastily and carelessely;
be their way never so smooth and plain, they will be still fearful of some
evil or other that may befall them: And the Almond tree shall flourish; that
is, their heads shall suddenly be as white with gray hairs, as the almond-tree
is, when it blossoms: for to the almond-tree, Solomon compares the hoary head
of the old man, rather then to any other tree, either because it uses to be
full of blossoms, and the blossoms thereof are very white, or because it
floureth and flourishes betimes, as some say in January, before other trees,
(whence it was that by the appearance of the rod of an almond-tree, Jer. 1.11.
the suddenness of the Judgment, that was coming upon Gods people, was
fore-shown to the Prophet, and so as the blossoming of the Almond-tree was a
sure sign of the springs fast approach, so the gray hairs of the old man,
those Churchyard flowers, as some have called them, are forerunners of death:
And the grasshopper shall be a burden; that is, the lightest thing that is,
shall be such a burden to them, that they shall be impatient of bearing it; Or
it may be understood as an allegorical expression, signifying that in old age,
their legs and other limbs shall become lean, and dry, and withered, like
those of the grasshopper, and so become a burden to them: And desire shall
fail; that is, the desire of meat, and drink, and marriage, yea the desire of
all those pleasures, wherein they much delighted whilst they were young, shall
then leave them. And because these last decays of old age mentioned hitherto
in this verse, are such as betide men in their decrepit years, when they are
almost at their journeyes end, therefore does Solomon here add the following
words, Because man goes to his long home; that is, to the grave, (whereinto
old men seem to have set one foot already) or to his eternal state after
death, wherein the dead must continue as long as this world lasts, until the
day of the general resurrection, and not flit about from one place to another,
as they did whilst they lived here upon the earth: And the mourners go about
the streets; that is, kindred and friends shall go weeping in the streets,
because of the sad condition wherein the dying man lies; Or, they shall with
great solemnity and with the attendance of many mourners carry his body through
the streets to his grave; And amongst these mourners such are to be included,
as were wont in former times to be hired to make lamentation at funerals. See
the Note, Job 3.8.

Verse. 6. Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken,
etc.] Some understand this verse also literally; to wit, that by the silver
cord, and the golden bowl, here is meant all kind of chains, and bracelets,
and rings, and jewels of silver and gold, wherewith the richer sort both of men
and women are wont to adorn themselves: And so likewise in the following words,
or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern,
under those terms of the pitcher at the fountain, and the wheel at the
cistern, they conceive all requisite provisions and accommodations for the
support and well-being of this present life are comprehended, both such as are
more obvious and easy to be gotten, even as a man by stooping down at a spring
may presently fill his pitcher with water, and likewise such as cannot be
attained without some more labor and cost, as when water must be drawn up by a
wheel from some deep well; And so they conceive the drift of this place to be
as if Solomon had said, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
before first old age, and then immediately death seiseth upon thee, when all
thy goodly and precious ornaments will be looked upon as broken, worthless
things, and thou will cast them away, as not worth the minding; yea when the
most needful helps and commodities of this life will be to thee as if they
were not, because thou can not make any use of them. But then again others
hold, that Solomon does here still proceed to set forth under these
allegorical expressions, how man is at last dissolved by death, after old age
has by degrees weakened and wasted the vital parts of the body; for to this
purpose they conceive, that the life of man is here compared to a fountain,
from whence water is taken up by a pitcher, or drawn up by a wheel, a bucket, a
cord, or a chain, to be powered into a cistern; and so the drift of these words
to be only this, that as when these things are broken at a well, there is no
more drawing up water thereby; so when the vital parts in a man, that should
convey nourishment and life and sense and motion to all the body, which is the
cistern, are broken and made useless, there is no hope that life should any
longer continue. Yea and besides the most of Expositors do more particularly
apply the several particulars here mentioned; as 1. By the silver cord that is
loosed, may be meant the pith or marrow of the backbone, which comes from the
brain in the back part of the head, and so is drawn along as a cord quite
thorough the backbone to the very bottom of it, only at the four and thirty
joints of the said bone, it seems to be tied together with so many links or
knots; which, because it is white, or is included in a smooth, bright skin,
like to silver, is therefore called the silver cord; yea and this may be
extended also to the nerves, which thorough the several joints of that bone
do shoot forth (as the shaggy threads of this cord) and spread themselves
thorough the body, and are the instruments of sense and motion, and appear like
so many white strings in the flesh. And now because when this marrow of the
backbone, together with the nerves, the branches of it, become lax and loose
by cold humors from the brains, men are usually taken with the dead palsy;
hence this expression seems to be taken, Or ever the silver cord be loosed. 2.
By the golden bowl broken, may be meant the heart, which because of the blood
and spirits it contains, may be compared to a golden bowl; or rather the skull
or brain-pan, or that thin membrane or sinewy skin, compassing the brain like a
swadling-cloath, or the inner rind of a tree, which is usually called the Pia
matter: It is called a bowl, because it is round, and a golden bowl, because it
contains the brain, which is such a precious part of man's body, upon the
safe-guarding whereof the life of man does so much depend. And because these,
the heart and the brain, are the principal vital parts in man, therefore when
men dye, this golden bowl is then said to be broken. 3. By the fountain here
may be meant, either the head which is the fountain of the animal spirits,
sense and motion; or the heart, which is the fountain of blood and vital
spirits. And 4. By the pitcher at the fountain, and the wheel at the cistern,
are meant those isntrumental parts, which convey nourishment, life, sense, and
motion into the body, which is the cistern; as those milky veins in the
Mesentery, which (after the digestion of meat in the stomach, and the discharge
of it from thence into the small guts) do draw into them the concocted chyle,
and convey it by a peculiar vessel, called Ductus chyl^ Thoracicus, into the
mass of blood, which together with the blood is carried to the heart; and 2.
the arteries, whereby the blood, together with the vital spirits, is discharged
from the heart into all parts of the body, to give life, heat and nourishment
to the whole; and then the veins do again return it to the heart, and the
arteries do again return it to every part of the body by a perpetual
circulation (in regard whereof these instruments of life, may the more fitly
here be compared to a Wheel, that is always turning round) and 3. the nerves
or sinews, by which from the brain, (where the vital spirits, brought by the
arteries from the heart to the brain, are digested and turned into animal
spirits) the animal spirits, which give sense and motion, are carried forth
into all parts of the body. And all these are said to be broken, when they
loose their drawing and distributing virtue, and so blood and spirits, and
heat, and sense, and motion do all fail in the body. Some I know would have
the pitcher broken at the fountain, to be the bladder, when the urine cease
to issue from thence according as in an orderly way it uses to do; and so
likewise the wheel, broken at the cistern, to be the lungs, which are as a
wheel, transmitting the air in and out, up and down, and may be said to be
broken, when they come to be taken off from their motion. But the former
application of these figurative expressions, I conceive is most proper.

Verse. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and the spirit
shall return unto God who gave it.] To wit, That it may appear before Gods
tribunal, by him to be sentenced either to heaven or hell. Or, the meaning may
be, that the soul returns to God, to live for ever with him in heaven: for, say
some Expositors, because Solomon is speaking here to the people of God,
therefore he speaks of the state of the soul after death no otherwise then as
passing presently to heavenly glory. However, the drift of Solomon in
mentioning this is to show, that therefore it behooves men whilst they live and
are in health to provide for eternity, because when once the soul and body are
parted, there remains then nothing but judgment.

Verse. 8. Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher) all is vanity.] As if he had
said, And hereby, as by all likewise that I have formerly said, it appears to
be most unquestionably true, which I said at first, that all things under the
Sun are exceeding vain, yea vanity it self. See the Note, Chap. 1.2.

Verse. 9. And moreover, because the Preacher was wise, etc.] The drift of these
words is to encourage men very attentively to read, and regard, and give
credit to this book, to the due consideration of the Author, the Penman of it;
1. Because he was a man upon whom God had conferred a high degree of wisdom
above other men, see 1 King. 4.29, 30, 31. and withal, when he wrote this
book, a true penitent, and reconciled to the Church, both which are
comprehended in these words, because the Preacher was wise; see the Note, Chap.
1.1. 2ly, Because he still taught the people knowledge; that is, he was one
that was still taking every opportunity to inform his people in the knowledge
of things, thereby approving himself both truly wise and truly penitent; and
the more himself increased in wisdom, the readier he was to teach others (for
so the words may be read, as our Bibles have it in the Margin, And the more
wise the Preacher was, he still taught the people knowledge.) 3. Because he was
very exact in marking well what he received from others, and what he gathered
from his own study and observations, and in weighing and pondering well every
thing that he wrote, and did with much diligence use all means for the
informing of himself in those things which he sought to know, all which is
employed in those words, Yea he gave good heed and sought out: And 4. Because he
had formerly given proof of his great wisdom and his desire to profit others
in the Proverbs which he had composed, digested into order, and published for
the good of the Church, And set in order many Proverbs; see the Note, Pro. 1.1.

Verse. 10. The Preacher sought, etc.] Here Solomon commends this Book to men
from the nature and quality of the doctrine therein contained; The Preacher
sought to find out acceptable words, or, as it is in the Hebrew, words of
delight; that is, he labored both by study and prayer, to write those things
that would be cause of great delight to those that were able truly to judge of
them, wholesome and profitable doctrine, such things as were worthy of all
acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. and that would yield real refreshing and comfort to
men's souls, and withal delivered in such expressions as might also delight the
readers: And that which was written was upright; that is, it was not written to
flatter men, or to tickle a carnal ear and fancy, nor any otherwise to please
men, then as might be for their spiritual benefit and edification: it was
written in sincerity, without favoring men in any corrupt way, and to make men
upright in all their ways; See the Note, Pro. 8.8. Even words of truth; that
is infallibly certain, and free from all error and falsehood.

Verse. 11. The words of the wise, etc.] Here Solomon commends his doctrine (and
so occasionally and consequently the doctrine of all other divine and sacred
Writers) from the virtue, efficacy and authority thereof, The words of the
wise; to wit, the Penmen of the Scripture, that were infallibly inspired by the
only wise God, and those that from thence do instruct men, to make them wise
unto salvation, are as goads; that is, sharp and pungent, to awaken and rowse
up the drowsy, to attend to what is taught them, to pierce men's hearts with
godly compunction and sorrow for sin, and with fear of Gods wrath, (as it is
said of the Jews, that upon the hearing of the Apostles preaching they were
pricked in their heart, Act. 2.37.) to reduce those that are gone astray, into
the right way, and to quicken and stir up those that are dull and sluggish, by
exhortations, promises and threatenings, by fear of punishments and hope of
reward, to be still proceeding forward in the way of well-doing, yea with
alacrity and liveliness to run the way of Gods commandments; not flattering
men in their sins, nor tickling their itching ears, but, as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 4.12. Quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing
even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit; And as nails, whereby is
meant, either, 1. such stakes or pins, wherewith shepherds do fasten their
hurdles or sheepfolds, by driving them into the ground, that so their sheep may
in those enclosures be kept in together, and then this implies the efficacy of
the words of the wise, to keep men from going astray after false doctrines, and
sinful courses, and to retain them in the unity of one and the same faith, and
in mutual love one to another; or 2. the nails, wherewith Carpenters and
others do fasten their work together, implying likewise the efficacy of the
Scripture to pierce and enter into the souls of men, to make them stediast,
constant and unmovable in the ways of truth and righteousness, to unite them
to God, and to Christ, and in mutual love one to another; fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies; that is, the Penmen of the Scripture, and others that
are sent forth to be teachers in the Church, whose work it is to drive in these
nails, by exhortation and faithful application, and to fasten them so in men's
hearts, that they may never be plucked out again; and who are therefore called
the Masters of Assemblies, because God has authorized them to call the holy
Assemblyes, Act. 6.2. and to be spiritual Rulers in his Church, Heb. 13.17.
Which are given from one Shepherd; to wit, God in Christ, the chief and
supreme Shepherd of our souls, Joh, 10.11. 1 Pet. 2.25. and 5.4. (so called
here in pursuance of the former metaphor of goads and nails, whereby heardsmen
do prick forward their oxen, and shepherds do fasten their sheep-pens.) who
has been in all ages the only teacher of his Church, in regard that it was he
that by his Spirit did infallibly guide the Prophets and Apostles, and other
holy men of God in writing the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.25. and 1 Pet. 1.11. and he
it is that has in all ages given the Church Pastors and Teachers, to show them
the way of life, Jer. 3.15. and Ephesians. 4.11. furnishing them with gifts, and
assisting them by his Spirit in the faithful discharge of their calling and
work.

Verse. 12. And further, by these, my Son, be admonished, etc.] That is, By
these holy instructions contained in this book, wherein the whole duty of man
is briefly delivered in a few words; or by these and other the writings of the
wise Penmen of the Scriptures, be informed and warned wherein to seek for true
bliss and happiness, not by seeking after and setting thy heart upon the
vain perishing things of this world, but by a quiet dependence upon Gods
providence here, in a comfortable enjoyment of the portion that God has here
allotted us, and serious seeking of those things that are eternal.

Of making many books there is no end, and much study (or, reading) is a
weariness to the flesh] That is, It wastes and wears away men's strength,
heating the brain, consuming the spirits, and drying up the moisture of the
body, and so makes their reading and study irksome and tedious to them: The
scope therefore of Solomon in this whole verse seems to be either, 1. To show
that he could have expressed that which he has written in this book far more
largely, many books might have been written of this subject; but that he
considered that much reading is wearisome, and that this which he had delivered
briefly would be sufficient to inform men of the truth herein contained; or 2.
to persuade men to content themselves with the directions given here, and in
other books of the holy Scripture, without seeking any further, and that
because, if men should look into other humane writings to learn how true
happiness is to be attained, they might weary themselves with endless toil
and labor, the books being so infinite, and the opinions of men therein so
different, but never reap any profit or satisfaction hereby, as to this
enquiry; and that because these are the perfect rule of faith and manners, so
that only in these and such other books as are agreeable to these, and
grounded on these, the way to the attainment of true happiness is to be found:
Or 3. to invite men to the reading of this and other parts of the Scripture,
which teach men the way to life eternal, rather then other humane books
concerning other sciences, which may distract the mine and weary the body, but
cannot yield that full satisfaction, which from these divind writings may be
attained.

Verse. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, etc.] That is, of
all the foreguing discourse, concerning the vanity of all earthly things, and
concerning the attainment of true happiness. That which may be drawn from all
that has been said, and that whereto all that has been delivered tends, the
sum and substance of all may be comprised in these two short directions,
(wherewith I may therefore well end this book, there being no need of adding
any thing more) Fear God and keep his Commandments; This is a short
abridgement of all that is required to make a man truly happy: under which we
must know that faith in Christ is necessarily comprehended, because it is by
faith in him, that the love of God to us is shed abroad in our hearts, whereby
our hearts are purified, and we are brought to love and fear God, and so to
endeavor sincerely to keep all his commandments: for this is the whole duty of
man, or as it is in the Hebrew, the whole of man. In this the whole safety and
happiness of man does consist; After all the enquiry that can be made, this
will be found to be the sum of all the means that can be used for the
obteining of true happiness.

Verse. 14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, etc.] To wit, At the
great day of Judgment, whereof Solomon had made mention before; see the Note,
Chap. 3.17. every work of man shall then be examined, and sentenced, there will
be no avoiding it; With every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it
be evil; to wit, not only those actions of men which were done so privately
and closely, that there was never any notice taken of them by others, but also
the thoughts, affections and intentions of men's hearts, which are known only
to God. And this is added here as a strong motive of the foregoing Exhortation,
to fear God and keep his commandments.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the SONG of SOLOMON.
CHAP. I.
Verse. 1. THe song of songs, which is Solomons] That is, Which was composed by
Solomon; see the Note, Pro. 1.1. to wit, either after his repentance, when he
came to see the vanity of all earthly things, as is set forth in the book of
Ecclesiastes; or else before his fall, which may seem the more probable,
because it is said in general, that then he made his songs, 1 King. 4.33. It
is clearly a Pastoral marriage-song, or a song of espousals or betrothings,
much of the same nature with the 45 Psalm, which is therefore called, A song
of loves, see the Note there. Only this is composed in the way of a Dialogue,
where the Speakers are the Bridegroom and the Bride, (represented in the
quality of a shepherd and shepheardess, or a Country damosel) and the
Bride-men and Bride-maides, the friends of the Bridegroom, and the companions
of the Bride. Very probable it is that Solomon composed this song upon occasion
of his marriage with Pharaohs daughter, because there are many passages in this
song which do so clearly allude thereto, as where the Bride is called the
Shulamite, as if one should say, the wife of Solomon, and is compared to the
horses in Pharaoh's charets, chap. 1.9. and where the Bridegroom is so often
called by the name of Solomon, or at least compared to Solomon, as Chap. 3.7,
9, 11. but especially because Solomon, as in many other regards, so also more
particularly in that his marriage with Pharaohs daughter, who being a stranger
by birth, became a Proselyte, was a most excellent type and figure of Christ,
admitting the Church of the Gentiles, as his Spouse, into the nearest
fellowship and communion with himself; see the Notes, Psalm. 45.9, 10. But yet
that it cannot be literally understood of Solomon and his wife, the daughter of
Pharaoh, or any other particular woman, is evident, because though the Bride be
sometimes termed the daughter of a Prince, chap. 7.1. yet elsewhere she is
represented as some Country damosel, that is Sunne-burnt, set to keep the
flocks, and to watch the vineyards, Chap. 1.6, 8. and that was beaten and
wounded by the watchmen of the City, Chap. 5.7. which are passages that do in
no wise suite with one that lived in the state of a Queen; yea it were absurd
and ridiculous to think, that Solomon's wife should be compared to a company of
horses in Pharaohs charets, her head to Carmel, her eyes to fishpooles, and her
nose to the tower of Lebanon, etc. chap. 7.4, 5. Such expressions are no way
comely for any but a spiritual Bride. And indeed the Bridegroom is here
described to be a King of that transcendent Majesty and glory, as is proper to
none but only to Christ, and the Bride is set forth by such rare beauty and
glory, as can belong to none but the Church, the Lambs wife, Revel. 19.7. And
therefore the drift of this song is prophetically to set forth the near
conjunction, and the exceeding great love that is between Christ and his
Church, and so by consequence and secondarily between Christ and every
faithful soul, and that under the metaphorical expressions of a
Shepheard-Bridegroome and his Bride, though not yet married together, but only
contracted and espoused. And indeed the Scripture does frequently elsewhere
speak of Christ in these figurative expressions, 1. of a shepherd, as Joh.
10.11. I am the good shepherd, and Heb. 13.20. where he is called, The great
shepherd of the sheep: and 2. of the Churches Husband or Bridegroom, as Isa.
54.5. Thy maker is thine husband (the Lord of hosts is his name) and thy
redeemer, the holy one of Israel, and 62.5. As the Bridegroom rejoices over
the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee; see also Hos. 2.16, 19, 20. and
Joh. 3.29. And this sufficiently discovers the vanity of that scruple which
some have made, whether this Song were written by divine inspiration, because
the name of God is no where mentioned in it, and because no passage in this
song is cited in any place of the New Testament; for besides that the same may
be said of the book of Esther (see the Note, Esth. 1.1.) considering the whole
book is carried in this figurative and allegorical strain, it is sufficient
that God in Christ is here set forth by that name that is most suitable
hereunto, to wit, the Churches Beloved; and there are many expressions in the
New Testament that seem clearly to have been taken from those conjugal
expressions that are used here. As for this Title, The song of songs, this song
is so called, not so much to imply, as some would have it, that it is a song
that consists of many songs, as to set forth the excellency of it, that it is
the chief and most excellent, not only of those thousand and five songs, which
were composed by Solomon, 1 King. 4.33. but also of all the other holy songs
recorded in the Scriptures, yea indeed the chiefest of all songs, that either
then had been or should hereafter be written; and that because it celebrateth
the chiefest and highest of all mysteries, to wit, the love, the union and
communion that is between Christ and his Church, more amply and fully then any
other does, as likewise because of the exquisite elegancy of those figurative
resemblances under which this spiritual mystery is expressed; even as upon
this account the most holy place in the Tabernacle and Temple was called, The
holy of holyes, and Christ, who is the chief subject of this song, is called,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Revel. 19 16. Whereupon the ancient Jews
have compared the book of the Proverbs to the outward Court of the Temple,
Ecclesiastes to the holy place, and this Song of songs to the holy of holies;
as esteeming it a treasury of the most high and sacred mysteries of holy
Scripture.

Verse. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, etc.] The Bride, the
Church does here abruptly, as it were out of impatience of love, and a holy
impotency of concealing her inflamed affections, break forth into this
exclamation concerning her beloved, the Lord Christ, who had before made love
to her; and had drawn thereby her affections to him, (which is that the Apostle
says, 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us) whence it is that
she adds in the next words, that she had already tasted his love to be better
then wine. It may be taken either as breathing forth her desires in a wish by
her self, or else as speaking to her Bride-maides (as indeed she does
afterward, ver. 5. I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,) and
that as in the person of one ready to faint, that rejects the wine and
odoriferous ointments, with other cordials, tendered by her companions for her
refreshing, and making known, that nothing will satisfy her but the love of
her beloved; as indeed such is the affection of every faithful soul to
Christ, that slighting all earthly comforts, they count them as nothing in
comparison of the spiritual expressions of his love. And observable it is,
that out of the strength of her desires after him, she speaks of Christ in the
third person, and that indefinitely, not expressing who it was of whom she
speaks, Let him kiss me, etc. (even as Mary Magdalen did, when she was
transported with grief, missing Christ in his grave, Joh. 20.15. Sir, If thou
have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, not naming who it was
of whom she spoke) as taking it for granted, that this was well known, that
she loved, and minded, and desired none but her beloved. But what is meant here
by the kisses of his mouth? I answer; Kisses are mentioned in the Scripture as
pledges and incentives of love, Pro. 24.26. Every man shall kiss his lips that
gives a right answer: see Luke 7.45. and 1 Pet. 5.14. And therefore in all
ages at the meeting of friends they used to kiss one another, as we see it was
at the meeting of Joseph and his brethren, Genesis 45.15. and at the meeting of
Moses and Aaron, Exodus 4.27. and so likewise when after some offense they were
reconciled, as we see in Esaus kissing Jacob, Genesis 33.4. and David's kissing
Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.33. And so their kissing was an outward token and pledge of
that tie of love whereby they stood bound one to another, and an intimation of
their desire that their very souls might be knit and united together. And hence
it is that many Expositors hold, that with respect to the Church in the time of
the old Testament, these words do set forth the Churches longing desires after
the Incarnation of Christ, namely, that he would no longer absent himself from
her, only sending to her by his Messengers and Ministers, whether Angels or
Prophets, as at sundry times and in diverse manners he had done, Heb. 1.1. but
that he would come unto her himself being manifested in the flesh, and by
himself make known to her the glad tidings of the Gospel. And indeed never
was there such an union betwixt God and man, nor such a manifestation of Gods
love to man, as there was in the Incarnation of Christ, Joh. 3.16. Romans 5.8.
And therefore the faithful in the old Testament, that did only see the
promises a far off, Heb. 11.39. did earnestly long after Christ's presence in
the flesh, and that clearer light which was to shine forth in the Ministry of
the Gospel. Luke 10.24. I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings have desired
to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: But I rather conceive
that the words are to be understood more generally, as an expression of the
longing desires of the Church in all ages, and consequently of every faithful
soul, that Christ, who had contracted her to himself as his Spouse, (the full
accomplishment whereof in marriage is deferred unto the taking of her up into
his fathers house in heaven,) would in the mean season give her, not one, but
many pledges of his love, not the kiss, but the kisses of his mouth (for there
is no measure nor satiety in this love) to wit, more and more clear and full
manifestations and assurances of his conjugal love and affection to her, and of
his being reconciled to her (for in this life there are sometimes some
estrangements betwixt Christ and his Church,) that she might be more nearly
united to him, and enjoy the more intimate approaches of his presence, and more
and more delightful communion with him; but especially that this might be
done, by speaking to her in the Ministry of the Gospel, and by the sweet
breathings of his Spirit thereby into her heart, applying the comfortable
doctrines of peace and salvation therein contained, (opposed to the severe
rebukes of the Law) to her heart and conscience, whereby she might come to have
the more feeling of his love to her; for indeed sweet and pleasing words are in
the Scripture called kisses, Pro. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a friend,
but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful: And observable it is to this
purpose, that she does not say, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his lips,
but with the kisses of his mouth; for the kisses of his mouth are not dumb
expressions, but vocal and lively declarations of his love in the Gospel,
graciously and powerfully applied by the Spirit to the heart and conscience.
Yea and this may be extended also to the Churches desire of beholding Christ
face to face in heaven.

For thy love is better then wine.] From the excess of the Churches affection
to Christ it is, that having spoken of him in the third person, Let him kiss
me, etc. suddenly she turns her speech to him, as if he were present, (all
being here full of patheticall expressions,) For, says she, thy love is better
then wine; that is, the sense and feeling of thy love is more profitable and
pleasing, more sweet and delightful, then all earthly delicates, and
creature comforts. Wine makes glad the heart of man, Psalm. 104.15. and Eccles.
10.19. it makes those that are of heavy hearts to forget their affliction,
poverty, and misery, Pro. 31.6, 7. and that because it does increase, warm and
refine the vital spirits; but now the apprehension of Christ's love, wrought in
the heart of believers by the graces and comforts of his Spirit, does far more
cheer and revive their souls, and inflame them heavenward, causing them to
forget all the fears and griefs wherewith the guilt of sin and terrors of the
Law had formerly imbittered their spirits. Whence it is that the manifestation
of Gods love thorough Christ in Gospel Ordinances is termed, Isa. 25.6. A
feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of
marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.

Verse. 3. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, etc.] In these words
there may seem to be an allusion to a custom, very usual in those Eastern
Countries, that Bridegroomes used to anoint themselves with sweet ointments;
And because it is unquestionable, that by Christ's good ointments here are meant
the gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit, which were superabundantly conferred
upon him, Joh. 3.34. God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him, and whereby
he was anointed to be the King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, Isa. 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach
good tidings unto the meek, etc. see the Note also, Psalm. 45.7. Therefore by
the savor or smell of his good ointments, must needs be meant the discovery of
these his gifts and graces, in the transcendent holiness of his life, his
divine teaching and miracles confirming the same, and all the good he did for
his people whilst he lived upon earth, Act. 10.38. together with the sweet
refreshing content and delight, which they yielded to the souls of those that
had any spiritual sense or discerning in them. And accordingly also we must
understand the following words, Because of the savor of thy good ointments,
thy name is as ointment poured forth; for hereby must needs be meant, either,
1. that because of the sweetness of these gifts and graces of his Spirit, the
very naming of him, or the hearing him named, was as delightful to her, as the
smell of some precious ointment when it is poured forth. And it may be also
there might be some allusion herein to that name the Messiah, or the Christ,
which is by interpretation, the Anointed: that name which is above every name,
Phil. 2.9. And concerning which it is said, Act. 4.12. that there is none other
name under heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved; or 2ly, that his
name, that is, he himself (see the Notes, Psalm. 5.11. and 20.1.) was as
ointment poured forth, both because his gifts and graces are from him poured
forth upon all the faithful, Joh. 14.16. according to that promise, I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2.28. and by the renewing of the holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, Tit. 3.5, 6. the broken hearts of
Christians are healed, their souls are strengthened, refreshed and comforted,
as men are in their bodies by precious ointments, and they are consecrated, as
Kings, and Priests, and Prophets unto God, as likewise because hereby the
faithful do take exceeding delight in Christ: or 3. that because of these his
precious gifts and graces, his name, that is, the communicating of the
knowledge of Christ by the Gospel, and the miracles wrought by them that
preached the Gospel, Act. 9.15. yields very sweet refreshing delight to the
hearts of believers, and causes his fame to be spread abroad from place to
place far and near; according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.14. Thanks be
unto God, which makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every
place.

Therefore do the Virgins love thee.] To wit, Because of the sweetness of thy
graces, and the discovery thereof by the Gospel, which makes thy fame to be
renowned all abroad. And by the Virgins here, as most conceive, is meant the
Spouses Bridemaides or companions, namely, either, 1. particular Churches, 2
Cor. 11.2. or else more particularly, all true Believers, as it is explained,
ver. 4. who do own the Church Catholic as their mother, and do honor her,
and attend, as it were, upon her in comely order, as Bride-maides do upon the
Bride, and do love Christ for his graces, 1 Pet. 1.8. for these are termed
Virgins, and said to follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, Rev. 14.4. for
which see also the Notes, Psalm. 45.9, 14.

Verse. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee.] This again is, I conceive, spoken
by the Church to Christ, as in the person of a betrothed damosel, that lying in
a languishing condition, refuses to be lifted up and cheared by her
companions, but calling as it were to her beloved, makes known that it was in
his power to draw her so, that she, and her companions too, should presently
run after him. Now the Church, and every faithful soul, may be said to be
drawn by Christ, partly by Christ's redeeming her to himself; of which also
some understand that of our Savior, Joh. 12. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from
the earth, will draw all men unto me. (And if this should be intended, the
words may be taken, as the desire of the Church in the days of the old
Testament, that Christ would come and accomplish the work of their redemption)
but especially by the Spirit of Christ revealing himself and his love to her,
and thereby persuading and causing her to follow after him in the ways of
faith, and love, and new obedience; according to that, Joh. 6.44. No man can
come to me, except the father, which has sent me, draw him; which is that
drawing of which the Lord speaks, Jer: 31.3. I have loved thee with an
everlasting love; therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee: and
again, Hos. 11.4. I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love. And
indeed, by reason of the weight of that carnal corruption which remains in
the best, which does continually clog them, and makes them listlesse, lasie and
slow of heart in following after Christ, Mat. 26.40. the faithful stand in
need to be drawn, not only by the first grace whereby their hearts are changed,
but also by a continual supply of grace, to enable them to withstand all the
oppositions they meet with in their way; And when they are effectually drawn
hereby, then they run after Christ amain; see Psalm. 119.32. according to the
direction of his word, and the pattern which himself has set them; yea and
they draw others to run along with them.

The King has brought me into his Chambers.] Here the Church turns her speech
again to her companions; and that to show, that it was no wonder though she so
earnestly desired communion with Christ, having formerly received so many
clear discoveries of his love, and having been so exceedingly refreshed
thereby. Nor is it any wonder that the Church, being represented in this song
as a Country damosel or shepherdess, should term her beloved, The King,
since it is usual with Lovers, even of the meaner sort of people, to please
themselves with such expressions as these, My Brother, my Lord, my King, when
they speak of their beloved ones, thereby to show how dearly and highly they
esteem them: The king has brought me into his chambers; to wit, his
treasuries and storehouses, or his chambers of presence, his bedchamber, or
closets: And by these his chambers, here may be meant, ^. the holy Scriptures,
and the assemblies of Gods people for holy and religious services, and
particularly the preaching of the Gospel there; and that because by these
Christ does peculiarly reveal to his Church, and the faithful members
thereof, himself, and all his secret counsels, Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, and so also, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. and Mat. 13.11,
12. they know the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. and he does there discover to
them all the hidden treasures and mysteries of grace; there they enjoy familiar
love, amiable conference, and conjugal communion with the Lord Christ, and so
are filled with his graces, and bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.4. yea there
he affords them, not only secret counsel, Psalm. 25.14. but also secret
protection, Psalm. 27.5. In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his
pavilion: in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me; And because these
things were done more obscurely in the time of the old Testament, Heb. 11.13.
Joh. 8.56. but more nearly and clearly in the days of the Gospel, Mat. 13.17.
Verily I say unto you, that many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see
those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them; therefore this may be chiefly meant
of the days of the Gospel: or 2. the discoveries which Christ, immediately by
his own Spirit, makes to the faithful of his love to them, and of the interest
which they have in all the benefits that he has purchased for them, etc. when
they are by themselves meditating of him and of those things that concern
their spiritual estate: Or 3. those heavenly mansions which Christ has
prepared for the faithful, Joh. 14.3. where they shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. and shall be for ever with the Lord, 1
These. 4.17. and shall ever enjoy that glory and bliss, which God has there
laid up for them, even those things, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2.9. And into these chambers
in heaven it may be said, that Christ has already brought the faithful even
here in this world, because already God has raised us up together, and made us
sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. and because before
hand he gives them some sight by his Spirit of those treasures of glory, which
are there provided for them, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. and they spiritually enjoy
communion with God above, and have their conversation in heaven.

We will be glad and rejoice in thee, etc.] That is, Because of this thy love
to me, and the sweet manifestations thereof, in all this honor thou have done
me, etc. both I and mine must needs exceedingly rejoice in thee, yea in thee
alone: We will remember thy love more then wine; that is, we will think of it,
and rehearse it, and speak of it to others with more joy, then men can take in
any earthly things; see the Note above, ver. 2. The upright love thee; that is,
those pure virgin-soules, mentioned in the forgoing verse, that profess thy
truth, and walk the right ways thereof, and all with an upright heart, and are
able rightly to judge of things, though but a few in comparison of others, must
needs by the remembrance of thy love be engaged to love thee sincerely.

Verse. 5. I am black but comely (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) etc.] Because it
might seem strange, that the Spouse, represented here in the person of a
Country damsel or shepherdess, should talk of the love of a King, and boast
of such high favors, which the King her Beloved had afforded her, in bringing
her into his chambers, etc. as she had said in the foregoing verse, in regard
she might seem unworthy of being so highly esteemed by a person of such
dignity, therefore to prevent these thoughts in those that stood by, she adds
these words, I am black, but comely, (O ye daughters of Jerusalem:) So that the
very drift of these words is, I conceive, to prevent the offenses that may be
taken at the Churches infirmities and tribulations. By the daughters of
Jerusalem, are meant, either the Spouses Bridemaides, those that were before
called the Virgins, ver. 3. (for which see the Note there) who may be so
termed, as being the daughters of that Jerusalem, which is the mother of us
all, Gal. 4.26. Or else, either first those that live in the Church, but yet
are not real members of the Church; or secondly, those of the Jews, that
would not join themselves with the Church of Christ, as indeed our Savior
uses the very same expression, speaking to the Inhabitants of the earthly
Jerusalem, Luke 23.28. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for
your selves, and for your children; for these are they that were most likely to
be offended at the Churches blackness. And as for that expression, which the
Church here uses, I am black, but comely, it seems to be used with respect to
the condition of Country damsels, that are wont to be brown and Sunburned; or
to the wife of Solomon, who being an Egyptian, the daughter of Pharaoh, was
brown and blackish, as all that nation use to be: so that it is all one as if
she had said, I confess that I am black, yet that does no way impair the
comeliness of my countenance; I am not deformed, but lovely brown, neither
will my Beloved like me ever a whit the worse for that. But now for the Church,
the Spouse of Christ, who is here intended; though she may be said to be black,
as some conceive, because of the profane ones and false-hearted hypocrites,
that are always amongst those that profess themselves Gods people, and yet
withal comely, because of those real Saints that are amongst them; yet I
conceive that there are two other things that are chiefly intended here by her
blackness, namely, that she is black, 1. in regard of the remainder of
corruptions that are in the best, whilst they live here in this world; even the
Apostle confesses of himself, that he was carnal, and sold under sin, Romans
7.14. And 2. in regard the Church is frequently in such a poor, afflicted and
mournful estate, as being despised and scorned, persecuted and reproached by
the men of the world; and this last I conceive is chiefly intended, both
because the sad and afflicted condition of Gods people is elsewhere set forth by
this expression, as, Jer. 8.21. For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I
hurt, I am black, etc. ^ Lam. 4.8. Their visage, says the Prophet of the
Nazarites, is blacker then a coal; as likewise because in the following verse
she does plainly ascribe her blackness to her being Sunburned. And then she is
said to be comely, because of the imputed righteousness of Christ, and the
saving graces wherewith she is inwardly adorned, see the Note, Psalm. 45.13. as
likewise because of the beauty of Gospel administrations and Ordinances,
continued in the Church even in her greatest persecutions. So that though she
was black and despicable in the eyes of men, being in her outward appearance as
the off-scowring of all things, yet she was lovely in the eyes of God and of
Christ, and in a very happy estate and condition; yea her very blackness, that
is, her suffering for righteousness sake did increase her comeliness; whence
is that, We glory in tribulations also, Romans 5.3. As for those following
similitudes, wherewith this is farther set forth, As the tents of Kedar, as the
curtains of Solomon; Some think that both of them are jointly used to express
the same thing, namely, that as the tents of Kedar, (whereof see the Note,
Psalm. 120.5.) were outwardly black, (and indeed the word Kedar signifies
black,) as being made of black haire-cloath, and as being continually dusty,
parched with the Sun and weather beaten; and yet withal were full of great
riches, to wit, because these Arabians that dwelt in tents, lived upon robbing
and spoiling those that passed by them; and so likewise, as the curtains of
Solomon; that is, the tents, which he used when he traveled far abroad, were
very mean on the outside, but inwardly adorned with curious hangings and
furniture; so was the Church outwardly black, but inwardly beautiful and
comely, as is before noted. And they that thus expound these words are wont to
justify this exposition, by showing that the covering of tents are often
elsewhere in Scripture called curtains, as 1 Chronicles. 17.1. Lo, I dwell in an
house of Cedars, but the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord remains under
curtains; and Isa. 54.2. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch
forth the curtains of thine habitations: But rather these comparisons are to be
applied to the two foregoing clauses dis-junctively, to wit, that the Church
acknowledges her self black, as the tents of Kedar; that is, as those
Arabians that dwelt in those tents, which were a swarthy black people, or else
as their tents themselves, which being the dwelling places of a poor rude
people, had nothing neat or handsome in them, and were base and black on the
outside; and yet withal professes that she (the house, wherein Christ the
true Solomon dwells,) was comely, as the curtains of Solomon; that is, as
those noble persons, that dwelt in Solomon's Court; or rather, as the hangings
of his house, which were rich and beautiful, made of silks of diverse colors
and interwoven with gold.

Verse. 6. Look not upon me, because I am black, because the Sun has looked
upon me.] As if she should have said, Though I am blackish, (for so the word
here properly signifies) yet that is only by accident, that is not my native
color; it is only because I am Sunburned; and therefore do not despise me for
this, because the Sun has by looking upon me, scorched me, and discolored my
face, do not you therefore look upon me, as one not worthy of the love of my
beloved. By this expression, Look not upon me, etc. may be meant, that they
should not look upon her; 1. with astonishment, as being amazed at her mean
outward condition, and so afraid to join themselves to her; or 2. with
gladness and rejoicing, as triu^phing over her, because of her afflictions;
for so the same phrase is used concerning Edoms magnifying himself over the
Jews in the day of their distress, Obad: 12. Thou should not have looked
on the day of thy brother: and Mic. 4.11. Let her be defiled (say the enemies
of the Church) let our eye look upon Zion: or 3. with contempt, coyly and
scornfully, as disdaining her because of her blackness; as it is said of the
Leviathan, Job 41.34. He beholds all high things; to wit, with scorn and
contempt.

Because the Sun has looked upon me;] That is, because the Sun of persecution
and affliction has scorched me; according to that, Mat: 13. where that which
said, ver. 6. When the Sun was up; is explained thus, ver. 21. When persecution
and tribulation arises; Or, because God in his displeasure has exposed me to
these tribulations and distresses. I know that those, who by the Churches
blackness, understand her sinfulness, or the mixture of wicked ones amongst
her true Saints, do accordingly hold, that by the Sun here is meant the Devil,
or the scorching of his temptations, which are the maine cause of that
blackness of the Church* But the following verse shows that it is the
blackness of her outward afflicted condition, that is here at least chiefly
intended.

My mothers children were angry with me, etc.] Here the Spouse shows how she
came to be Sunburned, namely, because her churlish brethren had turned her out
of doors, and forced her to be continually abroad in the Sun keeping the
vineyards; and in expressing this she uses these words, my mothers children,
either to imply one great cause why they had used her so hardly, to wit,
because they were but her halfe-brothers, the sons of her mother, but not the
sons of her father; or else, by way of aggravating their harsh dealing with
her, in that they were those that had tumbled in the same belly with her, that
had used her so discourteously: and so we see the same expression used, Psalm.
50.20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother; thou slanderest thy own
mothers son. But of whom does the Church say this, My mothers children were
angry with me? I answer, that hereby are meant, either, 1. all those inordinate
lusts, which remain in the faithful, and were conceived in the womb with her,
Psalm. 51.5. Of whom the Apostle Peter says, that they war against the soul,
1 Pet. 2.11. Or 2. the men of the world, that were of the same humane race with
her self, but always professed enemies to the people of God; Or rather, 3.
false bastard-brothers in the Church, ungodly men and hypocrites, that are
indeed in the Church, but yet God is not their father; for these do usually
hate and persecute those that are true Christians, and cast them out of the
Church, (according to that, Isa 66.5. Your brethren that hated you, that cast
you out for my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified) who may therefore
well say with David, Psalm. 69.8. I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and
an alien unto my mothers children; see also, Act. 20.29, 30. Now of these the
Spouse complains, They made me the keeper of the vineyards, (under which
serving in any hard Country-labour is comprehended, 2 King. 25.12. The Captain
of the Guard left of the poor of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen,)
and this may be understood spiritually two several ways, to wit, either, 1.
that unmortified lusts in the faithful did put them upon a great deal of
drudgery in the service of sin, and in giving them up to worldly pleasures, a
maine cause of their blackness; or 2. that those that pretended themselves to
be of the Church, false teachers and false brethren, did force her to join her
self to corrupt and superstitious Congregations, (vineyards wherein were the
vines of Sodom and of the feilds of Gomorrha, Deuteronomy. 32.32.) and to defile her
self with the corruptions of their religion, will-worships and traditions of
men, which did much impair her beauty; according to what we find written, Mat.
23.4. Act. 15.1.10. Gal. 6.12, 13. and Col. 2.20. etc. Or 3. that the primitive
Church of the Apostles were by the obstinacy and rage of their brethren the
Jews against them forced to leave them, and to betake themselves to keep the
vineyards of the Churches that were gathered amongst the Gentiles, Act. 13.46.
which brought great persecutions and troubles upon them: Or 4. that by false
brethren, heretics and others, the Church was brought to serve her enemies,
and to endure much hard bondage and misery; which may well be set forth by the
keeping of vineyards, that being so hard and laborious a service. As for the
last clause, but mine own vineyard have I not kept; therein I conceive, either
the Spouse would imply that she was not so meanly borne, as to be see to keep
vineyards; (No, she had not kept her own vineyard, which was her own peculiar
inheritance, but had others to keep it for her) only by the rage of her
brethren she was unkindly put upon this drudgery. And this may imply, that the
Church is of her self of honorable descent, though by the persecution of her
brethren she be brought here to live in a poor, and servile, and despised
condition. Or else she speaks it by way of farther bewayling her self in
regard of this particular, that whilst she was set to keep the vineyards, she
kept not her own vineyard. And then the mystical meaning may be; either, 1.
that whilst the faithful are by their inbred lusts carried out too much after
the world, they dangerously neglect their own precious souls; or 2. that the
Church, being forced by her brethren to join her self to corrupt assemblies,
and so being over-burdened with humane rites and ceremonies, did not maintain
the truth of God, and do her duty to him, as she ought to have done; or 3.
that by reason of the persecutions she endured, and the heavy pressures which
thereby she underwent, she was scattered and broken, that she could not serve
God so freely, and comfortably, as she desired, nor take that care of
particular Churches committed to her, as she would have done.

Verse. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, etc.] To
show that the Spouse was not discouraged with her blackness, so as for that to
fear lest her Beloved should any whit disregard her for it, here she turns
her speech again to him, and makes known how earnestly she desired to enjoy
his presence, the rather because of those things, which had been the cause of
her present blackness. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves, that is, whom I
love from my very soul, and whose presence therefore I desire to enjoy) where
thou feedest; to wit, thy flock (for in this Pastoral Song Christ is usually
represented as a Shepherd, as frequently elsewhere in the Scripture) and
feeding implies the whole work of a shepherd in regard of his flock; according
to that, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather
the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead
those that are with young: and thus it follows here, Where thou make thy
flocks to rest at noone; which is spoken according to the custom of
shepherds, especially in those hot Countries, that were wont at noone in the
heat of the day, to carry their flocks into their sheep-cotes, or to some
shadowy place in the fields, where they and their flocks might lie down and
rest themselves. So that for the understanding of the spiritual sense of this
passage, we must know, first, that the Church, because of the hard usage of her
false brethren, desires here to be informed by Christ, where those holy public
assemblies were, wherein he constantly fed the souls of his people with the
word truly preached, and other holy ordinances rightly administered, that so she
might go thither and enjoy his presence, and live under his government, and
partake of his ordinances, and might grow in grace, and be strengthened against
temptations. Secondly, that the reason of the Churches enquiry concerning this
is, that these holy assemblies are not always easy to be found, 1. Because
many pretend themselves to be the flock of Christ, and that Christ is present
amongst them as their shepherd, when it is not so; Mark 13.21, 22. If any man
shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ, or lo, he is there; believe him not; for
false Christ's and false Prophets shall rise etc. 2. Because Christ for sin
sometimes withdraws himself from his Church, and says, as Zach. 11.9. I will
not feed you: that that dies, let it dye, etc. and so the Church wants
faithful Pastors: and 3. Because the Church is sometimes forced to fly into a
wilderness, Revel. 12.14. and to hide her self for fear in secret places:
and thirdly, that the Church does more particularly add that clause, where thou
make thy flock to rest at noon, with respect to the comfort and safe repose
and peace, which Christ affords to his people in the noontide of the hottest
persecutions and temptations, according to that, Ezekiel. 34.15. I will feed my
flock, and I will cause them to lie down, says the Lord God; and that, Joh.
16.33. These things have I spoken to you, that in me you might have peace.

For why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy
companions?] That is, why should thou suffer me by going aside to enquire of
thee to fall in amongst the flocks of thy fellow-shepheards? This will not be
for thine honor, nor can stand well with my modesty. Now by Christ's companions
here are meant false teachers, and they are so called, either, 1. Because they
were such as were called to the office of being Pastors in the Church, or at
least took upon them to be such, though they were indeed but Idol-shepheards:
or 2. Because they glory in the name of Christians, and boast themselves to be
the friends of Christ, though they be nothing so: or 3. Because they will not
be subordinate to Christ, but take upon them that which belongs to him alone,
as the only King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, usurping power to
prescribe Laws for his worship and service with as much authority as himself,
as if they were not his servants, but his companions. So that the meaning of
the words seems to be this, that the Church makes known her fear, lest for
want of knowing exactly which was the true flock of Christ, she might go
astray and be drawn away to join her self to the corrupt Congregations of
false, idolatrous, or heretical teachers. This last clause may be indeed read,
as it is in the margin of our Bibles, for why should I be as one that is veiled
by the flocks of thy companions? And if it be read so, because this being
veiled may be taken for the attire of a harlot, as some would gather from that
which is said of Tamar, Genesis 38.15. or else for a sign of sorrow, because
mourners used to cover their faces, Ezekiel. 24.17. or for a sign of modesty; see
the Note, Genesis 24.65. Accordingly the meaning may be that the Church is afraid
of being amongst corrupt assemblyes, either 1. because she desired to avoid the
danger of contagion, yea all appearance of evil; or 2. Because she would not
be as a mourning widow, that is cast off and forsaken of her husband; or 3.
Because she was troubled to be amongst those, whose wickedness she should be
loath to behold, or amongst whom she should scarce dare to own the truth, or the
Lord Christ, her beloved.

Verse. 8. If thou know not, etc.] Here Christ satisfies his Spouse the Church
in that concerning which she had in the foregoing verse desired direction from
him. Nor can it seem strange to any, that Christ should speak to his Church,
as present with her, and yet withal give her direction how to find him, as if
he were absent from her, if we consider that even when Christ is absent from
his Church in regard of bodily presence, yea in regard of the manifestations of
the presence of his grace, yet as God, he is always present with her: As for
those first words, If thou know not, they may be premised, either, 1. to show,
that the faithful may not know, where the true Church is, that is truly his,
so fully and perfectly, as they should know it, they may be doubtful and
troubled about it, especially in the Churches low estate and condition; or 2ly,
to hint unto her, that it was strange she should not know this, and that she
had need to be very careful that she did not mistake herein; If thou know not,
(O thou fairest among women) etc. And thus he extolls her beauty, with respect
to her being washed white in the blood of the Lamb, and her being adorned with
the pure and sincere graces of Gods sanctifying Spirit, which is far more
lovely then the painting of hypocrites; as upon the same account it is said of
the Nazarites, Lam. 4.7. Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were whiter
then milk, they were more ruddy in body then rubies, their polishing was of
Saphir; and the Church is said to be a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. yea this may have respect to the
Churches foregoing complaint of her blackness; for hereby he gives her to
understand, that though she thought meanly of her self and was despised by
others, as one that was tanned and Sunburned, yet in his eyes she was exceeding
fair, and indeed therefore the fairer, because she bewailed her blackness,
the humble being always most beautiful in his sight: As for the following
direction given her, Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock; the
meaning is, that leaving the false shepherds and their flocks, she should mark
the footsteps of his flock, and go in that track, that is, that she should
follow the example of the faithful in former ages, recorded in the Scripture,
that had known the voice of Christ their shepherd, and had followed him;
according to that which is said, Heb. 6.12. Be ye followers of them, who
through faith and patience inherit the promises; and Romans 4.12. where believers
are said to walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had
being yet uncircumcised, and so by this means she should be sure to join her
self to the true flock of Christ, and to find him, who was always present
amongst them, Mat. 28.20. And withal observable it is, that Christ speaks
here of the faithful as one flock, opposed to the many flocks of his
companions, mentioned before, ver. 17. those that join not with the true
Church of Christ, being usually divided into many sects and parties.

And feed thy kids besides the Shepherds tents] That is, feed those of thy
flock, that are young and tender, those my little ones, that are despised and
contemned in the world, with the instructions of those faithful teachers, that
are truly sent of God to be spiritual guides unto his people; and of whom it
is said, that their lips shall preserve knowledge, and that men should seek the
Law at their mouths, Mal. 2.7. Or, teach them to follow the example or the
doctrine of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles; according to that which
is recorded in the holy Scriptures, which may well be here intended by the
tents of the shepherds.

Verse. 9. I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaohs
charets] If Solomon had intended to write this song concerning any of his
wives, it had been extremely harsh to compare them to Coach-horses, or
chariot-horses: see the Note, Chap. 1.1. It was therefore doubtless intended
concerning the Church, the Spouse of Christ, whom Christ here terms his love,
because the Church is indeed the sole object of Christ's special love. And
because the horse is a very comely and stately creature, and the Egyptian
horses were esteemed of all others the most generous, and of greatest speed and
beauty, (whence it was that Solomon had his horses from thence, 1 King. 10.28.
and the horses and charets of Egypt were in succeeding ages greatly admired and
sought after, Isa. 30.1. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay
on horses, and trust in charets) and it is not to be questioned but that the
Kings, the Pharaohs of Egypt, had the choicest of them all, therefore some
conceive that the Church is here compared to a company of horses in Pharaohs
charets, to imply, 1. her comeliness, gravity and Majesty, which made Christ
take as much delight in her, as men are wont to do in beholding a company of
goodly and gallant horses. 2. Her speed in flying into Christ, as soon as she
hears where he is to be found, and her unwearied forwardness in running the
ways of Gods Commandments, and in discharging all those honorable services
wherein Christ at any time imployes her. And 3. her readiness to be guided and
ordered by Christ in all things, or her complying with him in the matrimonial
yoke. But because the horse is usually set forth in the Scripture as a warlike
beast, Job 39.21. etc. and Pro. 21.31. The horse is prepared for the day of
battle, and the Egyptian horses and charets were much desired for the war,
therefore I rather think that the Church is here compared to a company of
horses in Pharaohs charets, to signify her strength and valor, and that she
should be victorious over her enemies, as for the same reason she is afterward
said to be terrible as an army with banners chap. 6.10. Because when the Church
did what he had advised her to do in the foregoing verse, that is, when she
abandoned the flocks of his companions, and joined her self to his flock, she
must then expect persecutions and troubles, therefore to comfort her against
these troubles with a promise of victory, he compares her to a company of
horses in Pharaohs charets; And indeed upon the same ground Christ and his
servants are set forth riding upon white horses, Revel. 19.11, 14. and it is
expressly said of the Church, Zach. 10.3. The Lord of hosts has visited his
flock the house of Judah, and has made them as his goodly horse in the battle.

Verse. 10. Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains
of gold.] Some think this is added yet farther to set forth why the Spouse was
compared in the foregoing verse to a company of horses in Pharaohs charets, to
wit, because her cheeks and neck were as comely to behold, or because they
were a richly adorned, as the cheeks and necks of their horses in those Eastern
Countries used to be, especially in Kings charets, that had rich chains about
their necks, and head-stals and bridles gorgeously adorned with rows of
jewels; which indeed agrees with that, Judge. 8.26. where it is said, that the
Kings of Midian had chains of gold about their Camels necks. But because the
Spouse had before complained of her being Sunburned, I rather think that her
Beloved does still proceed on to show, that though she was tanned, yet she was
exceeding comely and beautiful in his eye; and so alluding to the custom of
women in those Countries, that used to wear rows of jewels on their heads,
that hung down to their cheeks, etc. He says, Thy cheeks are comely with
rows of jewels, etc. That is, thou art curiously adorned with chains or
necklaces, and with rows of jewels: Or, (because the Spouse is here
represented as a shepherdess, and such Country damsels used not to wear
such costly attire) the meaning may be only this, that her face and neck (the
cheeks being put figuratively for the whole face, as being the chief seat of
shamefacednesse, modesty and beauty) were as comely as if they were adorned
with rows of jewels and chains of gold; their native beauty was such that
they needed no outward ornaments to set them forth. Now by these rows of
jewels and chains of gold, wherewith the Church, the Spouse of Christ, is
adorned, may be meant in general those Laws and Ordinances, and those gifts
and graces, shining forth in the profession and practice of Gods people, and
the good works that are done by them, whereby the outward face of the Church is
exceedingly adorned, and the members thereof are made comely and gracious in
the sight of God and good men; see the Notes, Pro. 1.9. and Psalm. 45.9, 13. Or
else those most eminent and conspicuous members of the Church, that are in a
high degree above others adorned with gifts and graces, which for their
singular worth may well be compared to jewels, and whereby they are fitted to
do much service to God and his people; see Pro. 25.12. Yet some do more
particularly apply the rows of jewels on the cheeks, to the beauty of the
orderly observation of Ordinances in the Church, and the chains on the neck,
to men's cheerful submitting of themselves to these Ordinances.

Verse. 11. We will make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver] It is
conceived that the Bridegroom does here promise, that he and his friends or
companions would farther adorn his Spouse by making her borders of gold, to
wit, to wear on her head or neck, with studs of silver, that is, curiously
wrought with specks, prominent knobs or knots of silver, to render them the
more beautiful. But the spiritual sense is clearly this, that Christ here
promises his Church, first, that he and his father and his holy Spirit (see
the Note, Genesis 1.26.) or he by his Prophets and Apostles and other his
faithful Ministers and servants, would yet farther adorn his Saints with an
increase of the manifold graces of his Spirit; or secondly, that they would
adorn the Church in Gospel times not only with a greater measure of grace, but
also with more glorious ordinances, then those carnal ordinances were under
the Law; according to that, Isa. 60.17. For brass I will bring gold, and for
iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: or thirdly,
that he would raise in his Church men of eminent gifts and graces, teachers and
others; according to that which is said of the Nazarites, Lam. 4.7. Her
Nazarites were purer then snow, they were whiter then milk, they were more
ruddy in body then rubies, their polishing was of Saphir. The expression here
used, is much like that, Pro. 25.11. A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold
in pictures of silver.

Verse. 12. While the King sits at his table, etc.] Here the Spouse seems to
speak again to her Bridemaides and companions (as before, ver. 2. and 5.) or
to the friends of her Beloved. And the drift of her speech is, either, 1. to
praise her Beloved, as in the foregoing verses he had praised her, and to
acknowledge that all that was amiable and lovely in her, had been wrought in
her by him; or 2. to show that as he did highly esteem of her, so likewise she
did make precious account of him, and that what she had done was done to
testify her respect to him, and by way of procuring his favor toward her;
While the King (see the Note above, ver. 4.) sits at his table, to wit,
accompanied with his guests, his holy Saints and servants, my spikenard sends
forth the smell thereof; for the understanding whereof we must know, 1. that
there is in these words an allusion to a feast, as the mention of the Kings
sitting at his table does evidently show. 2. That because the using of
perfumes, and odoriferous ointments for the refreshing and chearing their
guests, was in those days one of the chief civilities of their feasts, and
spikenard was one of the chief things whereof they did compose their most
sweet and precious ointments; Joh. 12.3. Then took Mary a pound of ointment of
spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus -- and the house was
filled with the odor of the ointment; see the Notes also, Psalm. 23.5. and
45.7, 8. Therefore does the Spouse, the Church make mention of her spikenard,
my spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. And 3. that as Christ's imparting
to his Saints the joys of his glorious presence in heaven is usually set forth
by a banquet; so also the communion they enjoy with Christ upon earth in the
preaching of the Gospel, and other his holy Ordinances, and particularly in
that love-feast at the Lords table, 1 Cor. 10.21. Many shall come (says our
Savior) from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven; see also, Mat. 22.12. And herein it is
likely there is an allusion to those holy feasts, which the Jews made with
their sacrifices in the time of the Law; for they did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink with us, 1 Cor.
10.3, 4. aad they were all refreshed with the same spiritual joys, though
they are now more fully and clearly imparted to us in the days of the Gospel.
And accordingly therefore by the Churches spikenard here may be meant, either,
1. Christ, or the graces of Christ; While the King sits at his table, my
spikenard sends forth the smell thereof; As if she should have said, My
Beloved is my spikenard, he is to me instead of all perfumes and precious
ointments, nothing is so sweet to me, as he is; Or, whilst the King, my
Beloved, sits in heaven, compassed about with his holy Angels and glorified
Saints, and I am here on the earth below, yet even from thence, notwithstanding
this vast distance, the sweet savor of his graces comes unto me, and
therewith I am refreshed by his word and Spirit, (see the Note above, ver. 3.)
and how much more then will it be so, when I shall be with him in glory? Or
else 2. the graces, and the holy fruits thereof, wrought in her by Christ;
While the King sits at his table; that is, while Christ is present amongst
his people, in his word and Ordinances, communicating himself to them, and
sitting with them as it were at the same table, a sign of sweetest friendship
and fellowship, my spikenard sends forth the smell thereof; that is, my faith
and other graces are actuated, quickened, and increased hereby, and do yield
the fruits of repentance, prayer, praises, and other good works, which are
both a comfort and refreshing to my self, and delightful to my Savior: So
that there is nothing in me, that is praiseworthy, but what is the work of his
own grace.

Verse. 13. A bundle of myrrh is my wel-beloved unto me.] That is, a bunch, or
a bag of myrrh; for if by myrrh here the flowers of myrrh be meant, then it
may be best translated, a bundle or bunch of myrrh; but if it be the sweet
gum that issues from the myrrhe-tree that is here intended, then it is best
translated a bundle or bag. However this expression seems to imply the
superabundance of grace and bliss, that is stored up in Christ; and the drift
of the Church in these words is to signify, either that all those sweet graces
in her, for which her Beloved had so commended her, were wholly from him; or
else rather that Christ was exceeding sweet and delightful to her, and a great
refreshing to her upon all occasions; so that though she was delightful to her
Beloved, as he had before expressed, yet nothing so, as he was to her. And
besides observable it is, how emphatically the Church limits this to her self,
A bundle of myrrh my wel-beloved is unto me; which is a speech of faith and
propriety, applying Christ and his benefits unto her self; as indeed the
faithful do only perceive the sweetness of Christ, others savor nothing but
worldly things only. Because myrrh has a bitter root (and therefore they
offered our Savior for drink when he fainted, wine mingled with myrrh, Mark
15.23.) and it is likewise of great use for embalming, (and therefore was used
by Nicodemus in the embalming of our Saviors dead body, Joh. 19.39.) therefore
some conceive that Christ is compared here to a bundle of myrrh, to signify
also, that Christ is bitter at first to men because of afflictions, and that by
Christ all true believers shall put on incorruption, and shall be preserved
unto eternity. But it is surely the sweetness of the myrrh only that is here
intended.

He shall lie all night betwixt my breasts.] In these words there seems to be
an allusion to the custom of women, Country damsels especially, in wearing
bunches, or nosegayes, as we call them, of sweet smelling flowers, within or
before their breasts, therewith to adorn and refresh themselves; or in wearing
silken sweet bags o^ pomanders, or boxes of perfumes, that the sweet savor
thereof might be delightful to themselves and others. However in saying that
Christ should lie all night betwixt her breasts, the Church makes known what
precious account she made of Christ, that she desired to have him nearly united
to her, even that he might dwell in her heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. that her
affections might still cleave unto him, and his to her, and that she might be
ever thinking of him, and of the great things he had done for her, Col. 3.16.
Yea this lying betwixt her breasts all night, may imply his constant and
perpetual abode in the Church, which is that Christ promised, Joh. 14.23. that
he and his father would make their abode with those that truly loved him, and
Mat. 28.20. Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. And
because of those words, my breasts, some understand it more particularly of
Christ's being in those that are the teachers of his Church, as a bundle of
myrrh unto his people.

Verse. 14. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Camphire in the vineyards of
Engedi.] The Spouse does here farther compare her beloved, the Lord Christ, to
a cluster of Camphire, which is a sweet gum, or Cypres (as the Original word
is translated in the margin of our Bibles) whose flowers or berries, as it is
said, do grow together in a cluster, as grapes do, and are exceeding sweet,
thereby to signify how sweet Christ was to her, (for which see the foregoing
Note) and that with respect to the many and glorious things he did and suffered
for her, and the many glorious privileges and benefits he purchased for her.
And because Engedi, a town in the tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.62. called also
Hazazon-tamar, 2 Chronicles. 20.2. being near to Jordan and watered with springs,
was a very fruitful soil for gardens and vineyards, where they had fig trees,
and other trees which they did highly esteem, planted amongst their vines,
therefore the Spouse compares her beloved to a cluster of camphire (or cypres)
in the vineyards of Engedi.

Verse. 15. Behold, thou art fair, my love, etc.] Here Christ speaks in the
praise of the Church, his Spouse, thereby giving her to understand, that there
was no love lost between him and her; she did not make such precious account of
him, but that he made as precious account of her. Concerning the Churches
beauty, see the Notes before, ver. 5. and 8. and Psalm. 45.13. Because the
faithful are by nature, not fair but deformed, this may be one reason amongst
others, why this particle behold is prefixed, as by way of admiration. And it
is twice repeated, either to assure her that it was so, that though she
complained of her blackness, yet indeed she was fair; or else to signify
both that she was exceeding fair, wonderful fair, even to admiration (as in
our ordinary speech when we would affirm a man to be exceeding naught, we use
to say, He is naught, he is naught; and when we would set forth a thing to be
very excellent, we are wont to say, It is excellent, it is excellent,) or that
she was every way fair, fair within and without, in grace and good works,
fair with all variety of beauty.

Thou have doves eyes] The eye being one of the principal beauties of the
face, and the modest eye of women being most amiable in men's eyes, the
Bridegroom here commends his Spouse particularly for the sweetness of her
eyes. And because 1. doves have goodly and lovely eyes, quick, bright and
piercing eyes, sparkling like fire: 2ly, they are noted to be constantly
faithful to their mates, not looking after others; and 3. they are very
simple, harmless, meek and gentle; according to that, Mat. 10.16. Be ye wise
as serpents, and harmless (or simple) as doves; therefore Christ does here
compare the Churches eyes to doves eyes, thereby intending, 1. that the eye of
her faith, whereby she discerned spiritual and supernatural things, was a
pure and chaste eye, in that she owned no other teacher but Christ, and would
not believe any other but his words only; Joh. 6.68. Lord, to whom shall we
go? says Peter, thou have the words of eternal life; in that she looked to
him only, and rested upon his alone righteousness for life and salvation,
Phil. 3.9, 10. and in that in all conditions she trusted in him alone, and
rested on his watchful providence over her, Psalm. 123.1, 2. not seeking to
idols, or relying on the help of any creatures; according to that, Isa. 17* 7,
8. At that day shall a man look to his maker, and his eyes shall have respect
to the holy One of Israel. And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his
hands, neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the
groves or the images. 2. That the eye of her intention in all the service she
did to God and to Christ was single and sincere, not having respect to her own
praise and glory, or any such thing, but merely to obey and please him: her
love and heart being wholly set upon him, and not looking with an adulterous eye
to worldly things; which is that singleness of the eye, whereof Christ
speaks, Mat. 6.22. If therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be
full of light: and 3. that the faithful are of a harmless, meek and gentle
spirit. This I conceive is intended by commending the Church for her dove-like
eyes. Yet some understand it of the faithfulness, sincerity and meekness of
those, whom God appoints to be Teachers in the Church, that being to watch over
their souls, Heb. 13.17. are therefore as eyes to the rest of the body.

Verse. 16. Behold thou art fair, my beloved, etc.] Here the Spouse returns
that praise of beauty to her Beloved* which in the foregoing verse he had given
to her: It is as if she had said, Am I fair? yea rather thou art fair; It is
fitter by far that I should say so of thee, in regard my beauty is nothing in
comparison of thine (and what is meant by the beauty of Christ, see in the
Note, Psalm. 45.2.) and all the beauty that I have, is derived from thine, I
shine with thy beams, and am fair, merely because of the beauty that thou
have put upon me; which is that the Evangelist says, Joh. 1.16. And of his
fullness have all we received, and grace for grace; and the Apostle, Gal. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: see also, 2 Cor. 3.18. Thus I
conceive these words depend upon that which went before; yet some think, that
because Christ had commended his Spouse in the last words of the foregoing
verse, for her chaste dove-like eyes, therefore she now affirms here, that his
beauty did well deserve, that she should look only to him and to no body else:
As for that which she adds concerning his pleasantness; Behold thou art
fair, my beloved, yea pleasant; thereby is meant that his beauty was not so
much terrible and majestical, as sweet and lovely; that as he was beautiful in
himself, so he was exceeding pleasing and amiable and delightful to her;
according to that, 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you which believe he is precious; and Gal.
6.14. God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Also our bed is green] In those Eastern Countries they used beds instead of
tables to eat at; see the Note, Esth. 1.6. but rather here there is relation
had to the beds, whereon they used to sleep by night; of which David speaks,
Psalm. 132.3. and in saying our bed is green, there seems to be an allusion to
the custom of those times in adorning their Bridal-beds with garlands, green
boughs and herbs of sweetest savor; And accordingly by our bed here is
meant, either the assemblies of Gods people, or the holy Ordinances, wherein
the Church does enjoy sweet communion with Christ, the Lord Christ familiarly
embracing her as his Spouse, and she him, and whereby she enjoys much sweet
peace and rest; Mat. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden and I will give you rest; or else the very hearts of the faithful,
wherein the spirits of the faithful do enjoy sweet communion with the Spirit
of Christ, and thereby exceeding great peace of conscience. And when the Church
says, Also our bed is green, thereby she intends, either that thorough her
enjoyment of Christ in his Ordinances she was in a flourishing and joyful
estate and condition, the peace which this yielded her being exceeding sweet
and delightful to her; or else that hereby she became very fruitful, to wit,
both in regard of her growth in grace, and her being fruitful in every good
work, Col. 1.10. which is very sweet and delightful to all that have the
Spirit of Christ, 1 These. 1.8. In every place your faith to Godward is spread
abroad; and also in regard of her bringing forth children to Christ; according
to that, 1 Cor. 4.15. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel;
see the Note also, Psalm. 45.16.

Verse. 17. The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fir.] Some
conceive that the Spouse does hereby give her Beloved to understand, that their
house, though some mean Country-cottage, yet because of his presence with her
therein was to her all one as if it were some stately cedar palace. However
spiritually by their house here is meant, either heaven, our house which is
from heaven, as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 5.2. where Christ and his Bride,
the Church, must one day dwell together for ever; or else the Catholic Church
of God on earth, which is called the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. wherein Christ
and the faithful do sweetly dwell and converse together. And because cedar is
a very precious and strong wood, not subject to rot or to be worme-eaten, and
so of a very permanent nature, and withal of a sweet smell, as the fur also
is, therefore in saying, The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of
fir; Or, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, our galleries of fir, which were
walking places for pleasure, round about on the tops of their houses; if we
take it as spoken in reference to our house in heaven, then the Spouse must
needs intend thereby, that her Beloved has there provided for her habitation
with him a house transcendently glorious and pleasant, and that shall never
decay nor wax old; A house (as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 5.1.) not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens; but if we understand it of the Church the house
of the living God here on earth, then it may signify first the glorious
excellency, strength and stability of the Church in general, against which the
gates of hell shall never prevail, Mat. 16.8. and that she is always most
precious in Gods sight; or 2. that the particular Congregations of the Saints
should through their communion with Christ be adorned with sweet graces, or men
of holy sweet and gracious spirits, (some of them being for their strength of
grace as pillars in the Church, or beams, that by their preaching of the
Gospel and other eminent good services in their places, do help much to the
staying and upholding of the Churches of Christ; and others as rafters, though
of less use, yet very useful and conspicuous in their places) as likewise
that they should be firm and during, and because of the Ordinances therein
enjoyed, and their Christian fellowship therein, like galleries of sweet wood,
pleasing and delightful both to God and to his people: Or 3. that the graces
of Gods people are firm and solid and incorruptible, by means whereof they
are sure to persevere and to continue constant in the faith unto the end: or 4.
that the Scriptures, the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and the holy
truths contained therein, whereon the faith of Gods people does rest, are the
strength of the Church, (and not rotten worme-eaten traditions) and so shall be
as long as the Church it self shall be upon earth.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. I Am the rose of Sharon, and the lilie of the valleys] We read of a
City or Town in the Land of Gilead, that was called Sharon, 1 Chronicles. 5.16. and
it seems that from this Town all the Country about, between Mount Tabor and
the Sea of Galile, from Cesarea to Joppa was also so called: It was doubtless
a rich champaigne Country, famous for its fat and flourishing pastures; and
therefore we find that king David's herds were fed there, 1 Chro. 27.29. and
Sharon is frequently mentioned amongst the most fruitful places in the land of
Canaan, as Isa. 39.9. where to set forth the grievous desolation that should be
brought upon the most flourishing parts of that Land, it is said, Sharon is
like a wilderness, and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits: and Isa.
35.1, 2. where the joyful flourishing of Christ's kingdom is set forth by the
flourishing of Sharon and Carmel. The desert shall rejoice and blossom as the
rose -- the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel
and Sharon: yea in this last place there may seem to be some hint given, that
Sharon was particularly famous for the best rose. However by the rose of Sharon
is meant the most goodly and beautiful rose. And so likewise by the lilie of
the valleys is meant, not that which is abusively so called by Herbalists, but
the most beautiful and goodly lilie, because valleys by reason of the wetnesse
and fatness of the soil, are wont to yield the fairest and most fragrant
lilies; yea it may be particularly meant of those valleys, mentioned together
with Sharon, 1 Chronicles 27.29. where David's herds were fed, as they were in
Sharon. But now by whom these words are spoken, whether by the Bridegroom or
the Bride, is somewhat questionable, because the words are applicable to Christ
and the Church too. They that take them to be the words of the Spouse, conceive
that the drift of them is to set forth, not only the spiritual beauty of the
Church, (for which see the Notes. chap. 1.5, 8. and Psalm. 45.13.) and how sweet
and delightful the graces of the faithful are both to Christ and others
endued with the Spirit of Christ, see the Notes, Chap. 1.12, 13. but also
especially the continual danger the Church is in, by reason of the many
enemies that are still ready to oppress her, being herein like a rose, not
enclosed and fenced in a garden, but growing in an open field, exposed to be
cropped by every hand, or trodden down by every beast that comes near it. But
because it seems more proper that Christ should thus set forth his own
excellencies, thereby the more to allure his Spouse to him, (according to those
expressions, which he used in his ministry whilst he was upon the earth, I am
the light of the world, Joh. 8.12. and I am the Way, and the Truth, and the
Light, Joh. 14.6.) then that the Church should thus commend her self, I rather
take these words to be the words of Christ to his Spouse the Church, wherein
taking occasion from what his Spouse had said of him in the latter end of the
foregoing Chapter, ver. 16. Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea pleasant;
he now replies thereto, I am the rose of Sharon, and the lilie of the valleys;
As if he had said, It is not without cause that thou do so highly esteem of
me, seeing my grace to poor sinners, that hay by the eye of faith beheld the
beauty of it, and have experimentally felt the sweetness of it, is above the
choicest of all worldly contentments. The rose is accounted the Queen of
flowers, far excelling all others in beauty and sweetness; and we know what
Christ says of the beauty of the lilies, Mat. 6.29. to wit, that even Solomon
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. So that by tearming himself
the rose of Sharon, and the lilie of the valleys, is employed, 1. his surpassing
spiritual beauty, for which see the Note, Psalm. 45.2. whence it is that he is
also said to be white and ruddy, chap. 5.10. 2ly, how sweet, pleasing and
delightful he is, not to his father only, Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant, whom I
uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights, but also to his Saints, whose
consciences are refreshed by the sense of his grace, even as the brain is
refreshed with the smell of the sweetest flowers; see the Notes, Chap. 1.3, 12,
13, 14. And 3. that though Christ's condition here in this world was mean and
low, as a lilie in the valleys, yet he was the more precious for this, and
received the more abundant grace and glory.

Verse. 2. As the lilie among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.] That
is the daughters of Jerusalem, or the daughters of men; and so it is the same
with that, chap. 18. O thou fairest among women. They that hold it was the
Spouse that in the foregoing verse termed her self the rose of Sharon, and
the lilie of the valleys, do accordingly say that the Bridegroom catching
hold of those words, does here presently reply, that she might well term her
self a lilie, since all the daughters amongst whom she lived were but as
thorns if compared with her. But if it were Christ that there termed himself
the lilie of the valleys, then it is clear that he proceeds here to glory also
in his Spouses beauty, in that as he was a lilie, so was she also, as being
clothed with his righteousness, and sanctified with his Spirit, in regard
whereto it is that St John says, 1 John 4.17. That as he is, so are we in this
world; and the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 6.17. That he that is joined unto the Lord
is one spirit. So that the drift of these words, is either, 1. to set forth the
state of the Church here in this world, to wit, that as the soft lilie, when it
grows amongst thorns, is pricked and torn by them, so is it with the Church
here in this world; living here amongst wicked, ungodly men, she is continually
afflicted and persecuted by them; whence is that, Hos. 2.6. Behold, I will
hedge up thy way with thorns; and that, Ezekiel. 28.24. There shall be no more a
pricking briar unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that
are round about them; see also the Notes, Numb. 33.55. and 2 Samuel 23.6. whereto
we may add also, that as the lilie retains her purity and sweetness, even in
the midst of brambles and thorns, yea and smells the more sweetly, the more it
is bruised by the thorns, so the faithful retain their innocence and
integrity when they dwell amongst the vilest men, and the more they are galled
and persecuted by them, the more heavenly-sweet their conversation is in every
regard; and likewise that God does many times make use, even of wicked ungodly
men, as a hedge of thorns, for the defense of his Church against others that
seek to ruin her; Or 2. rather, to set forth the excellency of the Church by
way of comparing her with others, As the lilie among thorns, so is my love
among the daughters; That is, when a lilie does grow, or, If we suppose a lilie
to grow up among thorns, as far as the sweet, white and beautiful lilie does
excel those saplesse and fruitless thorns, that are good for nothing but to
be burnt in the fire: so far does the Church in honor and dignity excel all
other companies and assemblies of people whatsoever: And so it is likewise with
every Saint in particular, in regard of the wicked professing themselves Gods
people, amongst whom they live; they are as so many lilies amongst thorns;
being blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse nation, among whom they shine as lights in the world,
Phil. 2.15. And indeed as the worthlesnesse and baseness of the thorns does
the more set forth the beauty of the lilies, so does the vild courses of
ungodly men the more set forth the holiness of true Christians. This, I say,
is chiefly intended by this comparative expression, which is evident in the
next verse, where the Churches Reply is to the very same purpose.

Verse. 3. As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among
the sons.] These are clearly the words of the Spouse; and observable it is how
Pastoral-like the expressions still are, Lenta salix quantum pallenti cedit
olivae. Her beloved had said in the foregoing verse, that she excelled all the
daughters as far as the lilie excells thorns, and now she extols him in the
same kind of language; As the apple tree among the trees of the wood; that is,
as far as the apple tree, which yields variety and oftentimes abundance of
fruit, both lovely, and sweet, and profitable, does excel all other the trees
of the wood, which either bear no fruit, or that which is sower, bitter and
unsavory, meat fitter for hogs then men, so is my beloved among the sons; that
is, so far does my beloved excel all other the sons of men; see the Note,
Psalm. 45.2. or all other the sons of God, or that pretend themselves to be the
sons of God; None of those Cedars the Angels are to be compared to him, and
much less to children of men, who are such poor worthless shrubs, and least
of all those false Christ's and false Prophets (called before his companions,
chap. 1.7.) trees that bring forth none but poisonous fruits, Grapes of gall,
of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah, Deuteronomy. 32.32. And thus the
Spouse has returned to her beloved the praise which he had given her, but with
advantage and increase; for whereas the lilie excells the thorns, only in
beauty and sweetness, the apple tree excells all other the trees of the wood,
not only in that it is lovely to the eye, and sweet to the smell; according to
that expression, Chap. 7.8. Thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and
the smell of thy nose like apples; but also in that it yields fruit, that is
cordial for the stomach, and pleasant to the taste, as is afterward expressed
in the last clause of this verse.

I sat down under his shadow with great delight.] To wit, as weary travelers
in the heat of the day are wont to sit down under the boughs of some goodly
shadowy tree, thereby to shelter themselves from the scorching beams of the
Sun, and so in the cool of that shadow do rest themselves to their great
refreshing and delight. The protection which Princes yield to their subjects is
usually set forth in the Scriptures by the shelter of a shadow, as in Lam.
4.20. The breath of our nostrills, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their
pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen: see
also Judge. 9.15. By the shadow of this apple tree therefore is meant, the
protection which Christ yields to all true believers by his providence and
mediation from the scorching heat of Gods wrath, the curses of the Law, the
persecutions of the world, and the danger of all judgments and afflictions
whatsoever: whereto agrees that promise concerning Christ's kingdom, Isa. 4.6.
And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat,
etc. See also the Notes, Psalm. 17.8. and 91.1. and 121.5, 6. And then by the
Churches sitting down under his shadow with great delight, is meant, 1. Our
putting our selves under his protection and government by owning him thorough
faith as our Lord and Savior: 2. our abiding and persevering in our faith and
union with him, Joh. 15.4.3. The quieting of our hearts and spirits by this
means from all fears and terrors, that glorious rest, foretold by the
Prophet, Isa. 11.10. which Christ promises to all that embrace him by a lively
faith, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest, etc. Mat. 11.28, 29. see also, Joh. 16.33. and which Believers have in
all ages enjoyed by him, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 4. The full satisfaction which this yields
to the souls of Believers, causing them to sit down, and without seeking any
farther, to place their whole happiness and content in him alone; and 5. the
unexpressible delight and joy that does hereupon cheer and revive their hearts.

And his fruit was sweet to my taste.] As if she had said, My beloved reapes no
fruit nor benefit by me, but I reap abundance of fruit and benefit by him; not
only refreshing under his shadow, but also fruit too, the golden apples, I
gather from this my dear and precious apple tree, whereon I daily feed by
faith, and find much sweetness therein. And by this fruit is meant, 1 all the
works of his Prophetical, Priestly and Kingly office, all that he did and
suffered for our redemption and salvation, the very meditation whereof yields
exceeding great delight to the faithful: and 2ly, all the spiritual blessings
purchased for us, and imparted to us thereby, as the Gospel, the fruit of his
lips, with all the promises and consolations thereof, and all other Gospel
ordinances; and so likewise Remission of sin, justification, sanctification,
with all the fruits of righteousness wrought in us thereby, our adoption, the
consolation of his Spirit, that hidden Manna, Revel. 2.17. and what ever other
benefits we enjoy through him, but especially the hope of glory and life
eternal, with respect to which fruit it is, that Christ is called the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God, Revel. 2.7. For all these
do yield most sweet and pleasant delight to the souls of those that are made
partakers thereof; whence are those expressions we meet with in the Scripture,
Psalm. 119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea sweeter then honey to
my mouth. And Psalm. 34.8. O taste and see that the Lord is good. And 1 Pet. 2.2,
3. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby: if so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. All the sweets
of earthly delights have no relish in them to a true Christian, in comparison
of the sweetness that he finds in Christ and his benefits.

Verse. 4. He brought me to the banqueting house.] Here the Spouse relates how
her beloved had formerly, or at present manifested his singular love to her by
bringing her into his banqueting house. It is in the Original the house of
wine; and accordingly they translate this place thus; He brought me to the
wine-cellar; and suitably hereunto, because wine-cellars are low vaults under
ground, dark, raw and cold, but yet withal well stored and fraught with wine,
that cheareth the heart, Psalm. 104.15. they understand this passage of the
great refreshing comforts which Christ does usually afford his people, when he
has brought them, for reasons best known to himself, into an estate of deep
and dismal affliction and sorrow. That condition of darkness and trouble,
which is in it self as a dungeon to the Spouse, is by Christ made a
wine-cellar, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me, that I have been afflicted, and 2
Cor. 1.4. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ. But reading the place as it is in our translation, He
brought me to the banqueting house; I conceive that by Christ's banqueting
house here is meant the Scripture, or the public assemblies and ordinances,
whereto when the Saints are brought thorough the secret swaying of their hearts
by his Spirit, besides the communion which there they enjoy with Christ, and
with their brethren, he there entertaines and feasts them with all variety of
dainties, the diverse gifts and graces of his Spirit, together with the sweetest
of comforts, working in them joys unspeakeable and glorious.

And his banner over me was love.] They that expound the foregoing words of
this verse of Christ's making the afflicted estate of his Church to be as a
wine-cellar to them, do accordingly understand this clause thus, that in the
afflictions of his people, Christ, the Captain of their salvation, by the
manifestation of his gracious presence amongst them, and the love he bears
them, does as with a banner displayed, cheer them up, proclaiming defense to
them, and resistance against their enemies; according to that, Isa. 59.19. When
the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a
standard against him. But reading the foregoing words as they are in our
Bibles, He brought me to the banqueting house, I conceive that accordingly in
this following clause, and his banner over me was love, Solomon alludes to the
custom of Captains hanging up their Banners or Ensigns over their heads when
they made any great feasts, thereby to add the more glory and splendour to
their entertainments; and the Churches maine intent in these words is to show,
that Christ by the manifestation of his love in the preaching of the Gospel,
does exceedingly glad and rejoice her heart. And indeed the preaching of the
Gospel may well be compared to a Standard, a Banner or Ensign displayed, whose
Motto or Device is LOVE, and that in several regards. 1. Because the great
work of preaching the Gospel is to lift up Christ crucified, as a Banner
displayed in the eyes of all nations, to unfold and display before men all the
heavenly mysteries of Gods eternal counsel concerning man's salvation, and so
to publish and make known that wonderful love of God in giving his own Son to
dye for poor sinners: And hence are those expressions, Joh. 3.14. As Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness; even so must the Son of man be lifted
up; to wit, in the preaching of the Gospel; and Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians
-- before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified
amongst you; and Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me -- is this grace given, that I should preach
among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; that is, the riches of
Gods love in Christ; to make known, as it follows there, ver. 18, 19. The
breadth, length and depth, and height of that love, which passes knowledge. 2.
Because as Captains by their Banners do gather their soldiers together, and
keep them close together in one body; So it is by setting up the Standard and
Banner of the Gospel amongst a people, that Christ does draw, and gather in his
Elect unto himself, to follow and serve him, and does keep them knit together
without scattering one from another: And therefore under these very terms does
the Prophet foretell the calling of the Gentiles, Isa. 11.10. There shall be a
root of Jesse; which shall stand for an Ensign of the people, to it shall the
Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious: and again, Chap. 49.22. Behold,
I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the people:
and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, etc. But what now is the cause
of this? Surely as it is merely the free grace and love of God that causes
him to call us by his Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.9. so it is also by the Gospels
discovery of Gods wonderful love to us in Christ, that we are won to love
him again, and to serve him in love; The love of Christ constrains us, says
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.14. and 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved
us. 3. Because as soldiers are by their Banner and Ensign encouraged and
heartened to fight manfully against all their enemies, and not to shrink but to
stick close to their colors in hope of victory; so by the discovery of the
love of God, and of Christ in the Gospel, Christians are emboldened to
withstand courageously all their spiritual enemies, and are continually
supported and inwardly strengthened, and so are enabled to hold out unto the
end, in assured expectation of being at last more then Conquerors through him
that has loved them, Romans 8.37. We glory in tribulations -- because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts, Romans 5.3, 5. And this it is that makes the
Church to her enemies, Chap. 6.4, 10. Terrible, as an Army with Banners. 4. As
it is known to what Company soldiers belong by the Banner which they follow,
so true Christians are known and distinguished from the men of the world by
that Gospel grace of Love, and by their conscionable attendance upon and
obedience to the ministry of the Gospel. Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another; and Joh. 10.27. My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And 5. As soldiers
are wont upon the taking of any Town or Castle to set up their Standards and
Ensigns in token of conquest; so the settling of the Gospel in any place, is a
sign that such a people are subdued to Christ; and Christ does there triumph
over Hell and Death, Hos. 13.14. yea and they that are subdued (which is
strange) do triumph also, as being made conquerors together with him, over all
their spiritual enemies; see Romans 8.36. etc. and Psalm. 20.6.

Verse. 5. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love.]
The Spouse having been feasted with the dainties of her beloveds banqueting
house, and therein tasted of his exceeding love to her, falls into a kind of
swoun or love-qualm, and thereupon calls upon her Bride-maids, or her beloved
and his Bride-men, to stay her, that is, to support her, and to keep her from
sinking, with flagons, to wit, of wine, (which has a cheering, reviving
quality, Psalm. 104.15.) and to comfort her with apples, to wit, with the smell
of them; for when men or women are ready to faint, it is usual, by putting
odoriferous apples, or oranges, or some other strong smelling things to their
nostrils, to revive them or keep them from swouning: That which we translate,
Comfort me with apples, is in the Hebrew, Strew me with apples, as if she
should have said, Strew apples under me, and therewith, as with a bolster or
bed beat up, or spread under me, (for they used beds at their banquets and
feasts) uphold me from sinking, and refresh my languishing spirits; for, says
she, I am sick of love, to wit, either through an exuberancy of admiration and
joy at the apprehension of her beloveds love to her, and the delight she took
in it, as it is said of the Queen of Sheba, when she was astonished with
admiration at her seeing the exceeding glory of Solomon, that there was no more
spirit in her, 1 King. 10.5. and as it is said that Jacobs heart fainted, when
he heard that Joseph was still alive, Genesis 45.26. or else rather through the
violence and passionatenesse of her love toward him, accompanied with a fear
of his parting from her (as indeed elsewhere the mention that is again made of
her being sick of love, is because her beloved had withdrawn himself, Chap.
5.6, 8.) and working in her a vehement desire of enjoying him more fully, then
as yet she did, at the day of her marriage. And indeed that an extraordinary
passion of love may thus wound the heart of a man or woman, and make them sick
and ready to faint, is evident by that which is said of Amnons falling sick for
his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.2, etc. Love softens and melts the heart, and does
often carry out the affections of lovers so violently to the party loved, that
their vital spirits are ready to fail thereby. But now for the spiritual sense
of this place, we must know, First, for the Churches being sick of love, that
though the faithful may be said to be sick of love, with respect to the
extreme grief and anguish of their spirits in a time of sore tribulation and
desertion, when notwithstanding their hearts are sincerely set upon Christ, yet
they lie under sad apprehensions of Gods displeasure, because they are for the
time without all sense of Christ's love to them, and cannot discern the least
saving work of grace wrought in them, but are always groaning under the
remembrance of their manifold failings and sins; which may well be reckoned
among the most grievous of those spiritual sicknesses, whereof our Savior
speaks, Matthew. 9.12. They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are
sick: and the Prophet Isa. 33.24. The inhabitants shall not say, I am sick; the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity; yet here I conceive
the sickness the Church speaks of, must be ascribed, either 1. to her being
overwhelmed and overcome through astonishment at the rare discovery of Christ's
wonderful love to her, whereof she had spoken in the foregoing verse, and the
unusual measure of joy wherewith hereupon she was transported and ravished: Or
2. rather, To her excess of love and ardent longing after a fuller enjoying of
Christ, her beloved, wrought in her by that late discovery of his exceeding
love to her, and the taste she had gotten of those sweet and heavenly dainties
wherewith he had feasted her; for in this case hope deferred makes the heart
sick, Pro. 13.12. especially if it be accompanied with a fear of loosing what
has been formerly enjoyed; and the soul that is transported with such
vehement desires after the full enjoying of Christ's presence, must needs be as
sick of the world, yea dying to the world, and senseless of all things that
are here below, and be always panting, and sighing, and groaning after the
enjoying of Christ in his kingdom of glory. Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. My
flesh and my heart fails, etc. And then, secondly, for the help she requires,
Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, we must know, 1. that it is
Christ, or rather the Ministers of Christ and other private Christians to whom
she speaks; and 2ly, that by the flagons and apples, wherewith she desires to
be stayed, and upheld, and comforted, are meant the cordial promises and
comfortable doctrines of the Gospel, together with the fruits of Christ's
Mediation, which she desires may out of the Scripture, the bowls and flagons
of the Sanctuary, be applied to her heart and conscience, and that in the
fullest measure, for the strengthening of her weak faith, and the chearing and
reviving of her drooping spirits, that her consolations might abound through
Christ; for as it was the discovery of Christ's love that had wounded her, so it
was only the manifestation of the same love that could heal her again. Make
me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones, which thou have broken may
rejoice, Psalm. 51.8.

Verse. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.]
There may well be in these words an allusion to the manner of their sitting on
their beds (if I may so call it) in those times when they feasted together,
which was that they lay along, as it were, in one another bosoms, the first
having his left hand under the head of him that was next him, so that with his
right hand also he might embrace him; and so it was in order with all the rest.
However it is clear that the fainting Spouse does here glory in the tender
care of her beloved over her, in that so soon as ever she had called for help
to them that were about her, he himself had presently catched her up in his
arms, and cherished her, (it is the Apostles word, Ephesians. 5.29.) even as a
^oving husband is wont to cherish his sick wife; which may be meant of Christ's
chearing up his afflicted people by the immediate motions of his Spirit, as it
were preventing the outward means of grace; or else of his working effectually
together with the outward means, to make them successful for the reviving and
bearing up of their fainting spirits. As for these expressions, His left hand
is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me, all that I conceive is
intended hereby is, that when the hearts of his people are ready to faint,
Christ is wont to employ all his power for their support, bearing them up, as
it were, with both his hands; or that by all possible expressions of his ardent
and tender love, as by so many close and fast embraces, he does labor to
assure them how near they lie to his heart, how inseparably they are united to
him, that he may keep them from sinking under any sorrows, and bear up their
hearts in the expectation of their future glory; see Psalm. 37.24.

Verse. 7. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, etc.] Who are meant by
these daughters of Jerusalem, see in the Note, Chap. 1.5. Because this verse is
several times repeated in this Song, it may seem to be inserted after the
manner of those verses, which we use to call versus intercalares, wherewith as
the foot of the Song, Pastorals and Marriage-Songs are in other Poets often
interlaced: very many Interpreters, translating the last words of this verse,
until she please, not as they are in our Bibles, until he please, do
accordingly conceive of this as the Bridegroomes charge, enjoining those about
his Bride, that seeing she was after her languishments fallen asleep in his
embraces, they should be very careful not to disturb or awaken her; which they
understand of taking heed that the Churches peace be not broken by heresies or
schisms, or any other disturbances whatsoever. But according to our
Translation, these are clearly the words of the Spouse; which may also seem
the more probable, both because as the foregoing words, so also those that
follow are her words; and likewise because it seems to be one of the decorums
of this Song, that the Bridegroom speaks only to his Bride-men and
companions; it is always the Bride that speaks to her Bride-maides, the
daughters of Jerusalem. It is the Spouse therefore that lying in the embraces
of her beloved, and apprehending that in this posture he might lay himself to
rest, does therefore charge her Bride-maides not to trouble or disquiet her
beloved, whilst he was pleased thus to cheer her up with his embraces. I
charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, or, as it is in the Hebrew, I adjure
you, I charge you, as by an oath, by the roes, and by the hindes of the field;
that is, I charge you, that as you dearly love and prize the roes and hindes of
the field, and would be loath to loose them, or according to the love ye bear
to them (which is said because Country damsels that used to feed their flocks
abroad in the fields, where the roes and hindes ran, were wont exceedingly to
delight in the beauty and comeliness of these pretty creatures, and likewise
in hunting them, and in sporting and playing with them) as if she should have
said, I adjure you by those things you most delight in, that ye stir not up
nor awake my love, that is, him whom my soul loves, or who dearly loves me,
til he please, that is, till he awakes of himself. Now that which is
spiritually intended hereby is this; The Church after her perplexity having
been comforted by the embraces of Christ, is very careful not to have this
peace and rest of hers disturbed, and thereupon charge the faithful,
according to the authority she has over her particular members, to be very
careful that they did not give her Lord the least offense, that they did not
by any heresies or schisms amongst them, by any distrustful fears, or
murmuring, or any sinful courses whatsoever, disturb or vex his holy Spirit,
lest being provoked thereby to displeasure, he should withdraw himself from
her; according to that, Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you
and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not
hear; see also, Chap. 63.10. This I conceive is that which is intended by
these words, Stir not up, nor awake my love; for as for the following words*
till he please, it is said that this word till, or until, does usually in the
Scripture imply, that a thing shall never be; as in Isa. 22.14. Surely this
iniquity shall not be purged from you, till you die; that is, never; see also
Genesis 28.15. and so here it implies that it would never please Christ to awake
in displeasure against his Church, and to hide himself from her, unless he
were disquieted and disturbed by the sins of his people. And yet the meaning
may be too, that the faithful in the time of the Law were to wait patiently
for the coming of the promised Messiah, and to take heed that they did not
provoke him by unbelieving fear; Or that when Christ seems to sleep and to
neglect his Church in times of trouble (as he did the Disciples in that storm,
Mark 4.38.) it is the duty of his people to content themselves with the
comforts, which he is pleased to afford them by his Spirit, and to wait
through faith and patience till he was pleased to come in to their help. But
now for the spiritual sense of this adjuration, I charge you by the roes, and
by the hindes of the field, that has the most difficulty in it. Some hold that
there is nothing else intended hereby, but as if the Church had said, I charge
you by those things that are most dear to you, and most amiable in your eyes;
only they say this is expressed in a language suitable to a Pastoral, by
mentioning the roes and the hindes of the field, which are the delight of
shepherds. But then again others understand this in a more mystical way: as,
1. Because these creatures are exceeding swift and nimble in running, (whence
it is said of Asahel, that he was as light of foot as a wild Roe, 2 Samuel 2.18.
see the Note also, Chap. 22.34.) therefore some do understand hereby the holy
Angels, who are more quick and speedy then roes and hindes in doing what ever
God enjoynes them; as if it had been said, I charge you by the Angels, who
observe your ways, and will speedily execute judgment upon you, if you
observe not my charge, that you do not any way disturb my beloved: and 2ly,
Because roes and hindes are wild untamed creatures, exceeding timorous and
frightfull, therefore others think the Gentiles in their wild unconverted
estate are figured hereby, and so take the meaning of the charge to be this,
that as the faithful would be loath the Gentiles should be scandalized by their
sinful and offensive conversation, and frighted from coming in to Christ, or
that the nations amongst whom they lived should be made isntrumental for
executing Gods wrath upon them, they should be careful to observe the charge
that was now given them. And 3. Because the males and females of these
creatures are noted for their ardent love one to the other; see the Note, Pro.
5.19. therefore others understand the adjuration thus, I charge you by the roes
and hindes of the field, that is, I charge you by that tender conjugal love
that should be betwixt Christ and Christians, like that of the roes and hindes
of the field, and who otherwise shall for this rise up in judgment against
you, that you do not by any unkind offensive carriage disquiet my Beloved, and
cause him to leave me in displeasure.

Verse. 8. The voice of my Beloved!] If there be any connection to be conceived
betwixt this and the foregoing verses, it must be supposed that while the
Spouse slept, her Beloved had withdrawn himself, and (as his words afterward
imply) had been abroad in the Country, and that thereupon being suddenly
wakened at his return, either by his voice, or otherwise, hearing him speak,
she breaks forth, as one hastily awakened and startled from her sleep, into
this abrupt and joyful expression, The voice of my beloved! as if she should
have said, Surely it is the voice of my beloved: which may be meant either
generally of any thing he had spoken, or particularly of those words of his
afterward rehearsed by her, ver. 10. Rise up, my love, my fair one and come
away. Nor is it at all hard to conceive how this is spoken of Christ and his
Church: for 1. Christ does sometimes withdraw and absent himself from his
Church for a while, as he did in regard of his bodily presence before his
Incarnation, and many times in regard of the manifestation of his grace and
favor to them; see Isa. 45.15. 2ly, Christ's voice does always give notice of
his coming, before he comes. Thus the Prophets did of old foretell the coming
of Christ in the flesh, Luke 1.68, 69, 70. He has visited his people (says
Zacharias) -- As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been
since the world began: and the Baptist was the voice of Christ preparing his
way before him, Mark 1.2, 3. And so likewise for his coming seasonably to the
help of his people, many precious promises he has given us in his word; Isa.
35.4. And 3ly, the Church knows the voice of Christ, and rejoices to hear
it; Joh. 10.3, 4. His own sheep know his voice; and Isa. 52.6. They shall know
in that day, that I am he that does speak; Behold it is I.

Behold! he comes leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills.] No
sooner did the Spouse hear the voice of her beloved, but she presently cheares
up her self in the expectation of his speedy coming; in the assurance whereof
she speaks as if she saw him coming, Behold! he comes. Now this may be
meant, 1. of Christ's coming in the flesh; for the faithful did in all ages
make known that they expected the coming of the Messiah according to his
promise; yea by the eye of faith they saw him coming a far off. Joh. 8.56.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. 2. Of
his coming to a people in the preaching of the Gospel; for where ever the
Gospel is preached, there Christ is present, Mat. 28.20. and is seen by
believers, Gal. 3.1. and received by faith into their souls, Joh. 13.20. And
3. of his coming in to the comfort and help of his people in all their trials
and troubles; for even in this case the faithful by the discoveries of Christ's
Spirit do discern his approaching to their help before he is come; even as
soon as the voice of Christ sounds in their ears, his Spirit comes in with
assurances of comfort, mercy, and help to their hearts: whence is that of
David, Make me to hear joy and gladness, Psalm. 51.8. And indeed these two
last applications have, I think, the fairest probability in them. But now for
that which is said by the Spouse of the manner of her beloveds coming to her,
leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills, that is questionless so
expressed with relation to that which follows in the next verse, where Christ
is compared to a roe or a young heart, creatures that are wont to run swiftly
over the mountains, leaping as they run, and skipping from one hillock and one
cliffe to another; in allusion whereto that expression also is used, Isa. 35.6.
Then shall the lame man leap as an heart: and so that which she intended to
signify hereby is, with what cheerful speed and alacrity she knew her beloved
would return to her, that he would not suffer any dangers or difficulty in his
journey to delay his coming, I know that some Expositors do say, that this
expression of Christ's leaping over the mountains, etc. is used to imply, 1.
the wonderful grace that was manifested to poor man, in that the fallen
Angels, once the great Potentates of heaven, were passed over, and the Son of
God was sent only to save the children of men. And 2. How openly and apparently
to the eye of faith Christ manifested himself, when he came to accomplish the
work of man's Redemption; according to that, Nah. 1.15. Behold upon the
mountains the feet of him that brings good tidings, etc. But I conceive with
the most of Expositors, that it is the zeal of Christ in overmastering all
difficulties, and breaking thorough all impediments in his way, that he may
come in seasonably to the help and salvation of his people, that is here
mainly, if not solely, intended. As when he came to redeem us, he brake
thorough the sins of his people, all the power and rage of Satan and his
instruments, wherewith they sought to cross him in his work, and trampled upon
death and hell, and all that stood in his way; Every valley shall be filled
(says the Baptist) and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and the
crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth, Luke
3.5. So likewise in carrying on the work of grace in his elect people, that he
may make them sharers with him in his glory, and in his coming to the aid and
comfort of his people in all their dangers, neither the hillocks of their
lesser, nor the mountains of their greater sins, no nor any opposition from
Satan, or the world, shall keep Christ off from them; the greatest mountains
shall be made plains before them, Zach. 4.7. All the kingdoms of the world
must become the Lords and his Christ's, Revel. 11.17. Nor shall any thing be
able to separate them from the love of God, which is in Christ; see Romans 8.38,
39.

Verse. 9. My beloved is like a roe or a young heart.] To wit, in regard of his
tender love, and amiable loveliness, but especially in regard of his speed in
coming in to the help of his people, according to that which is said of the
Gadites, 1 Chronicles. 12.8. that they were as swift as the roes upon the mountains.
But for this see the two foregoing Notes, ver. 7, 8.

Behold he stands behind our wall.] No sooner did the Spouse hear the voice
of her beloved, but she saw him coming, (as it is in the foregoing verse) and
in an instant he was present with her, a great expression of Christ's love and
delight in his Church; only at first he hides himself, as it were, Behold he
stands behind our wall; wherein there may be an allusion to the custom of
lovers, that to the end they may come the more unexpectedly upon those that do
earnestly wait for them, are wont at their first coming, to stand a while
unseen behind a door, or behind a wall. And several ways this is by Expositors
applied to Christ. 1. Some understand it of Christ's making himself known to the
Jews in a dark and hidden way, under the shadows of Legal Types and Ceremonies,
which the Apostle calls the partition wall, that divided betwixt the Jews and
Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.14. afterward he revealed himself to them by the Gospel,
clearly and plainly; which was signified by the rending asunder of the vail of
the Temple at the death of our Savior, Matthew. 27.51. but during the Ceremonial
Law he only called to them as it were from behind a wall. Others apply it to
the Incarnation of Christ, when the Word was made flesh, Joh. 1.14. and so the
glory of his Godhead was hidden behind the wall of his manhood, that mud-wall
of our flesh; our house of clay, as man's mortal body is called, Job 4.19. and
which may indeed the rather be called our wall, because it was our sin that
made it mortal: And hence it was that whilst he was upon earth, there were so
few that knew him, Joh. 1.10, 11. He was in the world, and the world was made
by him, and the world knew him not: He came unto his own, and his own received
him not. But 3. more plainly and satisfactorily it is applied to our imperfect
knowledge of Christ, and communion with Christ, whilst we are here in this
world; in heaven we shall behold him face to face, but here Christ stands, as
we may say, behind the wall of our hearts (such an expression we have in the
Hebrew, Jer. 4 19. where that which we translate, I am pained at my very heart,
is in the Original, I am pained at the walls of my heart) namely, because our
outward senses and natural understandings, are as a wall that keep us from any
clear and full enjoying of communion with him. Christ stands and knocks at the
door of our hearts, Rev. 3.20. but when by faith we do open to him: yet because
that which is in part is not yet done away, we enjoy his presence so, that he
still stands at a distance from us; our body of flesh, and our body of sin in
us, do still hinder us from a perfect and complete communion with him.

He looks forth at the window, showing himself through the lattesse.] This is
added further to set forth Christ's darker revelation of himself to his Church
here in this world, not only under the Law, (as is shown in the foregoing Note)
and whilst he lived upon earth, but also in all succeeding Gospel Times, for as
long as the Church is here in this world, and has all her light shining unto
her through the Word, and other Gospel Ordinances, Christ, and grace through
Christ, are but darkly and obscurely discovered to us, as when we see a man
through a window or a lattesse, according to those expressions of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see through a glass darkly: and 2 Cor. 3.18. We all, with
open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Only indeed
this expression here, he looks forth at the window, showing himself (or as it
is in the Hebrew, flourishing) through the lattesse, may besides also imply, 1.
That Christ shows himself to his people, in his Ordinances, sweet, pleasant and
amiable, like some sweet plant or flourishing flower, that appearing through a
window, by its pleasant beauty, and sweet sent, yields great delight to those
that behold it: And 2. That the eye of Christ's providence, does from above
heedfully observe, and fully see all our ways (even as a man that looks
through a window or lattesse, may fully and distinctly see those that are
without, when they can very hardly discern him) and does with much provident
care watch over us, for our safety and welfare.

Verse. 10. My beloved spoke and said unto me, etc.] To wit, by his Word and
Spirit, Rise up, my love, my fair one, See the Notes, chap. 1.9, 15. And come
away; The Spouse here relates how she was invited and persuaded by her beloved,
at his return, to go away with him, as I may say, to his country house, there
to enjoy the pleasures of the Springtide, as is expressed in the following
verses. Some conceive that the Church is here called to come from under the
burden of Legal rites, to enjoy the liberty and comfort of Gospel-priviledges;
as in Isa. 60.1. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee. But we may rather take it in a more general sense; to wit,
either, 1. That the Church is hereby invited to a more through reformation and
progress in grace, to lie no longer under any errors and superstition, to
arise from her sloth and security, from the intanglement of earthly cares and
pleasures, to abandon all her sinful courses, to forsake the world in heart
and affection, and to be still following on after Christ, as it is said of the
faithful, that they follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Revel. 14.4. that
so she might increase her joys, by a more full communion with him: And indeed,
considering the remainders of corrupt nature that are in the regenerate, even
to them may that of the Apostle be applied, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Or 2. that
she is called by Christ to arise out of her fears and sorrows, in her afflicted
estate, to the enjoying of that glorious and comfortable condition, which he
had prepared for her.

Verse. 11. For, lo the winter is past, the rain is over and gone.] According to
the several Expositions of the words in the foregoing verse, 1. Some understand
it of the winter of the Ceremonial Law, that was a time of cloudy darkness and
bondage, in the Ordinances whereof, there was but cold comfort comparatively;
but that being past, the Gospel succeeded, that acceptable time, as it is
called, Isa. 49.8. and 2 Cor. 6.2. that pleasing, joyful springtime of the
year of grace and salvation; the benefit whereof therefore the Church is here
persuaded cheerfully to enjoy. 2. Others take the winter to be that state of
sin, wherein the elect lay before their conversion, and that the Church is here
invited to a progress in grace upon this account, that it was not fit they
should be still such as they were in their unregenerate estate. Winter is a
dark, cold, dead, uncomfortable time, there is no pleasure then, all things are
then barren and dead, and lie covered under frost and snow: and so it is with
those that lie in their natural estate, it is ever winter with them, they are
dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2 1. there is no spring of grace in them,
nor warmth of solid and sound comfort, nothing that is truly desirable, because
sin depriveth a people of their beauty, even as a cold nipping winter strips
the earth of all her glory. But now when men are called in unto Christ, who is
the resurrection and the life, Joh. 11.25. they are then quickened together with
Christ, Ephesians. 2.5. they then become fruitful in every good work, Col. 1.10.
Gospel comforts, as in a spring time, warm their heart, and so they are
pleasant, sweet and fruitful in their lives. And this is that, I say, which
some Expositors think Christ presses upon the Church, to raise her out of that
state of deadness and worldliness wherewith she was surprised, that it was
not fit it* should be with her, as in the winter of her unregenerate estate.
And 3ly, others, I conceive most aptly, do by the winter understand the
afflicted estate and hard times of the Church here in this world, either by
reason of inward troubles and trials, or outward tribulation and distress.
These are cloudy, pinching, stormy and tempestuous times, when men lie under
sad apprehensions of Gods wrath for sin, these fill the soul with terrible
tempests of grief and fear; and when the world raises storms of persecution
against the Church, it must needs go hard with the poor people of God. Christ
therefore here assures his Church, that the heaven was now clear, and that
there was nothing now but what might yield delight, to wit, either because in
him they might be pacified against all their inward terrors and fears, Romans
5.1. or because he had stilled the rage of the enemy against them, according to
that which was long since prophesied of him, Isa. 4.6. that he should be for a
place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain. And Isa. 32.2. a
hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; and hereby he seeks
to raise her up from her fears and sorrows.

Verse. 12. The flowers appear on the earth.] To wit, those early flowers,
which are wont to bud forth in the first beginning of the spring, as the violet
and primrose, etc. or the blossoms of those trees, that do first shoot out.
And hereby may be meant, either, 1. the manifold sweet and comfortable
blessings which God affords his Church, after a sad winter of affliction and
persecution; or 2. Men and women eminent and conspicuous above others for their
gifts and piety, that should after those hard times begin to hold up their
heads with courage and comfort: or rather, 3. all the effects of Gods grace
wrought in the faithful by the nearer approach of Christ, that Sun of
righteousness, in Gospel Ordinances, as namely, a holy profession of the
faith, the sweet buddings of good desires, abundance of gifts and graces, those
fruits of the Spirit mentioned, Gal. 5.22. together with a heavenly
conversation, manifested in all kind of good works, and joys unspeakeable and
glorious following hereupon, all which tend to make the faithful a sweet
savor unto God, 2 Cor. 2.15. and useful and delightful to each other; and to
adorn the Church and make her to appear like another Paradise upon earth: see
Phil. 1.11. all which was long since foretold concerning the Church in Gospel
times, even in such like expressions; as Isa. 27.6. Israel shall blossom and
bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit: and Chap. 35.1, 2. The desert
shall rejoice and blossom as the rose. It shall blossom abundantly, etc. see
also Hos. 14.5, 6.

The time of the singing of birds is come.] Because the birds sing not so
continually and cheerfully in the winter, as they do in the spring and summer,
therefore is this mentioned as another token of the springs being come. And
hereby may be meant, either, 1 all the occasions of exceeding great joy, which
God should give unto his people after their great oppressions and troubles;
according to that which is said of the Jews after their return out of
Babylon, Psalm. 126.2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue
with singing; or 2. the exceeding joy of the Gospel, and so it may comprehend,
1. the carolling of that heavenly Quire of the Angels at the birth of Christ,
and the first publishing of the Gospel, Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the highest,
on earth peace, good will toward men. 2. the preaching of the Gospel by the
Ministers whom Christ has set apart to that service, which must needs be the
sweetest of music to the consciences of afflicted sinners, when by their glad
tidings they shall be assured of the pardon of their sins, and of Gods love
and favor; whence are those expressions concerning the preachers of the
Gospel, Isa. 52.7, 8. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him
that brings good tidings --! Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice, with the
voice together shall they sing. And 3. the joy of the Saints, by reason of the
joyful sound of the Gospel, which shall cause them seasonably to sing forth
praise unto God; see Isa. 24.14. and Ephesians. 5.18, 19.

And the voice of the turtle is heard in our Land.] Because this bird appears
first, as swallows and other birds with us, at the coming in of the Spring,
therefore is this also here added. Now because the turtle is an usual
hieroglyphick of solitariness and mourning, therefore some Expositors hold,
that by the voice of the turtle is meant the preaching of the Doctrines of
mourning for sin, self denial, bearing the Cross, crucifying the old man,
and such like, taught by Christ and his Ministers, or particularly by the
Baptist, as the forerunner of Christ: But because all the other expressions
joined with this, the budding forth of flowers, the singing of birds, etc. do
apparently signify a time of joy, therefore it seems most probable, that this
must likewise be so understood. And accordingly by the voice of the turtle, may
be meant, 1. the preaching of the glad tidings of the Gospel of peace, even
that voice of our Saviors, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that labor, and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, and that with respect to the turtles
being an Emblem of peace: or 2. the Churches praying to God, or praising of
God; which may be called the voice of the turtle, partly because the Church for
her chastity and pure conjugal love to Christ, may be fitly termed his turtle
dove; see the Note, Psalm. 74.19. and partly because it is by the holy Ghost,
who appeared upon Christ in the likeness of a dove, Mat. 3.16. that the Church
is acted both in her prayers and praises. Or if there were any respect had in
this expression to the mourning of the faithful for sin, I conceive it must
be upon this ground, because if this voice of the turtle* come once to be heard
in a Land, it is a most comfortable sign of near approaching deliverance.

Verse. 13. The fig tree puttteth forth her green figs, etc.] Because the
fig tree and the vine are two of the last trees that shoot forth in the spring,
therefore these are here mentioned in the last place, their budding forth being
a sign, that the spring is now well come on; as our Savior expressly also
says of the fig tree, Mat. 24.32. When his branch is yet tender, and puts
forth leaves, ye know that summer i^ nigh. And because the fig tree does shoot
forth her first green figs, before or together with her first leaves, whereas
other trees do for the most part first shoot forth blossoms and leaves, and
then afterward their several fruit, hence is the expression here used, The
fig tree puts forth her green figs. And so for the next words, And the vines
with the tender grape give a good smell; that which seems intended is, that
when the small little branches of the vines do first shoot out the flowers
thereof, they yield a very pretty delightful smell; they give a good smell;
that is, though they yield no extraordinary strong sent, yet they send forth a
very acceptable pleasant savor. However, that which is spiritually signified
hereby is, either, 1. that both Jews and Gentiles (for the fig tree may
signify the Church of the Jews, and the vines the several Congregations of
the Gentiles) should upon the preaching of the Gospel, betimes come in to
Christ, and should be adorned with variety of graces, and bring forth the
several fruits of new obedience, which should yield a sweet savor, being
acceptable to God thorough Jesus Christ; or 2. that God would bless his Church
after the winter of her low estate with peace, and the several sweet blessings
of peace; as indeed a comfortable quiet condition is often promised the people
of God under this phrase of their sitting under their vines, and under their
fig trees, as in Mica 4.4. and elsewhere. And then again in the figurative
expressions here used very observable it is, 1. that the people of God are here
compared to fig trees and vines, which usually bring forth in greatest plenty,
and whose fruit is counted the sweetest of all fruits, to show, that Christians
should bring forth fruit in great abundance, and that their obedience is very
pleasing to God, Hos 9.10. And 2. that Christ does not despise, but makes
precious account of the first buddings of grace in young Christians, though far
from that maturity and ripeness that afterward he will expect from them.

Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.] See the Note on these words
before, ver. 10. The repeating of them again implies, 1. the weightinesse of
that which the Church is here pressed to do. 2. With what speed she is
required to do it, even presently without any delay; see Genesis 41.32. 3. Our
dullness and sluggishnesse that must be so often pressed unto it: and 4. the
exceeding love and mercy of Christ in being so urgent with her in that which
was merely for her good.

Verse. 14. O my dove! that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places
of the stairs.] The stairs here intended are, I conceive, the craggy places
in rocks, which have the appearance of steps or stairs for men to climb up: so
that by the clefts of the rock, and the secret places of the stairs, the same
thing is meant, to wit, those holes and hollow places in high steep rocks,
wherein doves are wont to build their neasts for the greater safety, and to
hide themselves. Some conceive, that because the Spouse might keep in,
notwithstanding she had been so earnestly invited to come forth, out of fear
of being hardly used by the shepherds, therefore her Beloved does here again
desire her to come forth, in the confidence of his presence and protection,
that so he might delight himself with seeing her, and conferring with her:
However in the spiritual sense these words, O my dove! are an expression of
the great love that Christ bears to his Church, and the great delight that he
takes in her. In many regards the Church may be compared to a dove; as, 1.
Because the spiritual beauty of the faithful is like that of the dove; see the
Note, Chap. 1.8. and Psalm. 68.13. 2ly, Because their spiritual chastity is also
like that of the dove; see the Note, Chap. 1.15. 3ly, Because they are meek and
gentle and harmless as the dove; a bird, as some say, without any gall, and
has neither beak nor claws to do any hurt with: 4ly, Because as the dove is
a neat and cleanly bird, delighting to lodge in neat places, and to feed
cleanly; so the Church delights in all kind of purity, she loves no ways of
uncleaneness, nor delights to feed upon sinful pleasures, the dogs meat of
the world, nor upon men's inventions, but upon pure Manna, the pure word of God,
Christ, and spiritual things. 5ly, Because as the dove is a sociable creature,
delighting to consort and dwell together; so the Saints delight in the
communion and assemblies of the Saints; whence is that, Isa. 60.8. Who are
these that fly as a cloud, and as doves to their windows; and 6ly, Because
the Church is subject to many fears, and is often in sorrow and mourning, and
herein does much resemble the dove, a timorous and fearful bird; Hos. 11.11.
They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of
Assyria, and a bird that has a mournful kind of tone; whereto many passages
in the Prophets do allude, as Isa. 38.14. I did mourn as a dove; and chap.
59.11. We mourn sore like doves; and Ezekiel. 7.16. They that escape of them shall
escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them
mourning, every one for his iniquity. But the maine thing here intended, is,
that the Church is like the dove in regard of the doves hiding themselves in
the clefts of the rock, and in the secret places of the stairs. And hereby is
meant, either, that as the dove being a weak, helpless creature, no way able
to defend her self against birds of prey, has only this refuge left her, to
fly into the holes and clefts of rocks, thereby to secure her self; so the
Church, being weak in her self, and not able to grapple with her mighty
enemies, is often in times of persecution constrained to fly into the farthest
parts of the earth, and there to hide themselves and sit mourning like doves in
secret corners; as it is said of those Confessors, Heb. 11.38. That they
wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth;
see also Jer. 48.28. To which some add also the faithfulls withdrawing and
retiring themselves out of a modest apprehension of their worthlesness and many
infirmities, or a desire to serve God freely in secret, and so to avoid being
suspected of hypocrisy: Or 2. the Churches seeking to secure her self from
the wrath and judgments of God; and from the rage of persecutors, by flying
thorough faith and prayer to God in Christ, as her rock of refuge: Or 3. The
Churches sure safety, in that she is hid as in a rock, to wit, either, 1. in
the inaccessible rock of Gods election, which abides for ever, and cannot be
overthrown, 2 Timothy 2.19. Or 2. in the mediation of Christ, the true Rock of
shelter, Mat. 16.18. and 1 Cor. 10.4. even in the wounds that were made in his
blessed body, which were as the holes in this rock: Or 3. under the secret of
Gods providence and protection; for which see the Notes, Psalm. 32.7. and 61.2,
3. and 91.1.

Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice.] Some think that the
Church is here invited to come forth out of the narrow limits of Judea, and to
show her self amongst the Gentiles, and there boldly to preach the Gospel. It
is best to understand the words generally, that the Church is here invited to
enjoy communion with Christ more fully and comfortably then she had formerly
done; for by letting him see her countenance is meant, that she should hold up
her face with comfort, now the winter storms were over, that she should enjoy
his presence in his Ordinances, and walk with him in all holiness and
uprightness of conversation: and by letting him hear her voice is meant, that
she should be much in praying to him, and praising his name, that she should
let him frequently hear the voice of her supplications, Psalm. 28.2. and the
voice of her thanksgiving, Psalm. 26.7. see also, Psalm. 50.15.

For sweet is thy voice, etc.] The meaning is, that Christ delights in the
prayers and praises of his people; according to that, Mal. 3.4. Then shall the
offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord; and Pro. 15.8. The
prayer of the upright is his delight; yea even when she mournes as a dove
before him, she is then most welcome to him: For the sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit, etc. Psalm. 51.17. And so for the next words, And thy countenance
is comely; the meaning is, that Christ delights in the spiritual beauty of his
people; see the Note, Chap. 1.5. and Psalm. 45.11. and loves to see her often
presenting her self before him, yea even when she comes weeping, with a
blubbered face, and a mourning countenance; for his work is to bind up the
brokenhearted, etc. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3.

Verse. 15. Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines.] Because
of this word [ us] some conceive that these words must be taken as spoken by
the Bridegroom, and his Spouse jointly together: But this may be only, because
the charge here given was for the advantage of both. And considering that it
does most properly belong to his authority and power to take order for the
preventing of every thing that may be distasteful to him or to his Spouse, it
may seem most probable, that this is spoken by him to his Bridemen or
companions, to wit, that his Spouse being now come forth to go with him into
the fields, they should take order that their walking in the vineyards might
not be the less delightful to them, by their seeing what spoil the foxes had
made amongst the vines. Now in giving this charge, having said, Take us the
foxes, (wherewith indeed Judea did abound, see the Note Judge. 15.4.) he adds,
the little foxes, that spoil the vines; and that either only as tearming them
little, with reference to wolves and wild boars, and other greater beasts,
thereby implying that even these little foxes, as well as greater wild beasts,
would do much mischief in the vineyards, to wit, by eating the ripe grapes, and
by scraping holes about the vines, whereby they might be quite marred: or else
as intending thereby the younger cubs, and that not only the old ones, but even
these little foxes must also be taken, both because they would grow greater,
and now being young they might be the more easily taken; and likewise
especially, because these little foxes, by reason of their boldness, not being
yet so wary as the old ones, and by reason of their wantonness in gnawing and
scraping the vines, did often most mischief amongst the vineyards. And now for
the spiritual sense of this place; First, It is clear, that by Christ's and the
Churches vines here, are meant the several Congregations of Gods people, or
particular Christians, See the Note chap. 1.6. and Psalm. 80.8. The vineyard of
the Lord of hoasts is the house of Israel, says the Prophet, and the house of
Judah his pleasant plant, Isa. 5.7. Secondly, Though by the foxes that spoil
the vines, may be meant all the enemies of the Church in general, that waste
and destroy Gods people, as namely tyrants and persecutors, who for their craft
and blood-thirsty rage, may well be called foxes (such as Herod was, who is
called a fox, Luke 13.32.) and who may be here also termed the little foxes,
by way of contempt, to imply that how highly soever such thought of themselves
and of their mighty power, God would make no more of destroying them, then of
taking so many little foxes; yet here, I conceive, by the foxes ere meant, at
least principally, false teachers, heretics and schismatics; First, Because
such are expressly called foxes in the Scripture, Ezekiel. 13.4. O Israel, thy
Prophets are like the foxes in the deserts. Secondly, Because these are
frequently noted in the Scripture to be men of much serpentine craft and
subtilty; Deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13. such as cover their self-respects, and mischievous
purposes under a show of much zeal, and so lurking in the very bosom of the
Church; and that by sleight and cunning craftiness, do lie in wait to deceive,
Ephesians. 4.14. and by good words and fair speeches, and glozing pretenses, and
enticing carriage, and many other subtle courses, do indeed deceive the hearts
of the simple, Romans 16.18. And thirdly, Because these, by the name of little
foxes, seem purposely to be opposed to the wild boar out of the wood, and the
wild beasts out of the field, Psalm. 80.13. that is, persecuting tyrants out of
the Church, and that to imply, that though these do not root up and waste
Christ's vineyard, as those other do, yet a great deal of mischief they do
therein; and therefore their ways are said to be pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2.2.
and they are said to creep into houses, and to lead captive silly women laden
with sins, led away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3.6. yea and to subvert whole
houses, Tit. 1.11. whereto agrees that of the Prophet, Jer. 12.10. Many pastor^
have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot; they have
made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness. And yet withal the mention
that is made of the little foxes, may be also intended to imply, that even
those that seem least hurtful amongst these seducers, must not be endured, and
that they must be looked after betimes, when they first begin to show
themselves, because then they may be more easily suppressed, and so the
mischief, they will otherwise do, may be prevented. 3. The charge here given is
to Magistrates, and Ministers principally, who are his vine-dressers, and the
keepers of his vineyards; yet not so but that others in their places are
required to be assisting herein. And 4ly, by taking these foxes is meant, what
ever holy means may be used to rid the Church of these pestilent seducers and
disturbers of the Church, who are indeed no better then bruit beasts (as the
Apostle calls them, 2 Pet. 2.12.) made to be taken and destroyed; they must be
detected, and convinced, and confuted by the Ministers, and so taken (as I may
say) in the net of the Scripture, yea they must by just censures be cast out of
the Church, hunted and chased out of the Lords vineyards; yea and if this will
not make them give over doing mischief, they must be smoked out of their holes,
and either chained up, or (if incorrigible) destroyed, by the power of the
civil Magistrate, that the souls of Gods people may not be destroyed by them.

For our vines have tender grapes.] The meaning is, either that because the
vines did already bud out with tender grapes, therefore it was fit that care
should be taken to suppress the foxes, that the fair hopes they had of a
comfortable vintage, might not by them be made frustrate; or else that
therefore all diligence was to be used for the taking of the foxes, because now
the grapes were so young and tender, the smaller matter would shake them off,
or other ways destroy them. And so that which is mystically intended may be,
that new gathered Churches, and young beginners in Christianity, are most in
danger of Heretics and Schismatics, and ought with most care to be secured:
Christ is careful of young Christians, and would not lose the hopes of the
first buddings of grace.

Verse. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his.] Because of the words in the
following verse, Turn my beloved, etc. therefore some conceive that this must
be taken, as spoken by the Spouse to her Bride-maids, when her beloved had upon
some occasion withdrawn himself. And again some think that from the 10. verse
unto this verse, the Church related the words of her beloved, and here begins
to speak what she thought of what he had said. But neither of these are
necessary to be supposed. Only indeed this which the Church here says, seems
spoken as in answer to all those expressions of her beloveds love, which she
had related in the foregoing verses; Having said there, how earnestly he had
invited her to come forth to him, etc. hereupon she breaks forth into this way
of boasting and glorying in the love of her beloved, in the mutual interest
they had, and the delight and complacency they took one in another. My beloved
is mine, and I am his; as if she had said, I am sure of it, and can boldly
speak it (according to that, 1 John 4.16. We have known and believed the love
that God has to us,) my beloved did first give himself to me, and then I made
a total resignation of my self to him; and so by a Covenant of grace we are
really united together as husband and wife; He is flesh of my flesh, and bone
of my bone, and I am one spirit with him, He that is joined to the Lord, is one
spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. which is that the Lord by the Prophet says, Ezekiel. 16.8. I
swear unto thee and entered into a Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine:
and hence it is that our hearts are knit together in a bond of unchangeable
love; my beloved desires no other love but me, and I desire no other beloved
but him; we rest satisfied and are fully contented with one another love: And
hence it is that we enjoy full communion one with another; I have an interest
in all that is his, all his graces and glorious excellencies, and he has the
command of all that I have. And this seems also to be another of those passages
which are often repeated, as the burden of the Song. See the Note above, verse.
7.

He feeds among the lilies.] As if she should have said, He feeds his flock
in fruitful, pleasant, flowred, and sweet pastures, such as may well be called
gardens, rather then meadows; and therefore it is no wonder though I have set
my heart upon him, and do thus triumph in his love. Some take the word [ He
feedeth] passively, and so would have the meaning to be, that the graces and
services of his Saints are the choice dainties whereon Christ feeds, sweet and
pleasant as lilies. And then of those that understand it actively of his
feeding his flock among the lilies, (as before, chap. 1.7.) some say it is
meant of his feeding his Saints in his heavenly Paradise, with sweetest
pleasures and delights: But others again understand it better of the Church
here below, to wit, either that Christ exercises his Pastoral office among
pure and lovely Christians, lilie-white Saints, and such as grow up as lilies,
Hos. 14.5. or that he feeds his flock with goodly Scripture truths and
mysteries, or with very precious and sweet Ordinances: Or yet in more general
terms this expression may imply, either that Christ is very sweet to his
Spouse; or that he deals bountifully with his people, and carries himself with
much sweetness toward them.

Verse. 17. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, etc.] Some refer
this to the last clause of the foregoing verse, He feeds among the lilies,
until the day break, and the shadows flee away; and accordingly they would
have the meaning to be this, that Christ does the work of a Pastor amongst his
pure and precious flock, feeding them with his holy Ordinances, until the
morning of life eternal shall drive away the shadows of this world, and then
there will be no farther need of the word and Sacraments, but he will converse
with his Saints in a more glorious manner, and show himself to them face to
face in the splendour of his heavenly kingdom unto all eternity. But taking the
words as they are placed and joined together in our Bibles, Until the day
break, and the shadows flee away, turn my beloved, etc. The mystical sense is
far more clear, namely, that the Church, finding that her beloved had
withdrawn himself, (which was hinted in the foregoing Note,) does here call
upon him to return again, and that as one not able to endure his absence,
turn my beloved; or rather, that she desires of him, being now present, and
having now much cheared her with a gracious visit, that when ever he should see
cause to withdraw himself from her, (as there are times indeed when Christ
does hide himself from his Church and people, Isa. 45.15. Verily thou art a
God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior) he would be ready upon
all occasions to return to her help and comfort again. As for the first
branch of this verse, Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, some
take it to be all one in effect, as if the Church had desired that this Christ
would do, so long as there was a succession of day and night, that is, as long
as the world should continue; As if she had said, As long as the Sun shall
break out day after day in the morning, and as long as upon Sunsetting, the
shadows shall flee away, (the ground of which expression is, because in the
evening the shadows do run out in length, as seeming to flee away;
according to that of the Prophet, Jer. 6.4. Woe unto us, for the day goes
away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out) be ready seasonably to
come in to my refreshing. And so they make this place parallel with that, Psalm.
89.29, 36, 37. concerning which see the Notes there, and that this ( until) is
all one in effect, as if the Spouse had desired it might never be otherwise;
see the Note above, ver. 7. But I rather take these words, Until the day break,
and the shadows flee away, to be a Periphrasis of the day of Christ's second
coming, which is elsewhere called, the day of the Lord, 1 These. 5.2. and the
day of Christ, 2 These. 2.2. and with respect to the general Judgment that
shall then be, the great and the terrible day of the Lord, Joel 2.31. By the
darkness of the night in the Scripture is usually meant times of ignorance and
sin, as, Mic. 3.6. Night shall be unto you, that you shall not have a vision,
and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine, and the Sun shall
go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them; and Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. And so also
times of trouble and sorrow, as in Lam. 3.1, 2. I am the man that has seen
affliction by the rod of his wrath; He has led me and brought me into
darkness, and not into light. And again by the day is often meant a time of
knowledge, and holiness, and comfort, and joy; as in 1 These. 5.5. Ye are all
the children of light, and the children of the day, etc. And Romans 13.12, 13.
The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly
as in the day, etc. See the Note also, Esth. 8.16. And so here by the day
break, and the shadows fleeing away, is meant the breaking forth of the Lord
Christ, that Sun of righteousness, in the brightness of his glory at the day
of his second coming, and the fleeing away of all the shadows of ignorance
and sin, and misery thereupon; for as upon the breaking forth of the morning
light, the darkness of the night, which is nothing else but the shadow of the
earth interposed betwixt us and the Sun, does suddenly vanish away; and as
the shadows of the Ceremonial Law, as they are called, Col. 2.17. Heb. 10.1.
did all flee away at the day of his first coming, so in the shining forth of
that glorious morning of the day of his second coming, as it is called, Psalm.
49.14. All the shadows of sin and ignorance and sorrow shall be suddenly
chased away, after which there shall be no more any night, but the Church shall
be for ever in a state of perfect light and joy. That therefore which the
Church here desires of Christ is, that he would always constantly, even unto
the day of his second coming, be ready at hand to come in to her help and
comfort in all times of tribulation and desertion, and so support her and
stir up the graces that were in her, that she might persevere unto the end. I
know some limit this request of the Spouse to the faithfulls desire of comfort
in an hour of desertion, and so accordingly they understand her request thus,
that her beloved would return, till by a thorough discovery of himself to her
soul, he had wrought in her a sense and feeling of spiritual joy, which is
that, say they, the Apostle Peter intends in these words, 2 Pet 1.19. Until
the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts. But the former Exposition
is more full and clear.

And be thou like a roe or a young heart upon the mountains of Bether.] Or, as
it is in the margin, Upon the mountains of division. We read not elsewhere of
any place in the land of Judea, that was called Bether. The most probable
opinion that we meet with is, that it was that place in the Land of Gilead, on
the outside of Jordan, which is elsewhere called Bithron, 2 Samuel 2.29. and that
the mountains here were called the mountains of division; either, 1. Because
they were divided in the top into many several hills; or 2. Because the river
of Jordan was thereabouts divided when the Israelites did at first enter the
Land of Canaan; or 3. Rather because this place was by Jordan divided from the
Land of Judea. And so the ground, why the Spouse desires here that her beloved
would in his return to her, be like a roe or a young heart upon the mountains
of Bether, may be, either because in those mountains he used to feed his
flock; or because it was a place much frequented by roes and young hearts, and
so all that is intended is, that he would be as speedy in his return to her,
as those creatures are in their running upon the mountains of Bether. See the
Notes above, ver. 8, 9. And again by Christ's coming to the help of his Church
upon the mountains of division, may be meant, either, 1. his coming from the
heavens to their help, which may be called the mountains of division for their
height, and because they separate and divide betwixt us and Gods presence of
glory; or else 2. his coming to the Churches help and comfort in her several
Congregations, dispersed abroad in several places all the world over; and too
often sadly divided in regard of schisms and dissentions amongst themselves;
or 3. his leaping over or subduing those mountains of sin and ignorance,
whereby we are hindered from a full fruition of Christ. However, by his being
like a roe or a young heart, is clearly meant his coming sweetly and swiftly to
the help of his Church, according to those continual pantings of the faithful
after Christ, Come Lord Jesus, yea come quickly.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. BY night on my bed I sought him, whom my soul loves.] It is not
necessarily to be supposed, that in the several passages of this Song, there
should be always an immediate dependence of every verse upon that which went
before; they may represent what was done and said in several places and at
several times. But yet that which follows here may well be taken as depending
upon that which went before. It was hinted before, Chap. 2. ver. 8, 16, 17.
that whilst the Spouse slept, her Beloved had withdrawn himself from her; And
here now she proceeds to tell her Bride-maides how hereupon she behaved her
self, By night on my bed I sought him, whom my soul loves, to wit, as a wife
that missing her husband in the dark night, does first feel for him in the
bed, and afterward calls upon him, to see if he were in the Chamber. As for
those words, him whom my soul loves, see the Note, Chap. 1.7. Some say, that
by the Spouses seeking her beloved in her bed is only meant, that she wished
for him, and desired the time were come that she might find him there; and that
because till the marriage was consummate between them, it was not proper to say
that she expected to find him there. But considering the faithful are said in
the Scripture not only to be espoused, but also to be married to Christ here in
this world, as their husband; see Jer. 3.14. and Isa. 54.5. and Ephesians. 5.23. etc.
(though indeed the full consummation of the marriage betwixt Christ and his
Church in general, is not to be till Christ's second coming in glory.) I see no
reason why this figurative expression may not be understood literally as it is
in the Text, that she sought him in her bed. However, for the mystical sense of
the words we must know, 1. that though Christ is always graciously present
with his people, even in their worst condition, Isa. 43.2. and Psalm. 34.15, 18.
yet there are times when they may be without the sense of his favorable
presence, occasioned by the terrors of some sore affliction, and the darkness
that is upon their own spirits, or by his withdrawing the light of his
countenance from them; and then it must needs be dark night with them;
according to that, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that
obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no light?
2. That in these times of desertion, the faithful being quickened by the Spirit
of Christ, do usually seek to recover again some comfortable evidence of his
gracious presence by resorting to his Ordinances, by meditation, prayer,
repentance, and such like holy means of obteining a comfortable communion with
him: and 3. accordingly they may be said to seek him by night on their beds, 1.
Because meditating of Christ by night on their beds (taking it literally) is
one of the usual means whereby in such times of desertion the faithful are
wont thus to seek after Christ; at those times when others take their rest,
then their souls are tossed and troubled with longing desires after Christ: as
it is expressed, Isa. 26.9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: Or 2. Because this many times
befalls them, when they were immediately before wholly at ease and quiet; even
when the faithful enjoy full content in regard of outward delights, and being
withal free from all fears of their interest in Christ; do lay themselves
down securely, as it were on a bed of ease, many times by the wakening of Gods
Spirit, they are brought to bethink themselves more seriously of their estate,
and to enquire whether the quiet and peace of conscience they enjoy be found
and well-grounded or no; and not finding it so, they set themselves to seek
after it, and all their outward contentments and delights yield them no delight
at all without that: or 3. Because they seek after Christ in the darkness of
tribulation and desertion, with quiet, patient, and submissive spirits, being
content quietly to wait upon God: or 4. Because they seek after Christ idly,
being too much taken up with their worldly enjoyments, and not with that
anxiety and diligence and pains, as it is fit Christ should be sought; they
would be glad to enjoy the sweetness of Christ's gracious presence, but are
loath to abandon their carnal delights. And 5. to this some add, that the
faithful seek Christ by night on their bed, when in an hour of desertion they
seek him in the place of Gods public worship, (called before the Churches bed,
for which see the Note, Chap. 1.16.) where they are wont to enjoy his gracious
presence, and the embracings of his loving kindness. But of this I conceive
the Church speaks in the following verse.

I sought him, but I found him not.] This implies how eager she was to find
him: The repeating of the word, say some, I sought him, and then again I sought
him, implies that she was constant and earnest in seeking. But it may be added
by way of bewailing the succeslesnesse of her endeavors, at least for a time,
or in that way of seeking him in her bed. Where Christ is sought in times of
desertion, he is not always presently found: The faithful may seek him by
solitary meditations alone by themselves, and yet find no comfort; but
especially when men seek him coldly and idly, no marvel though then he still
hides himself; unless the Church does rouse her self out of the bed of carnal
ease, and seek Christ with zeal and fervent desires, he will still stand aloof
from her, Jer. 29.13. Ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me
with all your heart.

Verse. 2. I will rise now, etc.] Here the Spouse makes known, that missing her
beloved she could take no rest in her bed, but resolved with her self what is
here expressed, I will rise now; that is, presently, without any delay, lest I
lose mine opportunity: And go about the City in the streets, and in the broad
ways, I will seek him whom my soul loves; as if she had said, I will spare no
pains, but will seek him diligently every where: for seeking in the streets,
and in the broad ways, imports a busy and narrow search, according to that,
Jer. 5.1. Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and
know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, etc. That
which is intended is, that though the faithful in a time of desertion do not
presently find Christ, yet they will not give over, but will continue seeking
still, and will be content to undergo any pains and trouble, that they may come
to enjoy his favorable presence. By the Spouses rising out of her bed may be
meant, the faithfuls self-denial in regard of their ease, and worldly
contentments, and resolute abandoning of all things that may hinder them from
seeking the gracious presence of Christ, and that peace of conscience which
thereby they shall be sure to enjoy: Or, by her rising and going about the City
in the streets, and seeking her beloved in the broad ways, may be meant, That
when the faithful cannot obtain any sensible apprehensions of their interest
in Christ, and of his gracious presence by their own private meditations, or
what ever else was intended in the foregoing verse by seeking him by night on
their bed (for which see the Note there) they are wont then to seek it in other
ways, as either 1. By going to the Word and other holy Ordinances in the
public assemblies of Gods people, where Christ uses to teach, as Solomon
elsewhere says, Prove. 1.20, 21. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice
in the streets, she cries in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of
the gates, in the City she utters her words: See also Neh. 8.1. and Luke
13.26. Or 2. By consulting with as many of the Saints and servants of God, as
possibly they can, and getting directions from them, yea by observing the
courses of all sorts of people, and how it fares with them. Or 3. by stirring
up the graces that are in them, and buckling themselves to act their graces
with all cheerfulness and zeal, to walk in those ways which Christ has
prescribed them, and to tread in his steps. And indeed this is the very reason
why Christ does sometimes hide himself from his people, that hereby they may be
brought to seek him the more earnestly, even as David did, when he said, Psalm.
63.8. My soul follows hard after thee: and so this is one of the main
benefits which the faithful reap by their tribulations and desertions, that
hereby they become more fervent and industrious in the ways of Christianity,
Psalm. 119.67. they become so violent upon this, that as men besides themselves,
they mind nothing in a manner, but this, (as it was with the Spouse here, that
could not stay till morning, but in the dark night ran alone up and down the
City to seek her beloved) a zeal which worldlings judge to be no other but
madness, 1 Pet. 4.4. They think it strange, that you run not with them into
the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you. See also Act. 26.24.

I sought him, but I found him not.] That is, Though I sought him with all that
earnestness that is before expressed, yet I could not obtain that sensible
evidence of the presence of his grace that I desired. Some hold that the drift
of this passage is to signify that Christ is not to be found amongst the
greatest multitudes, or by the most common and generally received opinions of
men. But rather the drift of it is to show, that even when the faithful do use
the means appointed for the clearing of their evidences of their interest in
Christ, yet they may for a while still continue in darkness; and that because
Christ may still hide himself, either for the greater trial of their graces,
their faith, patience and constancy: or else to bring them to use the means
more seriously and diligently then they have formerly done.

Verse. 3. The watchmen that go about the City, found me.] That is, they found
her wandering by night up and down the City to seek for her Beloved. And if by
the City we understand Jerusalem, the City of God (as indeed, where should the
faithful look for Christ but there?) then by the watchmen must needs be meant,
either the Prophets and Apostles, and other true Pastors, or such at least, as
are in the place of Pastors and Teachers, together with other officers of the
Church: for such are usually in the Scripture called watchmen, as in Ezekiel.
3.17. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel: and Isa.
62.6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold
their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence.
And Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves;
for they watch for your souls. See also Isa. 52.7, 8. Some Expositors I know
hold that by these watchmen are meant the wisemen and the Princes of the world
that are mere strangers to the mysteries of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.8. And others,
that hereby are meant Heretics, that are still going about every where to
deceive, and that because it is not said that the Spouse did here receive any
information from these watchmen concerning her beloved, and Chap. 5.7. it is
expressly said that they smote her and wounded her. But considering that the
word watchmen does properly import such as by their place are to watch over the
souls of Gods people, most probably it must be meant of such as are Pastors and
Teachers in the Church; either, First, Such as are able and faithful watchmen
(and then observable it is, that they found out the Spouse, and not the Spouse
them; which intimates, that it is the duty of faithful Ministers to seek out
those, that look not after them.) Or secondly, Such as are in place of Pastors,
but no way fit for the place, being false teachers, blind and ignorant, such as
the Prophet complains of, Isa. 56.10. His watchmen a^ blind; they are all
ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber; and therefore no marvel though the Church could receive no
satisfaction from them.

To whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soul loves?] The vehemence of the Spouses
desire after her beloved is set forth by this, that not fearing the watchmen,
when they came upon her, she either stayed not till they questioned her, or
regarded not what they said, (if they did speak to her) but presently fell upon
enquiring of them, whether they had seen her beloved, not being ashamed to own
her Love to be the cause of her nightly wandering; as likewise by this, that she
speaks, as if she thought no body could be ignorant of her love, and as if
every body must needs know, and love and admire her beloved, as well as she.
All which does notably set forth how impatiently desirous the faithful are of
enjoying communion with Christ; and how far they are from being afraid or
ashamed to own him and their love to him, before those that have most power in
their hands.

Verse. 4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
soul loves.] That is, It was but a little while, or I was gone but a little
way after I had enquired of them, ere I found my beloved. They that by the
watchmen of the City do understand heretical teachers, or such as are in the
place of the Ministry, but are no way such as they ought to be, do accordingly
observe that men must pass by such before ever they can hope to find Christ.
Let them alone (says our Savior of such watchmen, Matthew. 15.14.) they be
blind leaders of the blind. But understanding thereby the faithful teachers of
the Church, hereby is employed, 1. that even in the use of the means, Christ is
not always presently found; he may for a while hide himself from afflicted
consciences, though they seek for comfort from the ministry of the word, both
that their joy may be the greater when they do find him, and that they may not
ascribe their comfort to the excellency of the means, but to the free grace of
Christ in revealing himself to them: 2. That they that persevere to seek
Christ in the use of all holy means, shall be sure notwithstanding at last to
find him; Seek and ye shall find, Mat. 7.7. Such love in seeking Christ shall
be at last successful, Joh. 14.21, 23. when they begin to think themselves
past all hope, then on a sudden Christ does often manifest himself to them
sooner then they expected, Heb. 10.37. Yet a little while, and he that shall
come will come and will not tarry: yea and 3. that this is usually by the help
of directions and instructions formerly received from Gods Ministers; (as here
it might be by the watch-mens directions that the Spouse found her Beloved,
though their answer be not expressed) those instructions, that did no good for
the present, may yet after a while be effectual for comfort.

I held him and would not let him go, etc.] This sets forth the vehemence of
the Spouses affection; As soon as I found, I catched hold on him, says she,
and held him fast, and would not let him go: which agrees fully with that
which Solomon elsewhere directs us to do, Pro* 4.13. Take fast hold of
instruction, let her not go, etc. When the faithful after a time of desertion
do recover the gracious presence of Christ, they are the more careful and
zealous to cleave fast to Christ; after so much hazard and sorrow in the loss
of him for a time, and so much pains taken to find him again, they are loath
and fearful by any negligence on their part to loose him any more, and
therefore they use all holy means to make his presence familiar and
perpetual, and determine they will not part with him for any advantage in the
world: as Jacob resolved when he was wrestling with the Angel, Genesis 32.26 I
will not let thee go, except thou bless me, so they resolve not to part with
Christ, till they receive that blessing from him, Matthew. 25.34. Come, ye
blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. And so accordingly
some understand the following words, Until I had brought him into my mothers
house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me; to wit, that the Spouse
resolves not to part with Christ, till she with him was brought, or till she
had brought him formed in her heart, Gal. 4.19. into the heavenly Jerusalem.
But indeed that is not the exposition that is most generally received. This
expression, I held him and would not let him go, until I had brought him into
my mothers house, etc. is suited to the modesty of a virgin, that would do
nothing without the consent of her mother, and likewise to the custom of those
times, namely, that the women used to dwell in each family apart by themselves;
see Genesis 24.67. And for the understanding of the spiritual meaning hereof we
must know, 1. that this may be spoken in the name of several believers, who
call the universal Church their mother that conceived them: or that the Church
that is at present militant upon earth, may term the Church in former times
her mother, from whom she received her being: and 2. that by my mothers house,
and the chamber of her that conceived me, is meant, either, 1. the public
Assemblies of Gods people; and so that which is intended is, that when the
faithful have found the sweet discoveries of Christ's love to them, their
endeavor then is to bring him into the public Assemblies, there to praise and
magnify his name, and to tell of his love to them, to be ravished with his
desired embraces, and to communicate her comforts to others, that they also may
rejoice with her: yea and some do hereupon apply it more particularly, as that
the Church of the Gentiles does here express her resolution not to be
satisfied till she have brought Christ into the several assemblies of the
converted Jews, from whom she did at first receive the knowledge of Christ. Or
2. The heart and conscience of believers, where faith dwells, Romans 10.10. and
then the meaning is, that when the faithful have gotten some comfortable
evidence of Gods love in Christ, they resolve not to let go their hold of him,
till they have gotten full and constant assurance of their election and
salvation by Christ, that so Christ and they may enjoy constant, familiar and
delightful communion one with another, as those do that live under the same
roof in their mothers house: for the word, until, see the Note, Chap. 2.17.

Verse. 5. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes and by the
hindes of the field, that ye stir not up nor awake my love, til he please.] The
very same passage, word for word, we had before, Chap. 2.7. for which see the
Note there. Only observable it is, which is here added by several Expositors,
that this passage seems to be thus repeated with reference to a custom, then
used and even to this day continued amongst us, to wit, that they were wont
with songs and the noise of musical instruments before the Bride-chamber to
awaken the Bridegroom and the Bride, by way of congratulating their marriage
to them.

Verse. 6. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?] The
best of Expositors hold, that here begins a new passage of this Song, which
has no dependence upon that which went before; (for which see the Note, Chap.
3.1.) wherein the Bridegroom, or rather the friends of the Bridegroom or
Bride, (who are still the Chorus in this Pastoral) discovering the Spouse
afar off, coming from feeding her flock, or driving home her flock out of
the wilderness, (for any Country that is not frequently inhabited, and full of
houses, is usually in the Scripture called a wilderness, see Exodus 3.1. and 1 Samuel 17.28.) do thereupon break forth into this expression of admiration, Who
is this that comes out of the wilderness, like pillars of smoke, etc? As if
they had said, What Country damosel is this, that comes up from the desert in
so stately a manner? Oh how lovely and comely and delightful is she! Her
tallnesse and straightness is set forth by comparing her to pillars of smoke;
and that which is added of her being like pillars of smoke, perfumed with
myrrh and frankincense, with all the powders of the merchant; that is, smoke
that arises from the burning of the sweetest of all powders, either has
relation to her perfumed attire, or else is intended only to set forth, that
she was as pleasing for her beauty and comeliness to the eye, as such rich
perfumes are pleasing to the smell. And because she is represented as ascending
up in a mountainous Country, where the higher she went up, and the nearer she
came to them, the more her tall stature was discovered to them, and the more
they smelt her sweetness, therefore she is said to go up like pillars of
perfumed smoke. Now all this is to show how spiritually glorious, comely and
delightful the Church is, even to admiration, either in the eyes of Christ, or
of the Angels and the faithful servants of Christ, his friends and Bride-men,
yea in the eyes of all that shall well take notice of her: first, she is said
to come out of the wilderness, (and that as in allusion to the Israelites being
carried out of the wilderness into Canaan) and that either, 1. Because she is
called out of the world, which is as a wilderness, dry and barren, and void of
all goodness, untilled, full of briars and thorns, a place of wild and savage
beasts, and because she is content to abandon the world, and all her carnal
lusts and worldly enjoyments, that she may go up to Christ. And this indeed
was most evident in the conversion of the Gentiles, who out of barbarism were
turned to be such a holy people; and therefore it is mentioned often in the
Scripture as a strange and wonderful thing; as in Isa. 35.1. The wilderness
and the solitary place shall be glad for them, and the desert shall rejoice.
And Chap. 43.19, 20. I will make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the
desert; The beast of the field shall honor me, the dragons and the owls, etc.
Or 2. with respect to her being delivered from some sad, desolate, wilderness
condition, wherein she had been for a time, by reason of some sore persecutions
by tyrants, or some grievous troubles occasioned by some pestilent heretics
and schismatics, that had bereaved her of much of her beauty and glory.
Secondly, she is said to ascend like pillars of smoke, both with respect to her
being raised by faith above the world, and her mounting up in her affections
and conversation heavenward, whether her beloved is gone before her; and
because she did in her first originals grow up and increase exceedingly,
multitudes being daily added to the Church, and that when her spiritual beauty
and glory was hidden from the world under an afflicted, obscure, smoaky
condition, and there was no outward power nor worldly wisdom or eloquence used
in persuading men to come in to her, as likewise because of her courage and
boldness in the exercise of the true Religion, without any omitting thereof
for fear, or any other base respect. And, thirdly, she is said to ascend like
pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, etc. as in allusion to
those pillars of smoke which used to arise from the sacrifices of the Temple,
where there was much incense burnt, Psalm. 141.2. to set forth the fragrancy of
her virtues and graces, and the spiritual sacrifices of prayer and
thanksgiving, and other good works, which do continually come up before God,
and make them a sweet savor unto him, 2 Cor. 2.15. See also, Act. 10.4. Phil.
4.18. and Revel. 5.8.

Verse. 7. Behold his Bed, which is Solomon's.] These may be the words of the
Spouse, the Church, who in the foregoing verse was discovered coming out of the
wilderness, and mounting up heavenward; wherein by setting forth the
magnificent glory of Solomon's Spouse, in regard of the bed, which he had
prepared for her; she seeks to imply, that if one that were betrothed to
Solomon must needs long to have her marriage consummate, that she might enjoy
him in such state and glory, it could not seem strange, that she should hasten
to the enjoyment of her beloved, the true Solomon, whose glory was so far
greater, then the others; see the Notes, 2 Samuel 12.24. and 1 King. 4.23, 24.
But it is more generally held, that this also, with that which follows in the
rest of this Chapter, is added by those that admired the Spouse in the
foregoing verse, to wit, the Bridegroom, or his friends, and that by way of
encouraging her still to hasten to her Beloved, that had provided so
magnificently. And by this bed of the true Solomon is meant, either, 1. the
holy assemblies of Gods people; or 2. the hearts of Gods people; for which see
the Notes before, Chap. 1.13, 16. Or 3. The kingdom of heaven, where the
Saints shall enjoy the love, and presence, and delightful embraces of the Lord
Christ, their husband, and that with incomprehensible rest and peace unto all
eternity. Some indeed would have this bed of Solomon's to be prayer, and others
the Scripture, in both which indeed the faithful do often enjoy sweet
communion with Christ. But the former expositions seem more clear and proper.

Threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel.] It may well be
that Solomon had this very number of valiant men, of his own subjects, that he
might have the more assurance of their faithfulness, (such as were David's
Worthies,) to watch every night, as a royal guard, before his chamber; see the
Note, 2 Samuel 11.9. Or else a definite number may be put for an indefinite. But
however hereby doubtless is figured, (as in allusion to the watch that was
kept by night in the Temple, Psalm. 134.1.) either how safely without all danger
or fear the Church shall rest with Christ in heaven, or else the keeping and
safe-guarding of the persons, the hearts and minds of the faithful here in
this world, partly by Gods provident care over them, 1 Pet. 1.5. and partly by
his causing them by his Spirit to keep a diligent watch over their own hearts
and ways, Pro. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence; by means whereof they
are both secured from dangers, Psalm. 91.1* 5. and likewise they enjoy much
sweet quiet and rest in their minds, Pro. 3.23, 24. According to that of the
Apostle, Phil. 4.7. The peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Yea by these threescore
Worthies keeping the bed of the true Solomon, may be meant, either, 1. the holy
Angels, true Israelites indeed, holy and faithful, who excel in strength,
Psalm. 103.20. and do continually take care for the preservation of Gods
people, Psalm. 34.7. Or 2. the faithful Pastors and Ministers of the Church;
those spiritual watchmen, spoken of before, ver. 3. for which see the Note
there. Or 3. the penmen of the Scripture, whose writings tend many ways to
the rest of Believers, Romans 15.4.

Verse. 8. They all hold swords, being expert in war.] That is, They are all
valiant expert soldiers, that know well how to handle their weapon. And if by
this guard, as is said in the foregoing verse, we understand the Angels, then
hereby their exceeding great power and prowess is signified; but if thereby we
understand the Pastors and Ministers of the Church, then the meaning may be,
that they stand always armed with that sword of the Spirit, which is the Word
of God, Ephesians 6.17. which is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, Heb. 4.12. and are able men, each of them well knowing how to use this
weapon skilfully for the defense of the faithful against all that oppose them
and seek their ruin; Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught,
that he may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince the
gainsayers, Tit. 1.9.

Every man has his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.] For
the sword on the thigh, See the Note, Psalm 45.3. That which is mainly intended
hereby, seems to be, that both Angels and Ministers are watchful over the
Churches peace and safety, and cheerfully ready to defend her from all sudden
dangers and fears, especially such as she may be subject to through ignorance
or error, or the secret attempts of the rulers of the darkness of this world,
Ephesians. 6.12.

Verse. 9. King Solomon made himself a charet of the wood of Lebanon] That is,
of Cedar, which was the chief wood of Lebanon, concerning which, see the Note,
Chap. 1.17. Some read this, as we see in the margin of our Bibles, King
Solomon made himself a bed of the wood of Lebanon; and accordingly they hold
that here there is given us a fuller description of the richness and
magnificence of that bed mentioned before, ver. 7. But it seems more probable,
that the word here used in the Original, which is indeed no where found but in
this place, does rather signify some Litter, such as our Sedans are, or some
Couch-coach or Charet of state, which Solomon provided for himself and his wife
to be carried in, at the time of their nuptials, or when ever they meant to
show themselves in any way of pomp and triumph amongst the people; and that
because of those words that follow, ver. 11. where the people are called forth
to the beholding of this glorious sight, Go forth, O ye daughters of Sion, and
behold King Solomon, etc. However the drift of this passage seems to be the
same with that before, ver. 7. namely, by setting forth further the magnificent
state of Solomon, to imply how much more desirable the enjoyment of Christ, the
true Solomon is, whose glory does so far transcend the glory of Solomon, as
in other things, so in regard of this his Charet; for by this Charet is meant,
either 1. The humane nature of Christ, wherein the Lord of glory showed himself
amongst men, And we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the
Father, Joh. 1.14. which was richly adorned with the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
and which he made and assumed to himself, being the more fitly compared to the
Cedars of Lebanon, because it never saw corruption, Act. 2.31. Or 2. The word
of the Gospel, which is indeed of Christ's own framing (we received it wholly
from him, and must not vary in the least from that form of doctrine, which he
delivered to us) and wherein Christ does ride as in a triumphant Charet from
one place to another all the world over, and so shall do always; and therefore
it is called the everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6. Or 3. The Church, made up by
Christ of particular Saints, those incorruptible Cedars, Psalm. 92.12, 13.
wherein by the profession and preaching of the Gospel, Christ is continually
carried up and down, as in a Charet amongst them.

Verse. 10. He made the pillars thereof of silver, etc.] Which was indeed very
plentiful in Solomon's days, 1 King 10.27. The bottom thereof of gold; that
is, the couch or seat whereon they were to sit, or lie, was made of rich cloth
of gold: The covering of it of purple; that is, the upper part of it, or the
curtains, which was the covering of those that sat in it, was made of some
costly purple stuff: The midst thereof being paved with love for the daughters
of Jerusalem; the meaning whereof I conceive to be this, that the inside of
this Charet was all lined with curious hangings of needle work, full of love
stories, or richly adorned with all variety of precious stones, the love and
delight of the daughters of Jerusalem. And perhaps this word paved, is used
figuratively, to show that the very flour of the coach, whereon they set their
feet, was overlaid with such rich clothes of tapestry, and as in allusion to
that variety of artificial works that used to be in their pavements in those
days. And now according to the several Expositions given of Solomon's Charet in
the foregoing verse, we may also spiritually apply the several parts of it, as
they are here particularly described, the more to set forth the glory of
Solomon, and under that the glory of Christ, of whom Solomon was a type First,
Understanding by the Charet the humane nature of Christ, by these pillars of
silver may be meant, the precious gifts wherewith his humane nature was
adorned: and 2. By the bottom thereof of gold, the singular and transcendent
purity of his nature, free from the least stain of sin, which made it fit for
the habitation of the only begotten Son of God. And 3. by the covering of it of
purple; the form of a servant, under which the glory of his Godhead was covered
or hidden from the eyes of men, especially with respect to his bloody passion,
for which it is said to be of purple; and 4. by the midst thereof being paved
with love for the daughters of Jerusalem; the heart of Christ, fully fraught
with love, which made him undertake the work of the redemption of Gods chosen
ones, or the amiablenesse of his doctrine and conversation, which drew the
people to love and admire him. But secondly, understanding thereby the word of
the Gospel, whereby Christ is carried forth into all nations, then by these
pillars of silver may be meant the firm and certain truths therein contained,
pure as silver, Psalm. 12.6. or the several Articles of the Christian faith:
and by the bottom of gold, the Covenant of grace contained therein, more
precious then gold, which is the groundwork of Christ's love to the Saints, and
that whereon the Saints rest for life and salvation, as on a sure foundation;
and by the purple covering, the rich and pleasant promises of the people, which
are comfortable coverings to them to shelter them from all evil; and by the
midst paved with love, those many Scripture-Stories, the whole scope whereof is
to set forth the love of Christ to his Saints, and the love which they likewise
have shown to their Lord Christ. And thirdly, Understanding thereby the
Church, then by the pillars of silver may be meant, the stability of the
Church, and the perseverance of the Saints; or the goodly graces wherewith the
Church is adorned; or rather, the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. and so also
other the faithful Ministers of Christ (wisdoms seven pillars, see the Note,
Pro. 9.1.) who by the doctrine of the Gospel are to bear up the Church, and by
the purity of their lives to be an ornament to her; according to that of the
Prophet, Mal. 3.3. He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he
shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, etc. And
by the bottom thereof of gold, the faith of Believers, much more precious then
gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. or the purity of their hearts, or the peace and quiet of
their consciences, by means of their reconciliation with God thorough Christ;
and by the purple covering, the heavenly power wherewith the Church is
protected, or their hope of heavenly glory, or rather their outward
conversation, which is Prince-like, holy and heavenly, those robes of
righteousness, which are also washed in the blood of the Lamb, Revel 7.14. and
many times made the more glorious thorough their sufferings for Christ; and by
the midst thereof being paved with love for the daughters of Jerusalem, the
shedding abroad of the love of Christ in the hearts of the faithful, and the
ardent love which this fetches back from them both toward God and Christ, and
their brethren, yea indeed toward all men whatsoever, all tending to the glory
and delight of the elect of God, the daughters of Jerusalem. Some refer these
last words to all that is said before concerning this charet, to wit, that it
was wholly made for the use of the daughters of Jerusalem, or that they might
be pleased with the sight of it, or that they might be won highly to love and
esteem Solomon. But most Expositors apply it to the last branch only.

Verse. 11. Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, etc.) This may be taken as
spoken, together with that in the foregoing verses, by the Bride-groomes
friends, or rather by the Bride her self, who upon occasion of that which was
said in the foregoing verses concerning the magnificence of her Beloveds
charet, the true Solomon, does call upon others to go forth and behold that
goodly sight, yet not to gaze so much upon the richness of the charet, as to
behold the magnificence of him that sat in it: And behold king Solomon, with
the Crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in
the day of the gladness of his heart: which may be meant of the Royal Crown,
and his mother Bathsheba may be said to have crowned him herewith, because it
was by her means that he, rather then any other of David's sons, was crowned
King, 1 King. 1.16. or rather it may be meant of some garland or crown which
his mother provided for him against his nuptials; for though no such thing be
expressed in the Scripture, yet it may well be that there was a custom in
those times, that mothers at the marriage of their sons amongst other
ornaments provided garlands, wherewith they crowned their heads, and so the
mothers of Princes provided crowns of gold for them: In allusion whereto this
may be spoken, Behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned
him in the day of his espousals, etc. As if the Bridegroomes friends, or the
Bride her self had said, Consider of Solomon's state in this his charet, and
compare it with that of our Bridegroom, and you will find that his was as
nothing in comparison; Or thus, You that never saw Solomon with the crown on
his head in the day of his espousals, come forth and behold his express image
in this our Solomon, and you will find the glory of our Solomon does far
surmount his. As for the spiritual sense of these words, we must consider, 1.
that Zion being the most eminent part of Jerusalem, and so a type of the
Church, as Jerusalem was, (see the Note, Psalm. 2.6.) the daughters of Zion, are
the same that were before termed the daughters of Jerusalem, chap. 1.5. for
which see the Note there. 2. That by the going forth of these daughters to
behold king Solomon is meant, that Christians should go out of themselves, out
of all their sins, their worldly intanglements and carnal confidences, and
out of the false Church, Zion transformed into Babylon, and should by the eye
of faith behold Christ, the true Solomon, the King of heaven and earth, and
more peculiarly the King of Zion, and to their astonishment and joy, observe
and consider how much his magnificent state did excel that of Solomon, which
is much the same with that, Zach. 9.9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion,
shout O daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy King comes unto thee. 3. That by the
crown wherewith his mother crowned him is meant, either those faithful souls
that by the preaching of the Gospel are won and converted to Christ; or the
glory and honor, which the Church has in all ages yielded to Christ by owning
his sovereignty, by placing all her hope of salvation in him, and spreading
abroad throughout the world, by the preaching of the Gospel the glory of his
person and kingdom, the great love he has shown to his people, and the great
things he has done for them. Both which we may the rather pitch upon. 1.
Because the Scripture speaks of the Church, the Congregation of the faithful,
as the mother of Christ, Revel. 12.1-5. and in the Church by the word of faith
Christ is conceived, Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travel in birth
again, until Christ be formed in you; and Christ himself did profess,
whilst he was upon earth, that he esteemed and honored them, as his mother,
Matthew. 12.50. 2ly, Because Christ is indeed by the faith of the Saints honored
in the world, as the king of Israel, Joh. 1.49. When Christ rules in his
Church by the scepter of his word, and people submit to his law and government,
they then set the Crown upon his head; and thence it is that Christ said of
his Disciples, Joh. 17.10 that he was glorified in them. And 3ly, Because the
Scripture does speak of the faithful that are by the Church converted and
won unto Christ, as his glory and crown; as Isa. 62.3. Thou shall also be a
crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy
God. And indeed if a people converted to Christ may be termed the Crown of
that Minister by whom they are converted, as the Apostle calls the Philippians
his joy and crown, Phil. 4.1. and a good wife may be termed a crown to her
husband, Pro. 12.4. well may the faithful, who are the Spouse of Christ, a
chosen generation, and a royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9 be said to be the crown,
wherewith his mother crowned him: yea and the rather happily may Christ be said
to be crowned by his mother, the Church of the Jews, because his first
converts were gathered there. And 4. By the day of his espousals, and the day
of the gladness of his heart, is meant the time when a people are by the
Gospel won to the faith, whence is that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have
espoused you unto one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ; for then does the Lord begin to rejoice in such a people, even as a
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, Isa. 62.5. Yea and some do apply this
particularly to the glory and dignity wherewith Christ was crowned after his
resurrection, Heb. 2.9. which might also be called the day of his espousals,
and of the gladness of his heart, because he had then procured his Church to
be presented to him as a glorious Spouse, (even as Eve after Adam awoke from
sleep was presented unto him) which was to the Lord a matter of great triumph
and joy.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. BEhold, thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair.] Here it is
clear that Christ the Bridegroom does extol the beauty of the Church, his
Spouse, and that by way of a kind reply to that discovery she had made of her
high esteem of him, if the later part of the foregoing Chapter be, as it is by
many, understood of her: We had the very same expression before, Chap. 1.15.
for which see the Note there; yet some apply this particularly to the Church of
the Jews.

Thou have doves eyes within thy locks.] Having extolled the Spouses beauty in
general, he proceeds to set forth her beauty in many particulars, the several
members of the Church, or the manifold graces, wherewith she is adorned; And
accordingly begins with her eyes, the most eminent and beautiful part: The
first words, Thou have doves eyes, were also opened before, Chap. 1.15. But
here they are repeated with an addition, Thou have doves eyes within thy locks;
happily, in allusion to the custom of Brides having their hair hanging loose
about them, which made their eyes shine forth from between their locks with the
more beauty and loveliness. Now first because by these dove-like eyes, I
conceive, the Churches Teachers are here principally meant, (though some
understand thereby faith, the first and chief of all Christian graces, without
which it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. and others add Magistrates to
Ministers, to make up the Churches two eyes.) and 2. Because the locks seem to
be mentioned here as an ornament to the eyes, therefore it seems most probable
that the drift of this expression, Thou have doves eyes within thy locks, is to
show, 1. that in the public assemblies of Gods people the Teachers, as the
eyes and lights of the Church, are most conspicuous; and 2. that such full
assemblies, when they receive the word into believing hearts, and thrive under
their teaching, are as the locks to the eyes, a great ornament unto their
Teachers, Phil. 4.1.

Thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from mount Gilead.] Or, that
eat of mount Gilead, as it is in the margin, that is, that feed on mount
Gilead, a fruitful soil, where the cattle, that were bred, were fat and
fair. The Spouses beauty is farther here set forth by showing that her hair,
which indeed the Apostle terms a woman's glory, 1 Cor. 11.14. was as great an
ornament to her head, as such a flock of goats were to mount Gilead, in the
eye of those that from a far did look up and behold them grazing there; and
that because her hair was thick and long, fine and soft, and bright, and
curled, and kept in neat and good order; and therein like to a long flock of
goodly goats going close together, whose hair also, especially when they were
fat and in good liking, used to be curled and long, (whence it was that they
made coverings or curtains for the Tabernacle of goats hair) for which also
see the Note, 1 Samuel 19.13. In all which, as likewise in the following
similitudes, it is very observable, how Pastoral-like the expressions still
are. And hereby is meant spiritually, either the Churches outward profession of
religion, which is indeed a great ornament to her, or her good works, or more
particularly, the pure and holy thoughts and meditations in the minds and heads
of the faithful, still ascending heavenward, which though they be innumerably
many, yet by the watchfulness of the Saints, are kept in good order, as a
flock of goats by the shepherd, or rather the multitude of believers,
numberless as the hairs upon a man's head are, who when they meet together in
full assemblies to wait upon God in his ordinances, are as goodly a sight as a
flock of goats upon mount Gilead.

Verse. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn, which came
up from the washing, etc.] Because the teeth are many, and their comeliness
consists much in the whiteness, cleanness, brightness, and evenness of them,
therefore it is that the teeth of the Spouse are here compared to a flock of
sheep that are even shorn, which came up from the washing: yea and there may be
an allusion in this expression to the usual means of keeping the teeth white
and sweet, which is often washing. And then for the following words, whereof
every one bear twins, and none is barren amongst them, I conceive the maine
thing intended thereby is, that a flock of sheep do never make a more goodly
show, then when each ewe has her lamb, especially when they have each of them
two twin-lambs going along with them, and so that this is added to set forth in
general the handsome comeliness of her teeth; yet if there be any thing
farther intended by this branch of the comparison in reference to the teeth, I
should think it is, 1. the correspondence of the upper and lower teeth one to
another, one answering the other, and being as like as twins one to another.
And 2. the fullness of their number, and their orderly standing close and even
together, when there is not a tooth wanting, and so no gap to be seen amongst
them, which is meant in that last clause, and none is barren among them. And
now for the spiritual application of this; Some by these teeth understand the
Ministers of the Gospel, who are, 1. many in number, 2. do receive their
strength from Christ, as teeth do receive their strength from the head; 3. are
by their place to prepare and chew the strong meat of the word, the deep and
harder truths of religion, (...), rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy
2.15. that it may be the better understood, received, and digested for the
nourishment of the whole body, (so that as before Ministers were mentioned as
the eyes of the Church, in relation to their watching over the people, so here
as the Churches teeth, in regard of their feeding the souls of Gods people by
their preaching and teaching) a work so needful that a people without Pastors
and Teachers are like a mouth without teeth, uncomely to behold, and which may
well endanger the pining and consuming away of the whole body; for where there
is no vision the people perish, Pro. 29.18. 4ly, of equal authority, power and
jurisdiction, Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27. like teeth of equal size, and none of them
exalting themselves above their fellows, and of sweet accordance amongst
themselves, united in love together, as twin-brethren, and of one tongue, and
one heart. 5. Men of singular purity and holiness, not only washed white by the
blood of Christ from the guilt of all their sins (which was signified by
their washing in Baptism) but also exemplary for the innocence and purity of
their lives and conversations: and 6. fruitful in their ministry, like sheep
that bear twins, as being instrumental for the conversion of many. And some
add too, that they are compared to shorn sheep, to imply that they above
others must be willing to be stripped of all, or at least that they must put
off all love of the world, and respect to earthly things, that they may be the
freer to follow Christ, and to serve him. Again others by the Churches teeth
understand her studying, meditating and ruminating on the word of God, the
bread of life; and therewith also her judging, discerning, and applying by
faith both the word and seals of the Covenant, which is the means whereby the
faithful do feed on Christ, and the promises, to the spiritual nourishing of
their souls; see the Note, Psalm. 22.26. all which holy actings of the soul,
are for their purity, cleanness, order and comeliness, compared to a flock of
sheep that are even shorn, which came up from the washing: and to sheep bearing
twins, with respect to the manifold good, which they produce in the faithful,
as namely, knowledge in the mind, and holy resolutions in the will, love to
God, and love to man, etc. And indeed both these applications of the Metaphor
in the Text are justly approved by the best Expositors.

Verse. 3. Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, etc.] That is, fine, soft,
round, and small, and for color cherry-red. And first hereby may be meant the
Pastors and Teachers of the Church, by whom God speaks to his Church, and the
Church makes known her desires to God. As before they were termed the
Churches eyes, with respect to their watching over the body of the people, and
her teeth because they prepare the food of life for the nourishment of their
souls, so here again they are called the Churches lips, in regard that they
declare to the people the sweet Oracles of God, and likewise do mightily
prevail with God by prayer on their behalf: in which holy employments they
may well be compared to a thread of scarlet, 1. Because they express not
themselves with big swelling words of vanity and humane eloquence (though
withal their speech must not be loose and negligent, but prepared with skill,
care, and diligence) according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.4. My speech
and my preaching was not with enticing mords of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit and power; see also ver. 13. 2ly, Because their
words are yet withal, as it were, dyed in grain with the royal Majesty, power
and authority of Christ, by whom they are commissioned to preach in his name.
3. Because in their teaching they are in a manner continually sounding forth
the doctrine of Christ crucified. And 4. Because they discharge their work in
these holy services with much ardency of zeal for the glory of God, and of
love and charity to the souls of Gods people. Or secondly, By these lips of
the Church, may be meant the speech and communication of Christians in
general, their prayers and praises, their confessions, and professions of
their faith, etc. which should not be lofty and full of vain ostentation, but
holy, pure, and gracious, breathing forth continually their fervent love to
God, and to their brethren; according to that of the Apostle, Let your speech
be with grace, Col. 4.6. and being made acceptable unto God through the scarlet
tincture of Christ's precious blood, may well upon that account also be compared
to a thread of scarlet. And so the following words may seem to be added by way
of explaining these, and thy speech is comely; that is, elegant, sweet, and
amiable, for because though a woman be never so beautiful, yet if her voice
and speech be rude and harsh, and any way unpleasant, that disgraceth all,
therefore is this added to the praise of the beauty of her lips, that her voice
and speech is comely. But, I say, hereby is meant the gracefulness and
loveliness of the language and speech of Gods people, as it is said
particularly of the praises that they daily give to God, that they are pleasant
and comely, Psalm. 147.1.

Thy temples are like a piece of a Pomegranate within thy looks.] That is, Thy
temples, (under which the cheeks may be included too, that are joined to the
temples) are beautiful and ruddy, and so appear thorough thy locks, which hang
upon them; see the Note above, verse. 1. Even the outward rind of the
Pomegranate is often, in some parts of it especially, of a reddish color,
(whence it was, as some conceive, that the Pomegranates in the high Priests
Ephod were ordered to be made of purple and of scarlet, Exodus 28.33.) and
therefore the words may refer to this. But yet because it is said, Thy
temples are like a piece of a Pomegranate, to wit, when it is cut asunder,
therefore I rather think the comparison is taken from the glorious
rosey-redness of the inside of the Pomegranate, when it is cut or broken in
pieces. However because the temples and cheeks are the seats of modesty and
shamefacednesse, and are thereby frequently died with a comely blush, therefore
by these temples and cheeks of the Spouse, may be meant the reverend and
modest face of the Church, the discreet, humble and modest conversation of Gods
people, who are full of love and good works, as a Pomegranate is of ruddy
kernels, fearing to do or speak any thing that is not seemly for them, and
blushing through shame, when they have failed, and who being quickened by the
same Spirit, and adhering to their Pastors, do much set forth the Churches
beauty. Yet some by these temples and cheeks of the Church, do again
understand the Preachers of the Gospel, who are most conspicuous in the Church,
and in regard of their ministry her greatest ornament. Yea and some, not
without good probability, do understand it of the Ruling Elders, and
Ecclesiastical Governors, who lie hid amongst the people, as the temples do
within the locks, and may the better be compared to a piece of a Pomegranate,
that is in Physic of great use for the restraining and healing of sundry
diseases, not only because this Aristocratical Government in the Church does
notably resemble the many goodly kernels that are united together in a
Pomegranate, but also especially because the chief work of these Officers is
to be healers in the Church, to restrain and cure all dissoluteness and
sinful distempers amongst the people.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an armory.] That is,
straight and round, strong and beautiful, and high, lifted up above the rest
of her body, as that Tower of David's was above the rest of the City. And by
this Tower of David may be meant, either that strong hold of Zion, which he
took from the Jebusites, and which it seems he enlarged and fortified; See the
Note, 2 Samuel 5.9. or rather that great Tower, which David built at the end of
his house, for a Castle of defense, mentioned, Neh. 3.25, 26, 27. and which is
also there ver. 19. called the armory; for which see the Note upon that place;
to which some conceive the Prophet does allude in calling the Church, Mic. 4.8.
the tower of the flock. But now by this neck of the Church, 1. Some do again
understand the Preachers of the Gospel, by whom spiritual food is conveyed to
the rest of the body for their nourishment, and who do by strength received
from Christ, hold forth Christ amongst the people, even as the neck by strength
received from the head, does bear up the head, and may well be compared to the
Tower that David built for an armory, because they are in their places as in a
watchtower, men eminent above others for their employments and for their
graces; and because they are appointed of God for the defense of the Church,
and for the subduing of all that oppose themselves to the obedience of Christ,
2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. and are as a spiritual armory, from whence the people are to
furnish themselves with all things requisite for the well managing of their
spiritual warfare. 2. Others, by this neck of the Church, understand the
doctrine of life given us by the inspiration of the Spirit of God in the
Scriptures, whereby the Church does excel in wisdom all the wisdom of the wise
men of the world, and whence the people of God may be furnished with the whole
armor of God, as the Apostle calls it, Ephesians. 6.13. to make them more then
conquerors over all their spiritual enemies. 3. Others do best, I think,
understand hereby that most eminent grace of faith, (which knits Christ and the
faithful together, as the neck does the head and the body, Joh. 17.20, 21.)
together with the fruits thereof; as namely, obedience to Christ as our Lord
and King, called the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. whereby believers do
willingly submit their necks to the yoke of Christ, and to bear stoutly
whatever afflictions God is pleased to exercise them with; but will not yield
to be servants and slaves to Satan and sin; and likewise their invincible
courage and constancy, their fortitude and holy boldness, whereby they fight
the good fight of faith, and against which all the gates of hell are not able
to prevail.

Whereon there hang a thousand bucklers etc.] That is, a huge multitude of
bucklers, (a definite number being put for an indefinite) All shields of mighty
men; that is, fit for the use of Princes, and great Commanders in the war, or
rather shields that had been hung up there by great soldiers, such as were
David's Worthies, who were men famous for their strength and valor, and are
several times called, David's mighty men* see the Note, 2 Samuel 23.8. and had it
seems a house, that was for their meeting, o^ for their armory, or some such
like service, which was called the house of the mighty, Neh. 3.16. to wit,
either the bucklers and shields, which they had taken from their enemies, which
were hung up as trophies of their victories; or else those which themselves had
used in the war, and had hung up there, as the monuments of their valor, and
the service they had done for their Country; in which regard some think that is
spoken of the Soldiers in Tire, Ezekiel. 27.11. They hanged the shield and helmet
in thee: they set forth thy comeliness. Some conceive that the weapons of
war kept in this armory, were afterward removed by Solomon into the Temple,
because the spears and shields, wherewith Jehoiada the high Priest armed the
Levites for the destroying of Athaliah, are called King David's spears and
shields, 2 Kings 11.10. But that is altogether uncertain. However, this I
conceive is clear, that having compared the Spouses neck to the tower of
David, in allusion to the chains of gold and pearl which women used to hang
about their necks, as their chiefest ornaments, he adds these words, Whereon
there hang a thousand bucklers, etc. And by these bucklers and shields are
meant, either, 1. the many and manifold gifts and graces, wherewith God has
fitted his Ministers for the defense of his Church; together with the purity of
their doctrine, their zeal in preaching, and holiness of life, whereby the
Church is very much beautified and strengthened; or 2. the divine sayings that
are in the Scripture, the examples of the Saints in former times that are there
recorded, and the many precious promises, which are there stored up, concerning
the many several ways of defense, whereby God will surely protect his people
against all dangers, as by the Ministry of the Angels, etc. Or 3. the Worthies
that through faith should be a great defense to the Church, such as the Martyrs
and others have been; or the heroical acts that should be done by them,
whereby the Church should become dreadful, even to her enemies; or 4. that in
the shield of faith, as the Apostle calls it, Ephesians. 6.16. there is virtually the
defense of a thousand shields.

Verse. 5. Thy two breasts are like two young roes, that are twins, which feed
among the lilies.] That is, In fruitful, pleasant and sweet pastures, see the
Note, Chap. 2.16. to imply, that they were little, plump, juicy, clear, fair,
and pleasant to behold; and they are compared to two young roes, that are
twins, to imply, that they were of the same form, size and proportion, every
way as like, as twins use to be. And now by these breasts of the Church, (in
the beauty whereof much of the beauty of the Church is said elsewhere to
consist; Ezekiel. 16.7. Thou art come to excellent ornaments; thy breasts are
fashioned) Some again hold, that the Pastors and Teachers in the Church are
meant, and that with respect to their catechizing and instructing people in the
Principles of Religion, their feeding of the younger and weaker Christians,
those that are yet but babes in Christ, with the sincere milk of the word, 1
Pet. 2.2. according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.2. I have fed you with
milk, and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not able to bear it; and that 1
These. 2.7. We were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherishes her children.
And indeed well may Ministers be termed the Churches Breasts, because they are
so affectionately desirous to nurse up those they have brought forth unto
Christ. As a woman's breasts will ache till they be drawn, so are Ministers even
pained with earnest desires that people would be instructed by them in the word
of life and salvation; I long to see you, says the Apostle, Romans 1.11. that I
may impart unto you some spiritual gift: and as the more a woman's breasts are
sucked, the more the milk increases; neither does any thing sooner dry up the
breasts, then not giving suck: so it is with Ministers; the more they teach,
the fuller and more able they are for the work of teaching; neither does any
thing sooner blast and dry up their gifts, then when they are negligent in
teaching. And then likewise Preachers of the Gospel may well be compared to
young roes, because the Gospel was by those that first preached it so speedily
spread in most parts of the world: and to young roes, that are twins, etc.
because they are so richly furnished with gifts and graces for the work of
their pastoral office, and thereby such a goodly ornament to the Church, and
because they are of one heart and mind, and do carry on the work of the Lord
unanimously, delivering nothing to the people but the pure words of Christ,
whose lips are said to be like lilies, Chap. 5.13. But then others again
understand the old and new Testament to be the two breasts of the Church, which
are as like as twins one to the other, continually full of that sweet and
saving doctrine of life and salvation, so that her children may always suck
and be satisfied, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 66.11. with these breasts of her
consolations, and may be refreshed and nourished and grow up unto life
eternal. These two, yea and some take these two breasts to be the two
Sacraments; or the Word and the Sacraments.

Verse. 6. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, etc.] Some learned
Expositors will have this to be the reply of the Spouse; But unless there were
some evident reason for it, (as indeed there is not) considering that both the
foregoing words, and those likewise that follow, are clearly the words of the
Bridegroom, I see not why these should not be taken as his words also. The
Spouse, the Church, had desired, Chap. 2.17. that Christ would upon all
occasions visit her in much mercy, Until the day break, and the shadows flee
away: turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe, or a young heart upon the
mountains of Bether; for which see the Notes there. And therefore it seems
most probable, that here Christ answers that desire of his Spouse, Until the
day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the mountain of myrrh,
and to the hill of frankincense; for the understanding whereof we must know,
that it may well be that the Spirit of God does here allude to certain
mountains and hills, that were replenished with all kind of odoriferous trees,
(the same perhaps, which were before called the mountains of Bether,) near to
which Solomon had a vineyard, whether he used to retire himself. 2. That by
the mountain of myrrh, and the hill of frankincense, may be meant, either, 1.
the Temple at Jerusalem, where myrrh and frankincense were daily offered unto
the Lord; which some think the more probable, because the word ( Mor) in the
Hebrew, (which we translate myrrh) may seem to have some allusion to the Mount
Moriah, (which might be so called at first, because it was a place where much
myrrh grew) where it is clear the Temple was built, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Or 2. the
heaven of heavens, and that because in this mountain Christ is exceedingly
delighted with the service that is there done him by the glorified Saints, and
the holy Angels: or 3. the Church and kingdom of Christ upon earth, whereof
the Temple was a type, see the Note, 1 Kings 6.1. and which is called, Ephesians.
2.21. A holy Temple unto the Lord, and the holy hill of Sion, see the Note,
Psalm. 2.6. where the incense of prayers and praises are continually offered
unto the Lord, which are acceptable unto him thorough the mediation of Christ,
yea where God does continually power forth of the graces and consolations of
his Spirit, by reason whereof the whole conversation of Christians does breath
forth nothing but the sweet savor of holiness and purity, which makes the
Lord take exceeding great delight in them. And some add hereto, that by the
mountain of myrrh, is meant the Church Catholic, and by the hill of
frankincense, particular Congregations. And lastly, that the meaning of this
place may be accordingly, either, 1. that till the day-breake of the Gospel,
and till the coming of Christ in the flesh, (when indeed the legal shadows
should all flee away) he would make his residence in the Temple of Jerusalem,
and would there dwell amongst them, where sweet odours were continually offered
up unto him; he would make that his resting place, though in the Tabernacle he
had formerly removed from one place to another, unto the time that the shadows
of all Mosaical types and ceremonies should by the light of the Gospel be
driven away. Or 2. that until the day of his second coming he would retire
himself, (in regard of his bodily presence) into that place of his rest in
heaven, where the praises and Hallelujahs of those glorious spirits about him
should be his delight; and this he mentions (as some conceive) thereby to
allure his Spouse to go thither along with him. Or 3. that though he did thus
withdraw himself in regard of his bodily presence, yet he would be ready upon
all occasions, even unto the day of his second glorious appearance, to come in
to the help and comfort of his Church, that mountain of myrrh, and hill of
frankincense, where his people would be continually offering to him those pure
evangelicall offerings, that were far sweeter in his esteem then the sweet
odours, that were offered unto him in the time of the Law.

Verse. 7. Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee.] As if he
should have said, Not to insist any farther in particulars; as in those parts
of thy body I have particularly mentioned, so indeed in thy whole body
throughout, thou art perfectly fair, without the least spot or blemish that
may impair thy beauty. And this he adds, that by this discovery of the high
esteem that he had of her, he might assure her of his tender care over her; and
might persuade her, as the words in the following verse seem to imply, to go
along with him. What is meant by that spiritual beauty of the Church, whereof
Christ here speaks, we may see in the Note, Chap. 1.15. Nor need we stumble at
that which is said of the perfection of her beauty, because there is so much
amiss in the souls of the holiest of Gods servants here in this world; for,
1. This may be spoken of the Churches future perfection in heaven, and the
expressing of it in the present tense, may be only to imply the certainty of
it; and with respect to this place it may well be that the Apostle uses in a
manner the very same expressions, Ephesians. 5.25, 27. where he says, that Christ
loved the Church, to wit, as his Spouse, and gave himself for it, -- that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing: but that it should be holy and without blemish. And 2. It may
be said truly of all the faithful, even here in this world, that they are all
fair, immaculate and spotless, though not in themselves, yet as they are
justified before God through the imputation of Christ's righteousness, cleansed
from all their sins, both greater and lesser, by his blood, 1 John 1.7. and
made perfect by his beauty put upon them; for this is that the Apostle says,
Col. 2.10. Ye are complete in him; and Chap. 1.22. Holy and unblameable, and
unreproveable in his sight.

Verse. 8. Come with me from Lebanon (my Spouse) with me from Lebanon: etc.] The
literal meaning of this place seems clearly to be this, that the Bridegroom
does here invite his Spouse to go along with him from Lebanon (where he found
her, or where it is supposed she was feeding her flock) to a place far more
fertile and pleasant, namely, to the mountain of myrrh, and the hill of
frankincense, whether he had before said that he would betake himself, ver. 6.
neither is there indeed any other place mentioned, to which he invites her. And
observable withal it is, 1. that he twice together repeates this his
invitation, Come with me from Lebanon, with me from Lebanon, to set forth how
vehemently he desired, that she would harken to him herein. And 2. that he
gives her here a Title, which he had never given her before, (though after this
he repeates it again and again, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. and Chap. 5.1.) namely,
that of his Spouse, Come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse, either by this loving
compellation the more to allure her to go along with him; or else to imply,
that as his Spouse she was bound to do what he required of her. And the same
he requires, I conceive, of her in the following words, Look from the top of
Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon; for these are mentioned either as
other places, where she used to be with her flocks, or as places over which
she was to pass, that she might go along with him to the mountain of myrrh;
and accordingly he means that she should look forth, appear and show her
self, coming along with him from those places; or else, that from these high
mountains he desired she would look, to view the exceeding delightfulness of
that place, whether he invited her to go along with him. And then in the close
of the verse that clause is added, From the Lions dens, from the mountains
of the Leopards, to imply the danger of those places, where she was, or over
which she was to pass, that she might be the more willing to hasten to the
place, whether he now invited her. But now for the understanding of the
spiritual sense of these words, we must consider, that for these mountains;
1. It is agreed by all Writers that Lebanon was a mountain on the North of the
Land of Canaan, see the Note, Josh. 1.7. and though it was a pleasant and
fruitful place (whence are those expressions, His countenance is as Lebanon,
excellent as the Cedars, Chap. 5.15. And the glory of Lebanon shall be given to
it, Isa. 35.2.) yet in comparison of other places it was looked upon as a
wilderness or forest, as those words imply, Isa. 29.17. Is it not yet a very
little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the
fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest? and it was a haunt of wild
beasts, as appears by that parable of Jehoash, 2 Kings 14.9. The thistle that
was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter
to my son to wife. And there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and
trod down the thistle. And then 2. for Shenir and Hermon, it is generally
thought that they were mountains, or at least two several tops or parts of a
mountain, without Jordan in that which was the land of the Amorites; see the
Note, Deuteronomy. 3.9. All the question is, 3. concerning Amana; for some say that
this was a mountain in Cilicia, others that it was in Syria, whence the valley
also with the river that ran therein was likewise called by the same name, 2
Kings 5.12. Are not Abana, (or Amana, as it is in the margin there) and
Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel? And others
again that it was a mountain bordering at least on the west of the land of
Canaan; so that, say they, here is a mountain mentioned on each quarter of
that Country, Lebanon on the North, and Shenir on the South, Hermon on the
East, and Amana on the West. And accordingly do Expositors differently
understand these passages, as they are the words of Christ to his Church; for
1. Some conceive that hereby is set forth Christ's calling of his chosen ones to
himself, and into the number of his Church and people, implying a promise,
that none of them should be lost, but that they should be all gathered in to
him in due time. And many particulars concerning this may be employed in the
figurative expressions here used; as 1. that they should be gathered not from
among the Jews only, but also from amongst the Gentiles, the most barbarous,
savage and brutish people, (which they say is employed by mentioning some
mountains within the confines of Judea, and some without, as likewise by the
dens of Lions and mountains of the Leopards) yea from all the corners of the
world; which they say is hinted by naming the mountains in every quarter of
the Land of Canaan. 2. That the efficacy of their calling should be such that
no pleasures here below (signified by the delights of Lebanon) nor no fear of
the rage of men, (Lions and Leopards) should keep them from Christ. 3. That by
their coming in to Christ, a way should be opened to them for the knowledge of
many mysteries concerning God and the way to life eternal, yea an entrance
should be given them into the true land of promise, Gods kingdom of glory;
which is signified (say they) by calling the Church from those mountains, from
which men might look, and by which they were to enter into the land of promise.
4. That being called in unto Christ they were to abandon all the brutish
corruptions that were in themselves and others, and to forsake the society of
wicked men, that they might follow him and walk with him in newness and
holiness of life. And 5. that Christ will be sure to deliver those that come
to him from all dangers whatsoever. But then again, 2. Others hold that Christ
here calls his Church from their militant condition on earth, where they are
usually amongst cruel and bloody persecutors, Lions and Leopards, (as David
speaks, Psalm. 57.4. My soul is among Lions) to follow him into that true
mountain of myrrh, and hill of frankincense, his kingdom of glory: and that
to this end, that she might be the more willing to follow him thither, he
advises her to look from the top of Amana, etc. that is, by the eye of faith
to behold the place of their rest in heaven, as from those mountains men might
see the pleasantness and beauty of the land of Canaan, and to observe what
glory God has there prepared for his people; which is judged the more
probable, because the time of the faithfulls entrance into the heaven, is the
time indeed when they are manifestly declared to be the Spouse of Christ, by
his carrying them home, as his Spouse, to his fathers house.

Verse. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my Spouse;] Or, Thou have
taken away mine heart, as it is in the margin, to wit, with the love thy beauty
has wrought in me, and the delight which thereupon I take in thee; The
Bridegroom here renders a reason why he had so earnestly solicited his Spouse
in the foregoing verse to go along with him from Lebanon, etc. namely, because
he was so exceedingly transported with love toward her. Never was love like
the love of Christ to his Church; He speaks here as a man overcome with love,
Thou have ravished my heart, implying, that her beauty had made such a strong
impression upon his heart, that he was not himself, he had not the command of
his own heart, it was so wholly gone out after her; as indeed love of Christ to
his Church made him regardlesse of himself. As for the title of sister here
added, my Sister, my Spouse, we must know, that besides that this is an usual
expression of tender love, see Matthew. 12.50. and may be used to signify, that
whatsoever was amiable, either in Sister or Spouse was to be found in her, the
Church may be truly called Christ's sister, 1. with respect to Christ's
Incarnation, by reason whereof they were both descended from the same stock,
and partakers of the same flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. and she is said to be
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. And 2. with respect to
her adoption, whereby she became the daughter of his father, and co-heire with
him of his kingdom of glory: and 3. with respect to her regeneration, as being
borne of God, and made partaker of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.10. all which
the Apostle might intend in that, Heb. 2.11. For both he that sanctifies, and
they who are sanctified, are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to
call them brethren.

Thou have ravished my heart, etc.] This repetition implies the vehemence of
his affection, and how exceedingly he was taken with her; With one of thine
eyes, with one chain of thy neck; As if he had said, Out of modesty thou
seem afraid to look on me, and think not thy self beautiful enough, nor
sufficiently adorned for me; but alas a cast of one of thine eyes, (I need not
look on both, thy beauty is so great in one) or any one chain of thy neck, is
enough to ravish me. Yet withal in this expression, with one of thine eyes,
there seems to be an allusion to that custom of women's covering their faces
so with a veil (as they do in Spain and other Countries at this day) that
they look out only with one of their eyes, that they may see their way before
them; and so only one of their eyes can be seen by others. And by this one eye
may be meant faith, without which no man can please God, Heb. 11.6. Or,
sincerity, whereby we singly aim at God and Christ in all that we do; Or any
one holy thought and affection. And so by one chain of her neck is meant, any
one of the graces wherewith Christians are adorned. But see the Note, Chap.
1.10.

Verse. 10. How fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse!] That is, How glorious
and excellent, how amiable, pleasant and delightful is thy love to me? to wit,
as it was manifested in the fruits thereof, her readiness to do his will
(according to that, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my friends, if you do whatsoever I
command you) and to suffer for his sake.

How much better is thy love, then wine! and the smell of thine ointments, then
all spices!] Which yet are exceeding sweet and costly. The meaning is, that the
discovery of the graces of Gods Spirit in her, by the holiness of her
conversation in every regard, was exceeding delightful both to God and men;
and that the fame thereof was spread abroad far and near; as the Apostle
says of the Romans, Your faith is spoken of thorowout the world; see also, 1
These. 1.6, 7, 8.

Verse. 11. Thy lips, O my Spouse, drop as the honeycomb, etc.] That is, Thy
speech is fluent and exceeding sweet and pleasant, see the Note, Pro. 16.24.
And this may be meant both of those heavenly and sweet Gospel truths, which the
Ministers of Christ do with all readiness of mind impart unto the people;
(being fully stored herewith themselves, as the honeycomb is with honey, they
do with all willingness freely impart them unto others; according to that,
Matthew. 10.8. Freely ye have received, freely give;) as likewise the sweet and
gracious speech that does upon all occasions flow from the mouths of Gods
people in general, as in their confessions, prayers and praises, their holy
conferences, exhortations, consolations, etc. As the words of Christ are most
sweet and pleasing to the faithful, see Psalm. 19.10. and 119.10. so are the
words of the faithful also to Christ. And the very same thing, I conceive, is
intended in the following words, Honey and milk are under thy tongue; yet this
may farther imply, that their speech is also wholesome and nourishing, such as
may minister grace unto the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. being like wholesome food for
the nourishing both of Christ's little ones, and those also that are of riper
years, and physical for the curing of the spiritual distempers of men's souls.

And the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.] This is said,
because Lebanon was full of sweet, odoriferous trees, and all kind of sweet
spices grew therein; the very name of it seems to be taken from Lebonah, which
in the Hebrew signifies frankincense; upon which ground also the like
expression is used concerning Israel, Hos. 14.6. His beauty shall be as the
Olive Tree, and his smell as Lebanon. And indeed so huge a quantity of ground,
as Lebanon contained, being full of such odoriferous spices, must needs send
forth a very strong fragrant smell afar off. Now by these sweet perfumed
garments of the Church, may be meant, 1. the imputed righteousness of Christ,
that rich robe, wherewith the Church is clothed, (whence is that expression,
Romans 13.14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ) and whereby she becomes
perfectly beautiful in Gods sight: 2ly, Those spiritual gifts and graces,
wherewith the Church is adorned, which must needs savor of the holy Spirit of
God, who is the author of them, and which the Apostle exhorts us to put on, as
so many glorious ornaments, Col. 3.12. And 3. the gracious conversation of Gods
people, wherewith they adorn the Gospel of Christ. And it may well be that in
this expression here used, the smell of thy garments is as the smell of
Lebanon, there may be an allusion to that speech of Jacob to his Son, Genesis
27* 27. See, the smell of my Son is as the smell of a field, which the Lord
has blessed; for which see the Note; as likewise, Psalm. 45.8.

Verse. 12. A garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse.] It is not improbable
which some say, that the Bridegroom in these words might have respect to the
custom of Country damsels adorning themselves with plenty and variety of
flowers; and that having spoken in the foregoing verse of the sweet smell of
his Spouses garments, he takes occasion from thence to add this expression,
wherein he compares her to a garden. Now for the Church, the Spouse of Christ,
she is compared to a garden, to set forth, 1. that she is very beautiful, in
regard that she is replenished with many holy men and women, in several ranks
and conditions, of choice and lovely spirits, adorned with variety of the
goodly gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, which like so many goodly flowers and
plants make them glorious in the eyes both of God and men; as likewise in
regard that all things are orderly disposed in the Church, I am with you in the
spirit, says the Apostle, Col. 2.5. joying and beholding your order; this
being the great beauty of a garden, when beds, and borders, and knots, and
walke^ are all disposed in most exquisite order. 2. That there is much care
used and pains taken to preserve her in her purity and beauty, acording to
what is required to keep a garden neat and handsome; and 3ly, that she is to
Christ as his Eden for pleasure and delight, where he loves to walk and enjoy
sweet communion with his people, I will walk among you, says the Lord, Lev.
26.12. and 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them and walk in them: whence it is
that the Church is called, Isa. 62.4. Hephzibah, that is, my delight is in her.
And then again she is compared to a garden enclosed; 1. Because as gardens are
lesser parcels of ground, taken out and severed from some larger field, so is
the Church, Christ's little flock, taken out and separated from the world for
Christ's peculiar service, Joh. 16.19. All the world besides is as a vast
wilderness, full of unclean beasts, but the Church is separated from them to
be Gods peculiar portion; Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, -- and I will receive you, and will be a father unto you, 2 Cor.
6.17, 18. 2ly, Because as gardens are always hemmed in with some fence, that
beasts may not break into them, and that passengers that go by may not go
into them at their pleasure, and so spoil and mar their beauty, so the
Church is continually secured from being defaced and defiled by the hedge of
divine Providence; yea and by the watchful care which God works in the
faithful for the securing and preserving of themselves; see Job 31.1. Psalm.
140.3. Pro. 4.23. and 13.3. And 3. Because this does notably set forth the
Churches spiritual chastity, in that she is wholly for him alone, to love,
worship, and serve him, and him only; she does not give her heart to the world,
or to any base and filthy lust, as if she were a common, into which all beasts
might freely come and take their pleasure; but she reserves her self purely
for Christ; according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you
to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ; see the
Note also, Number. 24.6.

A spring shut up, a fountain sealed.] As before the Church was compared to a
garden enclosed, so here, 1. to a spring, or a fountain, to wit, either with
respect to the word, the doctrine of salvation, those waters of the Sanctuary,
wherewith the Church is plentifully watered; whence is that of the Prophet,
Isa. 35.6. In the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the
desert; and that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.6. I have planted, Apollo watered: or
else with respect to the spirit of grace, which is in her as a fountain of
living waters, as it is called, Joh. 4.10. and Joh. 7.38, 39. He that believes
on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water. But this spoke he of the Spirit, etc. those waters, wherewith our
spiritual thirst is quenched, Isa. 44.3. our spiritual filth is washed away,
Ezekiel. 36.25. and we become fruitful in good works, as trees planted by the
waters; see the Note, Psalm. 1.3. And upon this account it was that the Prophet
long since used the same expressions in a manner concerning the Church, that
are here used, Isa. 58.11. Thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a
spring of water, whose waters fail not. So that we must still remember that
the Church is not said to be a spring or fountain, as if these waters of life
did spring originally from her, (for this is the peculiar privilege of Christ)
but only to signify, that thorough Christ's presence in her, she is so
abundantly replenished with these waters of life, as if she were all over a
spring or fountain of waters, and that it is from her, that these waters must
flow forth unto others; see also the Note, Psalm. 87.7. And 2. to a spring shut
up, a fountain sealed, as in allusion to the care that was taken in former
times in those hot Countries to keep their choicest springs and fountains
covered and shut up, (as we read of a Well, where the inhabitants used to
water their sheep, Genesis 29.3. that was covered with a great stone) that hereby
they might keep them clean and pure, that no unclean thing might be cast into
them to defile them, and that beasts might not go into them and mud them with
their feet, or any other way pollute them; yea and perhaps that the waters
therein might be preserved for the owners, and not drawn out and wasted by
others; whence happily is that expression that Solomon uses, Pro. 5.15, 17.
Drink waters out of thine own cistern -- Let them be only thine own, and not a
strangers with thee. And hereby is signified, either, 1. that these heavenly
treasures of Gods word and sanctifying Spirit do peculiarly belong to the
Church, and that no other plants or gardens are watered with these waters; yea
that none do partake of the word in it is lively efficacy, but only those that
are Gods chosen ones, the true and living members of the Church; these waters
are sealed up for them, and hidden from others; Isa. 8.16. Bind up the
testimony, seal the law among my disciples; and if our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to them that are lost, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4* 3. see also Isa. 29.11. Or
2ly, that God by his Providence will both preserve his Church from being
defiled with the abominable pollutions of the world, and likewise the
Scripture, and the doctrine of the Church from being corrupted and mudded by
the feet of ungodly men. Or, that the Church shall by the Spirit of God,
whereby they are sealed unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. be kept as a
chaste and pure virgin unto Christ, so that none shall have her heart and love,
but Christ only.

Verse. 13. Thy plants are an Orchard of Pomegranates, etc.] By the Churches
plants here are meant the several members of the Church, that thorough the
grace of God do spring and grow up in her: see the Notes, Psalm. 1.3. and
92.13. And they are said to be an orchard of Pomegranates, that is, like to an
orchard (or paradise) of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits, that is, yielding
those and diverse other several sorts of choice dainty fruits, such as those
that are afterward in this and the following verse, particularly mentioned,
some of them trees, some lesser shrubs, and some herbs, as camphire, spikenard
and saffron, calamus and cynamom, myrrh and aloes, etc. hereby signifying,
both that the Church should be fully fraught with holy men and women, of
several ranks and conditions, as an orchard with trees, and other plants, and
likewise that thorough the manifold graces of Gods Spirit, they should be as
beautiful, and send forth as fragrant a savor, and yield as sweet and
pleasant, as wholesome and medicinal fruit in their lives and conversations,
as such trees and herbs did, for camphire, spikenard, and myrrh, see the
Notes, Chap. 1.12, 13, 14. and for aloes, see the Note, Number. 24.6.

Verse. 15. A fountain of gardens, etc.] Very many of our best Expositors do
take these to be the words of the Church, acknowledging Christ to be the only
true fountain of saving knowledge and grace, and that if she were a fountain,
(as Christ had called her, ver. 12.) it was only because she conveyed those
waters of life to others, which were derived to her from him, who was the
spring from whence all her beauty and glory proceeded; and accordingly they
render the words thus; O thou fountain of gardens, etc. But it is better, I
conceive, rendered by our Translators, as a continuation of Christ's speech to
his Church, wherein he farther enlarges that glorious title he had before
given her, ver. 12. that she was a spring shut up, a fountain sealed, tearming
her, 1. A fountain of gardens, to show that she was not so shut up and sealed,
but that she did with those spiritual waters, wherewith she was abundantly
replenished, water all her gardens, that is, the several Congregations of the
Church, and the several members thereof. 2. A well of living waters, that is,
of springing, running water; for that the Scripture calls, living water, as is
evident, Genesis 26.19. where that which is translated, a well of springing water,
is in the Original, a well of living water; and so also do the heathen Poets,
as we see in that, Donec me flumine vivo, Abluero. And hereby is signified, the
purity, sweetness and perpetuity of the Churches doctrine and graces; and some
add too, that by tearming her a well, the profundity of Gospel-mysteries is
also employed. And 3. Streams from Lebanon, that is, streams watering all the
Israel of God, as pure, clear, wholesome and sweet; as those that came running
down from Lebanon; (as it is said that Jordan and diverse other brooks and
rivers did) and so watered the whole land of Canaan; And indeed if these waters
had any taste of the sweetness of Lebanon (as it is said that the waters that
run from those places, where cloves and cinamom grow, have some kind of taste
of the cloves and cinamom) they were the fitter to represent the sweet doctrine
and graces of the Church, and that too with their first issuing from Christ, as
those did from Lebanon.

Verse. 16. Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, etc.]
See the Notes above, ver. 12, 13. Because of those words, blow upon my garden,
very many Learned Expositors take these to be the words of Christ, commanding
the breathings of his Spirit upon his garden, the Church. But seeing in the
last clause of this verse, it is unquestionable that the Church speaks, Let my
beloved come into his garden, etc. neither is there indeed any impropriety of
speech in it, that the Church speaking of her self, should use these terms, my
garden, (for by reason of the union that is betwixt Christ and his Spouse, what
belongs to one, must needs belong also to the other) I see not why this first
branch of the verse, may not also be taken as the words of the Spouse, Awake, O
Northwind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden; that is, oh that all
possible occasions might be given to make known to my beloved what ever might
allure and draw his affections to me. And understanding it spiritually of the
Church, it is as if she had said, Since my Lord is pleased to term me a
garden, oh that he would by his holy Spirit breath upon me with quickening
efficacy; that the spices thereof may flow out, that is, that the gifts and
graces he has conferred upon me, may be stirred up and quickened, that they may
spring and grow up, and bring forth fruit abundantly, and that the sweet savor
thereof may be spread abroad to the delight of my Lord and others. The working
of Gods Spirit upon the hearts of men, is often compared in the Scripture to
the blowing of the wind; see Ezekiel. 37.9. and Joh. 3.8. and thence it was that
Act. 2.2. the Spirit descended upon the Apostles in the sound of a sudden and a
rushing wind; and that 1. Because it blows freely, when, and where, and how it
pleases, even as the wind does, which no creature can raise or restrain. The
wind blows where it lists (says our Savior, Joh. 3.8.) so is every one
that is born of the Spirit. 2. Because, as the wind, it works quickningly,
vitally, refreshingly, opening the heart, awakening the affections, chearing
the soul, and making Gods people fruitful in good works. 3. Because as the
wind blows many times with mighty force, so that nothing almost can stand
before it, so does the Spirit work with unresistable power upon the hearts and
consciences of men. 4. Because it is, as the wind, of a cooling nature,
allaying the heat and extremity of all our temptations and afflictions: and 5.
Because it is of a purging nature, purging away the corruptions of men's hearts,
as the wind does the air of noysom vapors. Now in desiring the holy
Inspirations of Gods Spirit, the Church calls both upon the Northwind to awake,
that is, to rise, and the Southwind to come and blow upon her garden. 1.
Because, as both the Northern and Southern winds are useful for gardens, the
one to purge and cool the air in extremity of heat, and by dispelling the
clouds to bring fair weather, and the other to warm and water the earth with
sweet and refreshing showers; so the Spirit does by contrary operations,
further the work of grace in the souls of his people; sometimes refreshing the
scorched soul with a sweet breath of comfort, and sometimes enflaming it with
heat and fervency of zeal: sometimes it rouseth men by sharp and piercing
terrors of wrath, death and judgments, and softneth hearts hardened in sin,
and sometimes it cheareth them again with promises and comforts: and 2. Because
she desired that by the manifold operations of Gods Spirit, the sweet savor of
her graces and good works might be spread abroad every way, so that Christ
might in every regard take delight in her, even as the blowing of the wind from
several quarters, does carry the sent of the spices in a garden to all that
come near it on every side.

Let my beloved come into his garden, etc.] That is, Let him manifest his
favorable presence in me more and more, and still and still take delight in
me; As if she had said, My beloved did ere-while invite me into his garden, his
mountain of myrrh, etc. (see the Notes above, ver. 6. and 8.) but rather let
him come and dwell in me, for even here he has a garden too: and eat his
pleasant fruits; that is, let him accept of, and delight in, let him be
honored and glorified by the graces and good works which by his Spirit he
has wrought in me; for she calls her self his garden, and all her graces
and holy conversation his pleasant fruits, because he it is that plants the
Church, and makes her fruitful; see Isa. 5.7. and 26.12. and Joh. 15.4, 5. and
because the faithful consecrate themselves, and all that they are and can do,
wholly to Christ, even to him alone.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. I Am come into my garden, my Sister, my Spouse, etc.] See the Note,
Chap. 4.10. This may be taken as Christ's assent, or his making known that he
had assented, to his Churches request, expressed in the close of the foregoing
Chapter, Let my beloved come into his garden; concerning which see the Note
there. It is as if he had said, Though thou questionest my favorable presence,
yet I am, and have been long since, in thee and with thee: But ye there is
another Exposition given by some very good Expositors, which seems to me very
probable, which is that Christ does here give a reason why he could not come to
her, as she desired, namely, because he was ascended into his garden in heaven,
which was his chief garden and paradise of pleasure, and wherein he was to
abide till their marriage-day was come; so covertly again pressing her, (as he
had before, Chap. 4.6.) that she should rather prepare to come to him into his
garden there.

I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honeycomb with my
honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk.] As if he had said, I have not only
gathered the sweet fruits of thy garden, My myrrh, etc. (for which see the
Note, Chap. 1.13.) but I have also eaten of the feast thou had there provided
for me; and observable it is, how (Pastorall-like) the dainties here mentioned
are such, as Country damsels are wont to provide for their lovers,
honey-combes, and wine, and milk. And what is meant by Christ's feeding on these
dainties, and why he calls them his honeycomb and honey, etc. we see in the
Note upon the last clause of the foregoing Chapter; Let my beloved come into
his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits: The graces and services of the
faithful are to Christ as sweet as honey, and wine, and milk. But then again
(according to what is said in the foregoing Note) some understand this with
reference to his garden or Paradise in heaven; I have gathered my myrrh with
my spice, I have eaten my honey with my honeycomb, etc. that is, pure honey,
even fresh in the honeycomb; meaning thereby, that he was delighting himself
in the praises and services of his holy Angels and glorified Saints, and in
those transcendent joys and pleasures which there they enjoyed together; (and
indeed the joys of heaven are often in the Scripture compared to a feast, both
to set forth the abundance of delight that shall be there, and because hereby
it is that the souls of the faithful live unto all eternity) And so this may
be added still to press the Spouse to come thither to him* that she might taste
of his dainties there; to which end he so often repeates this wo^ (my,) I have
gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honey with my honeycomb.

Eat, O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.] By these friends of
the Bridegroom may be meant his Companions, or his Bridemen; And in reference
to Christ, these may be his holy Angels, or his faithful ones, especially his
Ministers; for so Abraham is called the friend of God, Jam. 2.23. and Isa.
41.8. and Joh. 15.14. Ye are my friends, says our Savior to his Disciples, if
you do what ever I command you. And accordingly, either the Angels, and the
Saints and faithful servants of God are invited here to rejoice with Christ
for the holy fruits which his Church militant did bring forth to him; (as
indeed it is said, Luke 15.7. that there is joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents; and the faithful do always exceedingly rejoice in seeing their
brethren walk holily and righteously before God; see Joh. 3.29. and 1 John 4.
and 2 John 3.4.) Or else his glorified Saints are invited to take their share
with him, in the bliss and delight of his heavenly kingdom; according to
that, Luke 22.29, 30. I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has
appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom. The
last clause, Yea drink abundantly, O beloved, may be read, as it is in the
margin of our Bibles, and be drunken with loves. But even so the meaning is the
same, to wit, that he exhorts them to be ravished with the mutual love, which
Christ and his Church did manifest to each other, or with considering the
glory, which Christ in his kingdom had provided for his people.

Verse. 2. I sleep, etc.] Here begins the Relation of a new passage betwixt the
Spouse and her Beloved (which therefore cannot with any probability be made to
depend upon that which went before; see the Note, Chap. 3.1.) where the Spouse
shows how unkindly and unworthily she had used him, and what thereupon befell
her: And some would have these first words, I sleep, but my heart waketh, to be
understood dis-junctively of the Spouse and her Beloved, as if she had said, I
sleep, but my heart, that is, my Beloved (so lovers are wont to call one
another) waketh; and accordingly whilst I was sleeping, he came to visit me.
But rather in both clauses the Spouse speaks of her self; and shows in
what a condition she was, when her beloved came to visit her, namely, that she
was asleep in her bed, but yet not so fast asleep, but that her heart was
awake, in that her mind was buisied with thinking of her beloved, according to
that of the Poet, Haerent infixi in pectore vultus, Verbaque nec placidam
membris dat cura quietem; whence it was that as soon as he knocked and called
at her door, she presently heard him. Now hereby the Spirit of God sets forth
the spiritual sluggish and slumbering condition, half asleep and half awake,
wherein Christ often finds his Church and faithful servants. Sleep, is usually
caused, 1. from fullness of feeding; when the belly is full, the bones would be
at rest; and 2ly, from weariness, Isa. 5.27. None shall be weary -- none shall
slumber nor sleep. 3. from sorrow, as we see in the Disciples sleeping, Luke
22.45. And 4. from sloth and want of exercise, Pro. 19.15. Sloathfulnesse
casts into a deep sleep: and many other things there are that help it
forward. And when men are asleep, the instruments of sense and motion are bound
up, and men are troubled with many dreaming fancies, Isa. 29.8. Now because the
state of the Church, and the faithful, when the flesh prevails against the
Spirit, is much like that of men asleep, they become negligent, dull, and
listlesse in doing their duty, not minding the power and purity (...) religion,
are over-borne with sensual and sinful security, and do usually deceive
themselves with vain hopes and groundless fancies, which are no better then
dreams; and because this proceeds much from the same causes, as from men's
glutting themselves with worldly delights, and over-toyling themselves about
earthly things, from sloth and ease, etc. therefore the Scripture does usually
speak of men in such an estate, as of men asleep, as Romans 13.11. Now it is
high time to awake out of sleep; and 1 These. 5, 6. Let us not sleep, as do
others, but let us watch and be sober. And so does the Church here speak of
her self: but withal she adds, but my heart waketh, to wit, because, say
some, the Church never falls into such a sleep, but that she discernes and
holds fast the vitals of Religion, both for doctrine and practice; or rather,
because her faith and grace is not extinct, though it be oppressed; in the
faithful there is always a regenerate part, that does sincerely mind and love
Christ, and the way of Christianity; in their greatest neglect and security,
their conscience does check them for sleeping, they have a sincere desire to
withstand it what they can, and according to that, Gal. 5.17. of the Spirits
lusting against the flesh, and their ears are still open to discern and harken
to the voice of Christ; as is expressed in the next words.

It is the voice of my beloved, that knocks, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 2.8.
When the faithful are overcome with sleep, Christ is wont to come to waken
them, and to call and knock at the door of their hearts; according to that,
Revel. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: whereby is meant, 1. the
pressing importunities of his Word and Ministers: 2. the motions and
importunities of his Spirit: 3. the terrors wherewith he troubles their
consciences: 4. the special mercies which he affords them: and 5. the
afflictions wherewith he corrects them, which tend indeed to waken secure
sinners; Mic. 6.9. Hear the rod, and who has appointed it; and may be the
rather here intended, because they are mentioned together with Christ's
knocking, Rev. 3.19, 20. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten -- Behold, I
stand at the door and knock. And observable it is, that the Church,
notwithstanding the slumber of security wherein she lay, yet heard the voice
and knock of Christ, and did even then own him to be her only beloved, and by
relating this does aggravate her folly in neglecting him, as she did, It is the
voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my
dove, my undefiled; that is, Receive me into thy heart by a renewed act of
faith, and give admittance to my graces and virtues; for the loving Titles
which Christ here gives to his Church, which is the maine rhetoric of his
love, see the Notes, chap. 2.2. and 14. and 4.7.10. That which is most
observable is, that Christ manifests such fervent affections to his Church,
notwithstanding her deadness and faylings, and was as earnest for admission as
if it had been for his own good, whereas it was merely for hers; and that all
this the Church alleges by way of condemning her self.

For my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.] To
wit, whilst in the night season I have stood long waiting without doors, in
expectation of being let in by thee. Some conceive that Christ does here plead
for admission by mentioning the spiritual gifts and graces, that he brought
along with him for his love, to wit, the refreshing showers of his Word, and
the comforting and cooling dew of his Spirit; according to that of the Prophet,
Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew unto Israel. But questionless, as in allusion
to the inconveniences that lovers undergo whilst in cold and frosty nights
they wait at the doors of their lovers, in hope at last to be let in by them,
Christ speaks here either of the contempt and hard usage that he met with out
of the Church, all the world over, that he was there locked out of doors and
despised, and that as a motive to persuade the Church to let him in: or else
rather of the great affronts and hard usage he underwent, to wit, in his
servants the Ministers, whilst he waited so long to bring his chosen ones unto
repentance. And in relating this the Spouse still seeks to aggravate her base
usage of her beloved, that was willing to endure so much for her sake.

Verse. 3. I have put off my coat, etc] This may be understood, either as
spoken softly to her self, by way of arguing with her self why she was loath
to do what her beloved desired, or else as the answer which she returned aloud
to his request; and that either to intimate her discontent against him for
coming so unseasonably, or merely by these frivolous pretenses to excuse her
not coming to open the door to him; I have put off my coat, how shall I put it
on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? These last words are
grounded upon the custom of those hot Eastern Countries, where they used to
go bare legged, and in a great measure bare footed, and so were constantly
wont to wash their feet when they went to bed, both to wash off the dust and
sweat, and likewise to cool their feet, that they might the better compose
themselves to a quiet and settled rest. And both clauses imply, that being laid
in her bed, it would be too much trouble to dress her self again, that she
might go to open the door and let him in; all which she still relates by way
of judging her self for this her folly and unkindnesse. Now that which is
spiritually signified hereby is, that when Christ calls the best to repentance,
to a courageous profession of the truth, and to a holy Gospel-like
conversation, they are hardly persuaded hereto, and are wont to make many vain
delays, and to pretend many foolish excuses; I have put off my coat, etc. As
if the Church had said, I have put off and given over that strict and forward
profession I formerly made of Religion, and have laid my self down in the soft
and warm bed of sensual ease and security, I have freed my self from all
those griefs, and fears, and troubles, wherewith I formerly perplexed my
self, and am quite rid of those persecutions and afflictions I formerly
underwent, and lie snugging covered over head and ears with worldly delights
and contentments; and must I again betake my self to these hard duties of
Christianity, repentance and mortification, and such like? and must I again
expose my self to the sufferings I am now freed from to follow thee? This is
hard to flesh and blood. Corrupt courses never want fleshly shifts and excuses;
see Luke 11.7.

Verse. 4. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door.] That is, Because
I opened not the door to let him in, my beloved assayed to open the door
himself, namely, by putting in his hand, that is, the finger of his hand at
the keyhole, or some chink or craney thereabouts, or by putting in his hand,
at some little window or hole, that was in or near the door, that so he might
lift up the latch; or thrust back the lock or the bolt, whereby the door was
barred against him. And the spiritual meaning of this is, that Christ by the
effectual motions of his Spirit, conveyed secretly into the heart of his
Spouse, did seek to open her heart, even by removing that self-love, or that
love of worldly things, or any other lusts and corruptions, that had been the
bolt whereby her heart had been locked against him. And indeed the Spirit is
called in Scripture the finger of God; that which in Matthew. 12.28. is expressed
thus, If I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, in Luke 11.20. is expressed
thus, If I with the finger of God cast out Devils: And so likewise the hand of
God, as in Act. 11.21. where it is said of the Disciples that preached the
Gospel, that the hand, that is, the Spirit of the Lord was with them, and a
great number believed.

And my bowels were moved for him.] That is, When I saw how earnestly desirous
he was to get in, and how to that end he stood striving in the cold night to
open the door, I was inwardly much moved, to wit, with pity and strong
affection toward him, and with shame and sorrow for my keeping him out so
long. And that which is hereby intended is, that by the strong and effectual
workings of Christ's Spirit in the hearts of the faithful, they are usually
brought to repent of their former neglect of him, and to be carried out with
strong affection toward him.

Verse. 5. I rose up to open to my beloved, etc.] To wit, as her Beloved had
desired her to do; see the Notes above, ver. 2. and Chap. 3.1. And my hands
dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the
handles of the lock. The word in the Original which we translate sweet smelling
myrrh, does properly signify myrrh passing or running about, so called,
either, 1. Because the best and purest myrrh is such as flows freely of its
own accord; or 2ly, Because it is such as will pass readily in way of
traffic, as we call that money, which is no way like to be questioned,
current money, Genesis 23.16. Or 3. Because it was myrrh, the smell whereof would
pass out and spread abroad every way. Now Expositors go two several ways in
expounding this, which the Spouse here says concerning the dropping of her
hands and fingers with myrrh; for 1. Some conceive that she would hereby set
forth, that to render her self the more welcome to her beloved, who might be
offended with her delaying to let him in, she did suddenly anoint her hands
with ointment of myrrh, or that she snatched up a box of this ointment,
intending (according to the custom of those times) to power it upon her
beloveds head, that was now wet with the cold dew of the night, which being
casually broken, or the myrrh swelling as she went along, it ran down upon
her fingers as she was opening the lock. And if we thus conceive of it the
mystical sense must needs be, that when the faithful are once awakened out of
their fits of spiritual slumber and disregard of Christ, they are wont to show
the more affection to him afterward, yea and to manifest it in their works,
(which may be the myrrh upon the hands and fingers) and withal to repent and
mourn much for their former drowsinesse and neglect of him, (the bitter
myrrh, say some, that is here intended, which to our Lord Christ is most sweet
and acceptable) yea and to mourn over those corruptions, and those things
especially, which have been as the locks and bolts, whereby they have formerly
shut out Christ: But then 2ly, again, Others think, that her drift in these
words is to set forth the exceeding sweetness of her beloved, and of his love
to her, in that when she came to the door, her beloved, (whom she had before
termed a bundle of myrrh, Chap. 1.13.) had left such a plentiful pleasant
smell behind him, that the savor thereof fell upon her in such abundance, as
if her hands and fingers had dropped with pure myrrh; or that his endeavoring
to open the lock, had left such pure myrrh there behind him, that when she
came to touch the handles of the lock, pure myrrh did distill, as it were,
from his hands and fingers. And if we thus take it (which I conceive the most
probable) then the spiritual meaning is, that when the faithful do, after
some neglect of Christ, begin to open their hearts to him, with much penitent
sorrow for their former misdemeanors, it is the sweet love of Christ, shed
abroad in their hearts, that is the cause of it; or that it is the grace of
Christ accompanying these their first motions and endeavors, that makes them
the more active in all the works of repentance and obedience, even as a lock
that being anointed with oil does moove the more glibly: and that even when
Christ does seem to forsake his faithful servants, he always leaves such
impressions of his grace upon their spirits, that thereby their affections are
quickened toward him; And this still tends to aggravate her unkindnesse in
refusing to give admittance to the former tenders of love that he had made to
her.

Verse. 6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and
was gone.] The Spouses using these two expressions, my beloved had withdrawn
himself and was gone, may be all one in effect, as if she had said with a
great deal of passion, He was gone, he was gone; her grief being the greater,
because this had befallen her through her own folly. Or, the drift of this
expression may be rather to imply, that he had not only withdrawn himself a
little way, secretly and silently, putting up the injury quietly that had been
offered to him, and only to try her what she would do, but that he was quite
gone away from her. And indeed Christ does many times thus withdraw his
presence of grace from his Church and people; see the Notes, Chap. 2.8. and
3.1. To punish their drowsinesse and lukewarmnesse, and their neglecting those
tenders of grace, that have been made to them, he does afterward many times
withhold those communications of his grace and Spirit, that he had formerly
offered them, so that for the time they are ready to conclude that he has
quite forsaken them.

My soul failed when he spoke.] Some conceive that the Spouse does in these
words condemn her self for her stupidity in disregarding her beloved when he
so lovingly called to her, ver. 2. My soul, says she, failed when he spoke,
as if she had said, I was stupefied, and as one void of all reason and
understanding, in that I laid not to heart those sweet expressions of his love
when he spoke to me, Open to me my sister, my love, etc. It is much the same
with that the Psalmist says, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I, and ignorant: I
was as a beast before thee. And indeed this expression of the souls failing is
used much to this purpose, Isa. 19.3. The spirit of Egypt shall fail in the
midst thereof, and I will destroy the counsel thereof. But doubtless the
words may be understood of the failing of her soul at present, when she saw
her beloved had withdrawn himself, My soul failed when he spoke, that is, My
soul melted, and dyed away within me, I was as one in a swoone, half-dead
through grief and fear, when I saw he was gone, and that especially for the
words he had formerly spoken to me, (and therefore we see that afterward she
speaks, ver. 8. of her being sick of love) Or else thus, My soul failed, my
heart was even ready to dye within me, as melting through love, when he so
earnestly begged that I would open to him, and much more must it needs be so
with me then, when I saw he was gone.

I sought him, but I could not find him, I called him, but he gave me no
answer.] And thus Christ deals even with his faithful servants in their own
kind; when he sought them, and called upon them, they would not mind him, and
therefore afterward when they seek him, and call upon him, he will not hear
them: as we find it expressed, Mic. 3.4. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but
he will not hear them; he will even hide his face from them at that time, as
they have behaved themselves ill in their doings. But see the Notes, Chap. 3.1,
2.

Verse. 7. The watchmen that went about the City found me, etc.] See the Note,
Chap. 3.3. They smote me, they wounded me, to wit, because by her wandering
about in the night they took her for a harlot, and because she made a
disturbance in the City by calling and crying out in the night time for her
beloved, or happily because when they laid hands on her, not minding them, she
strove to get away, that she might go on in the pursuit of her beloved. Now
(according to that which is noted before, Chap. 3.3.) if by these watchmen be
meant the faithful Pastors, and Teachers, and Governors of the Church, whose
office indeed it is to look to the keeping of good order and peace in the
Church, then by their smiting and wounding her, must needs be meant their
smiting and wounding her heart with that sword of the Spirit, the word of God,
to wit, by just and sharp reproves for her evil carriage of her self toward
Christ; according to that of the Prophet, Hos. 6.5. But if by these watchmen
be meant false Teachers, wicked men that are in the place of Pastors and
Governors of the Church, but are indeed of an Antichristian spirit, then by
their smiting and wounding the Spouse is meant, either their wounding the
faithful with their scandalous and wicked lives, or else rather the bitter
reproaches and cruel persecutions wherewith they wound the faithful, and that
for no other reason, but because they seek after Christ; (for indeed
reproaching is termed smiting in the Scripture, Jer. 18.18. and so are all
other ways of persecuting and afflicting the children of God, see Isa. 53.4.)
And that this is here meant, is methinks evident, because the Church seems to
bewail her sufferings herein, which she would not have done, if the wounds she
speaks of had been only the reproves of her faithful Pastors; and because
these calamities seem to be mentioned* as brought upon the Church by way of
punishing her for her former neglect of Christ, and as a means to quicken her
in the way of repentance.

The keepers of the walls took away my vail from me.] Either the same persons,
that were before called the watchmen that went about the City, are here called
the keepers of the wall; or if we understand it of others, that had more
peculiarly the charge of looking to the walls, it must be supposed, either that
upon the outcry made these came in to the aid of the other, or else that the
Spouse, having gotten from the watchmen, fell afterward into the hand, of the
keepers of the wall, and that striving with them, she was forced to leave her
veil behind her: Now by these keepers of the walls, may be meant again, as
before, the faithful Pastors of the Church, who are said to take away the
Spouses veil; either because when they reprove the faithful, they are wont
also to take from them all the excuses and pretenses, wherewith they are wont
to palliate their offenses; or because they may by over-harsh censures condemn
the faithful as false-hearted hypocrites, and so strip off their veil, the
good esteem they formerly enjoyed. But rather by these keepers of the walls,
may be meant civil Magistrates, that are by their place to defend the Church
against outward enemies; or, as before is said of the watchmen, wicked Pastors
and Governors in the Church. And because vailes were worn by women as an
ornament, Isa. 3.23. as a token of the modesty of virgins, and therefore an
honor to them, Genesis 24.65. and the sign of wives subjection to their
husbands, see Genesis 20.16. and 1 Cor. 11.5. etc. therefore these persecuting
tyrants, because they stripped the Church of her outward estate, and by the
foul reproaches they cast upon her, charging her with heresy and schism, and
all manner of evil, they did what in them lay to bereave her of her good name
and repute, yea of her innocence, which was her honor; and by pressing upon
her false doctrines and humane inventions, did seek to strip her of the purity
and integrity of her doctrine and discipline, wherein consisted her subjection
to Christ, they are said to have taken away her veil from her.

Verse. 8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, etc.] See the Notes, Chap.
1.5. and 2.7. It seems that these daughters of Jerusalem, hearing the noise
that was made by the Spouses calling for her beloved, or upon the tumult that
was made by the watch-mens apprehending of her, came forth to see what the
matter was, and thereupon she spoke thus to them. Or else it must be supposed,
that having with much ado gotten away from the keepers of the walls, not
discouraged with the hard usage she had met with, she went on in her search and
enquiry after her beloved (as indeed the faithful are never more zealous for
Christ, then in times of persecution, and in an hour of desertion, occasioned
by their former neglect of Christ) and so meeting with these daughters of
Jerusalem, pressed them to help her in finding out her beloved, I charge you, O
daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him, that I am sick
of love. It is in the Or^ginal expressed very emphatically, with an earnest and
passionate kind of speech, If you find my beloved, what will ye tell him? why
truly, not what injuries have been offered me (that I mind not so much) but
that which you may easily discern in me, to wit, that I am sick of love, that
is, for want of him; for which see the Note, Chap. 2.5. It is an expression
much like that, Hos. 9.14. Give them, O Lord; what will thou give? give them a
miscarrying womb and dry breasts: and that the drift of it is all one, as if
she had said, I do not desire to conceal from you the cause of my troubled
soul, nor do I desire that you should conceal it, but rather that you should
freely impart it to him, namely, that I am sick of love. And so the meaning is,
that the Church desires her particular members and friends, or that the
faithful desire of all the Saints and servants of God, that if they enjoyed
the light of Christ's countenance, or that when they found his presence with
them in their private prayers, or private resortings, that they would then
spread her, or their cause before him, and plead with him on their behalf.

Verse. 9. What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O thou fairest among
women? etc.] See the Note, Chap. 1.8. The daughters of Jerusalem, mentioned in
the foregoing verse, do make this enquiry of the Spouse concerning her
beloved, that they might hereby minister an occasion to her to set forth his
praise, and that either thereby to give a vent to her affection, which might be
some ease to her heart, that seemed to be almost overwhelmed with trouble for
him; or rather, that they might receive full satisfaction from her concerning
him; as wondering at her love, and being fully persuaded, that there was
something considerable in it, that she, the fairest among women, should be so
vehemently carried out in her affection to him, and should lay such a solemn
charge and adjuration upon them concerning him; which is expressed in the
following words, wherein to show how earnestly they desired to be informed
herein, their inquiry of him is again repeated, What is thy beloved more then
another beloved, that thou do so charge us? That is, What excellencies are
there in him more then there are in others, that are by their friends esteemed
also worthy to be beloved? And several things are here observable, as this
relates to Christ and his Spouse, the Church; as namely, 1. That the beauty of
his Spouse is no whit impaired, when she is beaten, wounded and unveiled,
because the graces of Christians do shine forth with greatest brightness in
times of persecution and affliction. 2. That the faithfulls earnest seeking
after Christ is a singular means to put others upon enquiring after him: and
3. That Christians will be earnest to have the excellencies of Christ set forth
to them; 1. That they may thereby better their knowledge of him, whom indeed we
can never know enough, Ephesians. 3.19. and may be delighted to hear his praises (as
indeed men love to hear others talk of those they greatly affect) and be
stirred up the more to love him, and the more industriously to seek after him.
2. That those that do set forth his excellencies to them, may thereby find
their own affection the more inflamed toward him: and 3. That others also
hearing his praises might be won to love him, and to seek by faith to be
united to him. And besides this makes way to raise up our attentions, the more
heedfully to observe that glorious description that is immediately given us of
Christ.

Verse. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, etc.] Thus the Spouse sets forth the
beauty of her beloved, as one of a sanguine complexion, covertly thereby to
condemn her former folly in disregarding such a one as he was, and withal to
quicken her own affection toward him, and to represent him as one that
deserved to be beloved of all. And indeed it is the office of the Church thus
evidently to set forth Jesus Christ crucified before the eyes of men by the
preaching of the Gospel, Gal. 3.1. Expositors do several ways apply this,
as, 1. that Christ was white in regard of his Godhead, as being the brightness
of his fathers glory, Heb. 1.3. and therefore when at his transfiguration the
glory of his deity did shine forth thorough the veil of his body, it is said,
Matthew. 17.2. that his raiment was white as the light; and ruddy in regard of
his humanity, being made of the same substance with Adam, who had his name from
the red earth from whence he was taken, Genesis 2.7. and therefore is called the
second Adam, 1 Cor. 15.45. 2ly, that white might denote his innocence,
holiness and spotless purity; and red the imputation of the bloody scarlet
sins of men unto him, 2 Cor. 5.21. or the merit of his death and bloody
passion, whence he is described, Revel. 19.13. as clothed with a vesture
dipped in blood. And indeed the mixture of this white and red was admirable in
that great mystery of his passion, when he that had not the least stain of sin
in him, had sin notwithstanding in a way of justice charged upon him, and was
numbered with the transgressors, Isa. 53.12. And 3. that white might betoken his
mercy and grace to penitent sinners, as likewise his victory, triumph and joy,
Revel. 19.8, 14. and red his justice in executing vengeance upon his enemies.
Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. But I think that the drift of the words is only in general to
show, that the excellencies that are in Christ and the great things that he
has done and suffered for his Church, do make him most beautiful and lovely
in the eyes of his people: And to the same purpose is the following clause,
where it is said, that he is the chiefest (or* as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, A Standard Bearer,) among ten thousands: (because usually the tallest,
stoutest and goodliest men are chosen to be Standard-bearers) for hereby is
signified that Christ does transcendently excel in the loveliness of his
glorious excellencies all the children of men, see the Notes, Chap. 3.2. and
Psalm. 45.2. Yet some add also that he is called a Standard Bearer, with
respect to his leading his people in their way, and Christians marching and
fighting under his Colors; for which he is also called the Ensign of his
Church, Isa. 11.10.

Verse. 11. His head is as the most fine gold.] Some conceive that this is
spoken with reference to the golden Crown, which Solomon wore on his head, of
which mention was made before, Chap. 3.11. But because of these words, as the
most fine gold, I rather think the Spouse intends hereby to signify, that his
head was exceeding goodly to behold, or that there was a kind of splendour of
beauty and majesty in it; or it may be, that his intellectuals were exceeding
precious and excellent. And so mystically this may signify; 1. The
transcendent excellency of his Godhead; according to that, 1 Cor. 11.3. The
head of Christ is God: Or rather, 2. The surpassing excellency and glory of his
government and kingdom above all other kingdoms whatsoever; because
spiritual, heavenly and eternal; see Joh. 18.36. and Dan. 7.14. as likewise
the al-sufficiency that was in him for the exercise of this his Regal power, as
that in him were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and that he
was still ready to power forth the riches of his goodness and mercy for the
enriching and adorning of his people.

His locks are bushy (or, curled) and black as a Raven.] To wit, as the
feathers of a Raven, which are also smooth and shining, and therefore the more
beautiful. And this is added because black hair has been ever esteemed most
beautiful in men, whence was that of the Poet, Spectandus nigris oculis,
nigroque capillo. Now mystically, I conceive, these words do import, as the
exceeding spiritual beauty, so also the invincible fortitude and strength of
Christ, black and curled locks being signs of a hot and strong constitution.
Some by his locks do understand the innumerable company of Angels that attend
upon Christ; and others the Saints and servants of Christ, especially as
gathered into Congregations, which are an ornament to Christ; and others
again, his hidden and unsearchable counsels, and his secret profound
judgments, which are so intricate, that they cannot be fully known, and so
black and formidable, that they may well strike men with astonishment; and this
last seems the most probable.

Verse. 12. His eyes are as the eyes of doves, etc.] Thus Christ had before set
forth the beauty of his Spouses eyes, Chap. 1.15. and 4.1. (for which see the
Notes there) and here now the Spouse uses the same expression concerning
Christ's, only it is with an addition, that his eyes were as the eyes of doves
by the rivers of waters; that is, doves, that have their abiding place where
they have plenty of pure and clear water to wash themselves and their eyes in;
as indeed clear running water has been always esteemed good to refresh and
clear the eyes. Now though this may be not unfitly applied to the Ministers of
Christ in regard of their purity and sincerity (see the Note, Chap. 1.4.) and
their being so continually conversant in the Scriptures; and, as some think, to
the most pure and spotless wisdom and prudence of Christ, as man; yet I
rather think they are meant, either of the careful and affectionate respect
that he has always to his Church, (and so as the Church was before said to
have doves eyes, because of her faith and loyalty to Christ; so the same is
here said of Christ, because of his faithfulness to her) or else of the
beauty of his divine wisdom and providence; according to that, Habak. 1.13.
Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, etc. even in the ordering and
disposing of the vildest actions of the creature, the Lord is blameless and
pure; And for the same reason it is farther added concerning his eyes, that
they are washed with milk; that is, in milk-white water, or as white, as if
they were washed in milk; which is spoken only with respect to the white of the
eyes, and fitly set, which is in the Hebrew, sitting in fullness, which though
some understand as spoken in relation to doves sitting by full streams of
water; yet the meaning rather is, that his eyes were fitly set in the holes of
his head, exactly filling up those hollow places, neither sunk into the head
too low, nor staring out too much, even as a precious stone that is neatly set
in the foil of a ring; as indeed nothing can be more fitly disposed and
ordered, then it is by divine providence.

Verse. 13. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, etc] That is, they are like to
garden-beds and borders, curiously set with flowers and plants that bear
spices; and the ground of this figurative expression is, because there is in
the cheeks a little rising above the rest of the face, as there is in the beds
and borders of gardens above the rest of the earth; and because the sprouting
forth of the hair on his chinne and cheeks, did resemble the springing up of
spice-plants, in such beds and borders. All this tends to set forth that his
cheeks were beautiful and sweet, amiable and lovely, though withal full of
manly gravity and majesty. And to the same purpose also in the following words
they are said to be as sweet flowers, or (as it is rendered in the margin of
our Bibles) towers of perfumes; whereby may be meant, either aromaticall
flowers or plants growing up like towers or tu^rets; which indeed agrees best
with our Translation and the foregoing words; or else such kind of boxes, as
are spiring, like little turrets or towers, wherein men were wont to carry any
sweet spices, powders, or perfumes. However, by these cheeks of the Lord
Christ, beautiful and sweet, may be meant most probably the favorable
countenance of Christ, shining into the hearts of believers; or more generally
the aspect or sight that we shall have of him in heaven, which shall yield
fullness of life and joy, see the Notes, Psalm. 16.11. and 17.15. and which is
represented to us here in the Gospel, and apprehended by faith, as a sweet
Savior, and a Redeemer, mighty to save his people against all bodily and
spiritual enemies.

His lips like lilies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.] For sweet smelling
myrrh, see the Note above, ver. 5. Her meaning is, that his lips were as
beautiful, and did breath forth as sweet a smell, as do the lips of lilies,
yea the sweetest lilies, that yield as fragrant a smell, as if the oil of
myrrh did drop down from them. Or else it may be meant of the sweetness of
his speech. And observable it is, that whereas her beloved had told her, that
her lips did drop as the honeycomb, Chap. 4.11. she now returns the like
praise to him, that his lips were like lilies dropping smeet-smelling myrrh.
And this does notably set forth the purity and sweetness of the Word, and how
the Gospel of Christ being freely distilled by the lips of Gods Ministers, does
convey grace to the hearers, and thereby rejoices and reviveth their hearts.

Verse. 14. His hands are as gold rings set with the Beryl.] The Beryl is a
precious stone, as they say, of a Seagreen color; and indeed the Hebrew word
is Tarshish, by which in Psalm. 48.7. some say is meant the great Ocean Sea;
(from which some think the word Turkois is derived) and on this stone in the
High Priests breast plate, Exodus 28.20. was Asher engraven, who dwelt near the
Sea. However, hereby the Spouse intended that her beloveds hands were very
fair, goodly and precious, And it may be that by comparing his hands to gold
rings set with the Beryl, she might have respect to the bright shining nails
on the tops of his fingers. Now hereby, spiritually is meant that all the works
of Christ are pure, rare, precious and glorious, and most acceptable both
before God and men: whence it is said of his miracles and other his glorious
works, that he was a Prophet, mighty in deed and word before God and all the
people, Luke 24.19. and that glorious testimony was by the people given
concerning him, He has done all things well, Mark 7.37. Yet some, I know,
would limit this more particularly to his bounty and liberality in bestowing
the precious gifts and graces of his Spirit, together with other spiritual
blessings upon his Church and people.

His belly is as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires.] This is much like that
description of the Nazarites, Lam. 4.7. They were more ruddy in body then
rubies, their polishing was of Saphir. Now as the Church is here represented
speaking of Christ, under the person of Solomon, (and still also under a
Pastoral-parable of a shepherd and a shepherdess) though it may be spoken
with reference merely to the pure whiteness of his skin (because some Saphirs
are white and glister like a Diamond,) or to the whiteness of his skin,
together with the branches of blew veins therein, because some Saphires are of
a blew sky-colour; yet I rather think it is intended as a description of the
garments he wore on his breast and belly, to wit, that they were vey beautiful
and glorious, shining white, as the brightest polished Ivory, but adorned with
some trimming, or bound about with some girdle of blew; and that because the
Spouse intends here to give directions how the daughters of Jerusalem, to whom
she speaks, might know him, when they saw him; all which notwithstanding is to
be mystically understood of Christ; and is usually applied by Expositors,
either to the purity of his humane nature, and the adorning thereof with diverse
precious heavenly graces; or more generally to his inward, tender and hearty
bowels of affection (because the belly is indeed the seat of the bowels) the
love, mercy and pity, which he outwardly manifests to his Church and people;
which are indeed pure and sincere, precious and heavenly.

Verse. 15. His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold.]
By comparing his legs, under which his thighs are also comprehended, to
pillars of marble, she intends to set forth that they were full, straight,
strong, white, and every way proportionable and handsome, (to which some add
also, that his gate was grave, stately and Prince-like) and by comparing his
feet to sockets of fine gold, upon which those pillars of marble were fastened,
she intends to show, that they also were firm, steadfast, comely and glorious:
Or this last may be spoken with respect to the golden shoes which he wore on
his feet: for of the Spouses wearing such gorgeous shoes, mention is afterward
made, Chap. 7.1. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes daughter!
Now because the legs and feet are those instruments and members of the body,
whereby the whole body is upheld, and moved from one place to another,
therefore by these legs of Christ, that are as pillars of marble, and feet that
are as sockets of gold, whereon these pillars stand, must needs be meant, his
strong, firm and faithful, his pure and glorious managing and carrying on all
the works of his Mediatorship, as in treading down all his enemies under his
feet, Psalm. 110.1. in carrying on his Gospel where ever he pleases, breaking
through all the opposition that is made against him, in bearing up, supporting
and helping his mystical body the Church, so that the gates of hell are not
able to prevail against them, etc. in all which he never treads awry, nor fails
of doing what he has undertaken, by means whereof his Kingdom and Government
must needs be pure and upright, full of Majesty and Glory, and unchangeably
constant and durable; as likewise that the foundation of all these is his
divine Almighty strength and power, and his unchangeable truth and
faithfulness. I know that some Expositors do somewhat otherwise apply this, as
namely, that the Apostles doctrine, whereby Christ was carried forth into all
the world, and whereon the Church is firmly founded, Ephesians. 2.20. is these firm,
and stable, and beautiful legs, that are as marble pillars, whence it is that
the Apostles are called pillars, Gal. 2.9. and of them principally is that
spoken, Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel
of peace, etc! and that these pillars are said to be set on sockets of gold,
because they are grounded upon the writings of the Prophets, which are pure and
precious, a sure word of prophecy, as the Apostle calls them, 2 Pet. 1.19.

His countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.] By his countenance,
is not meant his face only, but the whole form and appearance of his person;
and so that which the Spouse intends hereby is, that her beloved was a tall,
goodly, personable man, and that his aspect was stately, and withal pleasant
and delightful. And hereby was signified the largeness, glory and eminency of
Christ's Kingdom (as elsewhere upon the same account it is compared to a little
stone, that became a great mountain, Dan. 2.35.) and that in regard of the
multitude of believers it should be as a forest, and that always flourishing
and continuing in its freshness and vigor: yea that whatever of himself Christ
is pleased to discover to us, is excellent and glorious.

Verse. 16. His mouth is most sweet.] Here again the Spouse uses the same
loving expressions concerning her beloved, which he had formerly used
concerning her, as Chap. 2.14. Sweet is thy voice; and Chap. 4.11. Thy lips, O
my Spouse, drop as the honeycomb, etc. And this is generally understood of the
exceeding sweetness of the words, speeches and sayings of Christ, his
doctrines, comforts and promises. See Psalm. 19.10. and 119.103. And some
understand it too of the Ministers of the Gospel, who are as it were the mouth
and the voice of Christ, whereby he dispenceth these sweetnesses of the word of
grace unto his people; as the Baptist is called the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Joh. 1.23. But because the Spouse had mentioned this before in
commending his lips, verse. 13. His lips like lilies, dropping sweet smelling
myrrh; and because this clause is in the Original, His palate is most sweet, I
see not why this may not be particularly meant of the motions of the Spirit
(which is as the breath of Christ) conveying the comforts and promises of the
word with much sweet delight unto the souls of believers. And indeed it is only
those that are admitted to the spiritual kisses and embraces of Christ, that do
ever discern the sweetness of these breathings.

Yea, he is altogether lovely.] As if she had said, Not to insist further on
particular parts, I may well wind up all briefly in this, that he is altogether
lovely, amiable and desirable, to wit, in his Person, Offices, Ordinances,
Graces, Providence and Members, and therefore is he called, The desire of all
Nations, Hag. 2.8. which the word in the Original does here also import.

This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.] See the
Note, Chap. 1.5. It is as if she should have said, According to this
description which I have given you of my beloved, you may easily know him,
there is not such another; and considering seriously of what I have said, you
will not blame me for being sick of love, for being transported with such a
violence of affection in seeking after him, or for laying such a solemn charge
and adjuration upon you.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. WHither is thy beloved gone? etc.] These are the words of the
daughters of Jerusalem, to whom the Spouse had made that large description of
her beloved, Chap. 5.8 -- 16. and concerning whom, see the Note, Chap. 1.5. As
pitying the Spouse for her sad condition, because of the absence of her friend,
so exceedingly worthy indeed to be beloved by her; and being themselves, by the
high commendation which she had given of him, enflamed with the love of him,
and with a strong desire to see him, to enjoy his presence, and to get an
interest in him, they offer to join with her, or to help her in seeking him
out, if she could but tell them which way he was gone or where he used to be,
and where they might be like to find him; for so much this question of theirs
imports, Whither is thy beloved gone? which out of the vehemence of their
affection, and to show how forward they were to do it, they repeat again; only
by that phrase of his being turned aside, they imply their hope, that he was
not gone far, nor would be long absent, O thou fairest among women, (See
Chap. 1.8.) whither it thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with
thee? All which is to signify, either that the Jews shall one day be brought
to seek after Christ, by the high commendation given of him by the Church of
the Gentiles; or else more generally, that when Gods Elect people are once by
the Preaching of the Gospel brought to know the transcendent worth and
excellency of Christ, they will seek after him, nor will be scared nor beaten
off by the hard usage, which the Church, his Spouse, has always met with in
the world. And withal observable it is, which is here implied, that they that
desire to seek after Christ, must be sure to go along with the Catholic
Church, or they are never like to find him.

Verse. 2. My beloved is gone down into his garden, etc.] Because immediately
before it was said that the Spouse was greatly distressed, because she could
not find her beloved, and yet here now she tells the daughters of Jerusalem
whither he was gone, therefore some conceive, that here there begins a new
Relation of another passage between the Bridegroom and the Bride, and that it
has respect to another time and state of things; according to what is noted
before, Chap. 3.1. But I rather think this is an answer to the Question
propounded to her in the foregoing verse by the daughters of Jerusalem; and it
seems that bethinking her self of the gracious disposition of her beloved,
and the experience she had always had of his gentleness, and the constancy of
his love to her, and it may be taking occasion from that which they had hinted,
that perhaps he was but only somewhere a little turned aside, she thus
determines concerning his going from her, My beloved is gone down into his
garden, As if she had said, Surely so it is; he is but only gone down into his
garden, there to refresh himself; where in that expression of his going down
to his garden, there is an allusion to Solomon's gardens in Jerusalem, which
were beneath in the fruitful valleys, whilst his Palace was in the upper part
of the City; and to these the Spouse says her beloved was gone; to the beds of
spices; that is, to delight himself with the pleasant sight and smell thereof,
as men do that walk in such gardens; to feed in the gardens, that is, to eat
of the fruits growing there in the several divisions of his garden, which were
as several gardens, or of some other dainties there provided for him; or to
feed his flock in pastures near to his garden, or within the hedge of it; see
the Note, Chap. 2.16. And to gather lilies, to wit, to please himself
therewith, or to make garlands for himself, or for his Spouse. And accordingly
that which is spiritually here intended is, that the faithful in their
desertions have still this feed of comfort abiding in them, that they know
Christ can never forsake his Church; and that after their desertions they are
wont to recover some comfortable evidence of his favorable presence again,
and are ready still to communicate what they know of Christ unto others; for by
his garden, here is meant, either, 1. the paradise of heaven; see the Note,
Chap. 5.1. where the Church teaches every true believer to seek Christ. And
then by his going to the beds of spices, his feeding in the gardens, and his
gathering lilies, must be meant the delight that Christ takes in the joys and
services that are yielded him; see that Note again, Chap. 5.1. Or 2ly, the
place where his Church abides on earth; see the Note, Chap. 4.12. And then we
must understand, 1. By the beds of spices, the variety of sweet Christians, or
their graces and good works, that are most delightful to Christ; and 2. By his
feeding in his gardens, either that he there feeds the souls of his people
with the choicest dainties, for which see the Note, Chap. 2.16. or else the
delight that he takes in the fellowship, the graces, and the services of his
Saints; see the Note, Chap. 4.16. And 3. by his gathering lilies, either his
gathering to himself his elect and chosen people, who are often in this Song
compared to lilies; see the Note, Chap. 2.2, 16. and 4.5. or else his gracious
acceptance of, and delight in both their persons and graces, and the great
delight he takes in their holy services.

Verse. 3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, etc.] See the Note, Chap.
2.16. The Spouse may be supposed to have broken forth into these words, when
she found her beloved in his garden, or met him as they were going thither to
find him, and that by way of glorying in the assurance of the love of her
beloved, notwithstanding her former disrespect of him, and the recovery of her
peace and joy thereby after all her sufferings and sorrows; yea it may also
imply her resolution never again to slight him, as she had now done, but to
give up her self wholly to him. All which does notably set forth how the
faithful are affected, when they have recovered the light of Gods countenance
after a time of desertion. As for the following words, Who feeds among the
Lilies, see the Note, Chap. 2.16.

Verse. 4. Thou art beautiful, etc.] The Spouse having found her beloved, and
having (as must be supposed) bewailed her neglect of him, and acquainted him
what she had since done and suffered in seeking after him, he thereupon makes
known in these words, hereby to cheer her up, what precious account he made of
her, that she was no less beautiful, pleasing and delightful in his eyes,
then she was before; to manifest which he uses afterward many of the same
expressions, which he had used before in the fourth Chapter: and all this tends
to set forth, that when Christ does manifest himself from heaven after times
of desertion to the faith of his penitent people, he does never a whit the
less love and esteem them, because of their former miscarriages, if they come
to seek him again in a right manner: for the Churches beauty, see the Note,
Chap. 1.5, 8. and Psalm. 45.11. It is here set forth by three elegant
similitudes; 1. Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah; which was a goodly
City in the tribe of Manasseh, for which see the Note, 1 Kings 14.17. The word
signifies well-pleasing, or acceptable, and therefore was it fit to set forth
the spiritual beauty of the Church, who is made fair and acceptable in and
thorough Christ, her beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. and 5.27. 2ly, Comely, as Jerusalem,
which was indeed esteemed in those times the most gallant and stately City for
the glory of her buildings, and especially the Temple there, that was in those
Eastern parts of the world, and therefore it is called, Psalm. 48.2. Beautiful
for situation, the joy of the whole earth, and Psalm. 122.3. A City, that is
compact together, yea and Lam* 2.15. The perfection of beauty: and the Church,
we know, is usually with respect thereto called Jerusalem: and 3ly, Terrible as
an army with banners; which expression, as it is not unfit to set forth the
praise of a woman (as the Church is here personated,) it being very commendable
in them, when the gravity and sobriety of their countenances does strike a
terror into wicked men; so it does notably set forth the Majesty of the Church,
in that she is to her enemies, and to the wicked, terrible as an army with
banners, that is, as an army that with banners displayed is going forth to
fight with their enemies, and that because of her invincible faith and
strength, against which hell-gates are not able to prevail. And indeed
observable it is, that (as in an army) it is the order and union of the Church,
their discipline for the punishing of those that walk disorderly, but
especially the presence of the Lord of hosts amongst them, as their Captain
and King, always ready to help and defend them, that makes the Church so
dreadful; according to that, Isa. 52.12. The Lord will go before you, and the
God of Israel will be your rereward; see the Note, Chap. 1.9. and 4.4.

Verse. 5. Turn away thine eyes from me, etc.] Taking occasion perhaps from the
Spouses fixing her eyes upon him, out of the exuberancy of her love to him, and
delight in him, now that after a time of desertion she had recovered his
presence again, the Bridegroom breaks forth into these passionate terms,
Turn away thine eyes from me; which must not be taken, as if he desired not she
should look on him any more, (for there was nothing he desired more, as he had
said before, Chap. 2.14. Let me see thy countenance, etc.) but as a poetical
expression, wherewith he would set forth the surpassing beauty of the Church,
and the extreme vehemence of his affection, namely, that her beauty,
especially of her eyes, was such, that he was not able, as it were to endure
the brightness of them; for they have overcome me; It is in the Hebrew, they
have puffed me up, or lifted me up, to wit, with joy and gladness, or with a
rapture of love; but the meaning is, that her beauty had transported him beyond
himself.

Thy hair is as a flock of goats, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 4.1.

Verse. 6. Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 4.2.

Verse. 7. As a piece of a Pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks.] See
the Note, Chap. 4.3.

Verse. 8. There are threescore Queens, etc.] This is still added to cheer up
the Spouse, by letting her see how highly he esteemed her; There are threescore
Queens, and fourscore Concubines, (which how they differed from those that
were legal wives, and therefore called Queens; see in the Notes, Genesis 22.24.
and 25.6. and Judge. 19.1.) and Virgins without number; that is, handmaids, and
maids of honor, that attended upon the Queens and Concubines; see the Note,
Psalm. 45.14. Some conceive, that this is spoken indefinitely with respect to
the Court of any Prince, and that a definite number is also put for an
indefinite, as before, Chap. 3.7. There are threescore Queens, etc. which, they
say, is all one as if the Bridegroom had said, Suppose there be, or, Though
there should be in a Princes Court never so many Queens, and Concubines, and
Virgins, which are usually of the most beautiful women and most gorgeously
attired; yet alas amongst them all there would not be one found, that were to
be compared to my love. But then others again understand it of the women in
Solomon's family; for, say they, because the Virgins are said to be indefinitely
without number, therefore it seems most probable, that by threescore Queens
and fourscore Concubines is meant, that there was of them just that definite
number, and this can therefore be meant of no other, but Solomon's Court, though
afterward indeed in his old age it is said that he had seven hundred wives,
and three hundred Concubines, 1 Kings 11.3. for which see the Note there. And
if we thus take the words, the drift of them must needs be to show, that
amongst these there were none, that equalled the beauty and loveliness of his
beloved Spouse. And however, some understand by these Queens, and Concubines,
and Virgins without number, the several Nations and Assemblies in the world
pretending an interest in Christ, some better by many degrees, and some worse,
and so make this passage to be the same in effect, As if Christ had said, Let
there be never so many Nations, Churches and Assemblies, that call themselves
by my name, and challenge an interest in my love, and that by their outward
prosperity may seem to have much respect from me, and much worth in
themselves, yet they are all not worthy to be mentioned in comparison of my
true Spouse: yet, I think, the meaning may be rather taken to be plainly this,
that how excellent soever the beauty and bravery might be of the Queens, and
Concubines, and Virgins in any Princes Court, (or particularly in Solomon's) yet
in such an innumerable company, there would not be one found, that could match
the spiritual beauty and glory of the Church; and this is that which is added
in the following verse.

Verse. 9. My dove, my undefiled, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 2.14. and 4.7. is
but one, that is, she is the only one whom I own as my Spouse; as there are
none fit to be ranked with her for beauty, so there is none that are so dear
to me, nor that stand in so near a relation to me as she does; there is no
other people joined to me by a Covenant of peace. This is meant of the
Catholic Church, who as she is but one, because all the particular true
Churches that are on earth, are so united together, that they make but one
body, Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body, and one spirit, etc. and because of their
brotherly love and unity amongst themselves, so also because though there are
many Assemblies and bastard Churches, that in the worlds judgment, and their
own esteem, are as Queens and Ladies, Revel. 18.7. and Isa. 47.7. yet there is
but one true legitimate Church, which Christ does own as his Bride and Spouse.

She is the only one of her mother, the choice one of her that bare her.] That
is, of the heavenly Jerusalem, Which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. whose
darling she is, as being her only Child, see Judge. 11.34. and exceeding
beautiful, as resembling her mother in her heavenly gifts and glorious
excellencies. Yea and some take this as spoken by way of comparison, to wit,
that the Church was as dear to Christ, as an only daughter uses to be to a
tender mother; Ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, says
the Lord to the Church of Israel, Exodus 19.5.

The daughters saw her and blessed her, etc.] That is, particular Churches or
believers (for in the Hebrew dialect, the common body of any company of people
are usually called the mother, and several members the daughters) when by the
preaching of the Gospel they came fully to understand her state and condition,
did admire her beauty and her happiness in the love of her beloved, and did
pronounce her blessed; see 2 Samuel 7.23. and Psalm. 143.15. Yea the Queens, and
the Concubines, and they praised her; that is, all sorts of people, high and
low, even the most honorable and mighty Nations in the world, both did and
shall admire and extol her spiritual beauty and glory. Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7. it is
said that the nations should say of the Israelites, Surely this great nation is
a wise and understanding people, etc. see also Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. and 33.29. and
Psalm. 126.2. and of the Christian Churches it is said, Act. 5.13. that the
people magnified them. Yea, this may be intended to imply, that those that here
pretend themselves falsely to be the Churches of Christ, shall find, if they
repent not, at least at the day of Judgment, that there is but one true
Church, and how happy they were that joined themselves thereto.

Verse. 10. Who is she that looks forth, etc?] Very many Expositors hold, that
here begins a new passage of this Pastoral, that has no connection with that
which went before, see the Note, Chap. 3.6. Wherein it must be supposed that as
the Bride was going up from her garden, a company of Virgins espying her, did
break forth into the admiration of her beauty, Who is she, etc? But it seems
far more probable, that the Bridegroom having said in the foregoing verse,
that the Queens and Concubines praised his Spouse, these are inserted as the
words, wherewith they praised her, Who is she that looks forth, etc? and it
is spoken by way of admiration, thereby to set forth her surpassing excellency;
as when David says, Psalm. 24.8. Who is this king of glory? and Psalm. 77.13.
Who is so great a God, as our God? and when the people were astonished at
Christ's mavelous works, Mark 4.41. What manner of man is this, that even the
wind and the sea obey him? so here, Who is she? that is, What manner of woman
is this? that looks forth as the morning; that is, that appears as the
morning does after a dark night, fresh and fair, lightsome and cheerful? see
Isa. 58.8. Fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible, as an Army with
Banners: By all which similitudes, the beauty and glory of the Church is set
forth; see Isa. 60.1, 3. The last of them is explained above, ver. 4. But for
the other, observable it is, 1. that by comparing her to these Lights of
heaven, there is an intimation given that the Churches beauty is not such as is
the glory of this world, but spiritual and heavenly; in that she is adorned
with heavenly excellencies, and that her conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.20.
And hence it is that she loses not her beauty, when she is in the saddest
condition; in the darkness of persecution she is fair as the Moon, as well
as clear as the Sun, in the days of peace and prosperity: and though she may
suffer an eclipse, or be under a cloud for a time, yet it is not long ere she
always shines forth again gloriously. 2. That by saying she is fair as the
Moon, which has her light from the Sun, and clear as the Sun, which is the
fountain of light, there may be also a hint given, that the Church has all
her beauty from Christ, who is the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. and that her
beauty consists chiefly in this, that she has by faith put on Christ, Gal.
3.27. and so is clothed with his righteousness, as the Church is described,
Revel. 12.1. Clothed with the Sun; and 3ly. that the ranking of these in this
order, by comparing her, 1. to the morning; 2. to the Moon; 3. to the Sun, may
seem to imply a gradual increase in the Churches beauty and glory; for so it
is with believers severally; the light of their knowledge and grace, is at
first but like the light of the morning in the dawning of the day, but by
degrees it shines more and more unto the perfect day, Pro. 4.18. And so it
has been with the Church in her several ages, before the Law, and under the
Law, and in Gospel times; her brightness was still greater and greater. The
beginnings of the Church of Israel were mean, and obscure; and so were the
beginnings of the Christian Church; but by degrees they both did rise to a
great height of brightness and glory; in so much that the light of the Church
did at length shine forth gloriously throughout the world; and shall at last be
made perfect in heaven, when the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the
kingdom of their father, Matthew. 13.43. I know that many understand this place
of the conversion of the Jews to the faith of Christ in the latter days; and
that because the words imply, that people should wonder at the sudden and
unexpected rising up of a new Church, that should be glorious, even to the
astonishment of those that should behold it. But I conceive it my be better
understood of the Church in general, as an acknowledgement of her glory by
those Queens and Concubines mentioned in the foregoing verse, Who is she that
looks forth, etc? As if they should have said, Is this the Church that we did
so despise and reproach? certainly her glory is now so apparently great, that
it is wonderful in our eyes.

Verse. 11. I went down into the garden of nuts, etc.] By nuts, (which is in the
Hebrew a word that is no where else found in the Scripture,) we must, I
conceive, understand some choicer sort of nuts, such as used to be planted in
gardens, as wall-nuts or filberds, or nutmegs rather, because the Bridegroomes
and Spouses gardens are still noted in this book to be planted with all kind of
aromaticks, as we may see, Chap. 4.12, 13, 14. of which the nutmeg is a chief,
and under which all other aromatical plants may be here comprehended. Now very
many learned Expositors do take these to be the words of the Spouse, wherein
she gives an account why she came down after her beloved to his garden,
namely, that having found him there, they might delight themselves with
beholding the sweet springing of the several plants that grew therein; which
may be employed in the following words, to see the fruits of the valley, etc.
And accordingly they hold the meaning is, either, 1. that the Church does
thorough faith mount up after Christ to heaven, (Christ's garden of nutmegs) to
see the fruits of the valley, etc. where in those hot Countries their gardens
used to be, to wit, to taste by a lively faith the first fruits of life
eternal, and by raising of her heart in holy desires to advance her self
toward heaven, whether her beloved Savior is gone before her; or 2ly, that she
visited the holy Assemblies, that finding Christ there, they might delight
themselves with seeing the graces of Gods Spirit springing and growing up
amongst his people. But because the Spouses going to the garden was to seek her
beloved, (and of this there is no express mention here made) therefore I
rather think that it is the Bridegroom that still here continues his speech
unto his Spouse; and that having professed his constant love to her in the
foregoing verses, here he makes known that he did not go away from her in
wrath and indignation against her, but only went a little to his garden, to see
how things thrived and prospered there. I went, says he, down into the garden
of nuts, etc. And the mystical meaning of the words must be, either that Christ
did only delight himself in the pleasures of his heavenly garden, his kingdom
of Glory; or else, that he did by this his hiding himself for a time, go as
it were to see and visit his Church, to make trial whether after the winter
of some tribulation and affliction, there were any spring of grace to be
discerned amongst them. Now in expressing this, 1. he calls his Church, the
garden of nuts, as some think, because as the nut seems outwardly to be
nothing but dry wood, but yet has a sweet and pleasant kernel therein; so the
Church seems despicable and worthless outwardly, but yet inwardly it is full
of grace and goodness; or else, (if by nuts we understand nutmegs,) because it
yields fruit, so odoriferous and pleasing to God. 2. He terms her the valley,
saying that he went down to see the fruits of the valley, to imply thereby,
either the humble spirits of his people, or how low and base they are in the
eyes of the world, or rather how abundantly they are watered with his word and
Spirit: and 3. the last clause, And to see whether the Vine flourished, and the
Pomegranates budded, by the vine and the Pomegranates, he means his people in
his Church, whose good works and holy life are as the sweetest of fruits to
him; and by their flourishing and budding, he means their first inclinations
to good, the first discoveries that are made of grace wrought in their hearts,
which Christ would have us know he much looks after in his people, as that
which gives hope of ripe and pleasant fruit in time to come. But now again,
all this some apply to the conversion of the Jews, who for the hardness that
is upon their hearts, Romans 11.25. and the bitterness of their spirits against
Christ, may well be compared to a garden of nuts, because the nut, the wall-nut
especially, has a hard shell, and a bitter rind; and concerning whom Christ
has made known in his word, that in the last days he will visit them, to see
whether there be any inclination in them to hear and believe the Gospel, yea
that he will again receive them to be his Church and people.

Verse. 12. Or ever I was aware my soul made me like the charets of Amminadib.]
That is, I made my self like the charets, etc. It is an Hebraism frequent in
the Scripture, the soul being put for the whole man, See the Note, Psalm. 6.4.
yet sometimes it implies also the doing of a thing with much earnestness and
vehemence of affection; and so it may do here. See the Notes, Chap. 1.7. and
Eccles. 7.28. That which we translate, Or ever I was aware, etc. is in the
Hebrew thus, I knew not, my soul made me like the charets of Amminadib. But
this is all one in effect with our Translation; for the meaning is, I knew not
how it came to pass, before I knew of it, or thought of any such thing, my
soul made me like the charets of Ammi^adib. There are two things that make this
place the most difficult that is in all this mystical Song; 1. Because it is so
hard to determine who this Amminadib was, of whose charets Solomon here speaks:
And 2. because it is as hard to say, whether these words must be taken as the
Bridegrooms or the Brides. For the first; we must know, 1. That we read in the
Scripture of several men called by the name of Amminadab, as Numb. 1.7. and 1 Chronicles. 6.22, etc. and to some of these some Expositors do apply that which is
said here. But because there is a clear difference between Amminadib and
Amminadab; and because there is nothing recorded in the Scriptures concerning
the charets of those Amminadabs, and it cannot be well questioned, but that
Solomon speaks here of the charets of Amminadib, as very famously known in
those times, therefore I conceive it far most probable, that this Amminadib
was some famous Chariot-driver in those times, that used to out-drive all men
in the races they ran with their charets, or else some Prince or great man that
in Solomon's days delighted in charets, as Absalom did, 2 Samuel 15.1. and had
charets that were above all other men's, famous for their speed: Yea and because
Amminadib is translated by some, the Prince of my people, therefore some think
that by the charets of Amminadib may be meant Solomon's charets. And again we
must know, 2ly, that this clause may be rendered, as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, My soul set me on the charets of my willing people, or, my noble, or,
princely people; and if we read it so, I know not what can be meant thereby,
but the charets either of the Princes of Israel, or of the neighbors or
friends of the Bridegroom or Bride, who being of an ingenuous and noble spirit,
were willing and ready any way to afford them any help or assistance. And then
secondly, for the party by whom this is spoken; I deny not but that they may be
taken as the words of the Spouse, giving her beloved an account how she came to
follow him to his garden, namely, that not knowing that he was gone down to his
garden for the reasons mentioned by him in the foregoing verse, but fearing
that he was departed in anger, she did thereupon follow him with as much speed,
as if she had been carried upon the charets of Amminadib; or, that missing him,
though she knew not whither he was gone, yet ere she was aware, being
transported with the vehemence of her desires after him, she became as the
charets of Amminadib, and was carried, she knew not how, to the garden where
her beloved was, with as much speed, as such charets are wont to run: Yea and
it may imply also, that her affection made her so courageous, that she was in
that regard too, like the charets of Amminadib, in that not fearing the dangers
of the night, even when she had been already so barbarously used, she never
gave over till she had at last met with her beloved. And if we take the words
thus, they serve to set forth, either how unexpectedly and suddenly the souls
of the faithful are sometimes caught up into heaven, in a manner they are not
able to express; or else, with what speed and vehemence of spirit Christians
are often carried to seek after Christ, when he has withdrawn himself from
them, and with what a strange impulse of spirit they are sometimes carried to
the use of those means, whereby they are brought at last to enjoy his
favorable presence. But because the foregoing verses, as is formerly noted,
seem most likely to be the words of the Bridegroom, I see no reason why this
should not also be so taken; to wit, that he does here make known to his
Spouse, either how he was suddenly carried away, not out of wrath against her,
but with a strong desire of visiting his garden, which seized upon him he knew
not how, and posted him away as if he had been set upon the charets of
Amminadib; or else how having visited his garden, he was suddenly he knew not
how, stirred up to make have back again to the comfort of his Spouse, being
carried with such an unexpressible and unresistable violence and speed therein,
that he seemed to himself to be as the charets of Amminadib, or as if he had
been set upon the charets of his willing people. And taking the words thus,
they set forth, either how exceeding desirous the Lord Christ is to see the
garden of his Church to sprout out and flourish; or rather how very forward he
is to show himself with comfort to his penitent people; As the father of the
Prodigal ran to meet his penitent son, Luke 15. 20. so does Christ hasten, as
if he were carried upon charets, to the comfort of his penitent Spouse; when
his people are willing in the day of his power, Psalm. 110.3. then Christ is
carried out as upon the charets of this his willing people, to meet and embrace
them; Or, then by the Ministry of his servants, who are as the charet of Israel
and the horsemen thereof, 2 King. 2.12. he brings them to the enjoyment of his
gracious presence; see Isa. 66.20. This is, I conceive, the meaning of this
hard place. But yet withal it may not be unusefull to take notice, that this
also some understand of the conversion of the Jews, namely, that through the
forwardness of the Gentiles to promote their conversion, they shall be brought
in speedily, as upon the charets of a willing people.

Verse. 13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, etc.] This name
Shulamite is derived partly from Salem, the ancient name of Jerusalem, Psalm.
76.3. And hence it is that diverse Expositors hold, that it is the Synagogue or
Nation of the Jews, that is here called the Shulamite, and do therefore look
upon this as a clear prophecy of that calling and conversion of the na^^on of
the Jews, whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.25. But I question not but that
it is the Spouse, of whom Solomon speaks all along in this Song, that is here
called the Shulamite; and that she is so called either from her City Salem; (as
Ruth of Moab is called the Moabitesse, Ruth 2.2.) for even Pharaohs daughter,
(to whom Solomon may allude in this Song) might well enough be expressed by
this name, after she was incorporated into the Church of the Jews, and so
became a daughter of Jerusalem; see the Note, Psalm. 45.10. or else from her
husband Solomon, wives being usually called by the names of their husbands;
according to that, Isa. 4.1. Let us be called by thy name. And so as Christ is
in this Song called Solomon, which signifies peaceable, (as Salem also
signifies peace, Heb. 7.2.) so the Church, the Spouse of Christ, is here
called Shulamite, to signify the communion she has with him, and the peace
she enjoys with God thorough his grace; as likewise because the Church or
Christ did at first come forth out of the City Jerusalem. The greatest
difficulty in this passage is to know by whom this is spoken to the Spouse, and
what is intended thereby. Many Expositors hold that it is the daughters of
Jerusalem, mentioned before, Chap. 5.8, 16. that went along with her to seek
her beloved, Chap. 6.1. that did thus call and cry after her, when being made
like unto the charets of Aminadib, as was said in the foregoing verse, she
posted away to seek her beloved, and left them behind her; or that did, as by
an acclamation of joy, invite her to return to Jerusalem, now that she had met
with her beloved, Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look
upon thee, that is, that we may acquaint our selves with thee, enjoy thy
company, and behold thy beauty. And accordingly they say, that it is to be
understood mystically thus, that those nations and persons, who were well
affected to the Church, do here desire, either that she might not be gathered
up into heaven without them, but might stay here on earth, till they were
admitted into her fellowship; or else, that she would return to her wonted
carriage of her self toward Christ, from which she had swerved, that so they
might have the more abundant cause to admire her and rejoice in her. But then
others judge, (and that most probably, as I conceive) that it is the Bridegroom
that still speaks to his Spouse, to wit, Christ to his Church, and that having
hitherto professed his constant love to her, notwithstanding her late
disrespect of him, he does now invite her to return to her first love, and to
her former respective carriage of her self toward him, offering to receive
her into his grace and favor again; Return, return, O Shulamite, return,
return; that we may behold thee; He ingeminates this word return four several
times, to signify the speed, that he required in her return, the vehemence of
his love, and the earnestness of his desires after her return; and hardly even
the faithful themselves after their strayings are brought home to Christ. And
then he adds, that we may look upon thee, to wit, with delight and joy; which
he speaks in the name of himself, and his companions and friends, the holy
Angels, or his faithful Ministers; for the Angels desire to look into the
things imparted to the Church by the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.12. and rejoice in the
penitent returns of poor sinners, Luke 15.10. Neither does any thing more
cheer the hearts of Gods faithful Ministers, then to behold the spiritual
welfare of his Church and people.

What will ye see in the Shulamite? etc.) Some take this as the words of the
Spouse, humbly abasing her self, as if she had said, Alas, what is to be seen
in the poor Shulamite? In me there is not the least thing that is worth the
looking on. And so also the following answer may be taken too as hers, as it
were the company of two Armies; As if she should have said, I am but a sad
spectacle to be gazed at, a poor persecuted people, like a company of two
Armies, covered over with dust and blood; And what delight can there be in such
a sight? Or else thus, If you look upon me, you shall find the Spirit and the
flesh, like two Armies fighting continually one against the other; and there is
but a poor deal of beauty and delight in such a sight. But the Question is
better taken as propounded by the Bridegroom, the more to stir up his
companions to the admiration of his Spouses beauty and glory, What will ye see
in the Shulamite? And then the answer is made by himself, as it were the
company of two Armies; that is, you will see in my Spouse an awful grace and
majesty, such as is in a well-marshalled Army ready to go out against an
enemy. And thus Christ sets forth the spiritual beauty of his Church; see the
Notes above, ver. 4. It is in the Original, as it were the company of Mahanaim,
wherein there may be an allusion to that story, Genesis 32.1. implying that the
Spouse and her retinue, the Church with all her members, were as goodly a
sight, as were the two hosts of Angels, that appeared there to Jacob for his
defense; especially that she shall be so, when the Jews and Gentiles shall be
united into one Church, Ephesians. 2.15. and so shall go forth in great pomp and
state, like two gallant Armies, to meet the Lord Christ, their Bridegroom.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. HOw beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes daughter!] For
this Title given the Spouse, see the Note, Psalm. 45.13. Many Expositors hold
that it is the daughters of Jerusalem, that do here set forth the beauty of
the Spouse in the several parts of her body; and their maine reason is,
because they judge it not proper that Christ should speak of himself that
which we find, ver. 5. The king is held in the Galleries. But nothing is more
frequent in the Scripture, then for men to speak of themselves in a third
person: I make no question therefore but that it is the Bridegroom, that gives
this following large description of the Spouses beauty; for who else indeed was
fit to speak of those parts mentioned in this and in the following verse, but
he who was both her maker and her husband, Isa. 54.5. And for the order that he
observes herein, in that he begins here with the feet, and so goes upward,
whereas before, Chap. 4.1. he began with the head, and so went downward; the
ground of this, I conceive, is, not only that by this variety this Song might
be made the more delightful, but also especially because intending in the
first place to praise her for that which did at present chiefly commend her to
him, to wit, her returning to him after her late straying, under this
expression, How beautiful are thy feet, etc? Upon this mention of her feet,
he takes occasion from thence to proceed by degrees upward in describing the
other members of her body. Now for the understanding of the first clause, How
beautiful are thy feet with shoes! we must know, 1. That by feet in the
Scripture, is usually meant the motions or goings of the feet; see Eccles. 5.1.
and consequently that as by the beauty of the Spouses feet, may be meant
literally the modesty, gravity, and majesty of her gate, and particularly the
loveliness and acceptablenesse of her present return to Christ; so also
spiritually may be meant thereby the admirable progress of the Gospel, by
reason of the zeal and diligence of those that preached it, the welcome they
should find amongst the people; according to that, Romans 10.15. How beautiful
are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, etc! as likewise the
amiable conversation of Christians, their careful walking in the truth and
obedience of the Gospel, and zeal in running the ways of Gods Commandments.
And 2. that in the beauty of the Spouses shoes there is an allusion to the
costly trimming, wherewith women in those times used to adorn their shoes;
whence it is, that we read, Isa. 3.18. of Gods threatening to take away the
bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet; as likewise, that the
wearing of shoes was in those days a sign of those that were in a free, and
joyful and prosperous estate and condition, as going barefoote, was on the
other side a sign of bondage and affliction; see 2 Samuel 15.30. and Isa. 20.4.
So that by the beauty of the Churches shoes is meant, the bliss and comfort
of Christians walking in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, Gal.
5.1. having their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians.
6.15. in that being assured of reconciliation by the Gospel of peace, they
shrink not for any sharpness or troubles they meet with in their way; as it
was now with the Spouse: before every small thing discouraged her, Chap. 5.3. I
have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? whereas now nothing could hinder
her from following after Christ.

The joints of thy thighs are like jewels, etc.] That is, neat and comely; the
work of the hands of a cunning workman; that is, one that is a choice workman
for making such things. By the joints of the thighs is meant, either the bones
that turn and move in the hollow of the thighs, or rather the hollownesse
wherein the hip or thighbone is moved or turned about. And indeed the word in
the Original, which we translate joints, is derived from a word that signifies
turning, or turning about. Now this signifies the straight and comely stature
of the Spouse, and her ready and decent mooving of her body in her going in a
due and comely posture. And so likewise it may signify the Churches strength
and concord, and her upright dealings and Gospel-like conversation. As for the
last clause, the work of the hands of a cunning workman, that has in the
mystical sense respect to God, who as he has with incomprehensible wisdom
most curiously framed all the joints in our bodies, so he is also the author of
his peoples new being; and therefore he calls Israel, even as they were a
righteous people, a branch of his planting, and the work of his hands, Isa.
60.21. and it is he that works all our works in us, and for us, Isa. 26.12.
see 1 Cor. 12.6.

Verse. 2. Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wants not liquor.] It is in
the Hebrew, which wants not mixture, for which see the Notes, Pro. 9.2. and
Cant. 5.1. And he means a goblet full of some precious liquor, even to the
very brim, like David's cup, that is said to run over, Psalm. 23.5. which makes
such a bowl the more lovely and beautiful; for the drift of the Bridegroom
in this comparison, is not only to imply the plenty of nourishment, which from
the navel is conveyed to a child in the mothers womb (to the hinting whereof
even the roundnesse of the goblet is significant, because that makes it the
more capacious) see the Notes, Job 40.16. and Pro. 3.8. but also to set forth
the beauty of the navel, which God has made to be an ornament to the belly,
and such that in regard of its curious shape, the roundnesse, hollownesse, and
the windings and circlings in it has some resemblance of a goblet, that is
artificially wrought, and turned with roundlets for the adorning of it. And
hereby, as all Expositors agree, that virtue is meant whereby new converts are
formed, and nourished, and cherished in the womb of the Church, which may be
applied severally: either, 1. To the grace of Regeneration it self, whereby
those that are begotten again and made new creatures, are secretly fed and
nourished, as the child is in the mothers womb by the navel, being made
careful to cherish those principles of grace and good desires that are wrought
in their hearts; which may well be compared to a goblet, which wants not
liquor, because this grace is never quite lost, but it is as a well of water,
springing up into everlasting life, Joh. 4.14. see also, Joh. 7.38. 2ly, To the
Ministers or Ministry of the Gospel, whereby the first beginnings of grace are
cherished and increased, Gal. 4.19. Which wants not liquor; in that the
Church shall never want that liquor of saving doctrine, wherewith the work of
grace must be cherished in her children, Matthew. 28.20. And 3ly, To the
Sacrament of Baptism, which is the outward seal of our Regeneration; of the
laver whereof it may well be said, that it wants no liquor, because from
thence plenty of instruction and comfort may be fetched for poor Christians
upon all occasions.

Thy belly is like an heap of wheat, etc.] That is, say some, a stack of
wheat-sheaves, or rather a heap of wheat-corne, that is round and rising, broad
beneath and narrow above. And hereby is signified, either, 1. the Churches
fruitfulness, in regard of the multitude of children, which she continually
brings forth unto God; in regard whereof, as she may be well compared to a
woman big with child, Revel. 12.2. whose belly may be well said to be as a heap
of wheat; so her numberless issue may also be said to be as a heap of wheat in
the floor of the Church, which keep close together, being united together by
one and the same faith, and the bond of charity and love one to another. And 2.
The abundant provision, wherewith the Church is stored for the feeding of all
that belong to her charge. And hence it is that some have applied this
particularly to the Lords Supper, (as they did that before of the Spouses navel
to the Sacrament of Baptism) because this Ordinance is appointed for the
strengthening of the faith of true believers. As for that last clause, set
about with lilies, some think, that there is an allusion therein to the custom
of making hedges about their stacks of wheat, and that the intention of these
words is to show, that Christians are as a heap of wheat, fenced about, not
with briars and thorns, but with lilies, that is, by their innocence and
blameless conversation. But I rather think that in this expression, there is
an allusion to a custom of adorning their heaps of new wheat in the joyful
time of harvest with flowers and garlands; and that accordingly the drift of
this clause is to show, either, 1. That Christians are gloriously adorned with
the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit: or 2ly, That the food of the Church is
sweet and pleasant, and the means of much spiritual joy to Gods people.
Because the belly is the seat of the bowels, therefore some understand that
which is said here of the Churches bowels of compassion and sweet tender
affections, which she shows to others in seeking their spiritual good. But
the former Exposition is justly preferred.

Verse. 3. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes, etc.] See the Note, Chap.
4.5.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is as a tower of Ivory.] Some understand hereby Solomon's
throne of Ivory, 1 Reg. 10.18. being the rather induced to think so, by
comparing this place with that in Neh. 8.4, where the pulpit of wood, whereon
the Levites expounded the Law unto the people, is in the Hebrew termed a tower
of wood. But 1. Because we read in the Scripture of Ivory houses, 1 King.
22.39. and Amos 3.15. and of Ivory palaces, Psalm. 45.8. And 2. Because in the
following branches of this verse, the comparisons that are used, are taken from
places that were famously known in those times, I see not why it may not be
very probably thought that it was some particular tower of Ivory, that is here
intended. The Bridegroom had before compared the neck of his Spouse to the
tower of David, Chap. 4.4. for which see the Note there: But here now to a
tower of Ivory, and that to show how exceeding pure, and white, and smooth, and
bright it was. And accordingly hereby is noted, either the purity and glorious
beauty of those graces, which were before intended by the Spouses neck, as
faith, etc. or else of the persons intended thereby, namely the Ministers and
Governors of the Church, See the Note, Chap. 4.4. how pure and precious their
doctrine should be, and how holy and blameless they should be in their
conversation.

Thine eyes like the fish-pools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim.] Heshbon
was a goodly City in the Country of the Reubenites, Numb. 32.37. that was
formerly the royal City of Sihon, King of the Amorites, Numb. 21.26. and here
it seems there were very goodly fish-pools, that were a great ornament to this
City, and for the plenty and pure clearness of the waters, and for their
curious and artificial making, were very famous throughout the Land of Israel;
and they were, as is noted here, by the gate of Bathrabbim, which is by
interpretation, the gate of many, so called, it seems, either because it was
the place of Judicature, or the Market place, and so multitudes of people
resorted thither; or rather, because such multitudes of people were still going
in and out at this gate, fetching water from these fish-pools. Now to these
fish-pools by the gate of Bathrabbim, the Bridegroom compares his Spouses eyes,
as before to doves eyes, Chap. 1.15. and 4.1. to show how clear, and bright,
and lovely her eyes were. And if by the Churches eyes, (according to what is
before noted in those forecited places) we understand the faith and knowledge
of Christians, this signifies how rich and plentiful their knowledge is, how
quick-sighted they are to see the truth, and to look into their own and other
men's actions: Or if hereby we understand those that are Teachers in the Church,
then hereby is signified, how useful and graceful they are to the Church;
they are abundantly replenished with wisdom, that so the people may flock to
them for instruction and counsel, as men do to such pools to draw water; and
by them may receive clear and full satisfaction, and be abundantly replenished
with saving knowledge, as with the waters of life. Some add that the Churches
eyes are compared to these pools of Heshbon, with respect to her frequent
pouring forth of abundant tears, both for her own sins, and the sins of
others. See Jer. 9.1. and 31.9. and Zech. 12.10. And others say, that the
Scriptures are the Spouses eyes, that are here compared to the fish-pools of
Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim, because every man may freely go to them, to
draw from thence of the water of life, and may therein, as in a glass, Jam.
1.23. discover the spots in his spiritual face, and so wash them off. But I
take the first applications of the similitude, to be far most genuine and
agreeable to the intention of the Holy Ghost.

Thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.] Though
there might be a tower in that house which Solomon built in or nigh unto
Jerusalem, which was called the house of the forest of Lebanon, 1 King. 7.2.
(for which see the Note there:) yet because Lebanon was a mountain in the
utmost North-border of the Land of Israel, and Damascus lay Northward from
Lebanon, I doubt not but that there was a tower also built by Solomon in that
mountain. See the Note, 1 King. 9.19. and that it was purposely built, that it
might be a watchtower and Frontier Garrison, to secure the Land against the
incursions of the Syrians from Damascus, which was their chief City, Isa. 7.8.
And this, I conceive, is the tower of Lebanon that is here intended; and that
those words, which looks toward Damascus, are added purposely to distinguish
it from the other tower of Lebanon, which was in or nigh unto Jerusalem. Nor
need it seem strange to us, that the Bridegroom should here compare his Spouses
nose, that is indeed one of the chief ornaments of the face, to a tower; if we
consider 1. That it is not with respect to the greatness of that tower, that
this comparison is made, but with respect to the beauty of that building, to
imply a nose fair and beautiful, not crooked but strait, well-featured and
well proportioned: 2. The nature of this Poem, which being a Pastoral, the
language therein is suited to that of shepherds, and country people, who are
wont to compare their loves to any thing that is strange, wonderful, and
glorious in their eyes; And 3. That the mystical and spiritual sense of every
passage must be principally respected, as they have respect to Christ and his
Spouse, the Church; for so here the Churches nose is compared to the tower of
Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus, the use whereof was to observe and
discover the first motions of their enemies, the Syrians, that so they might in
time be armed against them, thereby to signify, 1. The watchful care of the
Church for the preservation of her self and children against all the attempts
of her enemies, and that especially, by the vigilant care of her watchmen, the
Ministers of the Gospel, who are for this end set in places of eminency above
others, that they may be as towers of defense for the securing of the people.
2. The Churches wonderful sagacity in discovering the secret frauds of her
enemies, and the dangers that are coming upon her: The nose is the instrument
of smelling; and suitable hereto God has given his Church such an eminent gift
of solid judgment and discretion, and discerning of spirits, 1 Cor. 12.10.
that his people are able to smell out Satan his errors, and cunning stratagems,
even when he appears outwardly as an Angel of light, see 2 Cor. 2.11. and Rev.
2.2. and so by this means they are enabled to arm themselves against
approaching dangers; yea and hereby they can discern things that differ, and so
do only savor the things above, and bend all their force to make sure to
themselves things eternal. And 3. The Churches courage and magnanimity in
standing out against dangers, and resisting the attempts of her enemies thus
discovered, manifested in her outward carriage and behavior.

Verse. 5. Thine head upon thee is like Carmel.] Carmel was a high mountain in
Phaenicia, exceeding glorious and beautiful, because of its fruitfulness;
whence is that, Isa. 33.9. The earth mourns and languisheth; Lebanon is
ashamed, and hewn down: Sharon is like a wilderness, and Bashan and Carmel
shake off their fruits. And hence it is, that the Bridegroom compares the head
of his Spouse to Carmel; And this some think he does with respect to some
curious tire or ornaments, it may be some garland of flowers, after the manner
of Country Brides, she wore upon her head, which made her head like unto Mount
Carmel; But rather it is spoken with reference to her head it self; Thy head
upon thee is like Carmel; That is, Thy head which stands above the rest of thy
body, is as goodly and beautiful as Carmel; or, it as far excels all other
women's, as Carmel is above all other Mountains. Some read this, as it is in
the margin of our Bibles, Thine head upon thee is like crimson; and this also
may refer to the costly and beautiful attire, which she wore upon her head,
fit for her that was a Princes daughter, ver. 1. or it may rather imply, that
her head was stately and full of Prince-like Majesty. But however that which is
principally intended is, that the mind of the Church is filled with all wisdom
and knowledge, and adorned with all the goodly graces of Gods Spirit; or that
through the grace of God in Christ crucified, she is very lovely and amiable in
Gods sight.

And the hair of thine head is like purple.] This also some refer to the
purple-filletings, or haire-laces, or some other such like trimming, wherewith
her hair was adorned; Or, it may signify that her hair was of a bright and
lovely color, or Prince-like beautiful; for scarlet and purple were usually
worn by Princes. And according to the interpretation formerly given of the
Spouses hair, Chap. 4.1. this may spiritually signify, 1. That the Churches
outward profession is very glorious. 2. That her thoughts, and purposes, and
affections, were holy and heavenly, and dyed, as it were, in the blood of
Christ; yea and 3ly, that Christians themselves are adorned with the
righteousness of Christ, and many precious graces, and thereby made very
comely and beautiful in Gods sight.

The King is held in the galleries.] Or, as it is in the Hebrew, bound in the
galleries. So^e Expositors give this to be the meaning of these words, that
there is no King in the world, but if he should once come to behold the beauty
of the Church, he would be so ravished therewith, that he would desire
continually to satisfy his eyes with the sight thereof, and despising all the
glory of the world in comparison of her beauty, would mind nothing else but the
beholding of that. But I rather think that the Bridegroom, as it is usually in
the Scripture, speaks here of himself in a third person, The King is held in
the galleries; that is, when king Solomon, as he walks in his galleries,
espyeth thee, he is presently so captivated, and chained with thy beauty, that
he cannot move but stands gazing upon thee, as not being able to satisfy
himself with beholding of thee. The galleries of Kings used to be hanged with
rich purple hangings; and to these, it seems, the Bridegroom does here
allude; affirming, that as her hair was bound in her haire-laces, so was he
bound in those galleries by beholding her beauty; see the Note, Chap. 4.9. And
so the meaning is, that Christ, the true Solomon, is so exceedingly delighted
with the graces of his Spouse the Church, that he is even tied to her with the
bands and cords of such a firm conjugal love, that he cannot keep his eyes off
her, nor cannot but abide with her for ever; he is held in his galleries; that
is, say some, in the particular Congregations of his people, where his love
will engage him to be still with them unto the end of the world; see Hos. 2.19.
Isa. 62.4. Ezekiel. 37.26. and 48.35. and 2 Cor. 6.16.

Verse. 6. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!] That is,
for the manifold delights, which by reason of thy beauty, thou yieldest both to
me, and to others that converse with thee; see Isa. 66.10, 11. The Bridegroom
having elegantly set forth the beauty of his Spouse in many several parts of
her body, here he winds up all in this patheticall expression of admiration,
How fair, and how pleasant, etc! Thereby implying, that in regard of all the
particulars before mentioned, and so in regard of all the rest of her body,
which he had not named, her beauty was so wonderful great, that there were no
words whereby he could express it, How fair, and how pleasant, etc! And so
withal there may be in these words a reason couched, why he had said in the
foregoing verse, that the King was held in the galleries, namely, because her
beauty being so admirable, it was no wonder, though the king was captivated
with a constant desire of beholding her; see the Notes, Chap. 1.15, 16. and
4.7, 9.

Verse. 7. This thy stature is like to a Palm Tree.] That is, In regard of this
thy stature, which I have particularly described, and which consists indeed in
the due proportion of all the members, thou art like to a Palm Tree, to wit, in
that thou art, 1. tall, as the Palm Tree is, as the Poet in a like expression
sets forth the comeliness of a woman, Longa procerior alno: 2. Straight and
bolt-upright, which is always esteemed very graceful in women; and 3. Strong,
fresh, and flourishing, and so likewise in other particulars; for which see the
Note, Psalm. 92.12. where it is said, that the righteous shall flourish like the
Palm Tree. And in all this the Holy Ghost intends to set forth, not only the
transcendent eminency of the Churches dignity, and beauty, and glory, but also
the magnanimity and heavenly mindedness of Christians, who are still looking
upward, and have their conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. and the continual
progress and growth of the Church, till they come at last, Unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.

And thy breasts to clusters of grapes.] In the Original it is only clusters:
and indeed it is generally said, that the fruit of the Palm Tree grows in
clusters. But because in the following verse they are called clusters of the
Vine, therefore, I conceive, was the word renderd by our Translators, clusters
of grapes. And to show that these clusters of grapes are not unfitly joined
with the Palm Tree, mentioned in the foregoing part of this verse, Expositors
tell us, that in those Countries they used to plant their Vines by their
Palm Trees, that so the Vines clasping about these trees might thereby be born
up. However, having commended the goodlinesse of his Spouses stature, the
Bridegroom takes occasion from thence again to set forth the beauty of her
breasts, (though of them he had spoken before, ver. 3.) because when women grow
up in stature, then their breasts swell and grow great; And this is that which
he intends in saying her breasts were like to clusters of grapes, to wit, that
they were fair, and big, and full of milk, as those are of wine. Now whether we
understand this, according to the exposition formerly given of the Churches
breasts, Chap. 4, 5. either of the Pastors and Teachers in the Church, or the
two Testaments, the old and the new, the meaning of the comparison is clear,
to wit, that the Scriptures are abundantly replenished with wholesome
nourishment, and such as may be, like clusters of grapes, both for meat and
drink to the souls of Gods people: and that Ministers must be always as
breasts full of milk, for the satisfying of the spiritual hunger and thirst of
the children of God committed to their charge.

Verse. 8. I said, etc.] As if he should have said, I promised, and I will make
it good; Or, rather, I did firmly hereupon resolve and determine thus with my
self, I will go up to the Palm Tree; that is, I will climb up into this my
Palm Tree, I will converse with, and enjoy the love and delights of this my
dear Spouse. And so the meaning is, that Christ would join himself to his
Church, and be with her, and converse lovingly with her, as with his dearly
beloved Spouse: I will take hold of the boughs thereof; that is, say some
Expositors, that I may climb up thereby into this my Palm Tree. But because it
is generally said, that the Palm Tree, though very tall, has no boughs
growing out on the sides of the body of it, but only on the top, and that all
the fruit it bears grows there, therefore I rather think that by laying hold
of the boughs thereof is meant, either that he would prune them and dress
them, or else rather that he would take hold on them, and gather the fruit that
was growing thereon. And so it implies how tenderly careful the Bridegroom
would be over his Spouse for her good and welfare; or his resolution to delight
himself in her beauty and love; which in reference to Christ, does import two
particulars principally concerning his dealing with the Church, to wit, 1. that
he pruneth and purges every true Christian, and particular Congregation, (for
these may be meant by the boughs of this Palm Tree) to make them the more
beautiful and fruitful; according to that, Joh. 15.2. Every branch that
bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit; and 2. that
he takes exceeding great delight in the gracious disposition and holy
conversation of his Church and people.

Now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the Vine.] That is, Thou shall
become more and more fresh, and sweet, and lovely, both in mine eyes, and in
the eyes of others. That which is promised here is, that by the presence of
Christ in his Church, and his tender care to do her good, she should not be
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.8.
but, should blossom, and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit, Isa.
27.6. and so should yield the more delight to him, and the more plentiful
nourishment to her children.

And the smell of thy nose like apples.] This may be taken two several ways;
namely, 1. Of the breath which came out of her nostrils, that this should be
sweet as the most odoriferous apples; see the Note, Chap. 2.5. so that all that
approached near her, should be delighted with the favor of her sweet breath.
And if we take it thus, then the spiritual meaning may be, that the breathing
of the Church in her Teaching and holy conference shall be exceeding sweet and
delightful; see 2 Cor. 2.14. And so it is the same with that, Chap. 4.11. for
which see the Note there. Yea and look as the sweetness of the breath, is a
sign that the inward parts are sound and good, so the sweet breath of the
Church and people of God, is a sign that the hidden man of the heart is
incorrupt. And 2ly, Of the sweetness of that which is smelt by her; the smell
of thy nose shall be like apples, that is, thy nose by drawing in a pure, and
sweet, and heavenly air, shall refresh thy inward parts, as when the spirits
are refreshed with the smell of apples; meaning, that Gods people should by the
sweet breathings of Gods Spirit be quickened and refreshed in the inner man; Or,
the smell of thy nose, that is, that which thy nose smells, shall be like
apples, thy graces and gracious conversation, (especially in regard of those
graces for which the Spouses nose was, ver. 4. compared to the tower of
Lebanon) shall yield a sweet fragrant favor to thy self; and consequently
also both to me and others; yea thou shall perceive that the sweet savor of
thy good report and fame by reason hereof is spread abroad far and near.
Thus, I say, I conceive, the Holy Ghost does set forth the blessed effects of
Christ's drawing near to his Church here in this world: though others, I know,
take the whole verse to be a figurative expression of Christ's perfect
conjunction with his Church in the kingdom of heaven, and the unspeakable
pleasure, which he will take in her there for ever and ever.

Verse. 9. And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine, etc.] The Spouse had
formerly said of her beloved, Chap. 5.16. His mouth (or, his palate) is most
sweet; for which see the Note there; and here now he returns a like expression
of his high esteem of her; And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine;
meaning that her breath or speech was exceeding sweet and delightful. And that
which is spiritually intended hereby is, 1. That the doctrine of the Church is
sweet and pleasant to poor sinners, full of spirit and life, chearing and
refreshing the sad hearts of Gods people like wine, Pro. 31.6. see Pro. 9.2.
2ly, That Christ takes great delight in the faithful dispensing of this word
of his grace amongst the children of men, and in the prayers and praises which
they offer up to God; and 3ly, That the communication and speech of the
faithful is sweet and gracious, and such as tends to the edifying of others,
like generous wine, gladding the hearts of their brethren, and exceeding
delightful to Christ; according to that, Pro. 23.16. My reins shall rejoice,
when thy lips speak right things. As for the following words, For my beloved,
that goes down sweetly, it may be renderd according to the Hebrew, which goes
straightly (or, according to righteousnesses,) to my beloved; and they that
thus read the words understand them to be a description of the best wine, much
like that, Pro. 23.31. When it mooveth it self aright; for which see the Note
there. And indeed thus men are wont in these times to speak of wine, when it
looks brisk and sparkles in the cup, Ay, this is right. But who is meant in
those words, For my beloved? I answer; This indeed makes this place very
intricate; the rather because this is usually the expression, which the Bride
uses concerning the Bridegroom; which has made many Expositors take this
whole verse as spoken by the Bride. But methinks it is most evident, that this,
with all that went before from the beginning of this Chapter, is spoken by the
Bridegroom in commendation of the Bride. And accordingly there are three other
answers given by Expositors for the resolving of this Question; for, 1. Some
take it thus, that when the Bridegroom had said, The roof of thy mouth is like
the best wine, then the Bride interposed the following words, for my beloved,
etc. As if she had said, If the roof of my mouth be like the best wine, to be
sure it is only so for my beloved, no body else must drink or taste of it. 2ly,
Others hold, that the whole verse is spoken by the Bridegroom, only in those
words, for my beloved, he pleasantly mentions that loving expression which was
so frequent in his Spouses mouth, as if he had said, The roof of thy mouth is
like the best wine, as thou usest to say, for my beloved. And 3ly, (which I
like the best) Others think that the meaning of the Bridegroom in these words
is only this, that the roof of her mouth was like that choice wine, which at
his banquets he used to bring forth for his choicest and best-beloved friends.
Every way the intent of the words is much the same, namely, that the doctrine
of the Church is acceptable to Christ; or intended for the making known of
Christ, or for the chearing and refreshing of the beloved members of Christ.
And then the last words, Causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak;
that is an hyperbolical expression of the mighty efficacy of strong excellent
wine, as if one should say, that such wine is able to revive a dead man, or to
make a man's tongue run when he is fast asleep, or to make dull, stupid,
sleepy-headed fellows, very fluent and eloquent in speaking; as indeed strong
wine is wont to make men talkative, and to be given to babbling, as Solomon
says, Pro. 23.29. yea to affect a kind of finenesse and eloquence in speaking,
Faecundi calices quem non fecere disertum? I know that some by wine, causing
the lips of those that are asleep to speak, understand wine, that makes men
overcome with the strength of it, to speak as if they were asleep. And some
read the words, as they are rendered in the margin of our Bibles, Causing the
lips of the ancient to speak, who are indeed sometimes by reason of weakness
duller and heavier of speech. But the former both translation and exposition
are clearly the best. To be sure such is the mighty efficacy of the doctrine
of the Gospel, that it will quicken those that are dead asleep in sin, and
make even the tongue of the dumb sing, as it is, Isa. 35.6. and even when
Christians are most drowsy and sleepy, if the word comes once to have the word
of life dwell plentifully in them, this will make their tongues as the pen of a
ready writer, their language will be holy and pious, they will talk much of
the things of God, and of Christ, and they will not be able to forbear,
according to that, Act. 4.20. We cannot but speak the things which we have seen
and heard.

Verse. 10. I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.] As if she should
have said, (for these are clearly the words of the Spouse) I see it is so, by
these sweet expressions of his love, which I have now heard from him; I see we
do alike love one another. But see the Notes, Chap. 2.16. and 6.3.

Verse. 11. Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field: let us lodge in
the villages.] The Spouse speaks here after the manner of those, that dwelling
in the City do sometimes walk out into the field, or go to their
Country-houses to take the air, and to take notice how the Spring comes
forward, and how those things they have planted there do thrive and prosper:
And hereby is figuratively set forth the Churches care, 1. for the propagation
of the Gospel thoroughout all nations, according to the commission given her,
Matthew. 28.19. for the field is the world, Matthew. 13.38. 2ly, To visit those
Churches that are already planted, according to that of the Apostle Paul to
Barnabas, Act. 15.36. Let us go again and visit our brethren in every City,
where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do. 3. In
seeking the conversion of men, not to despise the simplest and meanest
cottages, but to seek the saving of the souls of the poor in such obscure
places, as well as others; for this may be employed also by the mention that is
made here of the field and the villages; see Matthew. 9.35. and Mark 6.6. and
Isa. 43.19, 20. etc. 4ly, To beg of Christ, that he would go along with her,
to protect and prosper her in this work; because though Pastors and Teachers
must labor in this work, and are therefore called fellow laborers with God, 1
Cor. 3.9. yet all their support and success is from Christ, without whom they
can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. And 5. Some add also, To withdraw themselves
sometime from the troubles and distractions of the world, that they may in
private retired places, enjoy the sweet and heavenly delight of holy
meditation, and of pouring forth their souls in prayer unto God.

Verse. 12. Let us get up early to the Vineyards.] The Spouse having smarted
sorely for her former sluggishnesse, when she refused to rise to her beloved,
Chap. 5.3. is now in a quite contrary temper of doing all things with all
possible diligence, that might be acceptable to her beloved, Let us get up
early to the Vineyards, to wit, because in the morning all things are sweetest
and most pleasant in the Country. And this sets forth the Churches diligence in
visiting and seeking the good of particular Congregations, (for these are
Christ's Vineyards, see Isa. 5.1. and the Note, Cant. 6.1.) according to a like
expression of the Lords sending his Prophets early to his people, 2 Chro.
36.15. and Jer. 25.3.4.

Let us see if the Vine flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the
Pomegranates bud forth.] That is, To see what access there was made to the
Church, and how the Christians therein, both young and old, did thrive and grow
in grace; see the Note, Chap. 6.11. for the tender grapes, see the Notes, Chap.
2.13, 15. and for the Pomegranates, see the Notes, Chap. 4.3, 13. and 6.7.

There will I give thee my loves.] It is expressed in the plural number to set
forth the excellency, the plenty and abundance thereof. Some take this to be a
modest expression of nearest conjugal communion; But it may intend only, that
she would there yield him all possible expressions of her unfeined love and
affection to him. However, the spiritual meaning is clear, that in the
Vineyards of the Church, the Assemblies of the Saints, the Spouse would give up
her self, soul and body, to Christ, and yield him the fruition of all her
graces, and the fruits thereof in her profession and good works; for which see
those notable places, Ezekiel. 20.40, 41. and Isa. 65.9.

Verse. 13. The mandrakes give a smell.] That is, a sweet pleasant smell; But
for the mandrakes, see the Note, Genesis 30.14. Whatever our mandrakes are, it is
clear that those mentioned there and here, were rare, and beautiful, and sweet
flowers; and if they had a virtue to procure love, as it is said they had, or
were generally conceived to have, and are therefore often by Writers called
Circea, this may be one reason why these are here particularly mentioned: for
this, with that which follows, is pressed by the Spouse as a motive to allure
her beloved to go along with her, as she had desired, ver. 11. into the
Country. And hereby is meant the sweet savor of the graces and good works of
Christians, whether Jews or Gentiles, which are very delightful. For which see
the Note, Chap. 2.13.

And at our gates all manner of precious fruits, etc.] See the Notes, Chap.
4.13, 16. In this expression here used, there seems to be an allusion, either
1. To the old custom of adorning the gates, and strewing the doors of
Bride-houses, with all kind of sweet and goodly flowers and fruits: Or 2ly, To
the manner of having all kind of delicious fruits planted by their walls, and
elsewhere close by their gates, so that they were always ready at hand for
them that came thither. Or rather 3ly, To the custom of their using to make the
chambers or lofts over their gates, in country houses, the storehouses, where
they kept the fruits of their gardens and orchards: And therefore does the
Spouse add those following words, New and old, which I have laid up for thee,
O my beloved; for the understanding whereof we must know; first, that this may
be spoken with reference to those trees, Orange trees and others, that use to
have, both old fruit that is fully ripe, and green fruit that is newly coming
on, growing on them at the same time; or else the new fruit of the present
year, and old of the foregoing year, laid up in their storehouses; or it may
be an expression only intended to imply their variety and plenty of fruits,
according to that which is said of the householder, which brings forth out of
his treasure, things new and old, Matthew. 13.52. See also Levit. 26.10.
Secondly, that by these fruits at their gates, both new and old, is spiritually
meant, either young converts and old professors; or else the first gifts and
graces conferred upon Christians, and their first good works, Revel. 2.5. and
fresh and new supplies of gifts and graces, diverse and many, which God
conferres upon his faithful ones, and their works more at the last then at the
first, Revel. 2.19. for so runs the promise to the sincere, that they shall
persevere and grow in grace. Matthew. 25.29. Unto every one that has shall be
given, and he shall have abundance. And these fruits are said to be at the
gates, either to imply the readiness and forwardness of the Saints to the
fruits of obedience to Christ: The Lord can never come to visit his Church, but
he shall find her ready presently to entertain him according to his will; or
else to signify the open profession, and clear discovery which they make of
holiness and righteousness in the sight of all men: And thirdly, that the
Spouse is said to have laid up these for her beloved, because the Churches
constant aim is to refer and improve all her gifts and graces to the glory
and service of Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. O That thou were as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my
mother.] To set forth the ardency of her affection to her beloved, and her
desire of conversing constantly with him, with all freedom of familiarity and
expressing their love mutually one to another, the Spouse here wishes, that he
were to her, as her brother, that sucked the breasts of her mother, meaning
thereby, either a brother most faithful and loving, a brother that had tumbled
in the same belly, and sucked of the same breasts with her, a brother by the
mothers side, because such use indeed to love one another most affectionately,
as we see in Joseph and Benjamin, See the Note, Deuteronomy. 13.6. or rather, a
brother, that were yet a little child, sucking the breasts of her mother, with
whom his elder sisters live continually in the same house, and are ever and
anon taking him up in their arms, and sporting themselves with him; as seems
most probable by the following words, When I should find thee without, I would
kiss thee, yet I should not be despised, which seems to imply, that the Spouse
desires that the marriage betwixt her and her beloved were fully consummated,
that so she might as freely embrace and kiss him, as a sister does her little
sucking brother, even when she finds him abroad out of doors, because she knows
no body will despise or reproach her for it, or count it any immodesty in her.
And accordingly the spiritual sense of these words may be, either 1. That it is
the Jews, that here desire to see the promised Messiah in the flesh; which how
earnestly they longed for in the days before Christ, that waited for this
consolation of Israel, we may see Matthew. 13.17. and Joh. 8.56. and Heb. 11.13.
Then Christ was to the faithful as a brother, see the Note, Chap. 4.9. yea as
a brother that sucked the breasts of their mother, either because he sucked the
breasts of man's humane nature, being suckled and nursed up by his mother, the
blessed Virgin, as other children are; or else because he sucked the spiritual
breasts of the Church, their mother, in that he attended upon the Ministry of
John, and other Jewish teachers. And then too it might be said that he was
found without, because then he came into the world, and was openly seen amongst
men. Before his Incarnation he lay hid in the bosom of his Father, and was no
other way revealed upon earth, but under the shadows of dark types and
ceremonies; but when that was done, which Christ said, Joh. 16.28. I am come
forth from the Father, and am come into the world, then he was found openly
abroad manifest in the flesh; and with reference to this time may those words
therefore be taken by the faithful, when I should find thee without, I would
kiss thee, that is, I would by all possible means manifest my love and humble
respect to thee, see the Note, Psalm. 2 12. Yet I should not be despised; to
wit, as I am now, whilst thou delayest thy coming, and so I am scorned and
despised, as expecting a Messiah that will never come. Or 2ly, that the Church
does here desire the consummation of her marriage with Christ in heaven, where
she might for ever dwell with him, and familiarly and openly manifest her love
to him, as brothers are wont to do that live together in one house, and that
without any danger of being despised. Here the men of the world are wont to
scorn and deride the faithful for their love to Christ; but when they shall
meet with him out of the world in heaven, their exceeding glory there shall
manifest, that they are not a people to be despised; yea there shall be no
enemy there to despise them. Or 3dly, that the Church does in this patheticall
wish, only set forth her longing desire, that she might yet enjoy a more
intimate and familiar communion with Christ, that being mutually knit together
by the same Spirit, the most affectionate brother and sister might not love one
another, and delight one in another more then they did. And then in the
following words, When I should find thee without I would kiss thee, yet I
should not be despised. The Church promises that she would openly embrace and
own him, and make a free profession of him before all the world, as knowing
that in the conclusion she should not be despised for it. Yea and lastly, some
make this the wish of the believing Jews that should be converted in the latter
days.

Verse. 2. I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers house, etc.]
According to what is noted in the close of the foregoing Note, this may be also
taken as a profession of the Jewish Church, that shall be converted in the
latter days, how far otherwise she would deal with Christ, then their
forefathers had done, to wit, that they would not cast him out of their
Synagogues, as they did, but would with all respect and joy, entertain him
into their Assemblies. But it is better understood of the Church in general;
and see therefore the Note upon the like expression, Chap. 3. 4. And indeed if
it should be restrained to any particular, it may seem more probable, that the
Church of the Gentiles does here promise to bring Christ into the Church of the
Jews; because she might well call them her mothers house, in regard the Church
of the Gentiles had her first Original from the Jews. However, observable it
is, that by expressing this with those several terms, I would lead thee and
bring thee, etc. the Spouse implies the joyfulnesse of the matter she was now
speaking of, and her firm resolution that she would certainly do it; she
would carry her beloved into her mothers house; who, says she, would instruct
me, to wit, as in all other things, so also how I should carry my self toward
thee, my beloved.

I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, etc.] That is, Ipocras; of the
juice of my Pomegranate. The meaning is, that she would entertain him there
with the choicest drinks she had. If this be restrained to the converted
Jews, as is said in the foregoing Note, it implies, that they would not give
Christ gall and vinegar to drink, as their ancestors had done, but give him the
best entertainment they could. But understanding this, as the former, of the
Church in general, the words show, that the word should not be fruitless in
her, because she would honor and serve Christ, with all her graces, and the
fruits thereof, her praises and holy conversation, which are most sweet,
pleasant and delightful to Christ; see the Notes, Chap. 4.10. and 5.1.

Verse. 3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should
embrace me.] Herein the Spouse declares, how her beloved would cherish her, if
he were once brought into her mothers house. But see the Note, Chap. 2.8.

Verse. 4. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor
awake my love, until he please.] To wit, When at any time, holding me in his
embraces, he shall fall asleep. It is in the Hebrew, Why should you stir up,
or, why should you awake my love, etc? As if she had said, It will be no way
advantageous, either to you or us, to provoke and displease the Lord Christ, to
interrupt his Rest and communion with his Sion, but rather it will be very
dangerous. But this implies the very same that is in our Translation, And
therefore I charge you do not do it. But see the Notes, Chap. 2.7. and 3.5.

Verse. 5. Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, etc?] For these
first words, see the Note, Chap. 3.6. But for the following words, leaning on
her beloved, they are added here, with respect to the Spouses supposed loving
and familiar carriage of her self to her beloved in her leaning upon him, as
she went along with him; for that this was an expression of familiarity and
love, is evident by the mention that is made of the custom of Kings leaning on
the hands of their great favorites, 2 Kings 5.18. and 7.2. Very many
Expositors take these to be the words of the Bridegroom; and accordingly
conceive that Christ does herein admire and extol the faith and love of his
Spouse, the Church, and rejoices and glories in her happy coming up out of
her wildernesse-estate, that she might thus associate her self with him her
Lord and Redeemer. Again others think, that it is the Bride, the Church, that
speaks this of her self in a third person, Who is this that comes up from
the wilderness, leaning on her beloved? and that too, as admiring at, and
rejoicing in her exceeding great happiness, in that she enjoyed so near and
sweet communion with Christ her beloved, and propounding it to be considered,
as a matter of wonder, by others. But I rather think, that as before, Chap.
3.6. so here likewise, they are the words of the friends of the Bridegroom or
Bride, or some others, that must be supposed to have met them by the way; and
that therefore in our Bibles they are included in a parenthesis by themselves.
And accordingly they must be taken as a joyful acclamation of the holy Angels,
or other the faithful servants of Christ, wondering, either 1. at the near
conjunction and dear love that was betwixt Christ and his Church; or 2ly, at
the springing up of some new Church in some place where there had been no
Congregation of believers before, and their being conducted by Christ thorough
the wilderness of the world; or 3. at the former Churches growth and increase,
her strength and zeal for Christ, and her steadfast and unmovable faith and
patience, by reason of her near union with, and constant dependence upon her
beloved Savior. But yet considering that the foregoing words and those which
follow after, are most probably thought to be the word; of the Spouse, methinks
it is the clearest way to take this also (which some Expositors do) as spoken
by her, only in the name of others; Who is this that comes up from the
wilderness, leaning on her beloved? As if she had said, Thus will people now
again extol my happiness; Every one that beholds me will admire my bliss in
that familiarity and love that is betwixt me and my beloved. However, by this
phrase of the Churches leaning upon her beloved, the Holy Ghost does imply, not
only her entire love to Christ, but also her dependence upon him by faith; that
the Church is weak in her self, (as the Vine that would sink and fall down to
the earth, were it not that she clings fast to her wall or pole) only by
casting her self upon his merits, and resting in all things upon him for help
and assistance, he is a sure support to her, and does strongly bear her up;
see Joh. 15.5. 2 Cor. 3.5. and Jer. 10.23.

I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.] Very many learned Expositors do
take these also to be the words of the Bridegroom to the Bride. And accordingly
they make the spiritual sense of the words to be, either, 1. that when the
Church lay in a sad and deplorable estate, that natural estate wherein she was
conceived and brought forth by her mother, like a child cast out in the fields
under a tree, unpittied and ready to perish (and indeed the Prophet compares
man in his natural estate to such a child cast out in the open field, and so
left in a sad and desperate condition, Ezekiel. 16.4, 5.) then Christ did by his
free grace raise her up, and bring her to that glorious condition which at
present she enjoyed: or 2ly, that when the Church lay under the tree of the
forbidden fruit, that is, under the guilt of that first sin, whereby all man's
posterity were destroyed, then Christ did love her, and raise her out of that
misery; and by the Ministry of the Gospel in the Primitive Church, she was born
again. But because in the Hebrew pricked Bibles, the words are in the
masculine gender, as spoken to a man, therefore the most of our Protestant
Expositors do take them to be the words of the Spouse to her beloved. And so
according to the letter of the Parable the Spouse may be supposed to speak this
by way of putting him in mind of the place in his mothers house, where they
began first to set their affections one upon another, to wit, that finding him
asleep under an apple tree there, she awakened him, and so upon that occasion
their hearts from thence-forth were mutually knit together; whereupon it is
that as rejoicing in the very place where he was borne, she adds those words
in a kind of rapture of joy, There thy mother brought thee forth, there she
brought thee forth that bare thee. But now for the spiritual sense intended by
the Holy Ghost with reference to Christ and his Church: 1. Some conceive that
by the apple tree here is meant the Paradise of God in heaven, the place of
Christ's repose in glory, and that it is said that the Church did there raise up
her beloved, because by the prayers and zeal of the faithful in those times
Christ was moved to visit her from heaven; and so there, that is, where the
people of God did waken him by their prayer; according to that expression used
concerning prayer, Psalm. 44.23. Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? the Son of
God was incarnate, and brought forth by his mother the Virgin Mary. Again, 2ly,
Some understand by the apple tree, that tree of grace and life, to wit, the
Gospel of Christ. The Spouse had before compared her beloved to an apple tree,
Chap. 2.3. for which see the Note there. Now, it seeme^, in allusion hereto,
because in the Gospel the wonderful love of Christ, and the hope of life and
salvation is made known to poor sinners, the Church here tells Christ, that
finding him there, she raised him up to come in to her help and comfort in her
misery and sorrow; and then she adds, there, that is, under this discovery of
Christ, and the way of salvation by the Ministry of the Gospel; thy mother
brought thee forth, that is, the Primitive Church, did conceive thee, and by
preaching, professing and practicing of the word, and by suffering for the
truth, did bring thee forth, as it were, into the world, and that not without
many bitter throes and hard labor, as the word in the Original signifies;
which may be referred, both to the anguish of true penitents that are brought
in to Christ, and to the sad sufferings and sorrows which they undergo that
by preaching the Gospel do seek their conversion, see 2 Cor. 6.4, 5. and 4.9,
10, 11. And how the Church may be said in this regard to be the mother of
Christ, see before in the Note, Chap. 3.11. But 3ly, Others by the apple tree,
understand that tree of offense where our first Parents Apostatized from God;
for because the Church did then first in our first Parents by faith lay hold
upon Christ, in that promise made to them, That the seed of the woman should
break the Serpents head, and did earnestly seek his love, and to get an
interest in him, therefore, say they, it is said here that the Church did there
raise him up; and that there his mother, that is, Eve the mother of this
promised seed, or the Church in our first Parents, did first conceive and bring
him forth. All which seems here to be pressed by the Spouse, thereby to engage
the heart of Christ the more to her.

Verse. 6. Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm.] The
same reason that is given the Hebrew Bibles, to prove the foregoing verse to be
the words of the Bridegroom, does also hold here; but see the Note there. Some
think that in the expression here used there is respect had to the custom of
great men's using to wear certain engraven tablets on their breasts, and
signets or seale-rings on their fingers, which because they did highly esteem,
and had them continually in their eye, whence is that which the Lord said
concerning Zorobabel, Hag. 2.23. In that day, says the Lord of hosts, will I
take thee, -- and will make thee as a signet; and concerning Jeconiah, Jer.
22.24. As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim King of
Judah, were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence;
therefore by these words the Spouse would imply her desire, that her beloved
would keep her still in his eye, and make very precious account of her. But I
rather think it is meant of the impression of a seal; Set me as a seal upon
thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm; that is, Let me be deeply imprinted upon
thine heart, and upon thine arm; meaning, that she earnestly desired, 1. That
she might be nearely and dearly joined and united to him; 2. That she might be
deeply fixed in his heart and affections, never to be removed from thence; see
2 Timothy 2.19. 3ly, That he might keep her continually in his mind and thoughts;
according to that which God says to his Church, Isa. 49.10, 22. Behold, I have
graven thee upon the palms of my hands: thy walls are continually before me.
And 4. That he would outwardly manifest his love by his actions, by helping
her, by supporting her in all her infirmities and afflictions, yea by causing
all things to work together for her good; which may be principally intended in
those words, as a seal upon thine arm; see Psalm. 77.15. and Isa. 40.10, 11. So
that there seems to be an allusion in the words to the precious stones that
were on the breast plate and the shoulder-pieces of the Ephod of the
High Priest, whereon the names of the twelve Tribes were engraven, like the
engravings of a Signet, Exodus 28.10, 11, 29. and so hereby covertly is employed,
that the earnest desire of the Spouse was, that her beloved would, as a
faithful High Priest, be continually careful of her salvation, mindful of
her himself, and ready to present a continual memorial of her before his
father, as ever appearing before him as her Mediator and Intercessor.

For love is strong as death, etc.] That is, It is as able to kill those that
are strongly transported herewith, if they cannot obtain their desires, as any
thing is; Or rather more generally, It is invincible and irresistible, as death
is; As no opposition can vanquish death, nor withstand the over-bearing power
of death; so neither can any thing suppress, nor overcome the strong
prevailing power of love; it will vanquish the strongest of men, see Psalm.
89.48. and will break thorough any resistance that is made against it for the
obtaining of what it desires. And this the Spouse adds as a reason of that her
foregoing passionate request, Set me as a seal upon thine heart; and so first
it may be referred to the love of Christ; Therefore she desired that he might
so affectionately love her, because she knew nothing would be then able to
weaken his love to her, and that nothing would be able to stand in his way to
hinder him from any manifestation of his love to her, no not death it self, as
we see in the Jews, for whom Christ prayed and dyed, when they were so
furiously enraged against him, see Romans 5.6, 7, 8. Or, secondly, Rather it may
be referred to the Spouses love; Therefore did she so eagerly beg that she
might be imprinted on his heart, etc. because her love was strong as death, if
he should not thus tenderly love her, it would be death to her; her love was so
vehement, that she could not resist it, nor would any thing else satisfy her.
And indeed true spiritual love will make men break thorough any losses,
sorrows and sufferings, yea death it self, that they may enjoy Christ;
according to that of the Apostle, Who shall separate from the love of Christ,
etc? Romans 8.35. And to the same purpose is the following clause, Jealousy is
cruel (or hard) as the grave; where, by Jealousy is not meant the wrath which
arises from vexing suspicion, or from discovery of falsenesse in the party
loved, which is indeed cruel enough, see Pro. 6.34. (for there can be no such
jealousy betwixt Christ and his Church) but rather that vehement and fervent
love, which we call zeal, which will not endure the least suspicion or fear
of the cooling of that love that is betwixt them, and which is therefore said
here to be cruel as the grave; either, 1. Because this love of the Saints to
Christ, is inexorable, it will no more yield to part with Christ, then the
grave will spare any man from being lodged in her house of darkness; or 2ly,
Because as the grave devoures all the bodies that are laid in it, so this
fervent love will make the Saints mortify their corruptions, and swallow down
any distresses or difficulties that stand in their way to hinder them from
Christ, making them regardlesse of themselves; according to that, Psalm. 69.9.
The zeal of thine house has eaten me up; And 3. Because the faithful can no
more endure those that offer any indignity to Christ, then Christ can endure
those that offer any wrong to his Church.

The coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.] That
is, This spiritual love of the Church to Christ, this jealousy or zeal, is
like coals of fire that yield a most vehement flame, to wit, because being
kindled in the hearts of believers by the Spirit of God, as a spirit of
burning, Isa. 4.4. it does even burn their hearts within them, it breaks forth
into strong and ardent affections, and breathings after Christ, and does burn
up and consume all those cursed corruptions that would hinder their love, as
the fire would lick up so much straw or stubble.

Verse. 7. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it,
etc.] Having in the foregoing verse compared love to a vehement fire, here he
adds (the more to set forth the strange force of love) that it was a fire,
which water could not quench, no not many waters, not whole floods of waters.
Thus some do give the sense of these words. But rather by many waters here and
floods of water are meant, as usually in the Scripture, many and sore
afflictions, see 2 Samuel 22.16. Psalm. 32.6. and 42.7. And so that which is
intended is, that no threatenings, afflictions, or persecutions, can beat off
the Spouse from the love of Christ; see Romans 8.35. And therefore in the
following words the contrary is added too, to wit, that as no terrors can beat
them off from the love of Christ, so neither can any temptations by the proffer
of the greatest wealth or rewards allure them from it; If a man would give all
the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned; that is, if
a man, though the wealthiest man in the world, should proffer a Christian all
his wealth, to hire him to abandon his love and loyalty to Christ; he would
look upon it with scorn and indignation, with contempt and detestation. A true
Believer will part with all he has for Christ's sake; but he will not part with
Christ for all the world. Some do otherwise render the meaning of this last
clause, to wit, that love cannot be purchased at any price; or that nothing can
be given to the Spouse, which she will be contented with, without the love of
her beloved; and so likewise that he will not value any thing we can give him,
if we give him not our hearts, our love. But the first Exposition is
questionless the best.

Verse. 8. We have a little sister, etc.] There being no convincing reason why
we should think, that this is spoken by any other then the same party, that
spoke all along in the foregoing verses of this Chapter; I conceive that these
are the words also of the Spouse to her Beloved, We have a little sister, and
she has no breasts: what shall we do for our sister, in the day when she
shall be spoken for? wherein she propounds to him, the having a young sister,
that was yet but little, and not grown up to years of being ripe for marriage,
she would know of him, as an evidence of that cordial affection which she
desired might be in his heart toward her, what they should do for this their
sister, when being grown up, any match should be propounded to her, or for her:
and herein it may well be, that Solomon has respect to the custom of Brides,
being very ready at their own nuptials to talk much of the marriage of their
younger sisters. So that clearly these are the words of the Jewish Church to
Christ concerning the Church of the Gentiles; Before the coming of Christ in
the flesh there were many Prophecies and promises, that at the coming of the
Messiah, the Gentiles should be brought in and made one Church with the Jews;
which therefore the faithful and righteous servants of God amongst them did
believe and expect, see Psalm. 2.8. and Isa. 11.10. And hence it is that the
Jewish Church is brought in here pleading for the Church of the Gentiles; She
calls her both hers and Christ's sister, We have a sister, either with respect
to that time, when she should be gathered in, as a sister Church, to the unity
of the same faith, and to the privilege of being made the children of God;
(and how Christ also owns such as a sister, see in the Note, Chap. 4.9.) or
else because even in Solomon's time she was already such in Gods decree, which
being made known, he by faith speaks of it, as if it were done already. And so
likewise she calls her a little sister, that had no breasts, that is, no
breasts to speak of, no such breasts as Virgins use to have when they are grown
up to years of marriage; of which the Prophet speaking says, Thy breasts are
fashioned, Ezekiel. 16.7. either with respect to the present times before the
conversion of the Gentiles, when the fullness of time for the appearance of the
Messiah not being yet come, Gal. 4.4. they were yet in the state of a young
maid under age, not ripe for marriage, without breasts, because they had not
the Scriptures, nor any teachers to instruct them in the knowledge of Christ;
or else with respect to the times when they were first newly converted, because
then they were but few, a little flock, as Christ calls them, Luke 12.32. a
young Church, and of little growth, and of little strength and courage, till
the Holy Ghost, after the Ascension of Christ, was powered forth upon them, and
without breasts, because without a settled Ministry; for such is the state of
Churches in their first beginnings, Act. 14.23. and Tit. 1.5. And then for that
which the Jewish Church propounds to Christ concerning this her sister-Church
of the Gentiles, What shall we do for our sister, in the day she shall be
spoken for? I conceive the time hereby intended is, when Christ should make
love to the Gentiles, and by winning them to embrace the Gospel, should take
them to be his Spouse, and so the Calling of the Gentiles, which was a mystery
kept secret since the world began, was made known to all Nations, Romans 16.25,
26. And that which she desires to know is, what course they should take then
with this their sister for the increase and strengthening of her faith, and
what advancement, glory and dignity should be farther conferred upon her: which
is propounded in the name both of Christ and the Spouse too, because though
Christ can only work grace in the hearts of men, and all the good the Church
enjoyes is wholly from him, yet his Ministers in the Church are instrumentally
co-workers together with him. And by propounding this, wherein Christ's glory
should be so much advanced by the access of the Gentiles, the Spouse does
manifest the ardency of her love to her Beloved. I know that this is otherwise
understood by some Expositors, namely, that it is the Church of the Gentiles
that does here speak to her Beloved concerning the Church of the Jews, that
shall embrace the faith of the Gospel in the latter days. But considering the
time when this Song was written, I think the former Exposition is the best; and
the general stream of Expositors runs this way.

Verse. 9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver, etc.]
Some conceive that the Spouse having propounded that question concerning their
little sister in the foregoing verse, What shall we do for our sister, etc?
does here answer her self. But it is far more plain to take it as the answer
of the Bridegroom, wherein he tells his Spouse, that as their little sister
proved either strong or weak, they would sutably provide a worthy husband for
her, that should be both an honor and a defense to her; for that I conceive
(according to the letter) is meant by this figurative expression, If she be a
wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver; and if she be a door, we will
enclose her with boards of Cedar. But that which is spiritually intended herein
by the Holy Ghost concerning the Church of the Gentiles is that we are
principally to mind. And for this there are different Expositions given, which
are not altogether improbable. As 1. Some take it thus, If she be a wall, that
is, If this Primitive Church of the Gentiles be furnished with a Christian
Magistracy, that may be as a wall about her for her defense and safety, We will
build upon her a palace of silver, that is, we will make her Government rich,
and honorable, and glorious: And if she be a door, that is, if she be
destitute of Magistrates, and have only Ministers and other Ecclesiastical
Officers to take care of her, to open to some, and to give them admission into
the Church, and to shut out others, according to Gospel rules, We will enclose
her with boards of Cedar, a wood sweet and durable, that rotteth not, nor
breeds worms; that is, we will make this Government comfortable and strong
for their defense, so that they may cheerfully go in and out before the people,
and keep them in peace and good order, and do the work of the Lord without fear
amongst them, 1 Cor. 16.10. 2ly, Others explain it thus, If she be a wall, that
is, if she be one of the two walls, whereof I am the Corner stone, joining Jews
and Gentiles together, We will build upon her a palace of silver, to wit, that
she may be the place of my abode in grace and everlasting glory; the purity and
beauty, and lastingnesse whereof is signified, by tearming it a palace of
silver: and if she be a door, that is, if she be by her Ministry the door of
this palace, We will enclose her with boards of Cedar, that is, we will
fortify her with such durable strength, that the gates of hell shall not be
able to prevail against her. 3ly, Others set forth the meaning of it thus, If
she be a wall, that is, if she be so strong and well-grounded in the truth,
that she become as a City that has walls, 2 Chronicles. 8.5. to wit, through her
faith and hope of salvation, according to that, Isa. 60.18. Thou shall call thy
walls, Salvation, and thy gates Praise; then we will build upon her a palace of
silver; that is, by the graces of my Spirit, communicated by the preaching of
the Gospel, she shall be made yet more strong to resist her enemies, and more
beautiful and glorious, that she may be still the fitter to be an habitation
of God through the spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. And if she be a door, that is, if she
become yet more perfect and complete, like a house or City, that has the doors
set up, (which is one of the last works in building, Neh. 3.1.) then we will
enclose her with boards of Cedar; that is, we will make her yet more
beautiful, durable and strong, and to be highly esteemed for the savor of her
sweet graces. 4ly, Because by a wall, strength, and constancy, and perseverance
is usually signified, as in Isa. 26.1. We have a strong City, salvation will
God appoint for walls and bulwarks; and that which God spoke to the Prophet,
Jer. 15.20. I will make thee unto this people a fenced brazen wall, (an
expression not unlike that of the Heathen Poet, Hic murus aheneus esto:)
therefore I take the meaning of the words to be all one in effect as if the
Bridegroom had said, You are troubled at the poor and contemptible beginnings
of the Gentile-Church; but be not so: If she be a wall, that is, if she be well
grounded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and so she continue
firm and constant in the worship of God, and the faith of the Gospel, not
sinking under the heavy weight of afflictions, and constantly resisting all
that shall seek to corrupt her, being herein like a wall, where though men
knock never so loud, there is no entrance can be had; then we will build upon
her a palace of silver, that is, we will strengthen and adorn her further with
many precious gifts and graces, according to that, Whosoever has, to him shall
be given, and he shall have more abundance, Matthew. 13.12. And if she be a door,
that is, if she be somewhat weaker, having embraced the faith, but not yet
thoroughly established in it, only she does not resist the Spirit, but is
willing and ready to open her heart to the word of grace, and the motions of
the Spirit, see the Note, Chap. 5.2. then we will enclose her with boards of
Cedar, that is, even in this case also she shall receive a further increase of
gifts and graces, for the further strengthening and beautifying of her; so that
to be sure she shall be secured and preserved, till she come at length to be
made partaker of an incorruptible Crown of glory. This I conceive is the true
meaning of the words; yet there is another Exposition of the last clause of the
verse, which seems also very probable: If she be a door, that is, if she be
over-wavering and inconstant, easily tempted and overcome, too ready to open
and entertain those that would seduce and corrupt her, yet we will not cast her
off, but we will enclose her with boards of Cedar, that is, we will by a strong
fence of affliction bar her up so, that she shall not go out to such
corrupters, nor admit them to come in to her, which fully agrees with that,
Hos. 2.6. Behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall, that
she shall not find her paths.

Verse. 10. I am a wall, and my breasts like towers.] Some take these as the
words of that younger sister of the Spouse, mentioned by her, verse. 8. and that
because the Bridegroom had said in the foregoing verse, If she be a wall, we
will build upon her a palace of silver, etc. therefore she replies, that she
was, not a door, but a wall, strong and firm, and constant, and that her
breasts were as towers, to wit, as towers built upon the wall of a City; that
is, whatever they had been, they were now grown to be such, or a husband that
loved her, would esteem them as such. But because it is very hard to reconcile
this, with that which was said before of this little sister, I rather think
that it is the Spouse, that takes occasion from that which her beloved had said
concerning her little sister, to set forth her own estate, as every way fit for
marriage, thereby implying her desire that their marriage might be consummated.
And accordingly in regard of the spiritual sense, though these words may be
taken as the words of the Church of the Gentiles, that little sister mentioned,
verse. 8. professing her self to be every way capable of that honor, which the
Bridegroom had promised to confer upon her, in those words, If she be a wall,
we will build upon her a palace of silver; for which see the foregoing Note:
yet I rather think it is the Spouse, the Jewish Church that here speaks; and
that either with respect to her own present condition, I am a wall; as if she
had said, I am such as thou requiredst my little sister should be, I am a wall,
constant and firm in my love to thee, and consequently in me God dwells* as in a
Prince-like silver palace, fit for the dwelling of so great a King; and my
breasts are like towers, that is, my doctrine is fully enough for the
nourishment of my children; or else rather with respect to that time, when the
promise being accomplished, which her beloved had made concerning the Gentiles,
both they and she should become one Church, and be jointly together the Spouse
of Christ: And accordingly she glories in that her expected glorious condition,
speaking of that which was to be, through the assurance of faith, as if it were
so already, I am a wall, as if she had said, Ay now I am indeed a wall, a
strong, a goodly and glorious City; by the glory of the coming in of the
Gentiles to me, my strength and splendour is much increased, and now indeed the
great King of heaven and earth will dwell in me, as in a silver palace; yea and
my breasts are become like towers, to wit, in regard of the strength, plenty
and glory of my doctrine in the dispensation of the Gospel. For 1. Because the
doctrine of the Gospel was soon spread abroad, and became famous and renowned
throughout the world, as towers are seen afar off: 2. Because it is by the
Gospel that the Church resists her enemies, and becomes invincible. And 3.
Because God was pleased to bestow such abundance of knowledge and other gifts
of the Spirit upon his servants in Gospel Times, whereby they were to nurse up
multitudes of children in all Nations all the world over, therefore are the
Churches breasts here, with reference to those times, said to be like towers.
And in all this, I say, the Spouse intimates her hopes to her beloved, that now
ere long there should be a full consummation of their marriage in heaven,
because indeed the days of the Gospel are so frequently called in the
Scripture, The last days.

Then was I in his eyes as one that found favor.] This may be added (according
to the different exposition of the foregoing words) as an acknowledgement made,
either by the Spouse, or her little sister, mentioned, ver. 8. that it was
merely the favor of the Bridegroom, that he was pleased to make that promise,
ver. 9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a Palace of silver, etc. or
that he was pleased to show that respect, that he had shown, either to the one
or to the other; or else as a declaration of the Bridegroomes approving and
accepting of that which was spoken in the foregoing words; Then, (to wit, when
I had spoken those words, I am a wall, and my breasts like towers,) I was in
his eyes as one that found favor; that is, I was very dear and precious in
his eyes, he took much delight and contentment in me. And so also we must
understand it as spoken by the Church, either that she acknowledges that it
was merely from Christ's free grace and favor to her, that she was in such a
condition, as she had before described; or else that she glories in his
acceptance of her faith and love, and the precious account that he made of her,
and the assurance she received from him of his constant and everlasting love to
her. The word in the Original which we translate favor, does properly signify
peace; which the Spouse might use with respect to the names of Solomon or
Shulamite. And indeed by nature we are all enemies to God, Romans 5.10. and it is
only by Christ that the Church comes to be at peace with God, and to feel any
peace, quiet, or contentment in her self.

Verse. 11. Solomon had a Vineyard at Baal-hamon, etc.] Some take this, with
that which follows in the next verse, to be the words of the Spouse; and that
to express her affection to her Beloved, she undertakes to show how much she
prized her Vineyard above Solomon's, meaning by her Vineyard, either some
particular Vineyard which she had, (and indeed before, Chap. 1.6. she had
spoken of a Vineyard, which she calls her own Vineyard) which she so highly
prized, because of the precious fruit which she expected that would yield her,
namely, the opportunity of many sweet retirements there with her Beloved; or
else her Beloved himself, a Vineyard from whom she expected that comfort and
delight that was far above all the profit that Solomon reaped from his
Vineyard; But methinks (considering this and the next verse jointly together,)
it is clearly the Bridegroom that speaks here, and that with respect to that
which his Spouse had said before, ver. 6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart,
etc. namely, to assure her that Solomon did not so highly esteem his choicest
Vineyard, which yielded him so great a revenue, as he did esteem of her, his
far more precious Vineyard. Concerning this famous Vineyard which Solomon had
at Baal-hamon, all that can be said, is, 1. That the word Baal-hamon does
properly signify, the Master, owner, or, possessor of a multitude. 2ly, That
Baal-hamon might therefore be some place famous for Vineyards, (amongst which
Solomon had one, eminent, as we may well think above the rest) and that it was
so called either with respect to the multitude of Vineyards that were there, or
to the abundance of fruit which they yielded, or to the abundance of people,
that by reason of the exceeding fertility of the place, did live upon those
Vineyards. Some hold it to be the same place that in Josh. 12.7. is called
Baal-Gad. And 3. That some think, that hereby is figuratively meant the
Commonwealth of Israel, or the City Jerusalem, the Vineyard which God had
committed to Solomon's care and custody, (as indeed the house of Israel is
termed Gods Vineyard, Isa, 5.1.) and this is here called Baal-hamon, because
the Israelites were a very numerous people, or because Jerusalem was such a
populous City, Lam. 1.1. How does the City fit solitary that was full of
people! And now according to this which has been said, may we conceive of the
spiritual sense of this place, to wit, that Christ does here set forth his
tender care over his Church, by comparing her to Solomon's Vineyard at
Baal-hamon. Some indeed do here by Solomon understand Christ, and by his
Vineyard, his Church, which is said to be in Baal-hamon, either with respect to
the world, among the multitude of whose nations Christ has his Church, which
is his choice Vineyard; or with respect to the manifold fruit, which she
yields or ought to yield to Christ, being planted by him in a fruitful
soil, and watered continually with his blessing. And accordingly we understand
the following words, He let out the Vineyard to keepers; to wit, that Christ
has appointed his servants, the Prophets first, and afterward the Apostles,
and their successors, to watch over and to dress his Vineyard, the Church; see
Matthew. 21.33. and 1 Cor. 3.9. Every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a
thousand pieces of silver; that is, they were all to bring as great an increase
in to Christ as possibly they could. But, I say, the words may far more
clearly be taken as spoken by way of comparison; and that Christ's aim herein
is to assure his Church, (and that by way of replying to that request of hers,
ver. 6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, etc.) that he did far more highly
prize her, then Solomon did that rich and goodly Vineyard, which he had at
Baal-hamon. To which end, first he sets forth the excellency of Solomon's
Vineyard in this Verse; and then afterward in the next verse, he shows what
a far more precious and delightful Vineyard his Spouse, his Church, was to
him. Solomon, says he, had a Vineyard at Baal-hamon, he let out the Vineyard
unto keepers; that is, to several farmers or officers, that were to dress and
manure it; every one, that is, every one of the keepers severally, for the
fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver, where a thousand, as
usually elsewhere, may be put indefinitely for a great number, see Chap. 4.4.
Isa. 7.23. and Eccles. 7.29. As if he had said, Every one of the keepers paid
thousands for the fruits of it: all which is expressed to set forth the great
fruitfulness of this Vineyard, which yielded so great a rent to Solomon, the
owner, besides the profit which the keepers made of it, that hired it; And
besides to imply the difference that was betwixt Solomon's and Christ's Vineyard,
in that Solomon, though a King, could not keep his Vineyard himself, but was
feign to set Officers or farmers to take care of it, as his father had done
before him, 1 Chronicles. 27.27. who therefore had their share in the fruit of it;
whereas Christ looks to his Vineyard himself, and so all the fruit and
benefit thereof belongs unto him alone; as is more fully expressed in the next
verse.

Verse. 12. My Vineyard, which is mine, is before me, etc.] They that take these
to be the words of the Spouse (according to what was noted on the foregoing
verse) do likewise therefore hold, that here she proves how much more highly
she prized her Vineyard, then Solomon did his, to wit, because she did not let
out her Vineyard to farmers, as Solomon did his, but had it continually in her
own eye, dressing it her self, and reserving it wholly to her self, for her
own peculiar use and delight. And accordingly they take the following words to
be spoken by her, as in a kind of glorying over Solomon; Thou (O Solomon) must
have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred; As if she
had said, Thou, O Solomon, must afford the keepers of thy Vineyard a fifth share
of the profit, which it yields, but the benefit of mine redounds wholly to my
self. But, as was before said, the words do appear far more clearly to be
the words of the Bridegroom, and so the words of Christ concerning his Spouse,
the Church; and that having in the foregoing verse set forth the excellency of
Solomon's Vineyard at Baal-hamon, here as by way of opposition, he shows how
far inferior Solomon's Vineyard was to his, and what far more precious account
he made of his Vineyard, then Solomon did of that which yielded him so great a
revenue, as namely, 1. Because Christ's Vineyard is more peculiarly his, then
Solomon's was, which may be employed in those words, My Vineyard, which is mine;
The Church was Christ's by conquest, purchase, and donation, and that as an
eternal inheritance, Psalm. 2.7. whereas Solomon's Vineyard was his, only upon
temporary and uncertain terms. 2. Because Solomon was feign to have keepers
to look to his Vineyard in his absence, but Christ is always present in his
Church, Matthew, 28.20. and Revel. 2.1. and therefore, as likewise because it is
so dear to him, and he takes such comfort and delight in it, he watches over
it, keeps it and dresseth it himself; according to that which the Lord says
of his Vineyard, Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it: I will water it every
moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day; for indeed though
Christ imployes his Ministers to be under him keepers of his Vineyard, yet they
are but as instruments in his hands, they do all they do by strength derived
from him, and can do nothing except he be present with them and in them, 1
Cor. 3.5. yea and when they have done what they can, thorough Christ that
strengthens them, it is only the Lord Christ that does make his Vine fruitful
and yield her increase, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. And 3. Because consequently the whole
fruit of Christ's Vineyard he reserves wholly to himself, not suffering any
part of it to be alienated from him, or to be disposed of by others; for though
Christ does always reward those whom he employes as keepers and laborers in
his Vineyard, Matthew. 20.1, 2. both here and hereafter, Dan. 12.3. Every man
shall receive his own reward according to his own labor, 1 Cor. 3.8. yet the
revenue and fruit of his Vineyard he reserves wholly to himself; the faith,
love, and obedience of his people, and the glory of all that is done for them,
and by them; is all for Christ, and not for his Ministers. And this is that
which he implies in the following words, wherein by an Apostrophe turning his
speech to Solomon; Thou, says he, (O Solomon) must have a thousand, and those
that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred: As if he should have said, Thus it is
with thy Vineyard, thy keepers go away with a fifth part of the profit; but it
is not so with mine, all the profit of my Vineyard redounds wholly to my self.
Some Expositors, I know do take these last words as spoken to Christ, the true
Solomon, Thou (O Solomon) must have a thousand, etc. implying, that though
Christ was to have the maine profit of the Vineyard, yet his Ministers, his
watchmen and laborers, were to receive a liberal compensation, and should
eat of the fruit of the Vineyard too; according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
9.7. Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? But then I
say, we must take this, as spoken by the Spouse, or some that stood by; whereas
methinks they are clearly the words of Christ the Bridegroom, preferring his
Vineyard and his care over it, before Solomon's at Baal-hamon, and that in
answer to what his Spouse had said, ver. 6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart,
etc. So that the sum of that which he says here to his Church, to assure her
of his tender love to her, and care over her, is all one in effect, as if he
had thus said, Thou, my love, because thou have me not always in thine eye,
and because I suffer thee to be sometimes tried with sore afflictions, art ever
and anon in a trembling and fainting condition, as doubting my love. But why
do thou not rest with confidence on me? That I may free thee of all thy
fears, I will show thee, how dear thou art to me, and how tenderly careful I
am, and always will be, of thee. Thou see what precious account Solomon
makes of his Vineyard at Baal-hamon; yet being man, though a King, he is feign
to let it out to farmers that must take care of it, and dress it, and keep it
in his absence; and so though he receives a great rent for it, yet others have
a share with him in the profit of it. But now thou, that art my Vineyard, art
continually in mine eye; and though I make use of men in planting and dressing
this my Vineyard, and of the Ministry of Angels in defending and keeping it;
yet I am always all in all in that work, and it is I only that give the
increase, I only justify, and sanctify, and defend, and glorify thee; and
therefore it is fit thou should wholly depend upon my love and provident
care over thee; neither must thou depend upon any other, nor give the glory of
thy welfare to any other. This I conceive is the full drift of these words.

Verse. 13. Thou that dwell in the gardens, etc.] It may be renderd according
to the Original, O thou inhabitresse of the gardens, a title fit for a Country
damosel, and whereby it is unquestionably clear, that here the Bridegroom
speaks to the Bride. Having in the foregoing verse labored to assure her of
his sincere love to her, and tender care over her, and being for a while to
take his leave of her; he makes this request to her, The companions hearken to
thy voice, cause me to hear it; wherein he desires that before the Bridemen
and Bridemaides, the companions that stood by as witnesses of the contract,
hearkening diligently to hear what should be concluded between them, she would
openly make known her mind to him herein, that so the consummating of the
marriage might be hastened; and accordingly we must understand the words as
spoken by Christ to his Spouse the Church. He terms his Church, Thou that
dwell in the gardens, either with respect to her being adorned with the
manifold graces of Gods holy Spirit; or to her residing in those places, where
particular Churches or Congregations were planted, as delightful to Christ as
so many Paradices or Edens; or to her having her conversation above in Gods
heavenly Paradise, even whilst she lives here below; for which see the Notes,
Chap. 4.12, 15. and 6.2, 11. And that which he desires of her, that he might
hear her voice, is meant of the voice of her confessions, praises and prayers;
see the Note, Chap. 2.14. but especially of her preaching the Gospel to her
companions; (though some I know would have it understood of her desire that he
might hear the voice of her praises in heaven) The companions harken to thy
voice, cause me to hear it; for by the Churches companions there may be meant,
either, 1. The Angels, who do indeed with great delight harken to the doctrine
of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.10. and 1 Pet. 1.20. Or 2ly, The Elect, or the faithful;
such as are received into the fellowship of Christ and his Saints, and have
obtained the like precious faith with them, 2 Pet. 1.1. and were before called
the friends of Christ; see the Note, Chap. 5.1. and so this may be a motive to
encourage her to preach the Gospel, because though the world will not, yet the
Elect of God would attentively hear her: Or 3ly, (as some think) it may be
extended also to all men here below, at least such as are not dogs and swine,
but will vouchsafe to hear; for because of our common creation and habitation
here on earth, even these may be termed the companions. However observable it
is, that with the same charge wherewith the Bridegroom does here take his leave
of his Bride, Christ did also take his leave of his Disciples, Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations, etc. Matthew. 28.19.

Verse. 14. Make have my Beloved, etc.] It is in the Original, flee, or flee
away; and be thou like to a Roe or to a young Heart upon the mountains of
spices: Now accordingly that which the Spouse here desires of her beloved, may
be, either, 1. That he would flee, or, make have away with her to some place of
extraordinary pleasure and delight, called therefore the mountains of spices,
where they might solace themselves together; such as was that, or the same
happily with that, which was before, Chap* 4.6 called the mountain of myrrh and
the hill of frankincense; or, 2. that after he had dispatched his affairs in
that place whither he was now going, he would make as much have or speed in his
return to her again as a Roe or a young Heart does, when they run upon, or for
succor flee unto the mountains of spices; see the Notes before, Chap. 2.7, 8,
9. and 17. And so likewise in regard of the spiritual sense here intended;
either, 1. The words may be taken as spoken by the Church to Christ, with
respect to his ascension into heaven; As if she had said, Though it would be
most pleasing to me to enjoy thy bodily presence here below, yet since it is
necessary that thou should ascend up to thy father, that thou may there
provide a place for me, and mine, and may from thence send the comforter to
us, therefore flee as a Roe or a young Heart to those mountains of spices; Or
else, 2. With respect to his coming in to her help upon all occasions, in the
several Assemblies of his people; which may be here called the mountains of
spices. Because Christ had called upon her in the foregoing verse, to cause her
voice to be heard in preaching the Gospel, and she knew that this would stir
up many enemies against her; therefore she requests that her Beloved would upon
all occasions come in speedily to her encouragement, succor, and support;
which agrees with that which was noted before, Chap. 2.17. Or rather, 3ly, with
respect to the second coming of Christ, namely, that the Church here desires
that Christ would hasten that his glorious appearance the second time for her
full and perfect redemption, and for the consummation of her marriage with him,
because then she knew that she should be also taken up with him from the
valleys of the gardens to the mountains of spices, as heaven may be well
called for its unconceivable delight and sweetness, there to enjoy his
glorious presence for ever without any interruption; see 1 Cor. 15.52. and 1
These. 4.16, 17. And thus as this divine Song began with a prayer, and as some
understand it for his first coming, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth; so it ends with a prayer for his second coming. And Solomon closes up
this Book with the same expressions in a manner which we find in the close of
St John's Revelation, Behold I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come, Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

