THE JESUITS NEW DISCOVERIES.

Printed in the Year, 1679.

THE Jesuits New Discoveries.
NOw is it the time to come to the Apollogy for Jesuits, that is, it is the
time to leave speaking of them, for he favors them most which says least of
them.

Yet that it might not be forgotten, that this Order of men have been good for
something, these following discoveries and inventions, will demonstrate as
plainly as the nose upon a man's face; to convince Gregory the Great, and Saint Bede, two old men as would believe nothing but what they saw, the Jesuits had a
pair of Spectacles of their own making, Consecrated, and by the benefit of
them, these two Old Saints did discern, (as they say) distinctly the Souls of
their friends, when they were discharged of their bodies, and sometimes the
Souls of such men as they knew by sight. Bellarmine in the Book of Purgatory
affirms, that a friend of his, a Priest borrowed the Spectacles, which were so
truly made* that he got a fight of hell, and saw Origin, (which deserved so
well of the Christian World) burning in hell: an ordinary sighted man, might
look into the bottom of this plot, if he could be befriended, which could b^
hatch by none but the devils in hell, and acted by none but their
representatives, the Jesuits upon Earth.

For those as will not believe their eyes, or for those things as cannot be
seen, they have a Jesuitical Tool, which is to be fitted and applied to the
ear; it was by the help of some such instrument that Robert Aquinas, took
Christ's long Oration he made, as he hung upon the Cross and undoubtedly he also
had the like assistance, which dedicated that Sermon which Christ made in
praise of his Father Joseph: otherwise how could these hear, that which none
but themselves ever heard. To say more to say less of these Intelligence
instruments, they would be very servicable at this time, that we might know
what private sense, the Jesuits put upon their last Speeches, which contained
as palpable lies; as Father Ireland who at his Execution denied he was at
London in August, and brought Evidence to aver it, when then and since it has
appeared notoriously false, but Tresham the Gun powder Traitor did the same,
and more they may do by the Canons of their Church, if there be a necessity for
it.

It Is not unlikely these Jesuits should be Spectacle-makers or any thing, being
Jack of all trades, or as the Jesuits Catechism in English has it, a Jesuit is
every man, of which that Book will afford some instances. No^ can any man
though he had declamed against the Jesuits till all the sand (...) (...) were
run (...) and practices, which the Pope and Papists defend, but take o^^^ (...)
with another they have done their party more hurt then good, for the (...) will
prevail.

The Monks Contemporary with Ignatius the Jesuits Schoolmaster vindicate him
for a fellow so subtle, although not very learned that he had attempted more,
then the devil before his fall, that he could not only tempt, but possess the
devil himself, they admired him as a Transubstantiated devil, and believed the
devil entered bodily into the Jesuits, (in those days) and like them
transformed themselves into all shapes, and haunted all places to fill it with
their doctrine of divils.

The Jesuits wickedly, and like themselves, plead their privilege, alleging
they can make it appear by a true Copy of a Charter from heaven, that God had
granted to their Order, that for the first 300 years, not one of their Order
should be damned. The book wherein this Grant is recor^ed, is the Image of the
first Jesuits; who obtained this Grant as they say, or rather forged the
Original. Ravilliack, Chastell and Clement, that killed the Kings of France,
were encouraged by some such Charter to become Religious Murderers, they all
protested their innocence and went cheerful to their Execution like men of a
seared Conscience.

Above all, to discover their Charity is wonderful, in maintaining and
furnishing most Courts and considerable parts of Christendom; with Bigots,
quezels, and She devotes; these she Jesuits and other persons popishly affected
are planted to purchass Land, to betray Councils, carry on, suppress, affect,
and disaffect Princes and people the popishly affected and interessed are the
Vipers who desire to bring forth a foreign Monarchy, no matter what so it be
papal, though they rend the bowels of Church and State, by the Golden art of
supplanting, when the Jesuit himself cannot appear.

If any think this Apollogy too short, he may think all the Jesuits lately
Executed is an Apollogie, by their own rule, that is their greatest Argument of
innocence to be accused by us.

At this time whilst they are yet somewhat able to do mischief, let them make
much of this Vindication, it may come to pass, that as they have been expelled
Venice, banished France, (which Father Gavan forgot, when he said all the
Papal world are the Jesuits Advocates,) they may be shaken off by other
Princes, then their own weakness may be their Apollogie.

If any object, the Jesuits have taken away rather then given any occasion of
writing for them, I confess it, and wish they may grow harmless out of
necessity, and really verify that which Vegetius said of old War-Chariots
^^^^ed with Sithes and Hooks, that at first they were terrible, but at last
^^ey became contemptible.

FINIS.

