THE Jesuit in the Pound: OR, Father Peter's in Disguise, Taken by Vice Admiral
Herbert
HALLOO! Halloo! my Dog too! my Dog too! There Jowler, at him Ringwood.
There, there, there, you have him on the Scent! He Is our own. Now Jolly
Hunrsman, wind the Horn. He Is Taken! he is Taken! he is Taken! The Old Fox, that
lately broke away from the English-Court, is now taken in the Dutch Noose. I
Gad; Herbert, and his Water-Spaniels, are plaguey Mouthed Currs, they neither
spare Fox nor Geese. What a Murrain cross-grained Wind blew the Holy Father
this way, when his Reverence with full Sail was bound for Paris, an Hundred
Thousand Pounds strong, bidding 2 long Farewell to England for ever?

But Fate, that flew faster than the Jesuit, soon overtook him, when the
Vice Admiral having notice of his Escape, and (more Tempted with the Spirit of
Revenge than the Thousand Pounds Reward) lay in close wait for him. He had had
a copious and ample Description of his Disguise, who was now dressed up like a
double Hypocrite, viz. That instead of a Canonical Gown, he had got on him a
Red Cloak, resembling the Bloody Robes of the Scarlet Whore. That this Cloak
was cut out of a spick and span new piece of Jesuitical Equivocation, Lined
with Mental Reservation, which was the Appurtenances of the outward Garment:
Underneath he had a Vest of the same Color, cut out of the Petticoat of the
said Whore; Lined with Ignorance, and Faced with Infallibility, being
within-side all Hypocrisy and Di^slimulation. But to the Matter.

In this Disguise (its said)he past down theRiver to Rochester; where, after a
plentiful Repast, being received on Board a small Yatch, prepared for his
Reception, they soon put off to Sea, the Wind and Tide seeming to favor his
Escape. But see the Inconstancy of the Flattering Fates; scarce were they out
of sight of Land, when a thick Mist dispersing, they discovered a Ship; which
(the better to Cloak the design) bore the French Colors, which put the
Dejected Jesuit into new Heart, hoping now to secure his Flight in a larger
Bottom. He hauls them in with the Chase Gun; They strike Sail, and lie by. The
Admiral, with Forty Men, boards 'em, yet find no Opposition: The Jesuit, with
all his Ship Crew, retires into the great Cabin, singing Te Deum for their
happy Deliverance. But Herbert, who knew Father Peter's too well to be mistaken
in that Disguise, seized him, conveying him (instead of going to Callis) to the
Dutch Fleet; from whence, it is verily believed, his 100000. Pounds will hardly
Pay his Ransom.

Thus you see, that norwithstanding all the Secret Policies, Contrivances, and
Disguises of these Impostures, nothing can for ever preserve them, but they
must at last fall into the Hands of Justice.

LONDON, Printed for S. M. 1688.


