King Charles I. No such SAINT, MARTYR, or GOOD PROTESTANT as commonly reputed;
BUT A FAVOURER of PAPISTS, and a Cruel and Oppressive TYRANT.

All plainly proved from undeniable Matters of Fact.

To which are added Dr. Burnet's (now Bishop of Salisbury) and other Reasons,
against the keeping up any longer the observation of a Fast on the 30th of
January.

AS ALSO Short Answers to these three Questions. I. What is the Occasion of the
Clergies Pride and Lording it over the Laity? II. Why they, and many of the
Laity, cry up this King for a Saint, Martyr? etc. III. What is the true Reason
that the generality of the Clergy, and many of the Laity, both Lawyers and
others, are constant Advocates for Kings (tho never so wicked) and Sacrificers
of the People?

He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. 2 Samuel 23.3.

And Ahab, the Son of Omri, did evil in the sight of the Lord, above all that
were before him. 1 Kings 30.

And has despised, in the indignation of his anger, the KING and the Priest.
Lam. 2.6.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of
the high ones that are on high, and the Kings of the earth, that are on the
earth. Isa. 24.21.

And I will come upon him while he is weary and weakhanded, and will make him
afraid, and all the people that are with him shall flee; and I will SMITE the
KING ONLY. 2 Samuel 17.2.

But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind was hardened with Pride, he was
deposed from his Kingly Throne, and they took his Glory from him. Dan. 5.20.

^or this Melchisedeck, King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, who met
Abraham returning from the Slaughter of Kings, and blessed him. Heb. 7.1.

LONDON, Printed in the 10th Year of our Redemption from Popery and Slavery.
School.

To the good People of England, who sincerely love and will maintain the
Protestant Religion, English Laws, Liberties and Properties.
Honest Countrymen,
THE design of this Book is twofold:

First, To give many and clear Demonstrations, that King Charles the First was
no such Saint or Martyr as he has been commonly reputed, nor yet a true
Protestant; but on the contrary, a great favourer of Papists, and an oppressive
Tyrant.

Secondly, To vindicate the just Resistance the Parliament of 1640, and People,
were constrained for their own safety to make.

I foresee this Treatise will meet with two Objections, First, That it
contradicts the old Maxim, De mortuis nihil nisi bonum. The second, That it
treats a crowned Head (nay, a pious Martyr's too) with little respect.

To the first I answer, That bonum here must be understood quasi verum, that
is, do not wrong or belie the Dead, for they are not in being to justify their
own Innocence: otherwise it will not only reflect on profane but sacred
History, nothing being more common in both, than to record the evil Actions
even of Princes themselves. I find this Maxim sometimes highly insisted on by
some of our Clergy and Laity, especially in favor of King Charles I. At other
times these sort of men make not the least scruple (for sinister ends) most
unjustly to vilify, as the greatest Villains imaginable, the Parliament of
1640, and those worthy Patriots that joined with it, to prevent the then many
apparent inundations of Popery and Arbitrary Power, that King, his Queen, and
evil Counselors were bringing on the three Kingdoms.

To the second, of respecting this crowned Head, I must confess I have not
treated him as I would a King (...) for the good of his People according to
Law, but as a Tyrant, who cannot pretend to the least Love or Honor from any
of his Subjects; except those Papists and others that were his Favorites, and
were embarked in the same wicked Designs with him, esteem it a great Sin to
idolize and deify the best Magistrate on Earth, but a much greater, to adore a
bloody and tyrannical Oppressor. And if the same men will, through custom,
simplicity, or want of information, no otherwise consider Kings than in the
gaudy name of Majesty, and admire them and their doings, as if they breathed
not the same Breath with other mortal men, I thank God I have learnt better;
and plainly see with what a besotted and degenerated baseness of spirit,
imbastardized from the ancient nobleness of their Ancestors, they have not only
in a religious, but a civil kind of Idolatry, idolized this King, and adored
the Image and Memory of him, who has offered at more cunning fetches to
undermine the Liberties of England, and put Tyranny into an Art, than any
British King before him.

To make good my Charge against this Prince, I shall first prove, that the
general course of his Actions, etc. were directly inconsistent with what a
Saint does, and ought to do: viz. 1. He was a proud Nimrod, a hardened Pharaoh.
2. A great Liar, (if he writ the Book called Eicon Basilike) for amongst the
many false Assertions against, and Accusations of the Parliament, he begins
with this notorious one, viz. That he called this last Parliament, not more by
the advice of others, than his own choice and inclination; when the contrary
was well known, both by the current of his own Actions, and by the Favorites
about him. For further proof of this, let any unbiassed Person but read his
Promises, Oaths, Protestations, and solemn Declarations to the Parliament, and
consider how little of truth was in them, how the Parliament in many of their
Petitions charged him with the breach of them, and he will receive sufficient
satisfaction. ^ He unhallowed, and unchristianed the very Duty of Prayer it
self, by borrowing to a Christian use, Prayers offered to a Heathen God. What
little fear had he of the true all seeing Deity? what little reverence of the
Holy Ghost, whose Office is to dictate and present our Christian Prayers? What
little care of Truth in his last words, or honor to himself or to his Friends,
or sense of his Afflictions, or of that sad hour which was upon him, as
immediately before his death, to pop into the hand of that grave Bishop who
attended him, as a special Relick of his saintly Exercises, a Prayer stolen,
word for word, from the mouth of a Heathen Woman praying to a Heathen God; and
that in no serious Book, but a vain amatorious Poem of Sir Philip Sidney's
Arcadia, a Book in that kind full of Worth and Wit, but among religious
Thoughts and Duties not worthy to be named, nor read at any time without
caution, much less in time of trouble and affliction to be a Christian's
Prayer Book; that thought no better of the living God, than of a buzzard Idol,
by serving him with the polluted trash of Romances and Arcadia's: A bold and
irreligious affront to the Divine Being! And in the 5th Chapter about Triennial
Parliaments, he has this passage, That the Tumults threatened to abuse all Acts
of Grace, and turn them into Wantonness. If they had turned his Wantonness into
the Grace of not abusing Scripture, it had been well; this no ways became such
a Saint as they would make him. Herod was eaten up of Worms, for suffering
others to compare his Voice to the Voice of God: But the borrower of this
phrase gives much more cause of jealousy, that he likened his own Acts of
Grace, to the Acts of God's Grace: And in the same Chapter, his letting some
men go up to the Pinnacle of the Temple, was to cast him down headlong. In this
Simily we have himself compared to Christ, the Parliament to the Devil; and his
giving them that Act of settling, to his letting them go up to the Pinnacle of
the Temple: this was a goodly use made of Scripture in his solitudes! And in
Chap. 8. on his repulse at Hull, in his Prayer, thus, Let not thy Justice
prevent the Objects and Opportunities of my Mercy. Must this be imputed to his
Folly, or Blasphemy, or to both? Shall the Justice of God give place, and serve
to glorify the Mercies of a Man? All other men that know what they ask, desire
of God that their doings may tend to his Glory; But in this Prayer, God is
required that his Justice would forbear to prevent, and as good as said to
entrench upon the Glory of a Man's Mercy. If God forbear his Justice, it must
be, sure, to the magnifying his own Mercy; but here a mortal Man takes the
boldness to ask that Glory out of his hand. He hated all those that were
esteemed Religious, doubting that their Principles too much asserted Liberty;
this was plainly seen by his vehement prosecution of them. He took a most
bloody and treacherous advantage of the Parliament's Army near Colebrook,
whilst he was under Treaty at Vxbridg with them, as he protested, to prevent
the shedding of Blood. From the beginning of the War he would rather sacrifice
the Lives of thousands of his good Subjects, than deliver up those evil
Counselors that sought to enslave England, or govern according to Law himself.
He admired, encouraged, and protected none but the worst and corruptest sort of
Courtiers; and the ragged Infantry of Stews and Brothels, the spawn and
shipwreck of Taverns and Dicing-houses, were the Bravo's and Hacksters that
attended him when he went in the most arbitrary and illegal manner into the
House of Commons; and that in his Army he had 1000 of blaspheming Cavaliers
about him, whose mouths let fly Oaths and Curses by the Volly; that entertained
and encouraged a most ignorant, profane and vicious Clergy, learned in nothing
but their Pride, their Covetousness and Superstition, whose unsincere and
levenous Doctrines corrupting the People, first taught them Looseness, then
Bondage, loosning them from all sound Knowledge and strictness of Life, the more
to fit them for the bondage of Tyranny and Superstition: A Clergy that from the
Press and Pulpit poisoned the People with the following abominable enslaving
Doctrines, of Passive (or more properly Assive) Obedience, Non-resistance,
Obeying without Reserve; That the Kings of England (by being anointed Birds)
are absolutely unaccountable to the People: That they have a power over the
Lives, Liberties, Laws and Goods of their people, and may do what they will
with them: That the King can do no wrong, and many more such horrid Notions;
enough to corrupt the best Prince, and enslave the freest people.

These devilish enslaving Doctrines, are most prejudicial and ungrateful to any
people, that not only believe, but know, that they are Freeborn Subjects: That
all Government was originally in the People, for they were before Kings: That
all Kings, etc. came by their power, Ex Pacto aut Scelere, either by Compact,
Covenant, etc. with the People, or by Usurpation. That they did not like the
Beasts in St. Peter's Vision, drop down from Heaven, with all their Dignities,
Power, etc. but had their Root and Foundation from the Earth. If by Usurpation,
the longest Sword must decide the Controversy; but if by Compact, the People of
England cannot harbor such hard thoughts of their Ancestors, as to imagine
they would make such ridiculous, foolish and nonsensical Bargains, as to sell
themselves (and as far as in them lay) their poor Posterity (for I may then
with reason call them so) to a vile, miserable and lasting Slavery. That if
their Ancestors were such Fools, Knaves or Madmen to sell their Birthrights, as
Esau did; the people of England know better things than to stand to that blind
Bargain, it being against the Law of Nature, which teaches Self-preservation.
Neither will the sensible part of Mankind any more believe, that any Kings have
such a Divine Right as will justify their violating their Coronation Oaths,
breaking through all the Laws of the Land, that are the Peoples chiefest
security: for they know and will preserve the undoubted privileges of freeborn
English Men.

They are also well assured, that when a King or Prince ceases to govern
according to Law, he turns Tyrant, and therefore ceases to be King, by which,
as the Scots wisely call it, he forefaults his Kingdom.

That Salus populi est suprema Lex; That the King was made for the Kingdom, and
not the Kingdom for him. That the King does not maintain the Kingdom, but the
Kingdom the King. That the King and all Magistrates are the Kingdoms Ministers
and Servants. That it is their Duty and Glory to serve the Kingdom. That Kings
must not reign by their Kingdoms ruin, nor be lifted up by their downfall. That
the End is greater than the Means, Health better than Physic. That the King
was not advanced to debase and enslave his People. That it is not the Ordinance
of God that millions of men should be miserable slaves and vassals to One. That
if the King be God's Anointed Jure Personae, in the Right of his Person, he is
Man's appointed Jure Coronae, in Right of the Crown; and therefore though he is
above every one singly, yet not above All. For common safety is the sole
Sovereign.

That if a King accepts of the Dignity of Government, and by his Coronation
Oath or otherwise covenants with his People; he must submit to all such
Agreements, to the Rules, Burdens and Troubles thereof. That the end of the
King's Revenue was not to make him able to destroy, but preserve his Subjects.

That the King has no Council above his Parliament. That the foolish senseless
and wicked Doctrines of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance, if strictly
observed, are of dangerous consequence to any Nation: for by these abominable
Positions, the Peoples hands being tied up, and nothing but Prayers and Tears
left, One Armed Tyrant may (if he pleases) destroy all his Subjects, and they
like madmen be accessory to their own deaths. Surely none but Turks, Slaves, or
French Vassals can really admire, or approve of such an Obedience.

That Bracton and Fleta (who were eminent Lawyers) were in the right in
declaring, That Rex Angliae habet superiores, viz. Legem per quam factus est
Rex, ac Comites and Barons qui debent ei Fraenum ponere. The King of England
has for his Superiors both the Law, by which he is constituted King (and which
is the measuring of his governing Power) and the Parliament, which is to
restrain him if he do amiss. Bracton l. 2. c. 16. Fleta l. 1. c. 17.

That the King by his Coronation Oath has a power to rule his People for their
best advantage, to administer to every man his just rights, to confirm such
Laws that the People make, conducing to the Common Good, etc. And no other
Authority can he with justice claim.

That it is against the Moral Law, that a Kingdom should suffer it self to be
unkingdom'd, ruined and destroyed (having power in their hands to save
themselves) self-preservation being natural, even to brute beasts when
disturbed.

That God does sometimes require that One should suffer for all, but never that
All should suffer for One.

That Rebellion consists in resisting of just Governors in their just
Government, and not in defending legal rights against a Tyrant.

That it is unlawful to keep any Oaths, Vows and Covenants to or for the King,
that are against the good of the Kingdom; for the performing or keeping them
would be an adding sin unto sin, wickedness unto wickedness, that is, to do
Evil, as well as to promise the doing thereof. He that covenants to do things
unlawful, covenants with Hell; must therefore the League of Hell and Death be
maintained? These things one would think should have some weight with our
Nonswearing Jacobites, who choose rather to break the solemn Oaths they took to
feed their Flocks, than to comply with swearing Faith and true Allegiance to
that Prince, that Providence in a most miraculous manner raised up to deliver
these Three Kingdoms from the Egyptian slavery it groaned under. A Prince who
by his own Merits and the Peoples Election can justly claim the best Title that
ever any King of England had, let the Fools and Knaves who madly dote on the
Divine Right of Succession, etc. say what they will to the contrary.

That the Oath of Allegiance is not made to the King Warring, or any ways
Acting against the welfare of the Kingdom, but to him as Governing for good
according to the Laws of the Land.

That the Oath of Supremacy does not allow him to be the Supreme Legislative
Power of the Kingdom, and that he is in all Cases the sole Judge, and over all
persons an absolute Lord, unto whose Will and Pleasure the People are bound to
be subject Actively or Passively; for such a Power becomes only those that are
perfect as God himself is perfect.

That all Oaths, Vows, Covenants and Compacts whatsoever, are conditional,
reciprocal and mutual, the King being as well bound to the People as the People
to the King.

That the King's voluntary and plenary breach of his Agreement with the People,
does ipso facto discharge the People from their Vows and Covenants, until such
time as the Agreement and Compact between the King and People be again renewed,
and united. The Nobility, Gentry and Clergy have in their noble assistance in
the late Revolution justified this Position to the height, and also that Kings
are accountable to their Subjects for their Male Administration.

That the People of England cannot give the Parliament a power to enslave
themselves, for thereby they would be Selfbetrayers, and in a degree Self
murderers. Neither can the People de Jure make Laws destructive to the
Common-safety, or give any Power to others to the making of such Laws.

That what King James the First told the Lords and Commons in the Year 1609. is
certainly true, viz. That he is no King but a Tyrant that governs not by Law.

That there is a very great and dangerous defect in the constitution of the
Government of England, if the same Power that gave the Coronation Oath, cannot
judge whether the said Oath be kept or not, and call to an account for the
violation thereof. Bracton, Fleta, the Parliament of 1640. and the late
Revolution seem clearly to allow Kings being accountable, etc.

That Kings and all Magistrates ought to be Nursing Fathers, not Bloody Tyrants
to make their People miserable, to reward Virtue, and not to encourage
Injustice, Oppression and Vice. That if they would answer the end of
Government, which is the Public Good, they ought to study the happiness and
welfare of their Subjects equally with their Own.

Lastly, That if they will not govern thus according to Law and Justice, they
must not think the People of England will be such Fools as to stay for their
accounting in the other World; for they do not love the Welshmans reckning,
which was to let her alone till the last Judgment, and then her would account
fairly for all her Rogueries, etc.

I am very well satisfied (let the wretched Advocates for Tyranny and Arbitrary
Power say what they will to the contrary) That these Doctrines or Maxims cannot
destroy Government, because they will not permit Governors to destroy the
People. Nay, they will establish a Just Government by rooting out the Unjust.
The Throne will be established by Righteousness, but ruined by Wickedness.
Those Doctrines that rectify Governors in the administration of Common Right
and Justice, do fasten the Crowns of Government upon their Heads; for by doing
every man right, their Throne is set up in every man's Heart: and not only so,
but the promised Presence of an Infinite Power, will ever secure and prosper
such Administrations.

These pious Doctrines do not implead Government, but the Evils thereof, and
are all included in this, The Safety of the People is still the chiefest Lord,
Rule, Reason and Law.

These Divine Truths will, I hope, be highly acceptable in this age of light
and knowledge; tho Laud, Sibthorp, Manwaring, Mountague, and other wicked
Clergymen of those and later times have unjustly esteemed them Rebellious.

I could produce many more Instances to inform the deluded part of mankind,
that this adored Prince was far from being a pious One; but for the present
shall give but one more clear Demonstration, that is, His causing a Declaration
to be published and read in all Churches, that all Sports, etc. whatsoever,
were lawful on the Sabbath Day. How agreeable this most wicked Act can be to
Religion I cannot conceive, and I am of opinion it will puzle all those that in
a blasphemous strain call him a Saint and Martyr to defend him from this horrid
impiety. See the Declaration at large printed in the Book called A Vindication
of the Parliament of 1640. Neither can I see for what Reasons any of his
adorers can make him a Martyr; for the word Martyr, in the Greek Martur,
signifies Testis, a Witness, In Ecclesia dicitur Testis and Confessor Veritatis
Verbo Dei patefactae, singulariter autem ille, qui propter Confessionem
Evangelicae veritatis sustinet Afflictiones, ipsamque adeo Mortem. Our
pretended Martyr (God knows) cannot come under any one of these Characters; for
it is plain that he did not dye for being a Witness or Confessor of the
Revealed Truths in God's Word, neither did he suffer Afflictions even unto
Death for the sake of owning or professing Evangelical Truths: No, the
Parliament did not oppose or prosecute him for being a Protestant, but for
favoring Papists, and subverting in a most arbitrary manner all the Laws and
Liberties of England.

I shall now proceed to show that this King could not be a firm Protestant: His
Letter to the Pope (printed at large in the Book called A Defense of the
Parliament of 1640. and the People of England, against King Charles the First
and his Adherents) in answer to the Letter he received from the Pope, is enough
to startle any (but such as Land's) Protestants. He calls the Pope Most Holy
Father, and tells him, I shall never be so extremely affected to any thing in
the World as to endeavor an Alliance with a Prince that has the same
apprehension of the True Religion with my self. Mr. Rushworth has it in these
words, Your Holinesses Conjecture of Our Desire to contract an Alliance and
Marriage with a Catholic Family and Princess, is agreeable both to your Wisdom
and Charity; for we would never desire so vehemently to be joind in a strict
and indissoluble Bond, with any mortal whatsoever, whose Religion we hated.

And toward the end of the Letter, I entreat your Holiness to believe, that I
have been always very far from encouraging Novelties, or to be a Partisan of
any Faction, against the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion.

In another place he protested, That he would expose Life and Estate in the
Exaltation of the Holy Chair. This cannot redound to the honor of a Protestant
King; for the Holy Chair, in its proper sense, means nothing but downright
Popery.

In another place he tells the Pope, I will employ my self for the time to
come, to have but one Religion, and one Faith, -- Having resolved in my self to
spare nothing in the World, and to suffer all manner of Discommodities, even to
the hazarding my Estate and Life for a thing so pleasing to God. This
Resolution cannot look like his converting the Pope and others to the
Protestant Religion, but directly the contrary. And in his Reply to the Nuncio
upon his delivering the Popes Letter to him, which you may read in Cabala, or
Mysteries of State, page 214. he says,

I kiss his Holiness Feet, for the Favor and Honor he does me; so much the
more esteemed, by how much the less deserved of me hitherto; and his Holiness
shall see what I do hereafter. [And so did England, Scotland and Ireland, and
the whole world; His Bishops and Chaplains pressed Popish Innovations, and
preached Doctrines of gross Popery.] And I think my Father will do the like; so
that his Holiness shall not repent him of what he has done.

His marrying a violent Papist, and making Articles with France in favor of
Papists, (read his Articles at large in the Book called A Defense of the
Parliament of 1640. etc.) His stopping all Prosecution against them; His
preferring many of them to places of eminent Trusts, particularly Weston to be
his Lord Treasurer, Arundell, Weston, Gottington and Windebanck, who all died
Papists; His pardoning Mountague his Chaplain for preaching downright Popery;
His unlawful corresponding and conspiring with the Irish and French to land
Forces against the Parliament. He was kind to the Irish Papists: And in his
third year, against the plain advice of Parliament, like a kind Pope, sold them
many Indulgences for money. Advised with them on all occasions, admitted them
to private Consultations with him and his Queen. His sending one Dillon, a
Papist Lord, soon after a chief Rebel, with Letters into Ireland; and his
dispatching a Commission under the great Seal of Scotland (at that time in his
own Custody) that they should forthwith, as formerly had been agreed, cause all
the Irish to rise in Arms. Read the Commission at large in the Book before
mentioned. His causing ten thousand Popish Irish Soldiers to be ordered for
England by the Earl of Glamorgan, do all show he had more confidence in Popish
Irish, than in his Protestant English Subjects: A rare Protestant I profess.
These with his betraying the Protestants of the Palatinate, Isle of Rhee and
Rochel, and the poor Protestants of Ireland, to the number of 154000, show the
slender affection he had for the Protestant Interest, either at home or abroad.
From such a merciless Protestant, Good Lord for ever deliver these Kingdoms.
Read his Letters to the Rochellers, and their Remonstrance upon his betraying
them, both printed in the Book, called A Defense of the Parliament of 1640. and
you will have little cause to admire this Martyr; And also the Sheet called,
Murder will out, printed in the same Book, which makes it appear he had a hand
in the horrid Irish Rebellion.

In the next place I shall plainly make it appear, beyond all doubt, that this
King was an oppressive Tyrant; and should I proceed on this melancholy Subject
so largely, as with the greatest truth and matters of Fact I might, I should
have cause to cry out with the Poet, Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem.
Many Instances of his Arbitrary and Illegal Government being printed in the
Book called, A Defense of the Parliament of 1640, etc. and also the following
Papers, which set this King out to the life, viz. The Pope's Letter to King
Charles I. and King Charles 's Answer. His Articles of Marriage with France.
His Declaration of Sports on the Lord's Day. His Letters of Assurance to the
Protestants of Rochel; and their Remonstrance on his deceiving them. His
Commission to the Irish Rebels: and Rorie Macquire and Philem Oneal 's
Declaration thereupon. K. Charles II. Letter to the Court of Claims in Ireland,
in behalf of the Marquess of Antrim, for acting by King Charles I. Order. King
Charles 's Prayer taken out of Pembrook 's Arcadia. An Abridgment of the
Articles of Peace that King Charles I. made with the Irish Rebels. Lord
Anglesey 's Memorandum, and Walker 's Reasons against Eikon Basilike.

I shall now content my self with enumerating a few more Instances of his
grievous oppressing the People of England as a Tyrant: viz. By his raising,
without Act of Parliament, 200000 l. on the poor Merchants for Ship Money, Coat
and Conduct money. His great Minions and Favorites, inventing new methods of
Monopolies, without ever acquainting the Parliament, to enable him, in a full
time of Peace, to live without a Parliament, as he did about 11 Years together;
Compulsive Knighthoods; the seizing, not of one Naboth's Vineyard, but of whole
Inheritances, under the pretense of Forest, or Crown Lands; Corruption and
Bribery compounded for, with Impunities granted for the future: Arbitrary and
excessive Fines on those People that stood in the gap against his Tyranny;
besides the barbarous Slashings, Whippings, Pillorings, and horrible
Imprisonments for many years. His intending to bow or break his People, to
persuade or force them to slavery, is so clear by the whole course of his
Reign, that it is amazing that men (even of the highest stamp of Toryism) should
have Front enough to deny it. He turned the Lord Conway out of his Secretary's
place, because he would not make the necessary advances to Rome, but refused to
receive the Sacrament in Henry VII's Chapel, after Popish Laud's way, which
was not in Bread, but in Wafers. His undermining our Religion and Government;
his raising an Army of English, Scots, Germans, and bloody Irish Papists, to
subject his Peoples Fortunes to his Will and Power, and make good the Breaches
upon the Liberties of England. That never was inclined to Parliaments, nor to
call them, but for a greedy hope of a whole National Bribe, his Subsidies; and
never loved, never fulfilled, never promoted the true End of Parliaments, the
Redress of Grievances, but still put them off and prolonged them, whether
gratified or not gratified. That caused Court Letters and Intimations to be
sent to deter the People from their free electing the best affected to their
Religion and Countries Liberties. That could not forbear declaring, that the
execution of Strafford stung his Conscience; and no marvel, when he was the
chief Author of those Misdeeds he suffered for. This Stafford was one of the
boldest and most impetuous Instruments that the King had, to advance any
violent or illegal Design. He had ruled Ireland, and some parts of England, in
an arbitrary manner; he had endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws, to
subvert Parliaments, and incense the King against them. He had endeavored to
make Hostility between England and Scotland; he had counseled the King to call
over that Irish Army of Papists which he had cunningly raised to reduce
England, as appeared by good testimony then present at the Consultation. For
which and many other Crimes proved against him in 28 Articles, he was condemned
of High Treason by the Parliament. This pious Martyr could highly demonstrate
his remorse for the Blood of Strafford that all good Men acquitted him of, but
not the least sorrow for setting up his Standard, and causing a Sea of innocent
Blood to be spilt by the Civil War, occasioned by his Male Administration. That
according to his own confession, violated the Privileges of the Commons, by
going in an Arbitrary way into their House. That as his Cabinet Letters
declare, called them a mungrel Parliament, that vexed his Queen with their base
and mutinous Motions. A special Bargain of such a Queen, at whose landing at
Dover, the 25th of June (New-stile) 1625, the Sun withdrew its Beams, as being
unwilling to shine upon a Descent so mighty fatal to this Nation, and the Night
hid the Miseries which that Day were brought into this flourishing Island upon
her arrival.

On the 26th the Queen with the King made their entry to London, having among
others in her Train, A Roman Catholic Bishop, on whom King Charles was obliged
to settle a Pension of 4000 l. a Year. Four Abbots under the Title of Almoners,
on each a 1000 l. Two Chaplains Priests 1400 l. Two Clerks of the Chapel; two
Grooms: Moreover, 12 Priests of the Oratory, on whom 6000 l. were to be settled
for their subsistence and maintenance. But besides all the Ecclesiastical
Persons, the Queen, not to trust to Protestants, brought over with her a Train
of Roman Catholics, whereof she formed her House, and, as it after proved, a
Seminary in the Kingdom; four Ladies of Honor for her Bedchamber, six Ladies
of Honor with their Governante, and one under her, besides Servants; 18
Gentlemen, six Valets de Chamber, a Chamberlain, a Secretary, five
Chambermaids, Semstresses, Laundresles, a Physician, an Apothecary,
Chirurgions, a Pantler, Cup-bearers, Cooks, Potagers, Roasters, Bakers,
Stewards, Coachmen, and all the Officers of her Stables. At her coming up to
London, almost all the People of that great City went before her (just as
heretofore the Trojans did the Horse that was the cause of their destruction)
in triumph into their City, with demonstrations of joy. But to their great
sorrow, these Halcion days lasted but a short time, for they soon found the
Queen's numerous Train of Ecclesiastics caused no small clamours and murmuring
amongst the People all over the Kingdom; for these Vipers were in perpetual
motion, and continually running from House to House under pretense of
Conversion-work; openly boasting they had already converted many thousands in
the little time they had been in England. Whereupon the King received diverse
Complaints, as well from Protestant Bishops and Ministers, as from the Masters
of Families, who accused those Priests, not only of perverting their Servants,
but their Children; and that by their wicked instigation, unknown to their
Parents, several of them were gone away beyond Sea, to be put into Colleges and
Convents, for their more commodious being bred up in the Romish Religion: But
upon all matters that happened as to that subject, the Queen still stepped into
the Breach, to prevent by her Credit any Mischiefs that should have fallen on
the Priests. But the Complaints of the People against these Vermin the Queen
brought with her were so great, that the King was necessitated to send them
back into France; which was done in August the same Year he was crowned. But at
the same time to prevent their complaining, the King heaped Favors,
Benevolences and Present upon all the Fry of Clergy, to reward their labor of
the Tares they had sown and left behind them in England: However all this
Liberality of the King was not sufficient to hinder their Complaints, nor their
Solicitations in the Court of France to return into England, to gather (as
they said) the Fruits of their Labor. The Queen on the other hand saw her self
forestalled of her desire to propagate the Catholic Faith, especially in her
Kingdom of England; and being pushed on by her Confessor, and others of the
same brood, did not fail to write of this matter very smartly to Lewis XIII.
her Brother, but particularly to the Queen Mother. And the King of France being
pushed on by the Queen Mother, took as a very great and sensible Affront, the
sending back of all the French that belonged to the Retinue, and were the
Domestic Servants of the Queen his Sister. The Cardinal that was absolute
Governor of the King, was so angry to see the French returned, (for that
grievously broke his Measures in England) and prevailed so much on the King his
Master, that he got him to send over an Ambassador Extraordinary to confer with
the Queen, and to make his complaints of it to the King. And that Minister did
his business so effectually, that those who had been dismissed, and obliged to
leave the Kingdom, returned to their former Post about the Queen, their
Mistress, and began their old trade of perverting people to the Romish
Religion; which lasted as long as the Queen continued in England. Whilst the
King was thus governed by his Papist Queen and France, how could poor England
think of being happy, or free from Popery, and its natural Consequence Tyranny?

That instead of praying for his People, as a good King should do, he prayed to
be delivered from them, as from wild Beasts, Inundations, and raging Seas, that
had overborn all Loyalty, (that is, would not let him be according to his Will,
a great Tyrant) Modesty, Laws, Justice and Religion: God save the People from
such Intercessors.

That the petitioning for removal of Evil Counselors, and redressing
Grievances in Church and State, was to him an intolerable Oppression. His
sending an Agent to Denmark with Letters to that King, requiring Aid against
the Parliament, besides the 8000 Irish raised by Strafford, which with a Scotch
and French Army were to join the English he then had. He encouraged the Scots
by telling them, what Money and Horse he was to have from Denmark; yielding to
the hireling Army of Scotland, rather than to the reasonable Requests of his
Parliament. His stopping and waylaying, both by Sea and Land, to his utmost
power, those Provisions and Supplies which the Parliament sent to relieve the
miserable Protestants of Ireland, clearly demonstrates he was desirous of
having them sacrificed to his Irish Friends, who were bloody Cutthroats.
Ireland being as Ephraim, the strength of his Head; Scotland, as Judah, was his
Lawgiver; but over England, as over Edom, he meant to cast his Shoe. His being
so false in all his Treaties, as to follow his grand Maxim, viz. Always to put
something into his Treaties which might give color to refuse all that was in
other things granted, and so make them signify nothing: a way of treating that
no way became a Crowned Head, much less an honest pious Prince, who ought to be
sincere in all his Undertakings.

That was so full of Revenge upon the Parliament, that he sent his violent
Queen (who with the greatest willingness went) to Holland, where she, by his
order, pawned and set to sale the Crown Jewels, (a Crime heretofore counted
treasonable) for no other use, but to raise an Army of Horse and Foot, with
Arms, etc. a very pious Design to bring in a wicked parcel of Foreigners to cut
his English Subjects Throats. This was a Martyr with a witness, by whom the
Nation had been swallowed up with Blood and Ruin, had not his Strength failed
him more than his Will. His admiring those Ministers that strengthened his
Hands, and hardened his Heart, and applauded him in his wilful ways against the
Good of his People, to whom he was a Constantine. They were as dear and
pleasing to him, as Amaziah the Priest of Bethel was to Jeroboam; for they had
learnt not to prophesy against Bethel, for it is the King's Chapel, the King's
Court: But his hating those good and pious Ministers the Parliament sent him,
proceeded from their telling him plain Truths, what was his Duty and Interest,
and preaching up Repentance for what he had done. His most wrongfully
pretending that he must kill or be killed, is so notoriously false, that
nothing can be clearer, it being very manifest that never was King less in
danger of any violence from his Subjects, till he unsheathed his Sword against
them. Nay long after that time, when he had spilt the Blood of thousands, they
had still his Person in a foolish veneration. His own Letters taken at the
Battle of Naseby were of great importance, to let the People see what Faith
there was in all his Promises and solemn Protestations: they discovered his
good Affection to Papists and Irish Rebels; the strict Intelligence he held;
the pernicious and dishonorable Peace he made with them; not solicited, but
rather soliciting, which by all Invocations that were holy he had in public
abjured. See the Articles of Peace abridged, in the Defense of the Parliament
of 1640, etc. These Letters revealed his Endeavors to bring in Foreign Forces,
Irish, French, Dutch, Lorainers, and our old Invaders the Danes, upon England.
These were visible to all men under his own hand, and were ordered by the
Parliament to be printed for public Information. These his own Letters
discovering his Grand Mystery of Iniquity, this holy Man was not a little
concerned at their being made public; for they pulled off his Mask, and showed
the World what sort of a Man he was.

Having, I hope beyond all doubt, given clear Demonstrations that King Charles
the First could be no Saint, Martyr, nor a true Protestant; but on the
contrary, a favourer of Popery, a wicked and oppressive Tyrant: I have little
or no occasion to proceed to my second Proposition, which was, to vindicate the
Parliament of 1640, and all those Noble Patriots that joined with it against
that King and his Evil Counselors; however I shall briefly defend them from
the impudent Charge of Rebels, tho I am heartily sorry that the ignorance of
some, prejudice and self-interest of others, should give the least occasion for
this Defense, especially in these our days, when, God be praised, Men can speak
and write English Truths without being hanged for them, as in the late wicked
Reigns, when Villains declared it for Law, that Scribere was Agere.

In prosecution of this Defense, I shall show you, 1. Who did rise and oppose
this Prince, and his Evil Counselors. 2. What were the Reasons that induced so
great an Opposition.


1. The Parliament and their Adherents, consisted of the best of the Nobility
and Gentry, Men eminent for Piety and Justice, viz. The Earls of Bedford,
Manchester, and Essex, etc. Lords, Paget, Mandeville, Wharton, Hollis, Brook,
etc. Commoners, Sir Thomas Fairfax, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Pymm, Sir Arthur Haslerig,
Mr. Strode, Sir John Elliot, Sir John Heveningham, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston,
Sir John Strangeways, Sir William Earl, etc. and many more too many to be
herein mentioned. It was also evident, that the most worthy of the Nobility,
Gentry, and Commonalty of the Kingdom, did most heartily engage with them in
this most Righteous Work of delivering England; and tho by Blood, yet God gave
them success against that Tyrant.

2. For what Reasons did the Parliament and People presume to resist the Lord's
Anointed? I answer, let those that desire satisfaction in this point, but read
over carefully and impartially, this small Book, and that called A Defense of
the Parliament of 1640. etc. and they will have no cause to enquire further; so
many real matters of Fact being therein contained, almost enough to convince
even Thomas a Didimus. But to be short, they were necessitated thereunto, being
in the greatest danger of losing the Protestant Religion, their Laws, their
Lives and Liberties. Was it not high time to stand up, when all that was dear
to Freeborn Englishmen was at stake? Was not the King a great favourer of
Papists, and lover of Tyranny? Was he not ruled by his violent Popish Queen, a
wicked, corrupt and Arbitrary Nobility, Gentry and Clergy, many of them of mean
fortunes, that were unhappy for Himself, but more unhappy for his Kingdom? And
were such persons as these fit to be trusted by the people? Men that labored
all they could to make the King a powerful Tyrant, and his Subjects a miserable
enslaved people. Besides, could rational men think it safe to permit such a
King, and his Evil Counselors to carry on those their Arbitrary Designs,
apparently destructive to the happiness and welfare of England? If they had
permitted these Evils to come upon them, they ought not only to be begged for
Fools, or Madmen, but deserved to lose the privileges of a Free People. But God
be praised for inspiring and assisting them with greater Wisdom and Courage,
than foolishly and tamely to suffer their Religion, Laws and Liberties to
become a Sacrifice to that Tyrant, or his Crew. His governing ad Libitum Regis
by his own arbitrary Lust and Will, and not per Legem Terrae, and calling but
three Parliaments in all his Reign, which (to the sorrow of England) was almost
twenty four years, must naturally create enemies against him. To conclude this
Head: His whole Reign was such a continued piece of Popish Tyranny and
Oppression, that the people of England with the greatest cheerfulness ran the
hazard of their Lives and Fortunes to free themselves and posterity from them
both: and I challenge the greatest Advocates for this pretended Saint and
Martyr, to disprove the least matter in this Book laid to his charge; nay, I Will
go farther, I challenge them to give me, or any one else a satisfactory account
of one good Act he ever did for the glory of God or the good of his three
Kingdoms, except constrained by his people thereunto.

For a conclusion of this Discourse, I shall make a few Remarques, which I
hope, if well observed, may be very useful not only to this present age, but to
posterity.

1. I shall give a short Answer to this Question, Why do the generality of the
Clergy and Laity so much adore and idolize all Monarchs (whether good or bad)
above the People? The Reason is plain, The People have nothing material in a
Monarchical Government to bestow upon these Court Parasites, for the Kings have
the disposal of the Bishoprics, Deanaries, Prebendaries, Archdeaconries, and
most other great Livings, and also most of the Temporal beneficial Places, as
Chancellors, Judges and other great Offices; from such a sort of men as these
nothing but Court-Doctrines can be expected; for they are well assured, should
they preach or write for the Rights or Privileges of the People in Arbitrary
Reigns, it would be the ready way to dash all their hopes of preferment into
pieces. And here I cannot but make a melancholy Observation, as to the Clergy
in general of the late Reigns, viz. That by all I could hear or read, they have
been so far from being Christian Advocates for the Rights and Privileges of
millions of people, that they have in a most wicked manner promoted and
preached up those Doctrines that plainly tended to make them miserable and
lasting Slaves. Indeed I must confess some few of them have signalized
themselves for the good of the People, and against Popery. Particularly that
incomparable Phoenix of our Age, Mr. SAMVEL JOHNSON, a person that by his
sensible Conversation, and his golden Works, has done more service, to rescue
England from Popery and Slavery, and secure English men's Rights and Privileges,
than most (if not all) the Bishops and Clergymen ever did since the
Reformation. His Works are so excellent and highly valuable, that they will
preserve his Fame long after he is dead; and will make good that Motto, Vivit
post funera virtus. And I could wish the Nobility and Gentry would encourage
(by subscriptions) some Bookseller or Printer to reprint all this great Man's
Works in one Folio; that the Divine and Noble Truths therein contained, might
be handed down (for the public good) to posterity. I am extremely well
pleased, that our Gracious King WILLIAM has in some measure (tho not so much,
nor so soon as I could wish, tho he had merited more than others) rewarded his
inhumane sufferings and eminent services for these Kingdoms. I would never have
a good man have the least cause to say, Virtus laudatur and alget; and that
Aude aliquid brevibus gyaris aut carcere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquid --


Was the right way to preferment.

2. What occasions the Clergy's usurping one Province more than belongs to
them, viz. the Law, when, God knows, they have work enough to preach the Gospel
as they ought to do, that their Flocks might be well fed with the Milk of God's
Word? 1. Want of that true Piety that would keep them closer to their duties to
God and men. 2. As I hinted before, they pick up scraps of Law to make Princes
great, that they may get promotion thereby, tho to the sacrificing of their
Country. Lastly, The imprudent familiarity the Nobility and Gentry have with
them, many of whom are poor, ignorant, impious and scandalous fellows, that
arise from being Parish Boys, etc. which makes them so proud as to strut and
lord it over the People to a prodigious degree. I would by no means be thought
by this, to be an enemy to pious good Clergymen, that as Christian Ministers
discharge their duties; for I solemnly profess I have the highest value and
esteem for all such holy men. And I observed in my Travels in Holland, that the
Dutch did highly respect their Ministers (whom I must really confess, I believe
to be famous for good Lives and Conversations, far beyond the generality of the
English Clergy.) Yet they kept these good men at a due distance, not suffering
any of their Ministers to be seen at any time in an Alehouse, Tavern, or in a
Coffee-house, except on their Travels, where refreshments must be had to
support nature. And if any of them shall transgress in this matter, they
immediately forfeit their reputation and esteem with the people. And if they
should in their Pulpits presume to meddle with State Affairs, and the
Magistrates hear of it, they send them a pair of Shoos, and order them to be
gone.

If Mountague, Sybthorp and Manwaring, of old; Pelling, Sherlock, Cartwright,
White, Lake, Watson, Crew, Thompson, Collier, Snet, Cook, Hawkins, Hicks,
Wilson, Long, Thompson of Bristol, Hollingworth, Milbourn, Birch, and a great
many more of the same stamp in the late Reigns, had been dealt with according
to their deserts, I know what would justly have become of most of them.

It Is observed, that the People of England are famous for punishing little
Rogues, such as Pick-pockets, etc. but carelessly and imprudently pass by those
Clergymen and Lawyers that have to the greatest degree robbed them of their
undoubted Birthrights and greatest Privileges, by wholesale, and endeavored to
establish a Government over them as absolute as the Grand Seignior's.

3. I shall take notice of the Observation of the 30th of January, in that
solemn manner as now kept; and if I make some close Remarks thereon, I hope I
shall not be hardly thought on, since a Person in so high a station, so eminent
for Parts and Piety, as Dr. Burnet, now Bishop of Salisbury has, before a
great Auditory in the famous City of London, ( viz. the Aldermen, etc.)
expressed himself fully against the keeping up that day, in his Sermon preached
at St. Lawrence Church London, Jan. 30. 1680. and since printed by R. Chiswell:
His words are, I acknowledge it were better if we could have Job's Wish, that
this day should perish, that darkness and the shadow of death should cover it,
that it should not see the dawning of the day, nor should the light shine upon
it; it were better to strike it out of our Calendar, and make our January
determine at the 29th, and add these remaining days to February. And to put it
out of doubt, what the Bishop of Salisbury's meaning was in that expression, It
were better if we could have Job 's Wish, I shall quote some other expressions
in that Sermon. Page 4. are these words; Upon their loving Truth and Peace,
those black and mournful days should be converted to days of gladness. Page 5.
It might have been expected, that our 29th of May should have worn out the
remembrance of the 30th of January; and now at the end of two and thirty years,
(to this time 50) it may be reasonably asked, Should we still continue to fast
and mourn? Page 28. [If we come to love the Truth and Peace] to live in Love
and Peace one with another, then our days of Fasting shall be turned into
solemn and cheerful Feasts: Then shall our 29th of May swallow up the
remembrance of the 30th of January: Or perhaps, as the Prophet foretold such
happy Deliverances should come to the Jews, as should make even that out of
Egypt to be forgotten; so we might hope for such days as should out shine and
darken the very 29th of May -- If we come to love Truth and Peace, then shall
even this Fast of the 10th month, according to the Jewish Account (which
according to Archbishop Usher, is exactly our 30th of January) be to us Joy
and Gladness.

1. I shall observe, That the keeping up the 30th of January has never, as I
could learn, done the least good, but much burt to these Kingdoms; for it has
given, and still gives the Clergy (who rarely preach or write for the good of
the Kingdom) an opportunity of poisoning the People with lying Stories, and
dangerous Notions, many of them crying up this King (to the great scandal of
Christianity) in a blasphemous manner, venting such horrid Expressions as these
in his behalf, viz. THAT HIS BLOOD CRIED LOUDER FOR VENGEANCE, THAN THE BLOOD
OF JESUS (our dear Redeemer.) Another vile Wretch said, That they accused our
Savior of being a Winebibber, and a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, but could
lay no such Charge to the Martyr of their own making. Are such wicked
Assertions to be tolerated among Christians? God forbid.

2. Contrary to all Christianity, it effectually keeps up perpetual
Animosities, Wraths, Feuds, and Divisions, in these three Kingdoms. Which are
of a pernicious consequence to the public Welfare of any People. For what good
Man can hear (without a just resentment) his Ancestors that ventured their
Blood and Treasure for the deliverance of their Country, be most falsely and
wickedly arraigned as Rebels, by a parcel of Clergymen, generally Advocates for
Tyranny, and many of them little sneaking, ignorant, and scandalous Fellows,
who on this madding Day impudently vent their lying Harangues against them, who
under God were the Instruments of much happiness to England?

3. The keeping up that day, furnishes the Jacobites with a mighty Argument
against the late happy and glorious Revolution; for they argue thus. Since by
Act of Parliament, the opposers of King Charles the First, who acted by
authority of Parliament (mark that) are branded as Rebels, etc. how much more
are they Rebels, that against their own Principles of Passive Obedience and Non
Resistance, turned out their Jure divino King, the late Tyrant James, who had
not committed half so many arbitrary and illegal Actions, nor been guilty of
such notorious Violations upon the Laws and Liberties of England, as that Holy
Martyr Charles the First was justly charged with?

4. This solemn observation is pleasing or acceptable to none, but those wicked
Clergymen or Laymen, that either had a hand in those arbitrary doings of that
King; or that would still maintain and justify such pernicious Doctrines and
Actions. Neither is it to be wondered at, that some of the Laymen are for
keeping up this day; by reason thy now enjoy the Estates of those men that
assisted in the redemption of their oppressed Country: for the old Saying is
true, Interest may flatter, but it will never lie.

5. If against all reason and justice to the memory of our deceased Patriots, I
should pro confesso allow they had been Rebels by resisting this King, I would
willingly be satisfied, what has their innocent posterity to answer for in
this case?

To conclude all; I do solemnly profess and declare in the presence of God,
That I have not written this Book to vindicate the Actions of any Relations of
mine that had any hand in opposing that King; nay I am not sure any of my
Family was engaged in that Righteous Cause; but for the undeceiving of those
that are most strangely, against all truth and reason, deluded by the Clergy to
believe a Lie, viz. That King Charles the First was a Saint and Martyr, and
that all those good people that withstood his notorious oppressions and evil
designs, were great Rebels.

Dear Country men, I have now set clear light before you, and I hope you will
no longer walk in darkness; I desire you will carefully read over and consider
this small Book, and that called A Defense of the Parliament of 1640, which
contains a black list of the pretended Martyr's tyrannical actions, etc. and
upon all occasions stand u p for the undoubted Truths therein; by doing of
which you will highly contribute toward the securing to your selve^ and
posterity, a Lasting Happiness:

Which is the most hearty prayer of yours and his Countries real Friend, D. J.

FINIS.

