A SERMON PREACHED At the FUNERAL of the Right Honble the Lady Frances Paget,
The religious Consort of the right Honble William Lord PAGET, (Eldest Daughter
to the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Holland, who was beheaded for his Loyalty
to his King) In the Parish Church of West-Drayton in the County of Middlesex,
on the 12th of November, 1672.

By JEHU JENNY, M. A. and Vicar of Harmondsworth.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Nevil Simmons at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1673.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE William Lord PAGET, Baron of Brandesert, Knight of the
Honorable Order of the Bath, etc.
My Lord,
NOthing but your Lordships Commands could have forced into the Light this
Discourse of so hasty conception, and they give some countenance to the
confidence of this Dedication, otherwise I am too conscious that nothing of
mine can deserve the Patronage of so great a Name or Title; nor do I hope for
Acceptance of this Service, further than it is a Testimony of my Obedience, and
bears some (though faint) Characters of your late dear Consort. That the Piety
and Virtue of that excellent Lady may still live in your Noble Family (of which
there are visible hopes largely promising) and consequently the Blessing of it
on your Posterity reach the utmost extent of the Promise to such Obedience,
shall be a considerable part of the constant Devotions of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obsequious Chaplain, Jehu Jenny.

MATTHEW. 24.46. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find
so doing.


FOR Man to know God and himself, is the Comprehension of his whole Duty. The
Poet could tell us of the latter, that it is that Wisdom which is from above,
from Heaven heavenly; that which will trans-element us, have that happy
influence to sublimate us into that which is celestial, make us partakers or
the Divine Nature, and at length when we shall be ripened and sufficiently
refined, translate us to the enjoyments of that Kingdom. Thus for Man to
understand himself, to know what he is, will make him new create him what he is
not, and render him happy in that degree to which without this knowledge he
could never attain. And upon this notice, this discovery, who thirsts not after
so much Goodness, followed with so great Reward? who is not impatiently eager
on the study of this Philosophers Stone? who will not judge it thrifty
prodigality to lay out all to purchase this Pearl of so great price? to any
considerate man this (...) must needs be matter of his highest satisfaction,
this acquirement is a recompense infinitely beyond all his labor and severity:
in the search after which there is no befooling darkness, no discouraging
difficulty, no climbing the Clouds, or crossing the Sea for it, but this word
of Wisdom is nigh thee, Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. it is plain and easy, that which
God has sent down to us; nay, which the Son of God, when for us men and for
our Salvation he came down from Heaven, himself has delivered to us, that
which in the Text he preached to his Disciples, and in them to us all, in which
he has satisfied the Psalmist's question, What is man? what is man, but a
Servant to the great Lord? and in this given a further resolve to the inquiry
of those Publicans and Soldiers, Luke 3. and who else shall come with the like
case, Master, what must we do? if Servants, what is our work, our employment? He
informs them, to be deligent in their Office; and to whet them to this, he lets
them know, that he himself will have an eye over them, and take an account of
them, and to encourage them to all this, that as he finds them to be faithful,
so shall they be looked by him, enjoy his favor, the fullest blessedness;
Blessed, etc.

And in this short account of the words, I have given you the Parts of my Text,
which are these.

I. In what capacity man stands here, he is a Servant, That Servant.

II. As such, what is his employment, expressed in these words, so doing.

III. The account will be taken of him, the Lord of the family will come to
take it himself, though it be intimated, that the time when he will come is
very uncertain.

IV. The reward of that Servant, that shall be found faithful and deligent;
Blessed is that Servant.

Of each of these with as much brevity as the Subject will allow.

I. In what capacity man stands here, he is a Servant, That Servant. God made
man, but made him not for naught; but to the excellency of his endowments in
the design of Heaven was proportioned an employment for him. The Schools
maintained this Axiom, Quicquid agit, agit propter finem, that whatsoever
moves in the nature of an Agent, designs something as the end of its acting.
And certainly this perfection must be eminently in the Author of Nature, and no
end can we define worthy his proposal, but his own Glory in the manifestations
of his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; the most learned Philosopher and the
greatest Divine that ever was in the World, affirms this of the great work of
Creation, Pro. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself: yea even the
Wicked for the day of evil. That disorderly improfitable part of the Creation
Telluris inutile pondus, as the Poet speaks, the wicked (though God made them
not so, he made man upright, and left him in the hands of his own counsel, as
the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 15.14. yet) his overruling Wisdom makes them serve
the designs of his inflexible Justice, because they will not pay that homage
they owe to their Maker, but refuse to be happy, and so defeat the purposes of
enthroning his Mercy, therefore he obliges them to wait on the triumph^ of his
Vengance as the just demerit of their obstinacy and rebellion. In the 1st of
Genesis last verse, when the Ahnighty surveys the workmanship of his fix days
creation, he gives his approbation: God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very good. Good in this respect among others, in regard of that
the God of order had placed in this large family of the Creation, allotting
each part its station, and assigning them operations according to what powers
and faculties he had implanted in them, so that from the Seraphim to the
Pismire there is no creature but what in a larger or less capacity is a Servant
of its Creator. The Philosopher could say that all things do serve in his
notion the first Being and Cause of all things; which is one of the meditations
of the Royal Psalmist, which he has left us, Psalm. 119.89, 90, 91. where he
enumerates particulars: For ever, O Lord, thy Word is settled in Heaven. Thy
Faithfulness is unto all Generations: thou have established the Earth, and it
abides. They continue this day according to thine Ordinances. And then he
concludes, For all are thy Servants. And upon enquiry we shall find his
assertion true. Do but lift up your eyes to the Heavens, and as the Prince of
the Philosophers affirms them to be in perpetual motion; so he that was a
Prince as well as a Philosopher, observes that they move in that Sphere which
their all-wise Framer fixed them in. Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory
of God. And if we behold the Sun, it confutes Copernicus, Rejoices as a strong
man to run his race, v. 5. Should I take you up into the third Heaven, the
Heaven of Heavens, the Angels there are ministering Spirits, Heh. 1. ult. Angels
and Archangels, and all the company of Heaven, all the Orders of that
Celestial Hierarchy, they do God's Commandments, and execute his pleasure,
Psalm. 103.20, 21. If we look upon the creatures here below, they bear a part in
this service, the Sea has the boundary of God's decree for its ebbing and
flowing; hitherto shall thou extend thy proud waves and no further: the most
inconsiderable inferior particles of the universe, the Snow, and Vapor, and
Stormy-Wind are said to fulfill his Word, Psalm. 148.8. So that this relation of
Servants the Angels those heavenly Courtiers disdain not, and the lower parts
of the World are not too mean for an Interest in; then certainly Man the Lord
of this sublimary World can upon no account plead exemption, he is a servant.
But as the Apostle uses the comparison touching the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.42.
One Star differs from another Star in glory. or as the same Apostle expresses
it, In a great house thee are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of
wood and earth. 2. Tim. 2.20. so it is here in the large Household of the
supernal and lower world, each servant has his province and employment set him
suitable to those capacities, by which he is enabled to make a discharge of his
duty, which what Man's is, is a seasonable enquiry; and,

II. The second part of the text. As a Servant what is man's employment expressed
in these words, so doing. Man has a work to do, but what it is you cannot
imagine in that little scantling of time allotted for this exercise I should
fully discourse to you, the doing the particulars of which will take up our
whole lives, did they never so far exceed David's sum of them. It is to do
the work which God has set us and sent us into the world to do, briefly it is
doing the works of our general and particular calling.

1. The works of our general calling as Christians. And here the Christian is
obliged to the observance of that divine precept. Romans 13.7. To render to all
their dues. And the duties of our general calling are reducible to these three
heads, which the Apostle gives us in charge, Tit. 2.12. To live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world.

1. To begin with our duty to him, who is the beginning of all things, and Lord
of the family. And this we are early called upon by the wiseman to make a
discharge of. Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.
He that gave us our being, provides for our well-being, and has contrived our
being happy, (unless we our selves frustrate the design) may upon all accounts
challenge a grateful service and homage, there being nothing in the world more
rational then Religion and the Worship of a Deity. And here the Christian has
a large task of duty, the performance of all internal and external acts of
Piety and Devotion, the maintaining always a reverential dread and fear of the
Divine Majesty, to adore that incomprehensible Being, to demean our selves so
toward God, as may best comport with those Divine attributes of his purity and
power, wisdom and goodness, sincerely and conscientiously to perform all
external acts of Religion, all duties of divine worship and service, to hear
and pray, meditate and receive, and what else in the whole duty of man God
requires of us, as his immediate worship. This is to live godly.

2. Righteously, toward our Fellow Servants. To love my Neighbor as my self,
to observe that golden rule, so much admired by the Heathen, so little
practiced by the Christian, so fully taught in the old and new Testament, so
frequently pressed by Prophets and Apostles, and inculcated by our Blessed Lord,
Whatsoever we would that men should do unto us, we should do the same to them.
To do justice and to love mercy, to make our selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, to distribute to the necessities of the poor, to do good to
all men, by good counsel and a suitable conversation to persuade as many as we
can to be holy and religious and to save their souls, to reprove our offending
Brother, to bear with the infirmities of those that are weak, to comfort those
that mourn, to exhort one another to day, while it is called to day, to do as
our Blessed Lord did, when he was upon the earth, whose business it was to go
about, and seek all opportunities of doing good, Acts. 10.38.

3. Soberly. To have so much regard to our selves as to do nothing unworthy of
that place in Gods family he has set us in. To observe all rules and precepts
of sobriety, temperance and chastity. Some of the heathen Philosophers have
dissuaded from some debaucheries, as indecencies and affronts offered to humane
Nature, but the Christian has higher motives for all sobriety of conversation;
to reverence our humane nature as united to the Divine in the person of Christ,
and so to preserve it from all spot and defilement, as he did when he was
vested with our flesh here below; to look upon our bodies as Temples of the
Holy Ghost, and so not to allow them to be sinks of sin and nests of all
uncleanness: and lastly, to think what they shall be in their glorified estate
after the resurrection, that so when Christ shall come to work that mighty
change upon them, he may not find them in the worst sense vile, that is, sinful
bodies. To do all this, and so to do it, as to be saluted with an Euge for our
well-doing, may well be thought no easy task, but that which will require all
Christian diligence and circumspection, so to redeem the time, as to fill up
every part of it with the proper duties of it, and yet after all this one thing
is still wanting which is, --

2. To be diligent in our particular Callings, that state and condition of life
to which God has called each of us, as some to be Magistrates, some Ministers,
some Merchants, some Artificers, etc. The Command of God to earn our bread in
the sweat of our brows, the prevention of idleness, the obligation of providing
for our families, God's distribution of several gifts, the benefit of humane
society and the Weal-publick, bespeak the necessity of some Calling or other
for every man to employ and busy himself in. Here perhaps there may be some
will censure my discourse to be ungentile, and that I maintain a paradox to
affirm, as I do, that every man must labor in some calling or other; if you
bring up this levelling humor, where is the Gentleman? was not he born like
that Leviathan Job speaks of, only to take his pastime in the World? But a
Reverend and modest The Author of the whole Duty of Man.
Author has made it out to be no Soloecism to assert a Gentleman to have a
Calling, the orderly disposal of his Family, the preserving what in him lies
peace among his Neighbors, the influencing all he converses with by a good
example will not suffer him to be an exception to this general rule, that every
man in the world has a Calling, and to be diligent in it is every man's duty,
and that which is highly justifiable: for the husbandman to be at his plough
the tradesman in his shop, the scholar at his book, is to be so doing. But
here we must observe a double caution.

1. That our general and particular Calling do not justle out or enterfere upon
the duties of each other. The wise Steward renders to each his portion in due
season. It is a sin for me to be in the market or in a worse place, when I
should be at the Church; and on the other hand, an indiscreet zeal must not
make me neglect my Calling and to provide for my family; such a profession
renders me worse than an infidel.

2. We must be sure keep within the bounds of our particular Calling for which
we have an express command. 1 Cor. 7.24. Let every man, wherein he is called,
therein abide with God. He that holds the plough must not touch the Ark, the
Apron and the Ephod, the Shop and the Pulpit are distinct, unless our Mechanic
Preachers can confute St. Paul, who says, that all are not Prophets, nor all
Apostles, nor all Teachers. The motion of a Christian must not be excentrick,
he must keep within bounds. No man can climb the Throne or the Pulpit without a
warrant from God, lest it be said to him, as the Egyptian to Moses, Exodus 2.14.
Who made thee a Prince, a Judge over us? who made thee a Preacher? for No man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron,
Heb. 5.4.

Thus have I with all imaginable brevity gone through the several parts of man's
duty, showed him what it is the Lord does require of him, to do justly, to love
mercy, to be sober and temperate, and walk humbly with his God. So that by way
of Application you will easily infer with me.

1. That it is not nihil agendo, doing nothing. Idleness is the Devils anvil, on
which he hammers us into any shape of vice or wickedness, it is a tempting of
the Tempter, a giving him the opportunity of throwing a temptation in our way,
and therefore it was St. Hieromes advice to be always busied, to prevent the
Devils having this advantage over us. Semper boni aliquid operis facito, ut
Diabolus te semper inveniat occupatum. Had David been in the Camp or at
Council Table, when he walked on the battlements of his house, Bathsheba had
washed her self without defiling uriahs bed. Man is of an active nature, if he
be doing nothing, he will quickly be doing something he should not. Nor,

2. Is it nil boni agendo, doing that which is as good as nothing. To spend a
morning inter speculum et pectinem, our eyes would ache and our hands grow
weary, should a Prayer Book be our entertainment but a third part of that time
the comb and the glass take us up. One meal consumes as much of our precious
time as Luther spent of the whole day in prayer, which was three hours.
Stratonitus said of the Rhoudians, that they built houses as if they were
immortal, but feasted as if they were to live but a little while; we who dwell
in houses of clay, feast as if we were immortal, no life beyond this, as if the
indulging our sensual appetites were the highest satisfaction of our reasonable
nature, and the hoc agere of a Christian. An empty visit, wherein our
entertainment is an idle and uncharitable censure of the actions of others, and
a debaucht Theater share the rest of the day. Than these the Emperors pricking
of flies will be found a busy idleness more innocent. Nor,

3. Is it male agendo, doing that which is worse than nothing, doing evil,
committing sin. This is the Devil's work, and as he sets them to work, from him
they must expect their wages, which what it is the Apostle lets them know
beforehand. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is eternal death. This will not pass in
the account, it will not be well our Lord should find us so doing if he does,
we shall have small thanks for our pains. Which minds me of the third general
of the text.

3. The account will be taken of him, the Lord of the family will come to take
it himself, though it be intimated, that the time when he will come is very
uncertain. Here we must know that there is a particular and a general coming of
our Lord to Judgment. His particular coming to Judgment is on every one in
particular at the hour of death, Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the
earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it. Where by the
return of the soul to God, we must understand its giving up an account of all
its actions done in the flesh, whether good or evil; as certainly as the Body
at death returns to its earthly Mother to be dissolved, so assuredly the soul
returns to its heavenly father to be judged. The general coming of Christ
shall be at the last day, when the dead bodies shall arise out of their graves,
and both soul and body receive the sentence of absolution or condemnation.
John. 5.29. All that are in the graves shall come forth, they that have done
good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation. This latter is a ratification and publication of the
former, and a more full collation or infliction of reward or punishment. Each
of those Advents of our Lord are certain, but the time of them very uncertain,

1. His particular coming to Judgment is certain, which is at the hour of
death. There is a Decree for this past and signed in Heaven. Heb. 9.27. It is
appointed for all Men once to die. And you know what follows that, And this
Decree is irreversible like the Laws of the Medes and Persians. Deaths vast
spoils and large triumphs sufficiently prove its universal Empire. It Is not to
purpose to insist upon this, when there is scarce any man living will show
himself so little a man, as to question whether he be mortal. The wise and the
fool, the King and the Subject, the Pastor and his Flock, the Honorable and
the vile Person, the Rich man and the Beggar, all mustly down in the dust, and
make their bed, as Job speaks, in the darkness. But though there be an
appointed time for this great and last change of man, yet when that time will
come is very uncertain. Those infinite diseases and ca^ualties to which the
life of man is incident and so easily cut the thread of it, fully evince that
there is nothing more certain then the uncertainty of the hour of death. One
dies in his nonage, another in the strength and vigor of his years, and
another in a full age: one in his bed, and another in the field. Hodie mihi,
cras tibi. The Bell went for such a one last, but who shall go next God knows.
To any of us that are here in health this hour, that for all we know before the
next it may be said as St. Peter to Sapphira, Acts. 5. Behold the feet of them
which brought this honorable Person to her grave, are ready to bear thee to the
same place. And therefore it is a point of the greatest (...) to consider our
latter end and prepare for it, since its (...) is so uncertain. And perhaps in
this case, that advice of (...) was not amiss, to him that desired to know when
was the best time to repent and reform his life in, to whom he gave this
answer, that it was safest to do that the day before he died, which was that
present day for any thing he was assured of the contrary.

2. As his particular coming at the hour of death is certain, so is his last
coming at the end of the World. The son of man shall come in his glory, and all
his holy Angels with him, and shall sit upon the Throne of his glory. Mat.
25.31. And then we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. And St. Peter has described this
day with its attendant circumstances. 2. Pet. 3.10. The day of the Lord will
come, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up. This is an Article of our faith, that Christ will
come to judge the quick and the dead, and is a deduction in Divinity that the
belief of a God and of his providence and government of the world does
necessarily infer. But of that day and hour, when this judgment shall pass on
the whole world, knows no man. Our Lord has told us, that this his coming
will be as a thief in the night, to allarm us to stand upon our guard and
watch, that we be not guilty of the improvidence, and so overtaken with the
surprise of the foolish Virgins: We have the Doctrine of Christ's coming, and
the use we should make of it both laid down by our Blessed Savior in the 42.
v. of this cb. Watch therefore, for you know not what hour your Lord does come.
And again verse. 44. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour you think
not, the son of man comes. There have indeed been some so bold as to adventure
to define those times and seasons which the Father has put in his own power,
and to pretend to a discovery of the Arcana Imperil of Heaven, among the rest
to determine when this day shall be; but in that time has overcome and outworn
several their computations, the presumption of their folly needs no other
confutation.

To press you to that which is the natural result of this Doctrine, diligence
and faithfulness in doing your duty, I shall only urge you with a double
consideration about this coming of our Lord.

I. It will be a severe and strict account our Lord will take of us when he
comes. He will bring every work into judgment with every secret thing, Eccles.
12.14. All our irreligion and profaneness, our injustice and oppression, our
intemperance and uncleanness. There will be no imposing on him, no
prevaricating with him, no palliating any fault, cloaking it from him, before
whom all things are naked and open. Heb. 4.13. Indeed if we be found faithful,
and that in the maine we are not tardy, God will overlook (I do not say he sees
not, but) he will pass by our failings and infirmities, our humane frailties.
But there be two things, either of which if we be found guilty of, it will go
hard with us instead of an euge we shall have an apage. Hypocrisy or
Partiality.

1. Hypocrisy and Insincerity in his Service, whatsoever we do, we must do it
heartily, as to the Lord. The heart is the chief part of the Sacrifice, which
if it be wanting, God loathes the Oblation, be it never so Costly. To love the
Lord our God with all the Heart, with all the Soul, and with all the Mind, is
the first and great Commandment of the Law, Mat. 22.37, 38. To bow and cringe
in the Temple, as the Syrian in the house of Rimmon, and the heart to be at a
distance, is a Service f^r for such a blind Idol, than an all-seeing,
heartsearching God.

2. Partiality, A most unhappy error men are willing to deceive themselves
with, they think to do the will of God in a Figure will serve the turn, and so
give him a part for the whole. If they are Zealous and forward in his Service
and Worship, he will wink at their Injustice and Oppression, or if I am
open-handed I may be wicked-hearted; an Alms shall dispense for my Uncleanness,
my Loyalty atone for my Impiety and Debauchery; if I have heapt up an Estate by
indirect means and unrighteous practices, to build a small Hospital, or
bequeath a petty Legacy to the Poor will sanctify the whole lump of ill-gotten
goods, and effect my pardon for all my wickedness. But God delivered to us the
whole Decalogue, and for the whole he will account with us. I Am sure we shall
never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven with a maimed obedience. If at the last
day we shall plead any of this, the good deeds we have done, and think that
they will expiate for whatsoever else we have omitted, Christ will reply to us
as to the Pharisees; These ought ye to have done, and not have left the other
undone. David's confidence was only in a Catholic Obedience, Psalm. 119.6.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments.

2. The Sentence that will be then past is final and decisive beyond any appeal
or rehearing. An error here is of most unhappy consequence, there is no place
for a second. We shall then be adjudged either to an happy or a dismal
Eternity, to everlasting life or endless punishment. Prayers and Tears,
Repentance and promises of amendment, which if sincere, are in this life
effectual for Mercy and Pardon, will then be unavailable: so that indeed we
have the Sentence of Life and Death within our selves, it is in our own choice
whether we will be happy or miserable to all eternity. These two estates depend
upon our acquitting our selves here in our Master's service; if upon our Lord's
seeming delay of his coming, we shall smite our fellow servants, eat and drink
with the drunken, be riotous and disorderly in the family, what can we expect
but to have our portion assigned us with Hypocrites, where there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth? On the other hand, if we are emulous of
happiness, and studious of our Lord's approbation, we must be faithful and
diligent, work if we expect wages, abound in every good work of humility,
sobriety and charity; for with him it shall fare well, whom his Lord when he
comes shall find so doing, he shall recieve a blessing from the Lord. And this
brings me to,

4. The last part of the Text, the reward of that Servant that shall be found
faithful and diligent; Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord shall find so
doing. And here two things offer themselves to our consideration. 1. The
constancy and perseverance of a Christian in well-doing; whom his Lord shall
find so doing. 2. His crown of reward for so doing; Blessed is that servant.
But a word of each of these, and I have done.

I. The constancy and perseverance of a Christian in welldoing; Whom his Lord
etc. It Is constancy crowns all our actions. He whose virtue like Ephraim's
goodness, Hosea 13. evaporates and dwindles away, as the morning Cloud, and
early dew, that will be baffled in his Christian Course by a thwarting
temptation, and grows weary of well doing, puts an affront upon Religion, and
is justly deprived the hopes of its reward. But he that amidst the foul shocks
of Satan and an evil world, abides like a rock in the Sea, stands immovable as
Mount Sion, he shall receive a Kingdom which cannot be moved. The devotion of a
Christian like the vestal fire must burn continually, never go out, he must be
like the Sun in the firmament fixed in his orb, and rejoice as a Giant to run
his course, give shine in the world to the latest minute of his setting. The
prize is at the end of a Christian's race. We read indeed, Mat. 20. of some
that came late into the vineyard, but of none that received the penny but those
that wrought in it till their Lord called them out. When St. Paul had finished
his course then and not till then he could put forth his hand to receive the
Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. If our Lord find us so doing he will
pronounce us blessed.

II. The last particular, the crown of reward for so doing; Blessed is that
Servant. Here it is not to be expected in the running of those few sands that
are yet behind, I should fully or (...) describe the Blessedness of the Text.
He that with the young man can truly say, O^nia haec observavi, he that does
these things with faithfulness and diligence, shall better understand this
blessedness by a fruition of it, then by the largest account can be given of
it, however allow me but in two words to give a short and distant prospect of
this Holy Land, as it were to show you a glimpse of this happiness. It Is to be
able to meet the King of terrors without fear, to bid Death welcome as the
messenger of happy tidings, to have the Soul enlarged from a prison of sin and
sorrow, trouble and temptation, to have a company of the Militia of Heaven, the
Courtiers of the great King conduct and introduce us into the Royal Presence,
to have the whole Quire of Saints and Angels shout at our entrance, and welcome
us into the joys of our Lord, to enjoy the pleasures of the spirits of just men
made perfect, to look back with amazing transport on that world of sin and
misery we are rescued from and have left behind us, those vast rocks and
dangers we escaped shipwracking on, to admire God's goodness, and praise him
for it continually: and after all this, when the Harvest is ripe, and the end
of the world is come, and the consummation of all things, to have our bodies at
the resurrection fashioned like the glorious body of Christ, and be made a fit
receptacle for the soul to enter and for ever dwell in, to be caught up in the
clouds, and meet the Lord in the air, to have our persons pronounced righteous
and innocent in the hearing of men and Angels, to sit on the bench with Christ,
to encompass his royal seat of Judicature and with him judge the world of
wicked men; and after this grand Assize is over, to have a more solemn
inaugration into bliss, each of us to take his place in the upper house, to be
seated about the Throne of God, and there to be for ever with the Lord.

Thus have I carried you thorough the several parts of my Text, and at last
brought you to the haven where you would be, the haven of rest, the highest
Heavens. Let me now entreat you to take one turn in the valley of the shadow of
death, whilst I apply my discourse, and you your meditation to this sad Text
before us. Of this Honorable Person our deceased Sister, and my ever honored
Lady, I hope it is not expected, it may seem needless for me to say much to you
her Relations, Neighbors and Acquaintance, to whom she was so well known, and
especially in this place where her works so loudly praise her in the gates: I
shall not therefore power forth the whole Box, only shed a few drops of this
precious Ointment. Not to tell you that she was descended of an ancient and
honorable Family, (though that be a thing not contemptible) this her just
funeral Exequies declare better than I can; but vix ea nostra voco, my task is
to blazon a more noble Escutcheon, her Honors she bears in the Herauldry of
Heaven, her Virtues which were properly her own, and a more enobling nobility
then that derived from her Anbestours. In her minority she had (as I am well
informed, and have good reason to believe) the advan^^^^ and blessing of a
virtuous and severe education, which early tincture left that relish, which
verified wise Solomon's maxim, Pro. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way he should
go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it. At an unusual age (though
mature in regard of her gravity and discretion) she entered into a married
estate, in which above forty years she was a most loving and loyal Consort to
her dear Lord, in which time she had so fully studied Solomon's Oeconomicks,
that her life was a most exact transcript of them; and without the least
flattery, I may say, her carriage in her domestic Relations was the best
Commentary I ever met with upon the 31 chapter of Proverbs, Solomon's description
of a virtuous woman, and a good housewife. If ever any woman had that ornament
of a meek and quiet spirit in her family, which St. Peter makes to be of so
great price in the sight of God, this good Lady had it. To her now disconsolate
Lord she was such a wife as Solomon describes. Pro. 31.12. she will do him good
all the days of her life; to her Children a tender and indulgent Mother, to
her Servants a loving and kind Mistress. -- But there were among many other
three eminent virtues in this excellent Person, which should I not mention,
besides a great injustice to the dead, in suffering her name to dye, I should
wrong the living of a worthy example, her Piety, her Charity, her Patience and
Christian Magnanimity.

I. I begin at the House of God, where she so delightted to be, her Piety. And
in this she was not newfangled, as the Age, but old-fashioned. Her Religion was
not a bare show or an empty noise, only that of the tongue or an outside paint,
but her Piety was solid and substantial, even and uniform, that which exerted
it self in the fruits of a good life. As to the external acts of Divine Service
and Worship, she was most frequent in them, she seldom took up with so little
as David's morning, evening, and noon, but very often came up to the Psalmist's
highest Pitch of devotion, of praying to and praising of God seven times in the
day; besides her public and closet-devotions, she constantly attended on the
morning and evening sacrifice of her family, in which she gave a most eminent
example: the sticking of a pin, or the laying of a hair kept her not till the
service was half over, but her zeal for the service of God made her careless of
what habit or dress she came in, rather then stay away or come tardy; her
exceeding devotion carried her to David's pious option, to enjoy the
Door-keepers place to be first in and last out of the House of God. And truly
she was of Joshua's sociable temper, she was for I and my house will serve the
Lord. Her servants never met with greater displeasure or more severe chiding
from her than for the neglect of their duty to God.

II. As her Piety was great, so her Charity was large. As God had given her the
riches of this world, so the knew full well that she had more in her Custody
than was her own, the poor's portion; she looked upon her self as the
Almighty's Almoner, and understood it his pleasure she should dispense
bountifully. An empty belly, a naked back, or the sores of an helpless Lazar,
were such oratory as ever prevailed for her relief. I am confident there be
many here weeping, as the Widows over Dorcas, Acts. 9. that can show the coats
and garments she provided for them, and who were clothed and fed by her
bounty. She might justly have made the protestation of Job; If I have seen any
perish for want of clothing, or any poor for want of covering: if his loins
have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep,
Job. 31.19.20. She was wise in her Charity, and understood her own interest
well, and knew that such sowing brought in a plentiful crop, a great increase,
that she should make a great return for all she thus laid out, and should be
reimbursed with an interest infinitely above the principal, when her Lord at
the last day shall publicly read her layings out; Hungry, and ye fed me,
thirsty, and ye gave me drink, naked, and ye clothed me.

3. Her Patience and Christian Magnanimity. And here I may well truly break
forth in admiration, as the Father upon the story of the Woman of Canaan; Mira
re^ evangelista, mulier non mulier etc. O wonderful! a woman and more then a
woman! Troubles and afflictions she had, what Saint ever had not? indeed how
could her virtue have been so bright and eminent without them. But her
deportment under them was admirable, her trust and confidence in God so stayed
her up, that she could be fervent and composed in he devotions, and cheerful in
her family, when the greatest pressures lay upon her; nay, to the former they
did ever add vigor and activity. If at any time the waves came so thick upon
her, that she found her self with Peter ready to sink, she quickly caught hold
of a sure stay, and recovered her self with David's reasoning in the like
extremity. Ps. 43. ver. ult. Why art thou cast down, O my soul! still put thy
trust in God. The meditations of an holy man upon which place of Scripture she
very often had recourse unto. Dr. Sibbs upon that text.
To hasten.

There were two circumstances about the death of this eminent Saint I must not
omit. About a fortnight before she died, she desired the holy Sacrament at my
hands, which I gave her the Sunday following; all the week before
(notwithstanding her great bodily weakness) with great devotion she was present
at the prayers of her family, and after that continued her attendance to the
very last. This Celestial Banquet so refreshed her soul, that the joys and
satisfaction she then possessed were a happy anticipation, a delicious fore-taste
of that Heaven, from which she was not to be long absent: and here her good
nature and Christian Charity took an occasion to express it self in being
kindly angry with some of her Servants for their neglect of that opportunity of
coming to the Lords Supper, and so not sharing with her in so great a comfort
and happiness. She that had been a careful observer of the Lords day in her
life, hasted early on that day to the celebration of an eternal Sabbath in the
Heavens. In a word, Departed about two aclock on sunday morning
as if in the language of David concerning God's house, she had said of her
little Sanctuary: Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. But a few
hours before she departed this life, she was at prayers with the family at the
Chapel, and I doubt not but after that in her greatest Agonies and extremity,
which lasted not very long, she had pious Ejaculations and holy Soliloquies,
her Lord found her so doing, and she is now in possession of the blessedness of
the Text. Where let us leave her, and give me leave to address my self in two
words,

I. To her near and dear Relations. I dare not forbid you the shedding of some
tears to the memory of so precious a Saint, and good a Mother, but I beg you to
moderate them with your Christian hopes. Your loss is great, and truly so is
mine, though I must not equal it, and so is her death to all that had the
honor and happiness of her acquaintance. But if you have one eye upon your
loss, let your other be upon her gain, her advantage, her happiness; methinks
she bespeaks you, Daughters weep not for me, but for yourselves and Children;
and look upon her death not so much a loss neither, as a short privation of her
company; consider her non amissam sed praemissam; not lost, only gone a little
before to that Rest we all labor after.

II. And to all that are here present, that knew her, let me beg you to let her
memory be precious with you, let her virtues never dye, but be persuaded to an
imitation of them, fix this great example continually before your eye. I
conclude all with the exhortation of the Apostle, Phil. 4.8. Finally, Brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report: if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things and do them; that when our Lord shall come, he may find
us so doing, and pronounce us blessed.

FINIS.

