THE Strong Man Armed CAST OUT, And his GOODS SPOILED: Or, the Poor Man sitting
at Jesus's Feet clothed, and in his Right Mind.

Being a True Convert's Testimony of the Power of the Lord, in turning the Soul
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God.

Wherein is clearly manifested, that there is Light in every Man and Woman,
which discovers their Conditions, bears a faithful Testimony against Sin, is
the Reprover of all Unbelief and Unrighteousness both in Heart and Life, and is
the Mighty Power of God for Salvation to all that believe in it and obey it.

And herein it is evidently proved, That they are none of the Ministers of
Christ that Oppose this Doctrine; with one infallible Character of the Real
Gospel Ministers; and most of the weighty Objections answered.

Formerly given forth in Writing unto my Relations and Acquaintance, the
Professors, called Independents, in Notingham-shire; declaring the just Cause
of my leaving their Assemblies. Together with a tender Invitation to all the
Honest-hearted, to come out of their dead Forms, and walk in the Light of the
Lord.

By James Jackson, formerly a Parish Priest, and a Teacher amongst the
Independents; and now through the exceeding Riches of God's Love, am made
willing to take up the Daily Cross, and walk with the despised Followers of the
Lamb, in Scorn called Quakers.

This is a Marvelous Thing, O ye Priests, and Professors, that ye know not
whence he is, and yet he has opened mine Eyes. Was it ever known, that ever
any man opened the Eyes of one that was born blind?

Printed in the Year, 1674.

TO My Loving Friends, Kindred, AND ACQUAINTANCE; The Tender, Sober and
Conscientious Professors amongst the People called Independents, in the County
of NOTTINGHAM.
THe Scriptures declare of a Man which had an Unclean Spirit, who had his
dwelling among the Tombs, and no man could bind him, no not with Chains;
because he had been often bound with Chains and Fetters, and the Chains had
been plucked asunder by him, and the Fetters broken in pieces; And being driven
of the Devil into the Wilderness, he was so unruly and fierce, tearing his
Clothes, and cutting his Flesh, that no man could tame him: But after the Lord
Jesus had healed this poor Creature, and effected such an extraordinary Change,
as caused Astonishment and Admiration in the Beholders; for it is said, That
when they who had known him before, now saw such a palpable Alteration, he that
was called Legion Sitting, and Clothed, and in his Right Mind, they were
afraid: and Jesus said unto him, Go home to thy Friends, and tell them how
Great Things the Lord has done for thee, and has had Compassion on thee.

And truly Friends, this day in my Particular is this Scripture fulfilled in
your Eyes; my Ungodly, Dissolute, Debauched and Extravagant Course of Life has
been known to most of you, when I sinned after strong Convictions, serious
Admonitions and Reproofs, Vows, Promises and Resolutions, against known
Scripture-Rules, Inward Light and Religious Education, breaking and violating
all these Bonds and Obligations (which as so many Chains and Fetters one would
think might be sufficient to tame and restrain the unruly Lusts of Youth)
whereby the Souls of some of the tenderest and chiefest of you have been
grieved, exceedingly wounded and exercised, endeavoring and earnestly
traveling with Prayers and Tears for my Recovery. Wherefore seeing the Lord
has passed by me when I was in my Blood, and pitied me, and said unto me,
Live; For it was the Lord only who saw my Way, and healed me, and restored
Comforts to me and my Mourners by the effectual Calling of his Grace, REVEALING
HIS SON IN ME, and has spared me as a Living Monument of his Patience, Endless
Mercy and Compassion: I therefore in the powerful Constrainings of this Love,
am unwilling to eat my Morsel alone, or to hide my Talent in the Earth; but
with Sampson, having tasted some Sweetness and Strength from the Lord, do
commend my Experiences unto you my Friends and Relations, declaring unto you
how great Things the Lord has done for me, and had Compassion on me, in
turning me from Darkness into his Mavelous Light, and from the power of Satan
into the Kingdom of his dear Son; To whom be Glory, Praise and Obedience for
evermore.

James Jackson.

THE Strong Man Armed CAST OUT, And His Goods Spoiled, etc.
IN the time of my greatest Pollution and Iniquity, while I fulfilled the Lusts
of the Flesh with Greediness, for many years before that Change and Reformation
was discerned in me at which ye rejoiced, even in the worst of my time; I
testify in the Presence of the Lord, that then I met with real and immediate
Reproofs, Rebukes and Convictions from something that did often Awaken, Judge
and Condemn me in my own Conscience, but knew not what it was, nor whence it
came; and because Iniquity was risen in me to an exceeding masterless height,
these Rebukes which I know were from a contrary Principle to Sin, prevailed
not, although at some times they were as Powerful and Terrible as the
Handwriting upon the Wall before Belshazzer, whereby my Countenance has been
changed, my Thoughts troubled, so that the Joints of my Loins were losed, and
my Knees smote one against another; then thought I to redress this Sorrow by
going into Merry and Pleasant Company, essaying to divert that inward
Perplexity by outward Jollaty, as Drinking, Gameing, Music, etc. but those
Diversions were unable to still and quiet these Tempestuous Surging Waves, and
were no more effectual to heal the Wound of my Sin-smitten Conscience, then if
a man should endeavor to quench Fire by pouring Oil thereon; for I found by
woeful Experience, that these unwarrantable Courses increased the Flame, and
added yet more Weight to the first Burden: Then have I many times solemnly
vowed, promised and resolved, To break off and cease from all Ungodly
Practices; and in keeping and observing these Covenants I have found some Ease
and Quietness for a time; but as soon as new Sins were committed, then arose
fresh Occasions of Sorrow, Trouble and Terror; and after this manner I
continued many years, until the Lord was pleased of his infinite Wisdom and
Faithfulness to hedge up my Way with Remarkable and Extraordinary Providence,
blasting all Purposes and Designs, and caused Afflictions, Losses and
Disappointments to come upon my outward Estate, Horror and Perplexity upon my
Soul, a most Violent and Raging Fever upon my Body, and at the same time above
an Hundred Miles from all Relations, Friends and Kindred; at which time, being
in a most Wretched, Deplorable and Succourless Condition, sinned my self almost
out of all the Comforts of this Life, and any Hope of Interest in a better;
being under this great Distress, and cast out to the loathing of my own Person,
and had all my Sins set in order before me, whereupon I was forced seriously to
consider my Ways, and found no place to escape the Wrath of the
Highly-provoked God; at which time I had no Benefit of any Outward Help,
Teaching or Counsel; but he, who before had been my Reprover, was then my only
Teacher, who sealed Instruction upon my Soul, whose Voice I heard, which did
shake and shake the Heavens, and the Earth also; and caused me to cry out,
Lord, What would thou have me to do? And being brought to the Foot of God,
could truly say, Speak now Lord, for thy Servant hears: And abiding in this
broken and shattered State, I clearly felt the Judgment of the Lord powerfully
at work in my Soul, as an Ax at the Root of the Tree, and as a Refiner's Fire,
till the Life and Power of Sin was slain, subdued and mortified perfectly in my
Will and Affections; then was the Lord Jesus revealed in me whom I had pierced;
the New Birth Discerned, which is created after God in true Holiness; and the
Immortal, Pure, Precious Seed, of the Eternal God, which ever before had been
pressed down, trodden under and held in Bondage, arose; yea, the Tender Plant
of his own Right Hand sprung up in me, panting and vehemently breathing after,
and never since could be satisfied but with his Living Presence. Behold! these
things works the Lord oftentimes with men, looking upon men; And if any say,
I have sinned, and perverted that which is Right, and it profitted me not, he
will deliver his Soul from going into the Pit, and his Life shall see the
Light. And this is the Sum of the Confession which I was not ashamed to witness
in your public Assemblies, both at Nottingham and other places, in the year
1668.

Objection. But it is probable some of you will object, saying, After this
Change was wrought, thou did Join to our Assemblies, Owned us, Prayed with
us, Preached amongst us, and seemed to enjoy Refreshings and Satisfaction in
our Assemblies; wherefore then art thou now departed from us, and gone to the
Quakers?

Answer 1. Notwithstanding that great and notable Work begun in my Soul, and in
some measure effected by the Mighty Power of the Lord, yet was there after some
time a certain Deadness, Coldness and Darkness drawn over me again, occasioned
through Weakness, Unwatchfulness and Formality, whereby that good Condition was
lost; nevertheless I found and felt tender Breathings moving in me, thirsting
and seeking for renewed Testimonies of the Love of God, then in the Simplicity
and Uprightness of my Heart, not knowing a more likely way to obtain
Satisfaction, I joined to your Society; and can truly affirm (though I now see
it was no better then seeking the Living among the Dead) that the Lord was
pleased in the Condescensions of his Love, many times to stoop down, and reach
forth from the openings of his Bosom Refreshings and Nourishment to that tender
Babe of his own begetting, yea, while I frequented your Assemblies.

Answ. 2. And as I continued Faithful and Obedient to that measure of Light and
Knowledge, which was revealed in me, it is well known to all, or the most of
you, what Censures, Opposition and Contradiction, both I and the plain
Scripture-Truths, which I declared in your Assemblies, suffered from many of
your Brethren, charging me, That I was leading into Quakerism, long before I
understood either by word or Writing what the Quakers held.

Answ. 3. But however, these Censures occasioned a free and impartial Search
into the Quakers Principle, Doctrine and Practice; for verily, before I was as
much afraid of the Quakers as ye can be: But standing single in the Will and
Counsel of the Lord, desirous to prove all things and hold fast that which is
good, abandoning all Consultations with Flesh, was resolved to cease from Man,
and to cleave unto the Truth, as the Lord should reveal and discover the same
to me, waiting in this Unbyassed, Unprejudiced and Dis-engaged Frame, examining
carefully the Principle, Foundation, Doctrine and Practice of this Despised
Holy People, great Clearness and Satisfaction arose in my Soul; for as Face
answered Face in a Glass, so were the Truths delivered by them, owned and
embraced by the Witness of God in my own Conscience; and the same Spirit,
Light, Life and Power, which is manifest in them, I came to feel in a measure
in my own Particular: And yet for all this, before I came to any visible
Closure with them, I sat down, and counted the Cost, and am made willing
freely to endure the Cross, and undergo the World's Reproach and Shame,
knowing, that whoever will be Christ's Disciple must deny himself, and take up
his Cross daily and follow him.

And truly Friends, the Day of the Lord's Power is come and felt, whereby I am
made willing to forsake Fathers and Mothers, Brethren and Sisters, Parsonages
and all kind of Ecclesiastical Promotions, Friends, Honors, Pleasures,
Profits, Houses, Lands, Goods, yea, and Life is self, to follow the Lamb, and
fall in with his Interest, as it is only witnessed and embraced by and amongst
the Children of Light, by the World called Quakers.

Answ. 4. But if it were possible, I desire to make clear to your Satisfaction,
that there was sufficient Ground for me; and so there is for you, who have any
Tenderness and Breathings in your Souls after the Lord, to separate your selves
from the Tents of those Ungodly Men, your Teachers, who are no better then
Filthy Dreamers, Blind Guides and Belly Gods, who belch out nothing but
Blasphemies, Lies, Slanders, False Accusations and Evil Speeches against God
and Christ, his Ways, Truth and People; and this I see and declare against
them in the Light: For, verily there is, and I witness it, an Honest, Gracious,
Tender Principle in many of you, called Independents, which kindles in you
perfect Hatred against Sin, and unsatisfied real Breathings and Pantings after
the Sensible Living Presence of the Lord; But your Leaders cause you to Err,
and ye are scattered upon the dark and barren Mountains: And this I testify in
the Name of the Living God, That it will be so with you while ye follow these
Wandering Stars, Clouds without Rain, Seducing Spirits, your Pastors and
Teachers, who are Ravening Wolves and Ministers of Antichrist, whom ye ought
not to receive into your Houses, nor bid them God speed; For,

(1.) They are altogether Ignorant of the True God; and all the Knowledge that
these men pretend to have of the Deity, is attained by Reading and Hearsay;
for they will confidently affirm, That Vision and Immediate Revelation is
ceased: Judge ye therefore what Knowledge these men have of God, when the
Scriptures say, No man knows the Father but they to whom the Son reveals him.

(2.) They Reproach and despise Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, of whom the
Scriptures witness and testify to be the True Light, which enlightens every
man that comes into the World: But they are not afraid to say, The Light in
every man is but a Natural Light, and at the best not able to save those who
believe in it and obey it. And to discover themselves more plainly to be the
Ministers of Antichrist, they are not ashamed to deny that Christ is come in
the Flesh: indeed both they and their Grandmother, the Church of Rome, are
willing to confess that Christ was come; but the Scripture is plain, That every
Soul that confesses not that Christ is come in the Flesh, the same is
Antichrist.

(3.) They fear not daily to Blaspheme the Holy Spirit of God; but call it A
Spirit of Delusion, and A Spirit of Error; and most presumptuously say of them
that are sanctified, guided, taught and anointed by the Holy Ghost, That they
are led by the Spirit of the Devil.

(4.) They trample under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, counting it a Weak and
Unholy Thing, while they impudently affirm, That the best of God's Saints (yea,
if he had no purer Saints then they are) cannot be free from sin whilst they
breath upon Earth, when the Scriptures witness, that the Blood of Christ
cleanses from all sin.

(5.) They preach another Gospel: Now the Scripture is plain, That if any man,
or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto us, then what we have
already received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.9. Now how can ye believe that
they are Ministers of the Gospel, when they know not what the true Gospel is;
For, says Paul, I certify unto you, Brethren, that the Gospel which I preach
is not after man; for I neither received it, neither was I taught it of man,
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: But your Teachers deny any such
Revelation in these days; wherefore it is hereby evident, that they are
Thieves, crept in some other ways, and bring another Gospel, then that whereof
Paul was a Minister, as he witnessed to the Collossians, Chap. 1.23. saying. Be
not moved from the Hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was
preached IN EVERY CREATURE under Heaven, (...) In universa creatura.
whereof I Paul am a Minister. And this is the Word of Faith which we preach,
even Christ, the Word, who is in thy Heart and in thy Mouth, says Paul, Romans
10. which all have heard, and the Sound thereof is gone through the whole
World: But these men labor to pervert the Gospel, and turn men from it,
saying, That the Light of Christ in every man's Conscience is not the Substance
of the Gospel, nor the Power of God to Salvation.

(6.) They have indeed a Form of Godliness, but want the Power; and well for
them if that was the worst: But they magnify and cry up a Form, and utterly
reject, despise, and deny the Power, which is the immortal Seed, Christ Jesus,
the Light within; and from such we are commanded to turn away.

Their Prayers and Sermons are made, contrived, studied and composed in their
own Time, Wills and Wisdom; but are Strangers to the Life, Power and Spirit of
Prayer: and deny that Christ speaks in any; which is evident that he does not
speak in them.

They cry up, and plead earnestly for Water Baptism, which Christ never
Administered, Instituted or Commanded to be Administered; and yet they call it
Christ's Ordinance: Some saying, Without this no Salvation; and the rest say,
With such as wilfully neglect this, have no Communion; But if they had ever
undergone and felt the Powerful, Lively, Purifying and thoroughly cleansing
Efficacy of the Spirit's Baptism, they would know it sufficient, without the
Help of their Dead, Cold, Idolized Waterworks.

They are greatly affected with that Bread and Wine, which after breathing upon
by the Pastor, is not Common, but Be-sainted, and so comes to be called the
Lord's Supper: It is evident hereby, that they never did eat of that Flesh
which is Bread indeed, nor drink of that Blood which is Drink indeed.

Now it is certain, that all Pictures, Images, Shadows, Resemblances, Figures
and Representations, which any people live in and plead for, do clearly argue,
That they are destitute of the Power, Life and Substance, yea, who^ely ignorant
of his Living Presence, in whom is hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge: And as they believe in one at a great Distance from them, out of
their View and Knowledge; so is it very convenient, they think, to necessitate
these Carnal Ordinances to reduce their unmindful and forgetful Thoughts into
more serious Remembrance, till he come: And yet these men will condemn the
Papists, though they be far short of their Devotion in this very Thing.

And so are they seen in the Light to be Wolves in Sheep's Clothing, ravened
from the Life and Power of those Saints, whom they are imitating upon the Stage
of their Formal Profession.

Wherefore, my dear Frieds, Come out from amongst them, and be ye separate,
lest ye be drunk with the Wine of their Fornication; For verily, the Lord is
risen to plead his own Cause, and be a swift Witness against these Sorcerers,
who are sporting themselves in the day time: And as those Soldiers regarded
not a Crucified Jesus so near them, but their Minds were taken up in parting
and casting Lots for his Raiment; so these men are so exercised in the
Outsides of Religion, Ordinances (so called) and Worship, that they are not at
all concerned with the Inside, which is the Life and Power of Godliness, even
Christ within, the Hope of Glory.

Answ. 5. And Lastly; As I have plainly declared the Reasons of my departing
from your Assemblies, so shall I witness faithfully to the Truth, as it is
known and practiced by the Holy People of God, called Quakers, with whom I now
walk, and of whom I declare and testify.

First, That they are built and rooted in and upon the Right Foundation, even
Christ Jesus, the Lord; who is their Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption, in whom alone they are justified by Faith, and saved.

That Root from whence they receive Life, Nourishment, Power and Growth, is the
only Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, the Rock of Ages, the Stone which
your Builders and their Brethren, the Priests, ever rejected, disallowed and
set at naught* which is, Christ in us, the Hope of Glory. Whereupon it is
evident that we differ in the Root from all the People in the World, though of
several Forms and Persuasions: For plainly, the Papists, Prelates, Presbyters,
Baptists and Independents, though they all differ in their Forms, Appearances,
and Circumstantial Opinions, yet do they all agree and meet in one and the same
Faith, Foundation and Root.

The Words, Writings, Declarations and Testimonies of the Saints, recorded in
Scripture, are the Foundation and Ground of all the Professing People in the
World; and all of them being Strangers to that one Spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures, are run into several Sects and Opinions, as they do carnally
understand and conceive they have Rule and Teaching in the Bible: But however,
they will own no other Light, Law, Gospel, Rule, Revelation and Word of God,
but their Bibles. But now this peculiar People, whom the Lord has gathered
from amongst all the Babylonish Confusions and Divisions under Heaven, are
built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief Cornerstone, in whom all the Building fitly framed together,
grows into an Holy Temple in the Lord.

So that these receive immediate Light, Life, Power, Teaching, Guidance, Rules,
Refreshings, Revelation, Peace and Satisfaction from that Word which was before
the Worlds were made; even that Life, Power, Foundation, Root, Spring and
Fountain, in and by which the Holy Prophets and Apostles were Quickened,
Enlightened, Anointed, Inspired, and gave forth the Scriptures, which is Christ
Jesus, the Word of God, the Power of God, the Son of God, the Light Within, the
only Savior of the World.

2dly, Their Faith is the Faith of the Son of God; Jesus Christ is the Author
and Finisher of it: It is not a Dead Historical Faith, but the Spirit and Life
of Faith, and no less then the Resurrection and Life of the Immortal Seed,
Enlightening, Quickening, Reforming and Renewing the whole Man; And this is
that Faith by which Sin is subdued, slain and mortified perfectly, the Heart
purified, the World conquered, the Soul sanctified, justified and saved
perfectly: But the Faith of all others is an Unholy, Dead, Imperfect Faith; it
sanctifies but in part (as they say) and so will never save to the uttermost.

3dly, Their Knowledge is Spiritual and Experimental, from the immediate
Unction of the Holy Ghost; what is known, proceeds not from Hearsay, but
divine Revelation: All that are born of the Spirit are taught of God, and need
not that any say, Know the Lord; for they all know him, from the greatest to
the least: This is Life Eternal to know God, who is Light, yea, the Father of
Lights; and that the Light within is the Son of God, whom he has sent; so to
know as to live and abide in his Light, is Life Eternal: And this is that
Mystery which is hid from the Wise and Prudent, and is revealed unto Babes; for
the World by all its Wisdom knows not God, neither does the Carnal Man (though
never so great a Scholar) discern the things of God; for they are Spiritually
discerned.

And as Christ was Bodily in the World, and the World knew him not, no, not the
great Doctors and Leaders of those several Sects and Religions in that day, as
the Samaritans, Herodians, Scribes, Pharisees and Sadduces, they knew him not;
and therefore the man that was born blind wondered, This is a Marvelous Thing,
says he, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine Eyes:
It was never known that any man opened the Eyes of one that was born blind.

Even so it is now; Christ is spiritually in the World, and the World knows
him not; no, not the Popes, Prelates, Presbyters, Priests and Pastors of all
the Religions in the World, they know him not, but say, It is the Devil, or at
best, but the Light of Nature; and so they know not from whence he is, yet has
he enlightened Thousands: And it was never known that the Devil or Nature
converted any to the Lord, that have been Naturalized to Sin.

4thly, Their Humility, which is the emptying of themselves of all their own
Righteousness, Wills, Wisdom and Self-Exaltation; and is a real, inward,
spiritual Abasement and Subjection to the Life, Power and Kingdom of Christ
Jesus, manifested in Spirit, ruling and dwelling in their mortal Bodies: And so
this True, Humble, Meek and Low Frame of Spirit proceeds from their
experimental Knowledge of Christ's living Presence in them; whereas they that
know God and Christ only by Reading and Hearsay, with a Literal and Historical
Knowledge, they are blown, swelled and puffed up with Airy Notions, Vain
Boastings and Self-Conceitedness.

5thly, Their Unity, which consists not only in the Oneness of Opinion and
Judgment, but proceeds from Unity of Spirit: And their Love one to another is
not from a Natural but a Heavenly and Spiritual Principle; It is not the Love
of one man to another, but it is the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts,
which makes them all of one Mind, and all speak, write and witness the same
thing: For as the Vital Spirits in the Natural Frame have its Operation through
every Member, it makes the Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Hands and Feet, to see, hear,
speak, work and walk, and yet but one Soul that moves and quickens all through
its speedy Intercourse into every Member and Part of the Body; so is it here,
the Love, Peace, Concord and Unity amongst these is remarkable; it flows from
the Fountain of Love, and influenceth the whole Body, which makes them in all
their Ways, Doctrine and Practice but as One Man: And though but a Poor, Weak,
Harmless, Innocent and Inoffensive People, are rendered through their Unity and
Love, as Terrible as an Army with Banners.

6thly, Their Patience is invincible: To them is this Grace given, Not only to
Believe in the Name of Jesus, but also to Suffer for his sake. And as the Lord
has made them Blessed and Glorious Instruments in his Hand to do his Will, so
has he made them contented to be perfected through Sufferings: For though the
Lord has been especially present with them, yet the World has been especially
against them; not for their own sakes (for they are the only Innocent and
Harmless People upon Earth) but for Christ's sake in them; yea, because there
is more of God among these men then others, therefore are they hated of all
men, and every where amongst all Religions evil spoken of: for the World most
hates where there is most of God; therefore the Single-hearted may guess where
there is most of God, by observing where the greatest Hatred of the World lies.

7thly, Their Faithfulness to the Truth, Ways and Interest of Christ; How have
they gone up and down in Weariness and Labors, in Hunger and Nakedness, in
Dangers and Deaths, to bear a Faithful Testimony against the Sin, Vanity, False
Worship and Abomination of the Times? When did they shrink in the least, or
turn back from their Duty, when Loss of Estate, Liberty, yea, Danger of
Banishment attended it? When did they Deny their Master or his Commands, or
Betray his Interest before King or Counsel Table, Judges, Justices or Bishops,
by Subscribing, Engaging, Swearing, Bowing or Complying to the Wills and Humors
of men? Nay, they have witnessed a Good Confession, and spoken of his
Testimonies before all these, and were not ashamed: When did they meet at Night
for fear of being seen, or creep in at Back-Doors into Cellars, Holes and
secret Places to hide themselves from the Knowledge of the Adversary? But the
time would fail me to speak of their Self-denial, Temperance, Sobriety,
Innocence, Doctrine, Order, Worship, their Spirit of Prayer and Watchfulness,
Holiness, Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: The King's Daughter
is all Glorious within, and her Raiment is of pure Gold. Therefore in Truth and
Sincerity to them I will say, Who is like unto thee, O People, saved by the
Lord, the Shield of thy Help and the Sword of thy Excellency? Thine Enemies
shall be found Liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their High Placet.

Yet to make it appear more plain, that this Light within, which indeed is our
Principle, is the Truth, and the Mighty Power of God for Salvation to all that
believe in it and obey it, will be further manifested by its Nature and Effects.

The NATURE of this Light.
It is a Living, Immortal, Unchangeable, Undefiled, Righteous and Perfect
Principle of pure Holiness, which never fell, complied with, or consented to
any Evil; But has ever opposed and stood cross to the whole corrupt Nature,
Will and Affections of fallen man: For I know that all Adam's Posterity are by
Nature fallen under Guilt, Pollution, Condemnation and Darkness. So that the
Light I speak of is nothing of Man's Nature, but of the pure Divine Nature,
even that Seed promised Genesis 3.15. yea, the Son of God, which is sent into the
World, that whosoever believe on him should not perish, but have Eternal Life.

The EFFECTS of this Light.
When Christ was upon Earth, John saw and bare record, That he was the Lamb of
God, which takes away the Sins of the World: Yet the Lord said, A greater
Testimony have I, then that of John; for the Works that I do in my Father's
Name, they testify of me: So say we of him now; he is spiritually the Light in
man, however slighted, rejected and undervalued by men; yet is he chosen of
God, and precious, the alone Savior of the World; and the Works he
accomplishes daily in the Souls and Consciences of men testify the same;
wherefore, if his Works be not such as none else can do, believe him not.

Effect I. Hereby the Sinner is convinced, judged, reproved and condemned
plainly and experimentally, for all the Sins that ever he commits, of what
Kind or Nature soever they be: Come (said the Woman of Samaria) and I will show
ye a Man that has told me all things that ever I did; John. 4.29.
is not this the Christ?

Effect 2. The Fear of the Lord, which is the Beginning of Wisdom, is never
truly placed in the Heart, till this Principle be witnessed and owned; for
while a Man looks at God and Christ at a great Distance, circumscribed in some
Place beyond the Stars, the Sinner rages and is confident; but when the Mind
and Understanding is persuaded that the Pure, Holy, Righteous, Omnipotent and
Omnipresent Lord God is not only nigh him, but within him also, he is then
brought into awful Apprehension of the most High, and forced to cry out with
Job, I have heard of thee before by the Hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eyes
have seen him: by this Means the Mind is melted into much Tenderness and
Brokenness, and with the Prophet complains, Woe is me; for I am undone. Now
consider this all ye that despise the Light within, Joh. 9.30
This is a Marvelous Thing (said the Young Man) that ye know not whence he is,
and yet he has opened my Eyes; since the World began was it not heard that any
Man opened the Eyes of one that was born Blind.

Effect 3. Waiting humbly in this pure Dread and Fear of the Lord, Man's
Insufficiency to answer the Requirings of the Holy Commandment is discerned;
but perfect Power and Strength in Christ the Light, is discovered; for indeed,
in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge: and standing up to
the Manifestation of this Light, the Judgment of the Lord is felt as a
Refiner's Fire, which thoroughly purifies, and as Fullers Soap that leaves no
Spot; then the Soul knows that flaming Sword, which kept fallen Man out of
Paradise; but now discerns the new Birth, which bears the Image of the Heavenly
Nature; the strong Man armed, which before held Possession, Bound, casting out,
and all his Goods spoiled by the Powerful Entrance of Christ into his Temple.

Effect 4. Waiting and abiding in this Light for Counsel and Teaching, the
whole Man being emptyed of his own Will and Wisdom, standing singly and purely
in the Will of the Lord, ready to be disposed, ordered and guided universally
by the Light, the Soul now thrives in the Fear and Love of God, brings forth
the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, and lives in that Faith which purifies
the Heart, and gets Victory over the World, Sin and Death.

These Things, with many other which might be mentioned, do make it manifest,
that whoever deny, despise and reproach the Light within, deny God, the Father
of Lights, despise Jesus Christ, the Light and Savior of the World, and
reproach the Holy Spirit which makes manifest and reproves the Sins of Men:
Wherefore all ye Professors that look out for another Savior, remember the
Answer of our Lord Jesus unto John Baptist, upon the like Account, Art thou he,
Luke 7.21.
or shall we look for another? Go (says Christ) and tell him that sent you,
what you have heard and seen; the Blind receive their Sight, the Deaf hear,
etc. Even the same in a spiritual Sense may be as really affirmed of the Light
within; hereby have the Eyes, Ears and Mouths of the Blind, Deaf and Dumb been
opened, the Lame, Lepers and the Dead, cured, cleansed and quickened, and the
Poor, whom none of the Proud, Covetous Clergy (so called) regards, they by
Virtue hereof, have the Everlasting Gospel preached unto them; and forever
blessed are they who are not offended in the Light, but love it, believe in it,
and obey it in all things.

Object. 1. But we are afraid of being deceived; this is a new and strange
Doctrine; did ever Christ or his Apostles bid Men believe and obey the Light
within?

Answ. 1. Art thou not already deceived? Consider therefore well thy Condition,
if thou art delivered out of the deceived State, in which the greatest Part of
the World yet remains; art thou yet in a sinful transgressed Estate? For the
Woman being deceived was in the Transgression, 1 Timothy 2.14.

Answ. 2. We that believe and abide in the Light, know that we are not
deceived; neither seek we to deceive any, neither fear we any deceiving us:
though indeed while we walked in the Imaginations of our own deceitful Hearts,
and warmed our selves by the Sparks of our own kindling, that then as the
Serpent beguiled Eve through his Subtilty, so our Minds were corrupted from the
Simplicity that is in Jesus; in which State we see many yet to stand whom the
Lord will undeceive in his own Time; But Evil Men and Seducers will wax worse,
deceiving and being deceived.

Answ. 3. Never fear Deceit in such who turn you to the Light, whereby ye may
discern betwixt Good and Bad, Truth and Falsehood; plainly, I would much fear
that he had a Design to cheat me, who leads into the Dark, and denies the
Benefit of the Light.

Answ. 4. Search with Freedom, and examine thoroughly this Doctrine, condemn it
not unheard, speak not Evil of any Thing unknown; for so may thou soon
condemn the Innocent, and make thy self guilty.

Answ. 5. Understand fully what we hold before thou contend against us, lest if
thou want this Patience and Wisdom, thou oppose not so much our Judgment as thy
own Conceit; better it is to hear a Man's Mind with Meekness, then hastily to
guess at it.

Answ. 6. Be not wedded to thy own Opinion, nor Wise in thy own Conceit, so as
to build upon thy own or other Men's Judgments, and rest satisfied therein,
because it is strengthened by Multitude, Custom and Antiquity; for undoubtedly
many have erred grossly in those Things they have thought themselves Infallible;
better it is to cleave to the clear and naked Truths of God alone, then to
follow the Doctrines of the most learned and eminent Professors in the World,
when they hold not the Truth as it is in Jesus.

Answ. 7. Reproach not this Doctrine, saying, It is New and Strange, or that
thou never heardst it so before; for this discovers thy Ignorance rather then
my Error: and that which at present seems to thee to be a New Error, being
rightly examined by the Scripture, will prove an Old Truth: If therefore thou will needs reject whatsoever favors of Novelty, how shall the Truths we yet
know not be brought in, and the Ignorance which yet remains be purged out?

Answ. 8. This is the same Doctrine which was preached by our blessed Savior,
and his holy Prophets and Apostles since the World began, and which was
believed and obeyed by all the faithful Saints and Servants of God since the
Creation; the same which the Lord gave in Charge to the Israelites by the Mouth
of Moses, saying, Behold, I send my Angel before thee to keep thee in the Way,
Exodus 23.20.
and to bring thee into the Place which I have prepared, Beware of him and obey
his Voice; provoak him not, for he will not pardon your Transgressions, for my
Name is in him; but if thou shall indeed obey his Voice, and do all that I
speak, then will I be an Enemy to thy Enemies, and an Adversary to thy
Adversaries. Numb. 15.30.
But the Soul that does ought presumtuously, reproacheth the Lord, and shall be
cut off from his People; because he despised the Word of the Lord. Now what is
this Word of the Lord? It is not the Scriptures; for there were no Bibles many
Years after that time, Deuteronomy. 30.11. to 14. Psalm. 119.9.105.
but the LIGT WITHIN. It is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off; but
the Word is very nigh unto thee, even in thy Heart and in thy Mouth, that thou
should hear it and do it: Wherefore David affifirmeth, that if a Young man
take heed to this Word, he shall cleanse his Ways thereby; and calls it a Lamp
to his Feet, and a Light to his Paths. This is also testified by the Prophet
Isaiah, Thou shall hear a Word behind thee, Isa. 30.21.
saying, This is the Way, walk in it; in which Path the wayfaring Men, though
Fools, cannot err. And our blessed Savior does confirm this Doctrine, Mat.
6.35. Lu. 17.21. Acts 3.22. us. 23, 26.
saying, Seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; which Kingdom he
told the Scribes and Pharisees, was within them. Thus Peter preached Christ the
Light; For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you, him shall you hear in all things; and it shall come to pass,
that every Soul that hears not that Prophet, shall be cut off, etc. Wherefore
unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you in
turning every one of you from his Iniquities; Acts 26.18.
and thus Pau^ was sent, To turn men from Darkness to Light, and from the Power
of Satan unto God. Now, is not this Darkness within, and the Light within? And
is it not an inward Turning, Acts 17.27.
To seek the Lord, if happily they might f^el after him and find him; though he
be not far from every one of us? And does not James turn men to the Light
within, writing to Sinners, Jam. 1.21.
Such as were in Filthiness and superfluity of Naughtiness? Does not he bid
them receive with Meekness the ingrafted Word, which was able to save their
Souls; which Peter calls the sure Word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19.
unto which ye do well to give heed as unto a Light that shines in a dark
Place? But most take the Word for the Scriptures; but we know no Word but
Christ Jesus, the Light, and his Name only is called the Word of God:
Therefore, say not in thy Heart, who shall bring and reveal Christ unto us? for
the Word is nigh thee, even in thy Heart and in thy Mouth: Now this Word is
Christ, the true Light in every man; Joh. 12.36.
wherefore says our Lord Jesus, While ye have the Light believe in the Light,
that ye may be the Children of the Light; As, Abel being guided by this Light,
through Faith was enabled to offer up a more acceptable Sacrifice then Cain: In
Obedience to this Enoch walked with, and pleased God: By this Noah being
warned, moved with Fear, prepared an Ark for the saving of his House: By this
was Abraham called to leave his own Country and his Father's House; and in
Obedience to this he departed, not knowing whether he went: Joseph being guided
by this, withstood the Temptations of his Mrs, though enforced with
Importunity, Pleasure, Profit and Secrecy: Hereby Moses chose rather to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
Season, esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches then the Treasures of
Egypt, and endured, as seeing him that is Invisible. And what shall I say more?
for the Time would fail to tell of Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jepthah, David,
Samuel, and of the Prophets, who by Faith, and Obedience to the Light, subdued
Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the Mouths of
Lions, quenched the Violence of Fire: Some were tortured, not accepting
Deliverance: Others had Trial of cruel Mockings, Scourgings, Bonds, and
Imprisonment, and Death. And is still the same at this Day; for the Light
within is the true Shepherd's Voice, which all the Lambs of Christ hear, obey
and follow, to the Hazard of all that is dear to them.

Object. 2. But thou denyest the Scriptures to be the Word of God, which is the
Only Rule to judge of Doctrines, and a sure Weapon to resist Satan, and confute
his Ministers; for it is very observable that Christ made Use of no other Means
to overcome the Tempter, but Only the Scriptures, which are the Sword of the
Spirit and the Word of God.

Answ. 1 Plainly, I deny the Scriptures are either the Sword of the Spirit, or
the Word of God: That the Word of God is the Sword of the Spirit, I own, and
witness that it is sharper then a Two-edged Sword, like a Hammer and a Fire,
the Ax at the Root of every corrupt Tree, and so are not the Scriptures; yea,
the Word of the Lord is Unchangeable, Incorruptible and Eternal, without
Beginning of Days, or End of Time; and so are not the Scriptures.

Answ. 2. Nevertheless, we prefer the Holy Scriptures as they were given forth
by the Holy Spirit of God, and believe them to be a true Declaration of God and
of his Word.

Answ. 3. Yet do we prefer Christ Jesus the Light, above the Scriptures; for in
all Things he must have the Pre-eminence; therefore says John the Baptist, I
prefer him before me, for he is before me, though in Appearance John was
seemingly before Christ; Before Abraham was, I am, said he: Wherefore know that
we build not upon the Holy Prophets and Blessed Apostles, their Words, Works,
Writings and Experiences; but we are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the Foundation and the chief
Cornerstone; so that we have not received our Light, Life, Peace, Comfort,
Faith, Hope and Assurance from the Writings of the Saints, but from him that
was their Light, Life, Hope, Root and Foundation, and have our Teaching from
that Light, whereby Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph walked
with and pleased God, long before any Scriptural Rules were manifested.

Answ. 4. Neither are the Scriptures the only Rule to judge of Doctrines; for
we know the Scriptures are hard to be understood; and therefore Men in their
carnal Wisdom are putting their several Meanings upon one and the same
Scripture; wherefore we say, the Spirit of God is the only Judge of Doctrines,
because he alone that gave forth knows the Meanings of Scriptures; 1 Cor. 2.10.
For the Spirit searches all Things; yea, the Deep Things of God.

Answ. 5. Nor yet do I believe that the Scriptures were the only Means which
Christ made Use of to overcome and repel the Tempter in the Wilderness; for we
observe, Satan pleaded Scripture as well as Christ, till he took indeed the
Sword of the Spirit, which is his Divine Power, and commanded him, saying, Get
thee behind me Satan; then the Devil left him, but not before he was thus
expelled.

Object. 3. But this Doctrine of the Light within is opposed by all the able
learned Divines (so called) in the Nation; yea, the most eminent Preachers
amongst the Presbyters, Independents and Baptists, do condemn it for Erroneous
and Divelish Delusion.

Answ. 1. It Is true, this Doctrine has been and is a Stone of Stumbling, and a
Rock of Offense unto all Sorts and Forms of Professors in the World;
especially, the Priests and Preachers are most inveterately incensed against
it, because the Craft by which they have gotten great Gain, is hereby
especially impared; nevertheless, the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against
it: the Truth is strong and will prevail, yea, it does and will flourish in
Despite of all the Scorns, Injuries, Opposition and Villainy of the World.

Answ. 2. The Scriptures are plain, that God has hid these Things from the
Wise and Prudent in the World, and has revealed them unto Babes: Behold
therefore ye Despisers and wonder; for this is the Work which God has wrought
in your Day, which ye will not believe, though it be declared unto you.

Answ. 3. And as for those Preachers among the Presbyters, etc. who oppose this
Doctrine, this I affirm, and testify against them, though they come in Sheeps
Clothing (that is) have gotten a more refined Way of Profession then others,
and cover themselves with the Words of the Prophets and Apostles, yet inwardly
are they Ravening Wolves, they are inwardly Ravened from the Light and Life of
those Saints, whose Words they have taken up; yea, it is an easy Thing to
prove against the best of them, that they live in Sin and plead for it.

Answ. 4. Whoever deny, reproach and oppose this Doctrine, are none of Christ's
Ministers, as will appear from a due Examination of their Call, Doctrine and
Practice: Who sent them? God or Man? What do they preach? the Word of God, or
the Words of Men? Is their Life and Conversation Humble, Meek, Self-denying and
Heavenly? Or is it not Proud, Fierce, Self-seeking and Worldly? Now our Lord
Jesus has left upon Record one Infallible Rule, whereby we may know which are
true Gospel Ministers, and which are not: and as it is granted, that Christ was
a true Gospel-Minister; so it is expected, that all Gospel Ministers be like
him in their Measure; for says Christ to his Father, As thou sent me into the
World, so have I sent them into the World, Joh. 17. And when he sent forth his
Disciples, to them he says, As the Father sent me, even so send I you. Hereby
then it will easily be discerned, that these Preachers, who so bitterly Rage
and Rail against the Light within, are never an one of them Christ's Ministers,
but Idol-Shepherds, Liars and False Prophets.

Qualification 1. Christ was the Son of God, and known to be so before he
undertook or exercised in the Ministry, for the Lord foreseing what after came
to pass by Peoples running into several Opinions and Doctrines of men, gave
this Charge and Testimony from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased, hear him: In like manner every true Believer is a Son of God,
generated of the immortal Seed, born anew by the Operation of the Spirit, made
a real Partaker of the Divine Nature, lives in and has Union with God through
Faith in Christ; for to as many as receive him he gives Power to become the
Sons of God.

Qualif. 2. He was immeasurably anointed with the Spirit, and was known to be
so; for says John, He that sent me to baptize, the same said unto me, On
whomsoever thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining, the same is he;
So may true Gospel Ministers be known, for they are as really anointed with the
Holy Spirit of God, as Christ was, though not so equally; yea every believing
Soul is endued with this Spirit; these are the Anointed ones of the Lord; and
whoever want this Spirit, they are none of his: And as Christ commanded his
Disciples to abide at Jerusalem till they had received this Unction; so whoever
undertake to preach before they have received this Power from the Lord, they
Run and he sent them not.

Qualif. 2. He endured and conquered the Assaults and Temptations of Satan in
the Wilderness, by virtue of his Sonship and Unction, before he was ever known
to preach the Gospel; in like manner all the true Children of God are taken
into Fellowship with Christ in his Trials, Temptations and Sufferings; but
especially such as have been called unto more eminent and public Work, have
met with greatest Conflicts, Wraftlings and Temptations, that they might be
kept humble before the Lord, and also be fitly disposed to speak a Word in due
season for the Relief of such as are brought under the same Trouble.

Qualif. 4. In the Power, Virtue and Strength of his Sonship, Unction and
Conquest, he went out and preached the Gospel, that is, proclaimed Glad Tidings
of the Grace and Good Will of God to the Poor, and preached Peace to the
Brokenhearted, testifying the Love of God to Mankind, in sending his Son to
them to open their Blind Eyes, and recover them out of the Snare of the Devil;
exhorting Men to believe in the Light, lest Eternal Darkness come upon them:
And all that was done in his Ministry, was not from any outward Encouragement
or Reward, but moved only hereunto from the Tenderness of his Pity and
Compassion to poor Sinners. So it is at this Day, all that are born of the
Spirit are true Ministers of the same Gospel, and publish it freely in the
Constrainings of the Love of God, which lays a Necessity upon them to minister
freely without Expectation of Gifts and Rewards: But do they deserve the Name
of Gospel Ministers, who preach another Doctrine then what Christ or his
Apostles ever did, confidently affirming, That the Doctrine of the Light
within, or to say, the Light in every Man's Conscience is the Light of Christ,
this is Blasphemy; but tell Men, that Light which does convince them of Sin is
not the Light of Christ, but Natural Conscience, and therefore not able to
sanctify and save such as believe in it and obey it? and yet they say, There
be some whom they call Saints and Believers, in whom there is true Saving
Light; but as for the greatest Part of the World, they are altogether
destitute hereof: and yet though they make a seeming Distinction between Saints
and Sinners, yet they themselves confess they are Sinners; yea, and believe
that they must be so while they breath upon Earth: And thus are People held in
Ignorance, Unbelief and Confusion, their blind Guides having caused them to err
from the Truth; for verily this has been and is the Doctrine of these eminent
Men.

Qualif. 5. That Gospel which Jesus Christ had preached, and witnessed to in
his holy Life, he confirmed and sealed by his Death in his Blood: Now this Last
is that which crowned and completed his Ministry; and the same Spirit is in
all the Faithful at this day, whereby Christ's Ministers are enabled to declare
the Truth in the Life and Power of the Eternal Word, without the Help and
Assistance of acquired Parts, Arts and Studies; for to such says Christ, It is
not you that speak, but the Spirit which speaks in you; and thus declaring
what they have seen, tasted and handled of the Word of Life, they are not
ashamed of their Work, nor afraid of Men; neither will they conceal their
Meetings in Time of greatest Danger, nor slip out at Back-Doors to avoid
Sufferings; but are in a continual Readiness and Preparedness to forsake all
that is dear to them, rather then to turn their Backs upon the Work of God, or
in the least to prove Unfaithful by Denying or Betraying the Truths of Christ:
Wherefore now consider these things all ye Admirers of Men, and give place to
the Witness of God in your own Consciences, and see if one of your Gifted
Brethren, Pastors and Teachers be thus qualified.

Object. 4. But the Scriptures are very plain, that Unbelievers and Reprobates
are without Christ, as in Ephesians. 2.12. and 2 Cor. 13 5. wherefore though we do
believe, that Christ is in every Believer, yet we cannot understand that the
Light in every Man is the Light of Christ.

Answ. 1. Indeed one of these Scriptures at first Appearance, seems to
contradict all that has been said before, it will be therefore necessary to
speak to them severally. That in Ephesians. 2.12. plainly affirms, That before
Conversion they were without God, and without Christ in the World: And truly, I
can witness this Scripture fulfilled in my own Particular; for I know the Time
when I was without Christ, and without God in the World, when I lived in Sinful
Pleasures and Delights, fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh with Greediness; I
lived then as if there was no God in the World, yea, without any awful Respect
to the Eye of God and Christ; And yet I can as truly affirm, that at that Time
the Light of Christ was in me testifying against my Iniquity: And this may seem
a Mystery that a Measure of his Light should be within a Man, when that Man is
without Christ; yet I have experienced the Truth hereof, and therefore
testify, that its one Thing for the Light of Christ to be in a Man, and
another Thing for a Man to be in the Light of Christ; and thus it is, the Light
of Christ may be in a Man, and yet that Man out of the Light of Christ;
whereupon I affirm and declare, that the Light of Christ is in every Man; but
no Man is in Christ till he be a new Creature.

And as to that other Scripture, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. This Place does not at
all oppose what before has been written, if it be seriously considered, but
does greatly confirm the Truth of this Doctrine: If therefore by Reprobates be
intended such as have sinned out the Day of Grace, and done Despite to the
Strivings of the Spirit of God, as the old World did; yea, and as those eminent
Professors whom Stephen reproves, saying, Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in
Heart and Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do
ye, Acts 7.51.

And as Jerusalem, which remained Impenitent in the Day of Visitation, till the
Things of her Peace were hid from her Eyes, Luke 19.42. And as those Guests
which had been often invited, and yet refused to come, making light of those
many renewed and reiterated Tenders of Grace, entreating the Messengers
spightfully and slew them, wherefore the King was wroth, and protested against
them, that none of those Murderers should taste of his Supper, Mat. 22. Or
like that Fig Tree, which the Master of the Vineyard when he had come three
Years expecting Fruit and found none, required the Dresser to cut it down and
cast it into the Fire, Luke 13.7. And like those, who had tasted of the
Heavenly Gift, and of the Good Word of God, and of the Powers of the World to
come; but after to fall away, and crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh,
and put him to open Shame; these bringing forth Thorns and Briars are rejected,
and are nigh unto Cursing, whose End is to be burned, Heb. 6.7, 8. And such as
the Lord complains of by the Prophet Jeremiah, saying, They are all grievous
Revolters, walking with Slanders; they are Brass and Iron, they are all
Corrupters, the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the Fire, the
Founder melts in Vain, for the Wicked are not pluck^d away; Reprobate Silver
shall Men call them, because the Lord has rejected them, Jer. 6.29. And the
Spirit speaks expressly, that some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, having
their Conscience seared with an Hot Iron, and so are past feling, 1 Timothy 4.2.
Now if Reprobates be taken in this Place for such as God has given up, cast
off and rejected, yet does not this prove but the Light of Christ was once in
them, and at Work in their Hearts: And further, by this Scripture it is
manifest, that the Light of Christ Jesus is in every Man; And this I know, will
suffice in Answer to satisfy the Unprejudiced concerning those Places of
Scripture.

Answ. 2. The Love of Christ constrains us thus to Judge, because if Christ
dyed for all, then were all Dead; and as Christ dyed for all, so has this
Grace appeared to all; for he has enlightened all that come into the World, and
we know that he is able and willing to save all that yield Obedience to, and
embrace the Tenders of his Boundless, Endless, Unlimited, Universal Love to
Mankind without Exception; and this we are verily persuaded of from these and
such like Considerations:

1. Because God is no Respecter of Persons, Acts 10.35. He makes his Sun to
rise on the Evil and the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust;
he accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor regards the Rich more then the
Poor; for they all are the Work of his Hands.

2. Because that Light which shined in our Dark, Ignorant, Unclean and
Unbelieving Hearts before Conversion, is the very same in which we live and
abide since our Conversion: That which formerly stood by, was an Eye witness
to, and bore a faithful Testimony against us while we walked in Darkness, is
the same which since the time of our believing and abiding in his Light
witnesses with our Spirits that we are the Children of God: That which caused
Trouble, Restlesness and Terror, when we lived in Unbelief, Rebellion and
Disobedience, is the same which causes Calmness, Stilness, Settlement and
Satisfaction, and brings forth peaceable Fruits of Righteousness in our
Souls, since we have believed and continued obedient thereto: That very Light
which before convinced, reproved, judged and condemned us for all Unbelief and
Unrighteousness both in Heart and Life, is still the same which does convert,
confirm, cleanse, justify and save; yea, that Light which before shined in
Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not, is but one and the same, which
after it was believed and obeyed, did expel and lead out of Darkness, that the
Light which before was ecclipsed, may now so shine before Men, that seeing our
Good Works, may glorify our Father which is in Heaven; in the Day of their
Visitation: wherefore the Love of Christ constrains us thus to judge, that the
Light of Christ is in every Man and Woman, who is able to save to the uttermost
all that believe in him and obey him; because when we were as Vile as the worst
of Sinners, we can witness that the same Light, which did then shine in
Darkness, does now, to the Praise of God, shine out of Darkness, whereof we are
not ashamed.

3. Because our Lord Jesus, who cannot Lie, has said, that man's Condemnation
arises only from the Contempt of and Disobedience to this Light, saying, This
is the Condemnation, Light is come into the World, but men love Darkness rather
then Light, Jo. 3.

This is (the) the Condemnation that Light is come into the World: That was
only, say some, Christ's Bodily Presence upon Earth in that Day; So then it
must needs follow, that Condemnation terminated and ended in that Generation,
because then that Bodily Presence expired: But we witness according to his own
Words, that he is come again in Spirit; for (says he) They shall say, Lo here,
and Lo there; but go not after them, nor follow them; Luke 17.21, 23, 24, 25.
look not out, for the Kingdom of God is within you: And as the Lightning
shines from one Part under Heaven to the other Part under Heaven, so shall the
Son of Man be in his Day; but first he must suffer many Things of this
Generation, and be rejected: We testify therefore, that these are the Days of
the Son of Man; and Christ Jesus the Light, is come into the World, into the
Souls and Consciences of Earthly, VVorldly-minded and Unbelieving Men and
Women; and they who love Darkness rather then Light cannot escape
Condemnation, because they neglect despise and reject so great Salvation:
Therefore as the Brazen Serpent was lift up by Moses in the Wilderness even so
Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, has God exalted with his own Right
Hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance and Forgiveness;
wherefore he said, When he ascended on high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave
Gifts unto Men; now that he ascended, what is it but that he descended first
into the lower Parts of the Earth; he that descended is the same also which
ascended far above all Heavens, THAT HE MIGHT FILL ALL THINGS. And thus is his
Light in every Man's Conscience, that they who feel themselves stung by the
fiery Serpents in the Wilderness of Sin, Darkness and Unbelief, and look
toward and believe in him, might not perish, but have Eternal Life; but
whoever neglect, overlook or under value this only Savior of the World,
Christ Jesus, the Light, the alone Guide to Rest, must necessarily perish in
the Wilderness, and dye in their Sins.

For it is most certain, that Man's Damnation must undoubtedly arise from some
of these Causes: (1.) Either for want of Light: Or (2.) From the Deficiency of
that Light: Or (3.) From man's own Rebellion and Disobedience to this Light.

Now to judge or believe that man's Condemnation is occasioned through the Want
of True Saving Light, is horrid Wickedness, because it charge God foolishly
with Injustice; and nothing less then to say with the Evil and Unprofitable
Servant, Lord, I know thee to be an Austere and Hard Man, reaping where thou
have not sown, and gathering where thou have not strawed; therefore I was
afraid, and went and hid thy Talent in the Earth: Yea, what greater
Unmercifulness and Injustice can be charged upon God, then to say or think,
That he has designed any Man's Ruin, and has denied him the Benefit of this
saving Light? When the Lord has assured Mankind as certainly as he lives, That
he desires not the Death of any Sinner; but that this is his Will, and herein
he is pleased, That the Wick^d might forsake their Wicked Ways, and live; for
he would that all men should be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth,
which Truth is Christ, the Light.

Neither can it be granted that man's Condemnation is occasioned through the
Insufficiency of this Light of Christ; for, as has been already proved, He is
able to save to the uttermost all that come to the Father by him, and is the
Mighty Power of God unto Salvation; which though in its first Appearance be as
small as a Grain of Mustard Seed, a Little Leaven, a Bruised Reed, or as
Smoking Flax, yet is it that Little Stone, cut out of the Mountains without
Hands; yea, though it be rejected, disallowed, set at naught, refused and
Despised by all Babel's Builders, as a Poor, Inconsiderable Matter: But though
these Phrases oppose the Appearance of Christ in Spirit, the Light, and despise
him as the Day of small Things, yet is it the only precious Stone, the tried
Stone, the Cornerstone, that sure Foundation and Rock of Ages, that whosoever
believe and build hereon, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against them.

Wherefore seeing that Light is come into the World, and that the Light Christ
Jesus is sufficient to redeem and save all that believe in and obey him; and
that Man's Condemnation proceeds only from Disobedience and Unbelief, in
rejecting the Light: It is therefore the earnest Travail of my Soul, That you,
my dear and truly beloved Friends and Relations, may turn in, to the Light in
your own Consciences; retire thither, and wait in the Silence of your own Wills
and Wisdom, for the clear Manifestations thereof, then shall you know him whom
all the World talks of, and need no more that any say, Know the Lord; for he
will reveal himself in you: Wherefore as ye love your own Souls, love and
cherrish that in you, which has shown you the Evil of Sin, the Vanity of this
Fading World, and has been at Work many a time in your Hearts and wrought you
into Tenderness, panting after Satisfaction from the Living Presence of God:
Oh! Love, believe only in him, hearken only to him, wait continually upon Him,
obey, follow and live in his Counsels; fall under his Reproofs with Meekness,
endure his Judgment with Patience, kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish
in the Way; cheerfully resign up your Wills, Affections, Souls, Bodies,
Pleasures, Profits, Honors, Estates, Liberty and Life it self, to be
universally ordered and disposed by him, whose Name is Wonderful Counselor,
the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. This is the Way to
True Honor and Durable Riches: Oh therefore be persuaded to stand single in
the Teachings, Guidance and Counsels of the Lord Jesus; Despise him not; be not
ashamed to own him and his poor Despised Followers.

Now, that your Hearts may be carried above the Snares that attend your
Conditions, and be wholely devoted to the Lord, and become Fellow Citizens with
the Saints in Light, is the earnest Breathing and Prayer of him, who is

Your Faithful Friend, James Jackson.

Postscript.
Reader,
HAving mentioned some things before in general, of the Just Cause of my
leaving the Independent People, I think it not unseasonable to give this
particular Account of an Offense received from the Uneven Walking of John
James, Pastor of the Independents in Nottinghamshire, which I signified to him
before my Forsaking that Way, a Copy whereof follows, which to this Day
stands over his Head; for he never returned me an Answer to my Letter, but
stirred up and incensed my Relations and others against me, telling them how
greatly I had Injured, Abused and Slandered him: But Wisdom is justified of her
Children.


John James,
THe Lord knows, and thou art not wholely Ignorant, That some years lately past
my Soul was plunged into a most Dreadful State; yea, and I certainly know, that
unless the most precious Sons of Sion be kept by the Mighty Power of God, and
in themselves carefully observe the first Declinings of their Hearts from the
Lord, they will be ensnared through the Deceitfulness of Sin, and become weak
as other Men: And consider, as thou art in great Danger to be ruined, through
the Indulgence and Flatteries of thy Brethren (some of them styling thee, The
Head of the Church, next and immediately under Christ) and lest thou should
receive Harm for want of Faithfulness in Friends watching over thee in Love, I
have in Love to thy Soul, and Discharge of my Duty, presented to thy serious
Consideration some of the things I hear of thee, and partly believe them.


Whereas heretofore thou usedst to preach against National Churches,
Antichrist's Clergy, their Covetousness, Pride, Forc^d Maintenance, etc. and
reprovedst thy Brethren for hearing those Parish Priests, with whom now thou
art joined in Combination, to augment thy Ecclesiastical Promotions, which
before was more Considerable then many Parsonages in the County; and so thou
art leading back again, licking up thy old Vomit; and of late have begun in
several Places to Sprinkle Infants.

That many of thy Poor Brethren, at whose Houses formerly thou kept'st
Meetings, have now been neglected for above Six Years; but have been ever
careful to visit thy kind Benefactors at Marnham, Skegby, etc. and very
punctual to keep thy Day with the Presbyterians at Nottingham and Chesterfield,
where thou knew thy Pay would be sweet and certain.

It was thee only, that after that great Assembly was gathered at Gamston by
the Labors of some private Men, who confined the Work there to a Pack of
Clergymen, viz. Thy Self, Rosse, Bosworth and Clark; And by the same Spirit,
and Prelatical Pre-eminence suspended old Allen (a more Righteous Man then thy
self) from Exercising in thy Dioces.

It was the Letter writ with thy own Hand, that obstructed the intended
Marriage betwixt John Atkinson and Mary Smith; for although seemingly thou
pretendedst Kindness to the said John, who indeed at the same time was in
Fellowship with thee, yet having Respect to a more peculiar Interest, secretly
writ to Northampton, and frustratedst the Hopes of the poor Man, which he never
Recovered, but Languished and Dyed.

And when a Letter was written to be sent to London, to the Professors there,
on the behalf of Robert Johnson, a Member of thy Church, to procure his Relief,
he being there and Unknown, was exceedingly Distressed for want of Bread; thou
did refuse to subscribe the Letter, and he was Famished and Dyed before that
Money got to him which was collected at Nottingham.

By which it does appear, that thou have lost that Honest Conscientious
Tenderness which once thou did seem to have, and that the Spirit of God is
not thy Guide and Helper; for it has been seriously observed by thy most
Judicious Hearers, that thou do not bear in thine Assemblies a Faithful
Testimony against the Formality, Earthliness, Pride, Bitterness and Sinful
Compliances of thine Auditors; but daubest with Untempered Mortar, and
preachest smooth things, Flourishes, Latin and Greek Sentences, and Eloquent
Phrases, to set off and beautify thy Wares.

Remember whence thou art fallen, and Repent; else know for certain, thou have
done thy Work, and the Lord will make no more Use of thee; If Salt has lost
his Savor, it is henceforth good for nothing.

I am thine Offended Friend, James Jackson.

THE END.

