(...) Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.
blazon or coat of arms of the University of Cambridge

TO THE Right worshipful Mr. Augustine Philips Master, Mr. Clement Cooley, Mr.
George Reinolds, Mr. Thomas Stevenson, and Mr. Edmond Clark, Wardens; Together
with the rest of the Assistants of the Company of the CLOTH-WORKERS: My very
loving and much honored friends.
Right worshipful,
HAving but a very few years since published, for the good of those that desire
to read the Scripture with understanding, Certain short Notes of Exposition
upon the five books of Moses, and finding that they have been entertained by
many with far greater esteem and approbation then ever I expected, or they
deserved: I have now adventured to send forth the rest after them, which I had
then lying by me; to wit, the like Notes upon the remaining historical part of
the old Testament, and indeed I did then in a manner engage my self by promise,
that if those found welcome, these ere long should follow after; and having
been often since pressed to make good that promise, by the importunity of many
Christian friends, but especially those of my reverend brethren in the
Ministry, whose judgment I prized above mine own, there lay an obligation
upon me for the satisfying of their desires, which I could not gainsay.

Now as the first part of these Annotations I did then dedicate to that
particular congregation, which the Lord has been pleased to commit to my care,
so this second part I now make bold to present unto you, who above twenty years
since were also pleased to choose me to dispense the word of grace unto you, at
some set times of your solemn meetings; and whom in many other respects I have
great cause to love and honor. It were indeed engagement enough, if there were
nothing else, to endear my affections to this worthy Society, that my dear
father, (whose memory is precious with me) and both his brothers were whilst
they lived, members of this Company, and in their times too honored with those
places of credit and trust, which since your selves have severally born. But
besides this it is well known, how much I owe you (and I willingly thus declare
it, that this may remain as a public testimony of my thankfulness to you) not
only for the great love and respect you have ever shown to me upon all
occasions, but also especially for the bounteous support which for diverse years
you have been pleased to afford to one of mine for my sake.

Add therefore, I beseech you, to your former favors, the gracious acceptance
of this piece of my labors; and the God of all grace improve it to you, for
your spiritual advantage. Histories of former times have been ever
acknowledged both most pleasant, and most profitable, (if a fair prospect from
a high hill be so pleasing to the eye, how pleasant must it needs be to the
mind of man, to have the memorable passages of ancient times presented to our
view in a fair prospect of History, as if we had then lived to see those things
done?) But above all, it must needs be thus in the History of the Scripture;
both because this chiefly acquaints us with the dispensations of Gods
providence toward his Church, the dearly beloved of his soul, in comparison of
whom, the rest of the world is not worth the regarding, and likewise, because
this was written by the unerring pen of men inspired by the holy Ghost, and
that purposely too (as the Apostle says,) for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. But what need I commend
to you the usefulness of any part of Gods word, which I hope you esteem with
David, above thousands of Gold and silver? If these Annotations shall afford
any help for the understanding of such passages in these books, as may seem at
first somewhat intricate and obscure, I have my desire. My prayer shall ever be
for this worthy Company, that the word of Christ may dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, and that God would still raise up many amongst you, that may be to
others patterns of piety and zeal for Gods truth, in this honorable City; and
so I rest,

Your Worships, ever ready to do you any service I am able, ARTHUR JACKSON.

The Preface to the READER.
Christian Reader,
WHat I prefixed by way of Preface before my Annotations upon the five books of
Moses, may serve also for these upon the remaining Historical part of the old
Testament, these being carried on in the same manner, and with respect unto the
same ends as the other were: Only one thing I thought good to add here, which
is this, that there are some Expositions, which as I went along, I met with so
often in so many several places (such as that where men desperately wicked are
termed children of Belial, and that where the Church is called the Lords
portion, and the Lords inheritance, and some other of the like nature) that I
was at last wearied with referring the Reader so often to those places where I
had formerly given the grounds of those expressions, and so resolved (to avoid
the tedium of such reiterated references) rather to leave every man by himself
to consider where the like expression was formerly used, which by the help of a
Concordance at least may be easily found, that so there he might seek for
satisfaction herein.

Further then this I have not at present to advertise you concerning these
Notes; but am only now to desire your favorable acceptance of what is here
published. Indeed when the late Annotations came forth upon the whole Bible,
composed by diverse worthy Divines, authorized thereto by command of Parliament,
I did at first question whether there would now be any need of these: But
considering with my self, first, that those for the most part are very brief,
as being at first intended only for marginall notes: secondly, that there are
very few Expositours that have written upon this part of the Bible, and
therefore a supply of further help herein could not be thought altogether
useless: and thirdly, that I was in some sort already engaged by promise for
these Annotations, which I formerly made known were then collected, I did at
last in these regards determine to proceed in my former resolutions.

Whether I shall ever go on any further in this way, the Lord only knows, the
infirmities of age grow so fast upon me, that I may well fear I shall not. And
besides, there is little encouragement for any work of this nature, in these
contentious times. There are some we see risen up amongst us, that are not
afraid to deny the Scriptures to be Gods word, which must needs be the ruin of
religion, and open a door to all profaneness and Atheism, should it be
suffered in the land. But we trust the Magistrate whom God has so highly
honored, will be so zealous for the honor of God, as ere long to stop the
mouths of such blasphemers; and in the mean season, none but those that are
given up of God to believe lies, will ever a whit the more question these
divine Oracles. Surely, the Scripture is the Churches Magna Charta, whereon all
our privileges and all our hopes depend as we are Christians, and therefore I
hope none that profess themselves fellow-citizens of the saints, will suffer
such a treasure as this to be taken from them: No, but the more violently Satan
rages against it, the more we should prize it, and the more diligently we
should exercise our selves in the study of it. Now Reader if herein this which
I send forth abroad for the good of the Church, shall afford thee any help,
bless God for it, and pray for him, who is

Thine in the Lord Jesus, ARTHUR JACKSON.

Faults escaped.
Page 19 line 14 for now they read and so now they. p. 56. l 7 divided r.
decided p. 8. l. 13. into parts r. into two parts p 135. l. 11. Ephraim
quarrelled r. Ephraims quarrel. p. 149. l. 10. retained r. reclaimed p. 181.
l. 26 Michael r. Michal, and l. 27 Michaels r. Michals p. 291. l. 4
understanding r. undertaking p. 301. l 45. pillars r. pillows p. 337. l. 4. and
lived r. that is, he lived p. 429. l. 29. it is Isaiah r. is that Isaiah p.
468. l. 17. after set out add for the most holy place p. 507. l. 3^. after
what God add required p 513. l. 30. between r. from p 514 l. 3 indeed, after
r. indeed, because after p. 656. l. 7. were carried r. were not carried l 40
off him r. off to him p. 669 l. 4. four r. four and twenty l. 31. we r. a^e
p. 684. l. ult 2. 6. r. 2. Sam 6 p 712. l. 1. observed r. offered p. 736. l.
17. was absolute, r. was not absolute and for also r. all p. 741. l. 24. at
least r. at last p. 757. l. 20. the readily r, the more readily p 760. l 37.
Hanani r. Nehemiah p 773. l. 3 quality r. quantity l 4. durst do r. durst not
do p. 805 l. 43, dele him.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the book of JOSHUA.
CHAP. I.
NOw after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord, it came to pass that
the Lord spoke unto Joshua, etc.] Here begins the history of Isreal's
commonwealth under the government of Joshua; and therefore is this book called
the book of Joshua. Some add also, that it was so called because it was
written by Joshua; which may be judged the more probable, first, because the
example of Moses herein, who wrote the State of Isreal's commonwealth in his
time, might be a strong inducement to Joshua to do the like: and secondly,
because that place, chap 24.26. And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the
Law of God, etc. is an evident proof that he wrote some part of this book, if
not that he wrote it all. It is true, there are some passages in this book
which could not be written by Joshua; as 1. That mention which is made of the
book of Jasher, Chap. 10.13. And the Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed
until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this
written in the book of Jasher? for this book of Jasher was written after David's
time, as is evident, 2. Sam. 1.18. where it is said, that David bid them teach
the children of Judah the use of the bow; behold it was written in the book of
Jasher. 2. That story of the expedition of the Danites when they took Laish,
mentioned in this book of Joshua, chap. 19.47. which was long after that,
Judges 18.1. etc. and 3. The relation of Joshua his death and burial, chap.
24.29, 30. These things, and some others that might be picked out could not
indeed be written by Joshua; but though the book it self were written by
Joshua, yet these passages might be inserted afterward by some other Penman of
the holy Ghost: for so also in the foregoing books which all men yield were
written by Moses, we find some passages too, that could not be written by Moses
himself, but were afterward added by some other, as is noted upon that
relation of the death and burial of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.5. etc. However,
sufficient it is for us to know, that whoever wrote this book he wrote it by
the inspiration of the holy Ghost; for hereto there is a testimony given in
the new Testament, where some passages thereof are cited as parts of the sacred
Scripture, the word of God; as that which in this chapter is spoken to Joshua,
and cited by S. Paul, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. As
for this first passage wherewith this book begins, it shows how Joshua received
a command from God to lead the Israelites over Jordan into the land of Canaan;
the Lord had before appointed that Joshua should succeed Moses in the
government of Israel, Numb. 27.18. and upon the laying of Moses hands upon him,
he had received an extraordinary measure of the gifts of Gods spirit to enable
him for the government, Deuteronomy. 34.9. And therefore doubtless immediately after
the death of Moses, Joshua took upon him the supreme Magistracy: But here now
we are told how either at that time so soon as Moses was dead, or rather after
the thirty days that were spent in lamenting the death of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.8.
the Lord spoke unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses minister, and gave him that
charge which is here after related. Whether God spoke this to Joshua by an
audible voice, by the secret instinct of his spirit, in some dream or vision,
or by the highpriests inquiring for him by the Vrim and Thummim we cannot
conclude, because we find it not expressed, only we find that God had formerly
promised that Eleazar the priest should ask counsel for him after the judgment
of Vrim before the Lord, Number. 27.21. But for this title given here to Joshua,
that he was Moses minister, the Lord spoke unto Joshua, Moses minister; we may
well think that was purposely added to imply one reason amongst others, why
Joshua was most fit to succeed Moses in the government, to wit, because having
been so many years together his minister, by his continual and daily
conversation with Moses he could not but learn much thereby to prepare and fit
him the better for this service.

Verse. 2. Moses my servant is dead, now therefore arise, etc.] Here the Lord
exhorts Joshua, that since Moses was dead, he should now lead the Israelites
over Jordan, and carry them into the land, which according to his former
promises made to their fathers, he was now ready to confer upon them. Now in
mentioning the death of Moses he uses this expression, Moses my servant is
dead; first, and principally, to imply what it was he required of him, to wit,
that as their captain and supreme governor he should now conduct them into the
land of Canaan, for Moses is here called Gods servant, in regard of the supreme
magistracy whereto God had advanced him, and so the drift of the words is, that
since Moses their governor was dead, he should now as his successor go before
the people in his stead: secondly, to imply, that as Moses in his magistracy
was subordinate to Gods will, and was only to do all things according to his
direction, so must it be with Joshua too: and thirdly, that by speaking thus
honorably of Moses, Moses my servant, Joshua might be encouraged faithfully to
serve God in his place, as Moses had done, that he also might gain such favor
and esteem with God as Moses had gained.

Verse. 3. Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I
given unto you, etc.] That is, every place in the land formerly promised them,
which is described and bounded in the following words, first, by the
wilderness that they had passed through, which was their South bound;
secondly, the mountain Lebanon, and the great river, the river Euphrates, which
was their North border, and thirdly, the great Sea, that is, the midland-sea,
which was their West border; as for their Eastern border that is not here
mentioned; because the Israelites were now at the East side of the land, and
the drift of these words was only to show Joshua how far the land he would
give them should reach every where from the place where they now were. Indeed,
that the Israelites did never extend the bounds of the land thus far, is
evident: for though in David's and Solomon's time all the nations as far as
Euphrates became tributaries to the crown of Israel, 1. Kings 4.21. Solomon
reigned over all kingdoms from the river, (that is, the great river Euphrates)
unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt, etc. yet they
never destroyed the inhabitants there, and planted themselves in their country
as they did in the land of Canaan: and therefore in that place before cited,
ver 25. the land of Israel is said to reach only from Dan to Beersheba as
formerly. But the reason of this was, because the people of Israel failed in
keeping covenant with God, and it was only upon condition of their obedience,
that God promised thus far to enlarge their borders.

Verse. 5. As I was with Moses so I will be with thee, etc.] In these words the
Lord does not only promise Joshua to assist him as he had assisted Moses, but
withal likewise by putting him in mind of the great things he had done for
Moses, he does covertly encourage him against the fear of those mighty nations
with whom he was to encounter.

Verse. 6. Be strong and of a good courage, etc.] We find this often pressed
upon Joshua, first by Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.7. And Moses called unto Joshua and said
unto him, in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and of a good courage, etc. for
which he had a special command from God, Deuteronomy. 1.38. and 3.28. Charge Joshua,
and encourage him, and strengthen him, etc. secondly, by the Lord himself,
Deuteronomy. 31.23. and so again three several times in this chapter here, and verse.
7. and verse. 9. and last of all, by the people. And why was this? not because
Joshua had discovered any faintheartednesse or cowardice; but first, because
the work he was to undertake was so weighty and perilous, and that not only
in regard of those many and mighty nations whom he was to destroy and plant the
Israelites in their room, but especially also in regard of the stubbornness of
the people whom he was to govern, of whose rebellion against Moses, yea against
God, he had often been an eyewitness: secondly, because the Lord knew well
that Joshua had humble and low thoughts of himself, and feared much his
insufficiency for so great a charge, as indeed the wiser and the more able men
are, the more jealous they are of themselves in such cases: and thirdly,
because even those that are best resolved do yet need to be quickened and
stirred up; and that principally, lest they should shrink from doing exactly
what God has enjoined them for fear of any difficulty that may lie in their
way: of which God gives Joshua special warning in the following verse, Only
be thou strong and very courageous, that thou may observe to do according to
all the Law which Moses my servant commanded thee, etc.

For unto this people shall thou divide for an inheritance, the land, etc.] As
if he had said, this I have appointed to be thy honor, and therefore be not
afraid to undertake the charge. And indeed this was the principal thing
wherein Joshua was a type of Christ; Moses did not carry the Israelites into
the land of Canaan, but Moses being dead Joshua did it: so neither could the
Law carry us into the heavenly Canaan; for by the righteousness of the Law can
no man be saved: but Christ, our Jesus, our Savior has by his merits opened a
way for us into the heavenly Canaan, and is gone before to prepare a place for
us, John 14.2, 3. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go to prepare a
place for you, I will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am,
there you may be also.

Verse. 7. Turn not from it to the right hand, or to the left, that thou may
prosper whithersoever thou go.] If we read the words as it is in our
Bibles, then there is here a promise employed, That if Joshua did strictly
observe Gods law, not yielding any way to turn aside from that rule, he should
prosper in every thing that he undertook. But if we read the last clause as it
is in the margin of our Bibles, that thou may do wisely whithersoever thou
go; then the drift of these words must be, either to give Joshua to
understand, that it would be his greatest wisdom to do in all things as God in
his Law had enjoined him, whatever his own reason might suggest to the
contrary; which agrees with that of the Prophet, Jer. 8.9. They have rejected
the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Or else, to assure him, that
if he did sincerely observe to do all things according to Gods law, then the
Lord would more abundantly pour forth the spirit of wisdom upon him; which
agrees with that of David, Psalm. 25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord?
him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose: and that of our Savior,
Matthew. 13.12. Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance.

Verse. 8. This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, etc.] The
book of the Law which Moses wrote, was delivered to the Levites, to be laid up
by them in the side of the ark, Deuteronomy. 31.25, 26. it was therefore a copy of
this law, whereof the Lord here spoke to Joshua, This book of the Law shall not
depart out of thy mouth; and the meaning of this is, that by frequent and
continual reading and conference, he should labor to be so expert in it, that
in all his judgments he should be able readily to judge as it was in that Law
determined, and in all other things to order himself according to the
directions which were there given.

Verse. 11. Prepare you victuals, for within three days you shall pass over
Jordan.] For though as yet they had that manna from heaven, yet where other
meat might be had, they were not debarred the eating of it. See Deuteronomy. 2.6. Now
though the story of the spies that were sent to view Jericho, be related in the
following chapter, yet doubtless this charge given by the Officers to the
people, for preparing victuals for themselves against they were to pass over
Jordan, was given them after they were returned from Jericho. For this charge
was given but three days before they were to go over Jordan, and the spies
stayed three days in the mountains for fear of those that pursued them as they
returned from Jericho, chap. 2.22.

Verse. 14. But ye shall pass before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of
valor.] That is, you shall pass over Jordan together with your brethren, and
all that pass over shall be mighty men of valor, or of the prime choice of
your armies: for that Joshua left garrisons in every city of these tribes for
the guard of those they left behind them, is evident. See Numb. 32.21.

Verse. 17. According as we hearkened to Moses in all things, so will we hearken
unto thee.] That is, as we acknowledged Moses and obeyed him as our supreme
Magistrate, so will we likewise obey thee. Nor need we wonder that they should
thus express themselves, because of the frequent rebellion of this people
against Moses: For first, that mutinous generation were all destroyed in the
wilderness, and it was their posterity, that had been more obsequious to
Moses, that made this promise. And secondly, even the people formerly had
ordinarily yielded obedience to Moses, though now and then they brake into
rebellion against him.

Only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.] That is, the Lord
prosper thee in all thy proceedings and attempts, as he prospered Moses: and
this they add, either only by occasion of the mention they had made of Moses
in the former words, the high and precious esteem they always had of him
causing them thus abruptly to break forth into this wish or prayer, That the
Lord would be with him as he was with Moses; or else, to intimate an
acknowledgment, that however they would be ready to go over with their
brethren, and aid them against the inhabitans of Canaan; yet it was not so much
their help as the Lords help that must make them victorious: We will, say they,
pass over Jordan, and do in all things what thou shall enjoin us, only the
Lord, that wrought so great things for us under the government of Moses, afford
us the same assistance and favor under thy government too.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ANd Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men, to spy
secretly saying, Go view the land even Jericho.] That is, the city of Jericho,
and the land about it. This Joshua did before he gave that charge to the people
which is related in the former chapter, verse. 10. though it be here inserted
after it, as is there noted. Considering what a mischief formerly followed upon
Moses his sending forth of spies to search the land, Deuteronomy. 1.27, 28. it may
seem strange that Joshua durst take this course again: but therefore it is most
probable that Joshua did not this without some special direction from God; and
then no wonder it is, though this succeeded well when that did not; for that
proceeded first from a motion made by the people, out of some secret fear and
distrust, as is noted upon Numb. 13.2. but here now the people had no hand in
it; and therefore there were not now twelve chief men chosen for this service
out of all the tribes, as there were then, but Joshua only chose two men whom
he knew able and fit for this employment, and these two he sent away secretly
without the knowledge of the people (for that I conceive is employed in this
word secretly; not only that they were ordered to carry themselves closely and
cunningly, perhaps in some disguise, that they might not be discovered, which
all spies are wont to do, but also that they were sent away privily without any
knowledge of the people, that so the business might be carried the more
covertly) and therefore we see also that when these spies returned, they gave
an account of what they had done only to Joshua, verse. 23, 24. whenas those
that Moses sent returned their answer to all the Congregation, Numb. 13.26.
However, if Joshua had not a special direction from God for the doing of this,
yet doubtless he did it not out of any secret distrust or fear, but out of a
necessary providence that became a General, that he might the better know what
course to take when they were gotten over into Canaan. For though God had
assured him that he should drive out the inhabitants of the land, yet he knew
that God expected that he should use all requisite means that might conduce
thereto, and therefore intending first to attempt Jericho, which was the
nearest city of note to the river Jordan, he sent spies thither to view the
city and land about it, to see how it was fortified, of what strength and
courage the people were, what preparations the inhabitants had made to resist
them, and which way they might best pass into the city.

And they went and came into an harlots house named Rahab, etc.] In passing
from Shittim to Jericho, they must needs pass over Jordan, which they might do
by those foords mentioned, verse. 7. And the men pursued after them the way to
Jordan unto the foords: and again, Judge. 3.28. As for their taking up their
lodging in Rahabs house when they came to Jericho, this they did, either
because in her house built upon the town wall, verse. 15. they might the more
conveniently view the fortifications and strength of the city, or because in
such an obscure corner they might be the better concealed, and were not so
likely to be discovered; or because thence they might most conveniently slip
away, if they should be discovered. The Hebrew word here translated an harlot,
is by some translated an hostess or victualler: but every where else
signifies an harlot, and is so here taken by the Apostles testimony, Heb.
11.31. By faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not.
James 2.25. Likewise also, was not Rahab the harlot justified by works? whence
it was perhaps that verse. 13. amongst those whose lives she pleads for, there
is no mention neither of husband nor children, though she lived in a house
apart from her father; yet was this woman by the special grace of God not
only won to embrace the faith of Israel, and to join her self to Gods
people; but besides, after her conversion she was married to Salmon a Prince of
the tribe of Judah, and so was of the stock of whom David, yea Christ
descended, Matthew. 1.5. a notable instance of the freedom of Gods grace, to
show mercy to them that are most unworthy of it.

Verse. 2. Behold there came men in hither to night of the children of Israel,
to search out the country.] That is, late in the evening, that so they might
the better pass undiscerned; and indeed their sudden discovery makes it
probable that it was by watchmen, purposely set to observe those that came into
the city, as in dangerous times they use.

Verse. 4. And the woman took the two men and hid them.] To wit, either before
the messengers of the King came to her house, having heard some muttering of
the business amongst her neighbors, or whilst they knocked at her gates
perceiving them to be messengers sent from the King. And this was that noble
act of faith, for which Rahab is so highly extolled in the Scriptures: Heb.
11.13. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when
she had received the spies with peace. Having heard of the great things which
God had done for the Israelites, by a special and extraordinary persuasion of
Gods spirit, she did verily believe that God had determined that this people
should destroy the inhabitants of the land, and dwell in their room, therefore
resolved to do what she could in preserving these spies, though it were with
the hazarding of her self: and thus though it be gross treachery in it self
for man or woman to hide those that seek the ruin of their country, and when
they are sought for, to make way for their escape; yet this in Rahab was
commendable, and that because she did it in faith, and to further that which
she knew God would have done, whose will is the sure rule both of good and
evil: and besides, she knew the Israelites would certainly take the city,
though these spies should have been apprehended.

There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were, etc.] In this answer
of Rahab to the Kings messengers, first, she plainly and readily, without any
stumbling, confesses what she knew was certainly known, and could not
therefore be denied, to wit, that there did two strangers that evening come
into her house, and that as hoping by her ingenuous confession hereof, to make
them the readier to believe what she meant further to say: But then in the next
words she does directly deceive them with a feigned tale: For four lies are
manifest in the following words, first, That she wist not whence they were:
secondly, verse. 5. That about the time of shutting of the gate the men went
out, that is, out of the city: thirdly, That whether they were gone she wot
not: and fourthly, That if they pursued after them quickly, they might overtake
them. Nor need we wonder that Rahab should be so highly commended for this she
did, seeing she spoke that in so many particulars which she knew was not true;
her seeking to hide the spies was an act of faith, very pleasing to God, but
her lying to the messengers was an infirmity, which God was pleased to pass
over: and thus indeed corruption does usually intermingle it self in the best
actions of the servants of God, and makes them do the good they do lamely and
imperfectly.

Verse. 5. Pursue after them quickly, for ye shall overtake them.] Thus by
intimating the necessity of a speedy pursuit, and by giving them hope of
overtaking them if they would immediately pursue them, she made semblance as if
she desired they might be apprehended, and withal, put them off from that
exact search, which otherwise they would surely have made.

Verse. 6. But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them
with the stalks of flax, etc.] Their houses being built plain on the top like
the leads of our churches, there she had spread the stalks of flax that they
might be dried by the sun, and under those she hid them.

Verse. 7. And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the foords.]
That is, being fully possessed with an opinion, that they should overtake and
apprehend these spies of Israel, they never searched her house any further,
but, as Rahab had advised them, away presently they went out of the city in the
pursuit of them; wherein the overuling power of God infatuating these men was
clearly discovered, there being indeed no just reason why the words of an
harlot, without any evidence given of the proof of what she said, should so
easily have beaten them off from the search of her house.

And as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the
gate.] That is, as soon as the Kings messengers were gone out of the city to
pursue after the spies, the men of the city shut the gates, as thinking
thereby to make sure that if they were not yet gone out, as Rahab had said they
were, they should not get out afterward: and this is noted, first, to show the
perilous straits the poor spies were still left in, being thus shut up in an
enemies city without any possible way, as it might seem, of escape: and
secondly, to intimate how herein also God did infatuate the inhabitants of the
city, who though they thought of preventing the escape of the spies if they
were not already gone out, and were thereupon so cautelous to shut the gates so
soon as ever the Kings messengers were gone forth, yet never minded the setting
of scouts and watchmen about the walls of the city to prevent likewise their
escaping that way. But thus God is wont to cause the wisdom of the wise to
perish, as the prophet speaks, Esa. 29.14.

Verse. 8. And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof.]
That is, before the men of the city were laid down, of whom mention was made in
the foregoing verse, she stayed not till all were gone to rest, but so soon as
the gate was shut, she went up unto the spies on the roof; or if we understand
it of the spies to whom she went up, the meaning must be this, that before they
were returned from that place where they were hid, to their beds, there to lie
down and take their rest, she came up to them upon the roof, etc. she did not
suffer them to take their rest there that night, because the danger was over,
and then send them away the next day, but presently went up to them to satisfy
them what was done (for lying in that condition they could not but long to know
the event) and having then made a covenant with them, immediately let them down
out at the window.

Verse. 9. And she said unto the men, I know the Lord has given you the land,
etc.] Doubtless she did first acquaint them with that which had passed betwixt
the Kings messengers and her; but to avoid the repeating again of that which
was before related, the story here begins with the profession she makes to them
of her confidence that the Israelites would certainly drive out her people and
possess their land, making this the ground of that she had done even to the
manifest hazarding of her own life for their preservation, and of the request
she afterward makes to them, that they should spare her and her fathers house,
when they took Jericho. And indeed observable it is, that whereas the
Israelites knew that this had been promised to their fathers for many
generations, and had heard that promise often confirmed to them by Moses, and
had seen the great things which God had done for them, and yet notwithstanding
did ever and anon stagger and fear, this poor woman, which had only heard of a
report of the wonders which God had done for them, was confidently persuaded
that God would give them the land, and made no question of it, I know, says
she, that the Lord has given you the land; insomuch that whilst these spies
were as yet in such a desperate danger in the eye of reason, being locked up in
a city of their enemies, and not knowing how to escape away, she could beg of
them for kindness and mercy to be shown to her and hers, no otherwise then if
they had taken the city already, and so all the lives of the inhabitants had
been at their disposing. As for their talking thus together being of two
several nations, we need not question that, for certainly the language of the
Canaanites and other neighboring nations was not in those times much different
from that of the Hebrew, as by many names both of men and cities amongst the
Canaanites is very evident.

Verse. 12. Swear unto me by the Lord, since I have showed you kindness, that
ye will also show kindness unto my fathers house.] The kindness which Rahab
here says she had shown to the spies, was not only her hiding them from the
Kings messengers, but also the project she had devised and resolved upon for
the letting of them down out of her window (and indeed the other had been but a
small kindness to them without this) and therefore questionless she had
acquainted them with her resolution herein, though that be not expressed.

Verse. 12. And give me a true token.] That is, a sign whereby we may make our
selves known to the Israelites when they take the city, and wherein you will be
true and faithful to us, and when you see it, spare us from the general
destruction.

Verse. 14. And the men answered her our life for yours.] This is spoken by way
of oath and execration, which Rahab had desired of them, verse. 12. as if they
had said, May destruction light upon us, if we take not such order that you and
yours shall be preserved.

If ye utter not this our business.] To bind her the more strictly, say some
Expositours, to persevere in this she had begun to do, and not to discover them
so soon as they were gone. They annex this condition, and thereby give her a
hint, that if she brought them in danger by discovering them, though God should
preserve them by some other means, yet she must expect no mercy from them. But
I rather conceive that the business they here speak of, is chiefly that
compact betwixt them agreed upon concerning the preservation of her and hers,
and the sign whereby they were to know her house, as seems probable verse. 20.
where the spies having spoken of this compact betwixt them, they then repeat
these words, If thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of this
thine oath. The meaning whereof is, that if by uttering that agreement which
they had made, others besides her kindred should crowd into her house, or by
using the same token of hanging out a scarlet thread, think to preserve their
households also from the public destruction, they would not then be bound by
their oath to afford her or hers any mercy.

Verse. 16. And she said unto them, Get you to the mountains, etc.] Some
conceive that this conference betwixt them which here follows, was before she
let the spies out at her window: But the contrary is evident, verse. 18. where
they speak of her letting them down out at the window as a thing already done,
Thou shall bind this line of scarlet thread in the window which thou did let
us down by. Indeed it is probable that the spies had before they were let down
agreed with her (though that be not expressed) that the line of scarlet thread,
which she had in a readiness to let them down by, should hang out at her
window, that thereby the Israelites might know her house when they came against
the city. But this which is here related was doubtless spoken after the men
were down, in the still of the night, the woman looking down to them out at her
window.

Verse. 17. And the men said, We will be blameless of this thine oath, etc.]
That is, we would not be found faulty in not keeping the oath which thou have
caused us to swear, nor would we be thought faulty therein when indeed we are
not; this therefore they premise as the reason they desired to have it cleared
fully betwixt them upon what conditions they had swore to secure her and hers;
and accordingly they propound three conditions in the following words: first,
that the line of scarlet thread, whereby they were let down, must be hanged out
at the window, as the token whereby the house should be known; and if therefore
through neglecting to do this, the Israelites should break into her house and
offer them any violence, they would be guiltless: secondly, that her father,
mother, brethren, and kindred should come home to her house and abide there;
and therefore if any of them were killed not being in the house, that should be
no breach of their oath: and thirdly, that she should by no means utter this
which had passed betwixt them to any body whatever, and if therefore others
should delude them by hanging out a scarlet thread at their window also, they
would not be bound by their oath to save neither the one nor the other.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. ANd Joshua rose early in the morning, and they removed from Shittim,
etc.] By the inference of this upon that which went before in the latter end of
the foregoing chapter, concerning the return of the spies which he had sent
from Jericho, it may seem that having heard from them the report which they
made of the fear of the inhabitants, he rose early the very next morning and
went away with all the Israelites from Shittim to Jordan; but if we thus
understand this place, then it must necessarily be yielded, that before the
spies returned to him, he had given that charge to the Israelites by the
Officers, whereof mention was made before, chap. 1.11. to wit, that they should
prepare themselves victuals, and that because within three days they should
pass over Jordan. For that charge was certainly given them at Shittim, (it
could not be given them when they came to Jordan, where they lodged only one
night, as it is said here, and then passed over the next day) and must needs
therefore be given them before the spies came back, if Joshua went away from
Shittim the very next morning after their return. But now, because it is very
improbable that Joshua would appoint the people to prepare to pass over Jordan
within three days, when as yet he could not tell whether the spies would
return within that time or no, neither was it to any purpose to send them if he
had not resolved to wait for their return, that according to the information
they should give him they might order their journey, therefore I conceive
rather, that the drift of these words is only to show, that when they removed
from Shittim to Jordan, Joshua rose early in the morning that day, to dispose
of all things for their intended journey, and not that it was early the next
morning after the spies returned. And so in this order I conceive those things
were done which are here related: First, after the return of the spies, the
people being much encouraged by the tidings they brought, Joshua commanded the
Officers of the people (as is noted before, chap. 1.10, 11.) saying, Pass
through the host and command the people, saying, Prepare you victuals, for
within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan: Secondly, when the people
had according to this direction made provision for their journey, Joshua rose
early in the morning, and they removed from Shittim and came to Jordan. And
then thirdly, the three days being expired after which they had been told they
should pass over Jordan (and that was the very day it seems when they were
come to Jordan) Joshua again sent the officers through the host to give
direction to the people, how they should follow the ark the next day in passing
over the river Jordan; and this is that which follows in the next verse, And it
came to pass after three days that the officers went through the host, etc.

Verse. 3. When ye see the Ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, and the
Priests the Levites bearing it, etc.] See the note upon Numb. 4.15.

Verse. 4. Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
cubits by measure, etc. As near as they could guess by their eye: and two
thousand cubits was a thousand yards of our measure. But why were the people
enjoined, in following the ark as it was carried by the Priests before them to
lead them over Jordan, to keep so far behind it? I answer, first, That all
Expositours do jointly agree, that this was partly to teach them to fear the
Lord their God, of whose presence amongst them the ark was a sign. But
secondly, another reason is here rendered in the following words, Come not near
unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go: for ye have not passed
this way heretofore. The meaning whereof is somewhat questionable: for there
are some that conceive of these words thus; to wit, That they were enjoined to
keep thus far behind the ark, to the end they might all the more commodiously
see the ark when the Priests went with it into the river Jordan, and how the
waters of the river were divided before them, and so might know the way by
which they were to go. But I see not how their being two thousand cubits behind
the ark, could be an advantage for the seeing of this, and not rather a
hinderance; unless we suppose that being so far behind the ark, they were
upon the asscent of a hill, which led down to the river Jordan, from whence
they might behold how the Priests went on with the ark, and entered the river.
Better therefore, I conceive, these words may be understood thus, Come not near
unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go: That is, that the
Priests bearing the ark may discover a sure and safe passage for you through
the river, before you come near to enter into it. Indeed when the river was
divided before them, there could be no question of seeing the way they were to
go. But as yet God did not make known to them the miracle he meant to work, but
held them as it were in suspense, only intimating the danger of this passage,
by commanding this distance betwixt the ark and them, to the end the Lord by
the ark which went before them, might find out a safe way for them, before they
might offer to set a foot in the channel. And thus this foregoing apprehension
of the danger of the passage, might make them with the more admiration and
thankfulness acknowledge the mercy of the following miracle.

Verse. 5. And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify your selves, etc.] To wit,
by endeavoring to bring your hearts to a holy temper, with all faith and
reverence and admiration to observe the great works which God will do for you:
and happily also by those Legal rites of washing their clothes, and keeping
themselves apart from their wives, formerly likewise enjoined at the giving the
Law. See Exodus 19. ver. 10. and 15.

Verse. 7. This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel.]
Herein was Joshua a type of Christ whom God magnified at his first entrance
upon the public discharge of his Office, to wit, at his baptism, Mat. 3.16,
17. And Jesus when he was baptized, went straightway out of the water: and lo,
the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the spirit of God descending like
a dove, and lighting upon him. And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my
beloved son, in whom I am well pleased; as he did also afterward by his many
miracles, for he was a man approved of God amongst them, by miracles, and
signs, and wonders, which God did by him in the midst of them, Acts 2.22.

Verse. 8. When you are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand
still in Jordan.] This is meant only of a little stop the priests were to make
upon their first setting their feet into the waters of Jordan (which had at
that time overflowed the banks, verse. 15.) namely till thereupon the Lord had
miraculously divided the waters, and opened a fair passage for them and the
people to go through. For that being done, the priests went immediately forward
with the ark upon their shoulders into the midst of Jordan. And then indeed
they stood still there till all the people were gone over, as it is afterward
expressed, verse. 17. And the priests that bare the ark of the Covenant of the
Lord, stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan; and all the Israelites
passed over on dry ground, until the people were passed clean over Jordan.

Verse. 10. He will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites and
Hittites, etc.] See the note upon Deuteronomy. 7.1.

Verse. 12. Now therefore take ye twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out of
every tribe a man.] Here it is not expressed for what employment these twelve
men were to be chosen; but Chap. 4.2. we are told for what service it was,
namely, to take twelve stones out of the midst of the river, and to set them up
in Gilgal as a memorial of this miraculous passage. For that they are the same
here spoken of seems employed, chap. 4.4. where it is said, at the second
repeating this charge, that Joshua called the twelve men whom he had prepared,
to wit, before they passed over Jordan. Yet the giving the charge here may also
happily implie, that the same twelve men were also to go along with the Priests
that they might be the more present eyewitnesses of this miraculous work of
Jordans dividing.

Verse. 13. As Soon as the soles of the feet of the Priests that bare the ark of
the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, etc.] Here Joshua makes known to the
people the miracle that God intended to work to give them entrance into the
land of Canaan, namely, that the Lord would divide the waters of Jordan before
them, that so they might pass over on dry land. And observable it is, that in
relating this to them, first, he particularly informs them that this should be
done at the very first setting of the Priests feet that bare the ark in the
waters of Jordan, thereby to assure them both that it was the Lord their God,
of whose presence the ark was a sign, by whose almighty power the waters
should be divided; and likewise that the Lord did this for them because of the
Covenant which he had made with them, whence that is so often repeated, verse.
11. and again, verse. 14. that it was the ark of the Covenant that passed over
before them. And secondly, that they might not question the Lords doing of this
he puts them in mind of the Lords sovereigne power in ruling and governing the
whole world under this Title, the Lord of all the earth: As Soon (says he) as
the soles of the feet of the Priests that bare the ark of the Lord, the Lord of
all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, the waters of Jordan shall
be cut off, etc.

Verse. 15. For Jordan overfloweth all his banks at the time of harvest.] To
wit, of barly-harvest, which was in that hot country in their first month,
called Abib or Nisan, the month wherein the Passover was kept (as is evident
Levit. 23.10. where it is said, that at the feast they were to bring a sheaf of
the first fruits of their harvest unto the Priest) and therefore we find it
elsewhere so expressed, 1. Chron. 12.15. These are they that went over Jordan
in the first month when it had overflown all his banks. And indeed observable
it is, that the Lord brought his people into the land of Canaan in harvest
time, just when it was ready furnished with the fruits of the earth that were
to be for their provision and store the following year. As for Jordans
overflowing his banks at this time, either it was the nature of this river so
to do: or else it was, as some conceive, because the sun growing hot at this
time of the year great streams of water came running down from the mountains
about Jordan, by reason of the melting of the snow that lay there, and so
caused the river to overflow his banks. But however, the reasons why this
clause is here inserted we may conceive to be these: First, to show how God did
herein try the faith of the Israelites, seeming herein as it were to oppose
their entrance into the land. Secondly, to show the necessity of the
miraculous dividing of the waters of Jordan, because by reason of this
inundation of the waters they could not pass over the foords as at other
times. Thirdly, to show how the feet of the Priests could touch the brim of the
waters as is said in the foregoing words before they came at the channel, in a
place convenient for them to stand on awhile; it was because Jordan at that
time overflowed his banks.

Verse. 16. The waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an
heap, etc.] The meaning of the first clause of this verse concerning the waters
above the place where Jordan was divided is not much questioned by expositours,
all in a manner making this to be the meaning of them, that those upper waters
stood firm as a wall, swelling continually and rising up higher and higher even
as far backward as from the city Adam that is besides Zaretan, unto the
place where the Israelites passed over: and that by reason of the successive
coming down of the waters from above, and their stay in that place, where they
were bounded and barred up by the Almighty power of God. But now the second
clause, which speaks of waters beneath the place where the river was divided,
and those that came down toward the sea of the plain, even the salt sea,
failed and were cut off, is somewhat more questionable; and that because some
by the failing and cutting off those lower waters understand only this, that
they rolled a little way toward the salt sea, till there was a space broad
enough for the people to go over, and then not being supplied still as before
by the waters from above, failed and were cut off from the upper waters, and
there stood on a heap, verse. 13. and so the ground lay bare for the Israelites
to pass over. But then others again, by the failing and cutting off those
waters understand that those lower waters, after they were divided from those
that were above, passing away by degrees toward the dead sea, they failed and
were cut off for want of a supply from above, and so the whole channel down
toward the sea was left quite without water. And this I conceive is most
agreeable to the words of the Text.

Verse. 17. And all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the
people were passed clean over Jordan.] That is, the waters of Jordan being thus
divided, the whole people of Israel went quietly over, there being no body on
the other side to withstand them; which is indeed very observable. It has
always been the constant policy of all nations to guard the rivers through
which the enemy must pass into their countries, because there they have a
great advantage over them to hinder their entrance into their land: and how was
it then that the Canaanites had not then set a guard upon these foords of
Jordan? I answer, Sure, because they were confidently persuaded that the
Israelites could not have passed over by reason of the overflowing of Jordan at
that time; or else, because God had stricken them with such a fear and
trembling of heart that they durst not stir out of their walled cities; or
else, because he had infatuated them and deprived them of that wisdom which is
ordinarily found in other men for the defense of their country against an
enemy.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 2. TAke ye twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man, etc.]
being passed over Jordan the Lord repeats the charge given them before, chap.
1. verse. 12. And indeed therefore was it there only briefly touched because it
was to be here again more largely expressed.

Verse. 3. Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the place where the
Priests feet stood firm, twelve stones, etc.] In the seventh verse the reason
is expressed why these twelve stones were to be taken up out of Jordan, about
the place where the Priests had stood with the ark, and to be carried to the
place where they were to lodge that night, which was Gilgal, verse. 19. namely
that they might there stand as a memorial to succeeding generations of this
miraculous work, when the Lord was pleased to divide Jordan before the ark that
the twelve tribes might pass over to take possession of the land which he had
given them for an inheritance: But may some say, seeing the tribes of Reuben
and Gad, and one half of the tribe of Manasseh, had already their inheritance
assigned them without Jordan, yea and were already in possession of it, why
were these tribes with the rest to testify their thankfulness by setting up
this memorial of Gods miraculous dividing of Jordan before them? Now for the
answer of this, it is not enough to say, that about forty thousand of these
tribes went over Jordan at this time with the rest of their brethren to assist
them in their wars, and that because these stones were set up in the name of
the whole tribes, and therefore the question still remains why these tribes
were to come in for a share in erecting this monument of Gods praise, that had
for their particular no share in the mercy? The truer answer therefore I
conceive to be this, That these tribes were to join with the rest herein,
first, Because the whole people of Israel though consisting of twelve several
tribes were yet all one body, and therefore no good could be done to any of the
tribes, but the whole body must needs have an interest in it, and ought to be
thankful for it: and secondly, Because hereby they might show that the land
which was allotted them without Jordan was a part of that land of promise, the
possession whereof was thankfully acknowledged in those twelve stones which
were now set up in Gilgal.

Verse. 9. And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, etc.] even
this also no doubt the Lord had given in charge to Joshua, though it be not
expressed, and that for the same end that the other were set in Gilgal. For
though they were hid under water yet the report of their being there set might
be a memorial of that great work; and besides, at a low ebb they might
happily be seen, at least the dashing of the waters against them might be
perceived.

And they are there unto this day.] This clause could not be written by Joshua;
and yet that proves not that Joshua wrote not this book; since many such
passages we find here and there even in the books of Moses.

Verse. 10. For the Priests that bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan
until every thing was finished that the Lord commanded Joshua to speak unto
the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua.] This clause,
according to all that Moses commanded Joshua, cannot be so understood, as if
Moses had particularly commanded Joshua that which was now done by the Priests
and people in their passage over Jordan. For Moses had never spoken of any such
thing to Joshua, but Joshua had received these directions immediately from God.
But the meaning of these words is only this, that all was done as God
commanded Joshua, which was according to what Moses had given Joshua in charge:
Moses had commanded Joshua to see that all things were done according to the
word of the Lord, and so it was in this particular of their passage over
Jordan, according to the charge he had received from Moses, all things were
done as the Lord commanded.

And the people hasted and passed over.] This haste which they made in passing
over was not so much because a multitude of people were to pass over in a few
hours, and were afterward to go as far as Gilgal that day, as from their
fear and weakness of faith; the sight of that mountain of waters which seemed
ready to overwhelm them could not but scare them, and hence it was that every
man made all the speed he could out of that vale of the shadow of death. Now
this is the rather added in this place, the more hereby to extol the faith of
the priests, who stood still without moving in the midst of Jordan till the
whole camp of Israel were gotten over into the land of Canaan, and all other
things were done concerning the stones set up in Gilgal, and in the midst of
Jordan, as God had appointed.

Verse. 13. About forty thousand prepared for war passed over, etc.] To wit,
of Ruben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, the rest being left in garrison
for the defense of the land, their wives, children, and cattle: for at the
last numbering of the people, there was of the Reubenites forty three thousand
seven hundred and thirty, and of the Gadites forty thousand five hundred,
Numb. 26.7, 18. besides the half of Manassehs tribe, who were in all fifty two
thousand seven hundred, Numb. 26.34.

Verse. 19. And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first
month.] Which was the very day whereon, by the Law, the lamb for the
Passover was to be set apart, Exodus 12.3. And hereby it is clear, that it was
full forty years within four or five days, from the coming of the Israelites
out of Egypt, to their entrance into the land of promise; for they came out of
Egypt on the fifteenth day of the first month, and now on the tenth day of the
first month they entered the land of Canaan.

Verse. 23. For the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you
until ye were passed over, etc.] The Israelites are appointed thus to answer
their children for many generations after, when they should inquire concerning
those stones that were set up in Gilgal, even as if that miracle had been
wrought for them in their own persons, the Lord your God dried up the waters of
Jordan from before you, etc. and that because in that the Lord did this for
their Ancestors, he did it for them, who were then in the loins of their
Ancestors, and that in regard of the profession of the same faith, they might
look upon that which was done for their Ancestors, as a pledge of his fatherly
love to them also, and his care of their welfare.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. AT that time the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives and
circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.] In this charge which
the Lord gave to Joshua for the circumcising of the children of Israel, to wit,
those that were born in their travels through the wilderness who had not been
hitherto circumcised, there are many things questionable; as first, the time
when this charge was given to Joshua, it is said here, that at that time the
Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives etc. which has manifest relation
to that which went before; but may be meant, either, that God gave them that
charge on the tenth day of the first month mentioned in the former chapter,
verse. 19. presently after they were passed over Jordan, (and indeed later then
so this charge could not be given; for they were doubtless circumcised on the
eleventh day, the very next day after their passing over Jordan, or else the
anguish of their cutting, which used to be greatest on the third day after
circumcision, Genesis 34.25. could not be, in any good measure, over on the
fourteenth day at even, when they were to celebrate the Passover) or else in a
larger extent, namely, that at that time when God gave them directions for
their passing over Jordan, and those other things formerly related, he gave
them also this charge, that when they were passed over Jordan they should
circumcise those of the people that were as yet uncircumcised; and this may be
thought the more probable; first, because then they might have the more time to
provide the sharp knives here mentioned: and secondly, because then they might
take order for the circumcising those of the two tribes and a half, whom they
had left behind them on the other side Jordan, as likewise for their
celebrating the Passover, who in all probability were not left uncircumcised,
when the rest of their brethren were circumcised. Secondly, what these knives
were which Joshua was appointed to prepare for this service. The word in the
Original is translated by some, knives of edges, or sharp knives, and by
others, knives of flints (for the word will bear both translations) and
accordingly, some concieve that Joshua was here enjoined to make so many sharp
flints, or knives of flints, as were requisite for this service: and that
because this tended the better to shadow forth our circumcision by Christ, who
is our rock: and others again conceive that he was only to provide knives or
rasours well sharpened wherewith to circumcise them; and indeed 1. because in
the first institution of circumcision we find no such thing prescribed, as that
it should be done with stones: and 2. because it cannot be well conceived how
knives of flints, for the speedy circumcising of so many hundred thousand men
could be on such a sudden purposely made, therefore I conceive that the
sharpning, or at least the getting in a readiness so many knives exactly
sharpened, is all that was here enjoined Joshua: Thirdly, why the Lord commanded
this to be done immediately upon their entrance into Canaan: of which these
reasons may be given, to wit, 1. because being come to Gilgal, where the camp
continued many years, and so not being to remove from one place to another as
they had done formerly at the removal of the cloud, they had not that reason
to forbear circumcision now, which they had before. 2. that this might signify
to them that it was by virtue of that covenant which God had made with their
fathers, whereof circumcision was the outward seal, that they were now put into
possession of the land of Canaan, and might the more courageously encounter the
inhabitants, having received this badge of their adoption, the sign of
circumcision: 3. that God might hereby make trial of their faith: and indeed a
very hard trial it was if it be well considered. All that were the flower and
strength of their armies were now to be circumcised, to wit, all that were born
since their coming out of Egypt, and that was all under forty years of age:
and when they lay sore of their circumcision, how easy a matter it had been
for their enemies, after the routing of those of the more aged that were not
now circumcised, to have come upon the rest, and to have cut all their throats,
we may see by the slaughter which the two sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi,
made amongst the Shechemites when they lay in the same condition, Genesis 34.25,
26. So that nothing could be more dangerous then that which God now enjoined
them. Had this been done when they were on the other side Jordan where the
inhabitants were already destroyed, it might have been done far more safely
and securely: but now when they were hemmed in by the river Jordan in the land
of their enemies, to weaken themselves so far, that if they should come
suddenly upon them, as they had reason to expect, they could be no way able to
make any resistance; this was all one, in the sight of reason, as if they had
been commanded to bind one another hand and foot, that the people of the land
might come upon them and massacre them all. And thus I say the Lord made trial
of their faith, to wit, whether in confidence of his protection they would do
whatever he enjoined them, though it seemed never so perilous in the judgment
of their own reason. 4, because on the fourteenth day of this month at even
they were to eat the Passover, of which none might eat that were
uncircumcised, Exodus 12.48. No uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. Yea,
when they were once in possession of the land of Canaan, they were to observe
all the precepts of the ceremonial Law exactly, Deuteronomy. 12.8, 9, 10. and
circumcision was the seal of the covenant whereby they were bound to the
keeping of these Laws, whence it is, that the Apostle says, Gal. 5.3. that
every man that is circumcised, is a debtor to the whole Law. But last of all,
it may be questioned, why the circumcising of the Israelites given now in
charge to Joshua, is called circumcising them again the second time? And to
this I answer, that the reason of this is, not because those that had been
circumcised before were to be now circumcised again, (for that could not be)
but because this ordinance of circumcision, which had been for some years
omitted, was now to be put in practice again; Circumcise again the children of
Israel the second time: That is, set on foot again the use of the Sacrament,
which had now been forborne and intermitted these forty years. The first time
of circumcising was from the time that it was first enjoined Abraham unto their
coming out of Egypt; since then they had not used it; and thence is it, that
Joshua is commanded to begin again that holy rite the second time.

Verse. 3. And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of
Israel at the hill of the foreskins.] That is, according as God had commanded,
Joshua took order for the providing of sharp knives, and for the circumcising
those of the Israelites that were as yet uncircumcised, and that was all that
were under forty years old, all that were born since their coming out of
Egypt. And indeed, considering how many thousand there were of these, and how
speedily this work was to be done, (for it was begun on the eleventh day of the
month, and was to be so speedily dispatched that they might be able to eat the
Passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even) it was not possible that
this could be done by Joshua himself, but we may rather well think, that all
that were before circumcised were employed in this service. As for the place
where this was done, it was called upon this occasion Gibeah-haazaloth, that
is, the hill of foreskins, to wit, because there they did cast away or bury the
foreskins of those that were circumcised.

Verse. 4. All the people that came out of Egypt, that were males, even all the
men of war died in the wilderness, etc.] That is, all the people that were
twenty years old and upward, Numb. 14.29. Your carcases shall fall in the
wilderness, and all that were numbered of you according to your whole number
from twenty years old, and upward, which have murmured against me.

Verse. 5. But all the people that were born in the wilderness by the way, as
they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised.] To wit, because
they were upon the way traveling toward the land of Canaan (as the words here
seem to imply) and so could not conveniently circumcise their children. For
after they were newly circumcised, rest was requisite, and it must needs be
very dangerous to remove them, whilst they yet lay sore of their circumcision;
though they stayed long in some places, yet they knew not beforehand of their
stay, but were continually in expectation to remove upon the removing of the
cloud that went before them. Had the Israelites sinned in this, it is not
likely that either God, who severely punished them for other breaches of his
Law would have passed by this so many years together unpunished, yea
unreproved; or that Moses, who smarted for the neglect of circumcision in his
own family, Exodus 4.24. would have suffered the people to run on without
check in so gross a contempt of Gods ordinance. And therefore, either God gave
them a special dispensation for this time of their travel, or else they knew
that the rite of being circumcised the eighth day, was not so enjoined that
upon no occasion it might be differred (for what if at that time the child were
sick and weak?) and therefore having so just a cause they did now intermit this
duty of circumcision till they could come into the promised land.

Verse. 7. And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua
circumcised.] That is, those that were born in their travels: For those that
were under twenty years at their coming out of Egypt being now living, were
already circumcised; so that Joshua brought into the land of Canaan, Israelites
both circumcised and uncircumcised, being herein a type of Christ, who has
made both one, Ephesians. 2.14. In whom there is no difference between Jew and
Gentile, circumcision and uncircumcision, Col. 3.11.

Verse. 8. They abode in their places in the camp till they were whole.] To wit,
no enemy attempting any thing against them, or once offering to molest them in
this their weakness, no not so much as to scare them or put them in any
fright. To try their faith and obedience, God enjoins not circumcision on the
other side of Jordan, where they might have done it more safely and securely,
without fear of their enemies taking advantage against them; but here in the
very face of their enemies: now they found that there was no danger in trusting
God, and doing what he enjoined them.

Verse. 9. And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the
reproach of Egypt from off you.] In this word rolled, the Lord seems to allude
to the manner of circumcision, to wit, because when they were circumcised,
their foreskinnes being slit up, were rolled upward, and then cut off and cast
away. But the greatest difficulty in these words, is to know, why it is said,
that in their circumcision the reproach of Egypt was rolled away from off them;
and of this there are two reasons given, both which are very probable: For
first, some by the reproach of Egypt understand the reproaches which the
Egyptians did usually cast upon the Israelites, that they were fugitives and
rebels, and had under a pretense of being Gods people, cast off the yoke of
their lawful Sovereigne; and these reproaches of the Egyptians, they say, were
now confuted by the circumcision of the Israelites, because it was the seal and
mark of the choice that God had made of them to be his peculiar people, and
that before they went down into Egypt out of Canaan, the land of promise, to
which now they were returned. Had they continued still in their uncircumcision,
wanting this badge of the special interest which God had in them, they might
have seemed liable to those reproaches which the Egyptians cast upon them; but
now by renewing this seal of the ancient covenant which God had made with them,
it was again made manifest that they had not revolted from their lawful
governors, but had only embraced that liberty to which the Lord had restored
them, who had long since taken them to be his peculiar people. But then
secondly, others again by the reproach of Egypt, understand the uncircumcision
of their flesh, and that because as circumcision was the glory of the
Israelites, as being the outward badge of the covenant betwixt God and them, to
wit, that he would be their God, and they should be his peculiar people; whence
it is that Saint Paul reckons this amongst those things whereof he might glory
in regard of the flesh, that he was circumcised the eighth day, Phil. 3.4 5. so
uncircumcision was the reproach of other nations, in that it was the sign of
their being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenant of promise, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. And thence we see with what contempt the
Israelites were wont to speak of other nations in regard of their
uncircumcision; Who is this uncircumcised Philistim, says David, that he
should defy the armies of the living God? 1. Sam. 17.26. We dare not do this
thing, say the sons of Jacob to Hamor and Shechem, to give our sister to one
that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us. Now, say they, however
uncircumcision was the common reproach of all nations, yet it is here called
particularly the reproach of Egypt, because the Israelites lived amongst them,
and were best acquainted with this reproach amongst them. Jn regard that they
came out of Egypt, and were no doubt attired like the Egyptians, had they
continued in their uncircumcision, they would have rather seemed to be
uncircumcised Egyptians, then the Israel of God; but now being circumcised,
this reproach of Egypt was rolled away from off them. And this I take to be the
best exposition of these words.

Verse. 10. And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the
Passover, etc.] Both those that were of old circumcised, and those newly
circumcised; for by the fourteenth day at even they might be well recovered of
their cutting. It seems the Passover also had been unto this time not
celebrated, at least not by them that were uncircumcised. See Exodus 12.48.

Verse. 11. And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the
Passover, unleavened cakes and parched corn in the self same day.] By parched
corn here, must needs be meant the new corn of the present year, and that
because, first, It is not probable that they used to parch any other but new
corn, whilst it was yet soft: and secondly, Because else there should be
nothing that was singular concerning this day noted in these words. For
doubtless they did eat unleavened bread the day before this, together with the
Passover; they are the express words of the law of the Passover, Exodus 12.8.
They shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread;
and therefore that which is here noted concerning this morrow after the
Passover, is, that then they did eat both unleavened cakes of the old corn of
the land (which they might get out of the barns and granaries of the villages
about them, the inhabitants being fled into the defenced cities, or further up
into the country) and likewise of the new corn of that year parched, the self
same day: for it was now just harvest time, as was noted before, Chap. 3.15.
when they entered Canaan. That which is most questionable in these words, is,
what day it was that is called here, the morrow after the Passover? Some hold
that it was on the fifteenth day of the month, and that because the Passover
was killed on the fourteenth day at even, Exodus 12.16. But because it is
evident that by the Law of God they might not eat of the new corn of the land,
till they had brought a sheaf of the first fruits of their harvest unto the
Priests, Levit. 23.14, Ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green
ears until the self same day that ye have brought an offering unto your God;
and that they did on the sixteenth day of that month, the morrow after the
sabbath, as it is there called, verse. 11. that is, the morrow after the feast
of unleavened bread, which was on the fifteenth day; therefore I should think
it far more probable which others hold, to wit, that the sixteenth day was
the morrow after the Passover here spoken of, whereon the Israelites did eat
both unleavened cakes of the old corn, and parched corn of the new, even the
very same day whereon the sheaf of the first fruits of their harvest was
offered to the Lord; after the offering whereof they might lawfully eat of the
new corn, and not till then. Nor need it seem strange that the sixteenth day
should be called the morrow after the Passover here spoken of, because though
they killed the Passover on the fourteenth day at even, yet the evening or
night wherein they did eat the Paschall Lamb, was the beginning of the
fifteenth day, which might well therefore be called the day of the Passover.

Verse. 12. And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten the old corn
of the land, etc.] Some Expositours are of opinion that this also is to be
understood of the sixteenth day of the month, the same that is called in the
foregoing verse, the morrow after the Passover: and that because it cannot be
denied but that the Israelites did eat unleavened cakes of the old corn of the
land on the fifteenth day, which was the first day of the feast of unleavened
bread. But since the text seems to make a manifest difference betwixt the
morrow after the Passover, verse. 11. whereon they did eat unleavened cakes and
parched corn; and the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land,
in this verse, when the manna ceased; therefore I think it more probable that
the manna ceased on the seventeenth day of the month, and that is called the
morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land, with reference to that
which went before, verse. 11. to wit, the morrow after they had eaten (as was
there said) unleavened cakes of the old corn of the land, and parched corn in
the self same day. The reason why this is so expressly noted, that the manna
ceased after the Israelites had begun to eat of the corn of the land, is
because hereby it was made evident, that the manna came not all this while they
had enjoyed it from any natural cause in the clouds; but was provided for them
by an extraordinary way, during the time they wanted bread, by the Almighty
power of God; who therefore now sent it no longer, when they were entered into a
land flowing with milk and honey, where they had plenty not of corn only, but
of all other provision likewise that was requisite for them. And thus shall it
be also with Gods people in heaven: As when the Israelites came to eat of the
fruit of Canaan, manna ceased, so when we come to our heavenly Canaan, the
word, the sacraments, and all other outward comforts shall cease, and that
because our bliss, our life, and our fruition of God there, shall need none of
these outward supports, Rev. 21.22, 23. And I saw no Temple therein; for the
Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it: And the city had no
need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it, etc.

Verse. 13. And it came to pass when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lift up his
eyes and looked, and behold there stood a man, etc.] It is evident, that long
after this the camp of the Israelites continued still in Gilgal: for it is said
of the Gibeonites, chap. 9.6. that they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal.
But why then is it said here, that Joshua was by Jericho? I answer, first, That
Gilgal, at least the outmost quarters of the camp in Gilgal were not far from
Jericho, and therefore we see it is said before, chap. 4.19. that they encamped
at Gilgal in the east border of Jericho: and secondly, That though the camp was
in Gilgal, yet Joshua might be come up nearer to Jericho upon some occasion, as
happily to observe the country about it, to see where it might be best
assailed, and so might see the vision here related, to wit, that he lift up his
eyes and looked, and behold there stood a man over against him, with his sword
drawn in his hand. Being, it seems, alone by himself either to pray or
meditate, or perhaps to view the strength of Jericho, on a sudden, not thinking
of any such thing, as he looked up he saw a man stand before him with a drawn
sword in his hand, and this was the son of God, the Angel of the Covenant,
who now appeared thus to Joshua in the shape of a man, to encourage him with
assurance that God would fight for him against the inhabitants of the land, and
particularly to give him directions what course he should take against Jericho,
as we may see in the following chapter, verse. 2. where of this man thus
appearing to Joshua it is said, that the Lord, or Jehovah, said unto Joshua,
See, I have given into thy hand Jericho, etc.

Verse. 14. And he said, Nay, but as a Captain of the host of the Lord am I now
come.] That is, not for your adversaries am I here, but as a Captain of the
Israelites to fight for them.

Verse. 15. Loose thy shoe from off thy foot, etc.] See the note upon Exodus 3.5.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 2. ANd the Lord said unto Joshua, etc.] Who now appeared to Joshua in
the shape of an armed man, as was said before, chap. 5.13.

Verse. 3. And ye shall compass the city all the men of war and go round
about the city once, etc.] This no doubt they were enjoined to do at such a
distance from the walls, that they might not be in danger of any arrows or
other things which the inhabitants might shoot at them. That which is most
worthy our enquiring in this course which the Lord here prescribes for the
taking of Jericho, is, why the Lord would have such means used for the
effecting of this, as were not only so unlikely to effect it, but also so
absurd and ridiculous in the eye of reason; what likelihood was there in humane
judgment, that their tracing about the city once every day for six days
together, and seven times the seventh day, or that the Priests blowing with
trumpets of rams-horns, and the shouting of the people, should batter down the
walls of so strong a city? yea, the appointing of trumpets of rams-horns for
the Priests, had above all the rest a show of ridiculousnesse. Had they made
use of the silver trumpets of the Sanctuary, there had been both more state,
and a better ground of hope in the sounding of those sacred signs of Gods
presence amongst them; but these trumpets of rams-horns might seem only fit to
move laughter for a work of such importance as they had now in hand. But to all
this now it may be answered; First, that hereby the Lord made it manifest
beyond all exception, that it was he only that delivered the city into their
hands: The less they did herein, the less cause had they to ascribe any thing
to their own wisdom or valor; and the more ridiculous the means were that
were used, the more evident it was that the work was not done by any power of
the means, but by the sole power of God. Secondly, that hereby the almighty
power of God was the more magnified, who could effect such great works by such
unlikely and simple means; for this did discover plainly, how far the power
of God did surpass the reach of man's wisdom, even that (as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 5.25) The foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the
weakness of God is stronger then men. And thirdly, that the more absurd and
simple the means appointed were in reason, the better was the faith of Gods
people tried, whether they would in confidence of Gods promise do what he
enjoined them, however strange it might seem to them, and would become fools,
that they might be wise, as the same Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 3.18. So that we
see the Lord did in great wisdom prescribe this course for the taking of
Jericho, which reason was like to scorn and deride: yea, and herein we have
besides an observable figure of Gods subduing the world to Christ our Joshua,
or Jesus, in these days of the Gospel. For as by trumpets of rams-horns, that
is, by the foolishness of preaching (for so carnal men judge of it, 1. Cor.
1.21.) does the Lord beat down all the strong holds, and fortifications of
Satan raised in men's hearts, even every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2. Cor. 10.4, 5. That which the world counts foolishness, 1. Cor.
1.23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness, it proves the mighty power of God unto salvation to those
that believe: and thus has God provided, that all the glory should redound to
him, and not unto his instruments the preachers of the Gospel: We have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us, 2. Cor. 4.7.

Thus shall thou do six days, etc.] Six days together, once a day, are the
Israelites here appointed to march about Jericho in a solemn manner, as is
afterward expressed, and on the seventh day, verse. 4. they were to do it seven
several times; this doubtless was to exercise the faith and patience of the
people. It had been as easy for God to have caused the walls of Jericho to
fall at the first days compassing the city, as after seven days toil; but
thus God loves to try the faith and patience of his people, to see whether they
will wait for the accomplishment of his promises, when they are not presently
fulfilled. As for their marching about the city on the sabbath day (which must
needs be granted, because they did it seven days together) we need not stumble
at it: for Gods precept is the rule of righteousness, nor can men sin in
doing what God has commanded.

Verse. 5. And it shall come to pass that when they make a long blast, etc.]
See the note upon Exodus 19.19.

And the wall of the city shall fall down flat, etc.] But how was it then that
Rahabs house did not fall together with the wall? for it is expressly said
before, Chap. 2.15. that her house was upon the wall, and she dwelt upon the
wall, and yet after the wall was fallen it is said, verse. 22. of this chapter,
that Joshua commanded the two men that he had formerly sent to spy out the
country, to go into the harlots house, and to bring her out, and all that she
had. Now to this I answer, that doubtless therefore all the wall about the
city did not fall, but only that part of the wall over against which the
Israelites were in a long train, when they had compassed the city the last
time, that so they might go up, every man right from the place where they were,
and enter at this breach into the city. And indeed, this makes the fall of the
city wall the more strange and miraculous.

Verse. 9. And the armed men went before the priests that blew the trumpets, and
the rereward came after the ark.] I doubt not but this order prescribed here by
Joshua, for the peoples marching about the city, was formerly given him in
charge by the Lord, though it be not there expressed. However, very observable
is the peoples readiness in obeying his command, which makes it to me most
probable, that Joshua had told them what the Lord had imparted to him,
concerning the falling of the city wall, which they believing the rather,
because of the miracle they had so lately seen of the dividing of Jordan, were
the readier to do what Joshua enjoined them, and thence is that which the
Apostle says, Heb. 11.30. By faith, the walls of Jericho fell down, after they
were compassed about seven days. It is questioned by some, why those
Israelites were armed that went before the ark, seeing the wall was to fall of
it self? But this scruple is altogether causeless, for it was fit they should
be armed for their own defense, and the defense of the ark, in case the
inhabitants should sally out upon them: and besides, they were to go up, upon
the city to destroy the inhabitants, so soon as ever the wall was fallen, and
their going armed beforehand, did testify that they believed what God had said
herein, and were ready to execute the Lords command. The greatest difficulty in
these words is, who are here meant by the rereward that came after the ark?
Some hold that this is meant of the tribes of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali, and
that because, Numb. 10.25. their camp is called the rereward, and used always
as the Israelites traveled through the wilderness to march in the rere, which
order they conceive was here observed for the greater pomp and state. But yet
because the words seem so plainly to imply, that all the people that were armed
went before the ark; Let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the Lord,
verse. 7. and here again, the armed men went before the priests that blew with
the trumpets, therefore it may seem more probable which others say, that by
rereward, here is meant the remainder of the people that were not armed.

Verse. 16. Joshua said unto the people, Shout, etc.] The following reason, for
the Lord has given you the city, shows the ground why this shouting was
enjoined them, to wit, first, to strike the hearts of the men of Jericho with
fear: secondly, to testify their faith in Gods promise, and their joyful
assurance that now the city should be delivered up unto them: and thirdly, to
encourage one another in the following assault.

Verse. 17. And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are therein,
to the Lord.] This Joshua received in charge from the Lord, though it were not
formerly expressed, as is evident, 1. Kings 16.34. In his days did Hiel, the
Bethelite, build Jericho: he laid the foundation in Abiram his firstborn, and
set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of
the Lord, which he spoke by Joshua the son of Nun. And by Joshua no doubt
this charge was given to the people, before the time when they were to shout:
but here it is inserted, when it was to be put in execution, to make way to
the follovving story of Achans transgression, chap. 7. Why this city was thus
destroyed rather then the other cities we need not enquire, since it is enough
that it pleased God so to appoint. But probably, two reasons may be given:
first, that hereby the other inhabitants might be warned not to stand out
against God, or if they did, to render them the more inexcusable: and secondly,
that it might be offered to the divine justice as a kind of first fruits, as
the words implie, the city shall be accursed to the Lord; thereby
acknowledging that the whole land was his, but that he was pleased to give it
them. As concerning things accursed or devoted, see the notes upon Levit. 27.28.

Verse. 19. But all the silver and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are
consecrated unto the Lord.] Under these we may probably conceive that all other
metalls are comprehended, and happily they were made to pass through the fire
ere they were brought into the Lords treasury, as those were, Number. 31.22, 23.
Only the gold, the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,
Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire and
it shall be clean: concerning their images of gold and silver, there is no
question to be made but that either they were melted and so brought into the
treasury, or else utterly wafted with the things in the city, according to
that law, Deuteronomy. 7.25. The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire;
thou shall not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto
thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.

Verse. 20. The wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city,
etc.] Thus God without the help of the Israelites beat down the walls of
Jericho, wherein the Israelites were to have no part of the spoil. See the
former note upon verse. 5.

Verse. 23. And they brought out all her kindred and left them without the camp
of Israel.] That is, having fetched Rahab, her kindred, and all she had out of
her house, they carried them to some place without their camp, and there they
left them. And thus both the Israelites testified what an esteem they had of
the holiness of their camp where God was pleased to dwell amongst them; and
withal, Rahab and her kindred were hereby taught to acknowledge bewail and
forsake the impuritie of their gentile condition; and were kept as aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel, till they had made profession of their desire to
embrace the religion and faith of Israel, and were cleansed from their former
pollutions according to the Law, Numb. 31.19. And do ye abide without the camp
seven days: whosoever has killed any person, and whosoever has touched any
slain, purify both your selves and your captives on the third day and on the
seventh day.

Verse. 24. And they burnt the city with fire and all that was therein.] It
might well in reason have been very grievous to the people to destroy such
goodly houses wherein they might so conveniently have seated themselves, and
the whole prey and spoil of so fair a city, which might so greatly have
enriched them. But herein is noted their observable obedience at present to the
Lords command, not a man of them offering to meddle with one jot of the spoil,
save only Achan, of whose sacrilege we have the relation in the following
chapter.

Verse. 26. Cursed be the man before the Lord, that rises up and builds this
city Jericho.] God would have the ruins of this town remain as a perpetual
monument of the power of God showed both in his severitie against this
idolatrous city, and his mercy to his people; and therefore Joshua is by the
Lord appointed to curse him that should by building this city again as it were
blot out the memorial of this miraculous work. For that Joshua pronounced this
curse by Gods command is evident 1. Kings 16.34. In his days did Hiel the
Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his
firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according
to the word of the Lord which he spoke by Joshua the son of Nun.

He shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest
son shall he set up the gates of it.] That is, let it cost him the loss of
all his children: the first when he begins it, the other as he goes forward
with the work, and the last when he finisheth it. For the hanging up the gates
is counted as it were the finishing of a city. How this curse fell upon Hiel
the Bethelite who in Ahabs reign built this city again, is noted in the place
before cited, 1. Kings 16.34.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed
thing.] That is, one of the Israelites. The people being considered conjunctim,
as one entire body, that which was done by one of the members is here ascribed
to the whole body of Israel.

For Achan the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the
tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing.] This Achan is also called Achar,
1. Chron. 2.7. which signifies a troubler, whence he is called there Achar the
troubler of Israel, as likewise the place where he was stoned is called the
valley of Achar, that is, of trouble, verse. 26. of this chapter. Partly the
better to evidence the certain truth of the history, and partly to implie the
stain he brought upon his ancestors, his genealogy is here set down, to wit,
that Carmi was his father, and so Zabdi, who is also called Zimri, 1. Chron.
2.6. his grandfather, and Zerah or Zarah, who was the son of Judah, Genesis
38.30. was his great grandfather. Indeed considering that Zerah was at least
fourteen years old when he went with his father Judah and his grandfather Jacob
into Egypt, about the year of the world 2298. (as by computation of years
gathered from the history of Moses may be made evident) and that from their
going down into Egypt, unto the destruction of Jericho are usually reckoned at
the least two hundred fifty and six years, it may well seem strange that in
all this time there should be but four generations, Zerah the son of Judah
being but the great grandfather of Achan. But this doubt may well be satisfied
by yielding that each of these that are mentioned were born in their fathers
latter days. For if Zerah begat Zabdi when he was seventie and one years old,
fifty seven years after his going into Egypt, in the year of the world 2355.
and Zabdi begat Carmi at seventie years old in the year of the world 2425. and
Carmi begat Achan also at seventie years old in the year of the world 2495.
then was Achan at their coming out of Egypt nineteen years old, and at the
sacking of Jericho about fifty nine or threescore.

And the anger of the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel.] To wit,
because Israel had sinned, as it is said before: And indeed as in the body we
use to beat the back for any offense committed by the tongue; so in bodies
politic, civil societies, it is no wonder that God should lay upon any of the
members temporal punishments for a sin committed by another of that body;
especially if we consider that God may have always just cause to punish any of
his people for sin in themselves, though for the present he take occasion to
strike for the sin of another, that men may learn to hate sin the more,
which brings ruin upon more many times then the sinner himself, and be the
more studious to bring others to fear God as themselves do.

Verse. 2. And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is besides Beth-aven,
on the east side of Beth-el, etc.] This Ai in Genesis 12.8. is written Hai, and
Nehem. 11.31. Aijah. It is said here to have been near both to Beth-el and
Beth-aven; Beth-el therefore was not far from Beth-aven which signifies the
house of vanity, or of a lie; and in regard whereof it was that when Jeroboam
had set up his idols in Beth-el, by signification the house of God, the
prophets were wont to call it in contempt and scorn by the name of this
neighbor town Beth-aven, the house of vanity. Hos. 4.15. Though thou Israel
play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither
go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear, The Lord lives. and 10.5. The inhabitants of
Samaria shall fear because of the calves of Beth-aven. Now to this Ai Joshua
sent spies as before to Jericho, yet these men were not to go into Ai, as
before into Jericho, but into the country about ^t where they might view the
passages, and observe afar off the strength and fortifications of the city;
Go up, says he, view the country.

Verse. 3. And they returned to Joshua and said unto him, Let not all the people
go up, etc.] And thus by the confidence and resolution of these men, and by
their slighting of Ai as a place of no strength, that might easily be taken by
a few of the Israelites, the Lord did secretly make way to that which he had
purposed to do in the chastising of the Israelites for the sin of Achan.
Doubtless the spies spoke what they thought, to wit, that it was needless to
carry up the whole host of Israel against so small a city as Ai was, Let about
two or three thousand go up, say they, and smite Ai, and make not all the
people to labor thither; for they are but few. But God had a further end in
this which they knew not of; namely, that the Israelites might be smitten by
the men of Ai (whereas had all the army of Israel gone up, the inhabitants of
Ai would not have dared to have sallied out,) and withal, that this might be
done but to a small company of the Israelites to speak of, that the loss and
dishonor might be the less. And hence it was too, that Joshua and the rest
did so presently approve of this advice of the spies, whenas otherwise much
might have been said against it.

Verse. 4. So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men, and
they fled before the men of Ai.] Notwithstanding the men of Ai were doubtless,
as the rest of the inhabitants of Canaan, greatly dejected with fear of the
Israelites, and the Israelites on the other side much imboldned with the late
wonders God had wrought for them, and particularly with the overthrow and
destruction of Jericho, and though they went not rashly against this city (for
he had sent spies beforehand to search out the passages and advantages of the
country, and whereas the spies had advised to send two or three thousand, he
had for the better assurance pitched upon the greater number, to wit, three
thousand, and those no doubt of his choicest soldiers) yet when the men of Ai
sallied out, the Israelites fled presently before them: which shows plainly,
that God being offended did in an ex^raordinary manner strike them with
astonishment and fear.

Verse. 5. For they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and
smote them in the going down.] That is, in the descent of a hill. So that it
seems the Israelites fled at the first onset, before a man was slain of them,
being stricken with a strange fear, and were only slain flying.

Wherefore the hearts of the people melted and became as water.] That is, the
whole people of Israel were extremely terrified and dismayed because of the
flight of those forces they had sent against Ai. It is strange also indeed that
so poor a loss as this (for there were but six and thirty slain) should drive
the whole camp of Israel into such a terror: But God had withdrawn his
supporting hand, and in this case the most stout and valiant will soon shrink
and be afraid.

Verse. 6. And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face,
etc.] To wit, because the Canaanites had thus put the Israelites to flight. The
loss they had received indeed was nothing to speak of: for what was the loss
of six and thirty men to them that had so many hundred thousand in their Camp?
But alas it was not their loss so much as the apprehension of Gods displeasure
that lay so heavy upon them. God had promised that no man should be able to
stand before them, Chap. 3.16. and that he would without fail drive out the
inhabitants of the land before them, Chap. 3.10. their flying therefore now
before the enemy, especially in so inglorious a manner, was to them an
argument, that God was offended with them, and so had withdrawn himself from
their help, and hence was this heavy lamentation: even the smallest affliction,
if it be looked upon as an effect of Gods anger, is terrible to the people of
God. Wicked men only grieve for the punishment, and therefore so long as God
visits them with a more gentle hand by way of warning they never regard it. But
the genuine children of God mourn chiefly still for Gods displeasure, which if
it be discovered by a frown or the least chastisement it wounds them to the
heart. Concerning this custom of rending their clothes when they were greatly
afflicted for any thing that befell them, see the note upon Genesis 37.29.

And put dust upon their heads.] This was another expression of grief which the
Jews and other nations likewise in former times used upon any extraordinary
occasion of sorrow, as we may see, 1. Sam. 4.12. Job 2.12. And when they lift
up their eyes afar off and knew him not, they lift up their voice and wept,
and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward
heaven. Ezekiel. 27.30. And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee and
shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, and shall wallow
themselves in the ashes; and was practiced at this time by Joshua and the
elders of Israel, 1. by way of humbling themselves before God, even to imply
what Abraham in express words acknowledged Genesis 18.27. that they were but dust
and ashes, not worthy to appear before God, or to speak unto him: 2. By way of
imploring Gods mercy to them in regard of the frailty of their condition,
according to that expression which Job uses, Job 10.9. Remember, I beseech
thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou bring me into dust
again; and David, Psalm. 103.14. For he knows our frame; he remembers that we
are but dust: and 3. By way of representing their miserable and sad condition
which with words they were not able sufficiently to express, even that they
were brought down to the very dust, to a low and poor and despised condition,
and were indeed in a manner as so many dead men.

Verse. 7. And Joshua said, Alas O Lord God, wherefore have thou at all brought
this people over Jordan, etc.] Some expositours seek to give such an
interpretation to these words, as may wholly clear Joshua from that which the
words seem to intend, to wit, an impatient expostulation with God for bringing
the Israelites over Jordan that he might there deliver them into the hands of
the Amorites to destroy them, and to that end they make the meaning of his
words to be only this, That he desired to know of God what it was wherewith he
had provoked him to deliver them up into the power of their enemies, over whom
otherwise they should have been victorious, as if he had said, It is not O Lord
without cause that thou have withdrawn thine assistance from us, and suffered
these uncircumcised people to put us to slight, and therefore make known to us
we beseech thee what the sin is whereby we have forfeited those promises thou
have made to us, of driving out the inhabitants of this land before us; And so
likewise they understand the following clause, would to God we had been content
and dwelt on the other side Jordan, as intended only to imply how much better
it had been for them to have stayed in the land without Jordan, then to be
brought over Jordan to be destroyed by the inhabitants there. And indeed it
cannot be well thought that either Joshua did indeed think that God had brought
them over Jordan purposely that the Canaanites might there destroy them, or
that he intended to contest and quarrel with God for dealing so with him, or
that he so much as wished indeed that they had not come over Jordan. Well, but
yet the words do manifestly imply more then an humble desire of knowing what
the sin was wherewith they had provoked God to let the enemy prevail over
them; Wherefore have thou at all brought this people over Jordan, etc. are
manifestly words of Expostulation with God; and therefore I conceive that thus
we must understand them, to wit, that though Joshua did not think indeed that
God had a purpose to deliver them into the power of the Canaanites, but meant
only to plead with God for his poor people, that he would not repent of the
good he had promised he would do for them, nor suffer the Canaanites to prevail
over them, yet in expressing his desire herein, being carried away with his
passion and sorrow, he brake forth beyond the bounds of that modesty and
reverence, wherewith it is fit that men should express their desires, when
they address themselves to supplicate the great God of heaven and earth.

Verse. 9. And what will thou do unto thy great name?] To wit, because if thy
people be cut off, the idolatrous Canaanites will hereupon take occasion to
blaspheme thy name, saying, as Deuteronomy. 33.27. Our hand is high, and the Lord has
not done all this, or, the Lord was not able to give them the land which he had
promised them: and so will prefer their idol-gods before the Lord God of
Israel.

Verse. 11. For they have taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen,
etc.] Here the Lord sets forth the several degrees of the heinousness of that
sin of Achans, wherewith all Israel was involved, for first, says the Lord,
they have taken of the accursed thing, that is, they have reserved to
themselves some part of that which as an accursed thing should have been burnt,
to wit, the Babylonish garment: secondly, they have also stolen, that is, they
have taken of that also which I reserved for my self, to wit, the gold and
silver: thirdly, and dissembled also, that is, they have done this closely and
cunningly, the party offending carrying the matter so as if he had done no such
thing (which indeed must needs be a great aggravation of his sin, this being no
less implicitly, but a denial of Gods omniscience, or a bold contempt of his
wrath against those that transgress his Laws:) and then fourthly, they have
put it even amongst their own stuff, which is added as the last and highest
aggravation of this wickedness, because this argued a remorselesse resolution
to hold what he had so wickedly gotten, and that he was far from being
smitten in conscience for what he had done.

Verse. 13. Up, sanctify the people, etc.] See the note upon Exodus 19.10.

Verse. 14. And it shall be that the tribe which the Lord takes shall come
according to the families thereof, etc.] That is, the tribe upon which that lot
falls, shall bring all their several families, that so by casting of lots,
it may also be discovered which is the guilty family: for that the guilty
tribe, and then the guilty family, and then the household were taken by lots,
is evident by comparing this place with that in the 1. Sam. 14.41, 42. where
the same phrase is used, Saul said unto the Lord God of Israel, give a perfect
lot, and Saul and Jonathan were taken; And Saul said, Cast lots between me and
Jonathan my son, and Jonathan was taken. But why did not the Lord tell Joshua
that Achan was the party that had sinned, but cause him thus to be discovered
by casting of lots? I answer: first, because by this means the Lord tried Achan
whether he would come in voluntarily and confess his sin; and indeed by
Achans holding out so long, even till the lot fell upon his own person, there
was a notable discovery made, how hardly men are brought to confess their
secret sins, and how prone they are to flatter themselves with a vain hope,
that their secret sins shall never be discovered: and secondly, because
hereby the Lord made known that even the most casual things, to wit, the
casting of lots are certainly governed by the providence of God, according to
that of Solomon, Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposing thereof is of God: a truth the fitter to be cleared to this people,
because the land was within a short time to be divided amongst them by lot.

Verse. 15. And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing,
shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he has, etc.] That is, after he has
undergone the punishment due to him by the Law, as a presumptuous transgressour
of Gods command (which was, that he should be stoned, Numb. 15.30, 35.) let him
be also burnt with fire, according as the things anathematized, or accursed,
were to be consumed. See verse. 25. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and
burned them with fire after they had stoned them with stones.

Verse. 17. And he brought the family of Judah, etc.] That is, the families
which were four or five, Numb. 26.20, 21.

And he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man.] That is, the heads of
that family one after another, to wit, those five mentioned, 1. Chron. 2.6.
The sons of Zerah, Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, Dara, five of
them in all, and so Zabdi was taken, that is, the lot fell upon his posterity
and household, who were brought man by man.

Verse. 18. And he brought his household man by man, etc.] That is, Joshua, as
above verse. 16. So Joshua rose up early in the morning, etc.

Verse. 21. And behold they are hid in the earth, in the midst of my tent, and
the silver under it.] That is, and the silver you shall find under the garment,
or rather (as the original may be understood) wrapped up within the garment, to
wit, because it consisted of so many several pieces of coin, and this he
expresses, that by this particular relating how they were hid, it might be the
more evident that he spoke truly.

Verse. 22. So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent, etc.] This
running of the messengers to Achans tent, to fetch the things stolen which he
had confessed were hidden there, might well proceed from their eager and
earnest desire to clear themselves from the accursed thing which had kindled
Gods anger against them: (for they were fetched not only to discover the truth
of what Achan confessed, but also that they might be burnt, as God had
commanded verse. 15.) yet it may be also, that God commanded them to run, lest
any upon Achans confession should get thither and remove them elsewhere.

Verse. 24. And Joshua and all Israel took Achan, etc.] Here the story relates
how Joshua and the Israelites took Achan, with the things he had stolen, his
children, and all that he had, and carried them down to the valley, called
afterward upon this occasion, the valley of Achar, that they might be there
burnt, as God had commanded. Now amongst other things there being here
particular mention made of his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, etc. it may
be gathered from thence, that he had before a competent estate, and did not
therefore steal those things for want, which he took out of the spoil of
Jericho, but out of mere covetousness for the further enriching of himself,
which was doubtless a great aggravation of his sin.

Verse. 25. And all Israel stoned them with stones, and burned them with fire
after they had stoned them with stones.] So that both Achan and his sons and
daughters were stoned. Now though this Joshua might not have done by the
ordinary Law, Deuteronomy. 24.16. The father shall not be put to death for the
children, neither shall the children be put to death for the father: yet here
it was just, because God commanded it; yea though they were no way consenting
to their fathers sin: for first, God might have respect if they were of grown
years, to the punishment of other sins whereof he knew them guilty, or might
take them away in mercy: but however though they were infants, at least some of
them, to take away the life of innocents by this means, was no injustice in
God, no more then when he takes them away by the biting of a beast or a
serpent, or by causing them to fall into the fire or water, or by the violence
of a fever, or any other means. Gods judgments are many times unsearchable,
they are always just.

Verse. 26. And they raised over him a great heap of stones.] To wit, as a
monument to give warning to posterity not to provoke God by transgressing his
Law as Achan had done, and withal, as a means to prevent that none of the
people should meddle with the gold and silver, which as an accursed thing was
cast into the fire.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. TAke all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai, etc.]
Though the city of Ai were but small, yet all the men of war were now
appointed to go up against it, both for the better heartning of the people in
regard of their former astonishment and fear; as also, because they were all to
be employed in taking the spoil of the city.

Verse. 2. And thou shall do to Ai and her King, as thou did unto Jericho and
her King.] That is, as thou did burn the city of Jericho, and did slay the
King and inhabitants thereof, so shall thou also do to the city of Ai, the King
and the inhabitants thereof. The meaning is not that the same should be done in
every particular as was done at Jericho (for we do not read that the King of
Jericho was hanged as the King of Ai was, nor that the rebuilding of Ai was
forbidden under a curse as the rebuilding of Jericho was) but that they should
utterly destroy the city and the inhabitants as they did Jericho; indeed it
may seem strange, why the Lord enjoined them to burn this city also after they
had taken the spoil thereof, and that because the Lord had formerly promised
the Israelites, that they should dwell in their cities, and in their houses,
Deuteronomy. 19.1. nor do we read that after this, they used to burn the cities,
except it were Hazor, chap. 11.11. But for this, these two reasons are given by
Expositours, to wit, that God did so appoint it, first, because as yet God
would not have them possess any fortified towns or cities, lest they should
put confidence in the strength of these places, and not wholly rest and rely
upon God: and secondly, because the people being to be led further, to mount
Ebal and mount Gerizim, God would not have them leave this city standing behind
them, lest any of the inhabitants should retire thither, and again fortify the
city against them. As for the encouragement intimated in the mention that is
here made of what they had done to Jericho, see the note upon a like passage in
Deuteronomy. 3.2.

Verse. 2. Lay thee an ambush for the city behind it.] Herein also God had
respect to the weakness and foregoing fears of the people by giving them hope
of vanquishing their enemies not by fine force in a pitched battle, but by this
secret device and stratagem of war.

Verse. 3. So Joshua arose and all the people of war to go up against Ai,
etc.] The relation which we have here of the course which Joshua took for the
surprising of Ai is very intricate, so that it is indeed very hard to say both
what company of the Israelites went up against Ai, and how many of them were
laid in ambush for the surprising of the city, when Joshua and those that were
with him made show of flying before the men of Ai. For first, some expositours
are of opinion that all the men of war in Israel, (that is, all in a manner,
all except some few that were left for the defense of the camp) went up with
Joshua against Ai, and that the night before he meant to make an assault upon
the city, he chose out thirty thousand of his soldiers whom he sent away by
night giving them in charge to lay themselves in ambush in some convenient
place behind the city, which was on the west side of Ai, between Bethel and
Ai, which they accordingly did, and that then very early the next morning
Joshua drew up all the rest of the people that were with him, and pitched on a
hill on the Northside of Ai, and being there took other five thousand men and
laid them also in ambush between Bethel and Ai, as the other were, but (^ay
they) more northerly and somewhat nearer his army, conceiving that this ambush
was not laid to surprise the city and set it on fire as the other was, but for
some other purpose, as happily to fall upon the backs of the enemy to prevent
their flying away when Joshua and those that were with him should turn head
against them, etc. And indeed according to the plain order of the words this
seems to have been the course that was taken; for here we see it is said, that
Joshua arose and all the people of war to go up against Ai, and that he chose
out thirty thousand mighty men of valor, and sent them away by night; and then
it follows in the next verse (which seems plainly to have relation to the
thirty thousand before mentioned) And he commanded them, saying, Behold ye
shall lie in wait against the city, even behind it, etc. and I and all the
people that are with me will approach unto the city, etc. and again, verse. 9.
Joshua therefore sent them forth, (which still seems to be spoken of the thirty
thousand before mentioned) and they went to lie in ambush, and abode between
Bethel and Ai on the west side of Ai. And then afterward speaking of that
which Joshua did the next morning, verse. 10, 11, 12. it is said, that Joshua
rose up early in the morning, etc. and all the people of war that were with
him went up and drew nigh and came before the city, and pitched on the north
side of Ai, etc. and he took about five thousand men and set them to lie in
ambush between Bethel and Ai on the west side of the city. So that according
to the plain letter of the text no man could think at first reading but that
there were two ambushes laid; one of thirty thousand men, verse. 3, 4. and
another of about five thousand verse. 12. Well, but yet others and indeed the
most and best of all Expositours do otherwise conceive, of that which is here
written concerning the surprising of Ai, namely that Joshua took only thirty
thousand in all with him to go against Ai, and that there was no other ambush
laid between Bethel and Ai but that of the five thousand mentioned verse. 12.
And the reasons which move them thus to conceive of this passage of the story
are very considerable, to wit, first, Because had they carried all the men of
war of Israel against Ai, which were many hundred thousands, it is not likely
that the men of Ai would have adventured to sallie out against them; secondly,
Because the place assigned for the ambush both verse. 4. and verse. 12. is the
very same, to wit, the west side of Ai, between Bethel and Ai; nor can any
probable reason be given either why two several ambushes should be laid on the
same side of the city, or how such a mighty number of armed men, as first
thirty thousand, and then five thousand should conveniently be disposed of to
lie undiscovered in two several ambushes between Ai and Bethel, a town near at
hand and confederate with Ai; and thirdly, especially, Because there is no
mention made in the sequel of this story of any thing that was done for the
surprisall of Ai but only by one ambush, who when the men of Ai were pursuing
the rest of the Israelites came out, and on a sudden took the city, and set it
on fire. Upon these grounds, I say, most that have written upon this place do
hold that there was but one ambush laid, to wit, that of five thousand men
mentioned verse. 12. So that according to this opinion of theirs, whereas it is
said here, that Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valor, and sent
them away by night, and he commanded them, saying, Behold ye shall lie in wait
against the city, etc. The words must not be so understood as if he commanded
all those thirty thousand men to lie in ambush behind Ai, but that he
commanded them that they should lay some in ambush, to wit, the five thousand
mentioned afterward verse. 12. And indeed this Exposition I conceive to be the
most probable; only because it is so expressly said verse. 1. Take all the
people of war with thee and arise go up to Ai, and here again, So Joshua
arose and all the people of war to go up against Ai, I cannot see how it can
be denied that Joshua carried the whole army of Israel with him: so that thus
I think we may best conceive of the whole carriage of this expedition against
Ai, to wit, first, That Joshua marched with all the men of war from Gilgal
till they were come so near it that they might the following night go up to the
city, verse. 3. secondly, That he sent away from thence that night verse. 3, 4.
thirty thousand of his choicest men with a charge that taking the advantage of
the night they should lay an ambush behind the city between Bethel and Ai, to
wit, an ambush of five thousand men, as is afterward expressed verse. 12. the
other five and twenty thousand being sent with him, that they staying some
where not far from them, might be able to encounter the enemy, in case the
inhabitants of the city should discover them and come out with all their power
against them; all which they did accordingly verse. 9. and Joshua lodged that
night amongst the rest of the people. thirdly, That early the next morning
before it was yet day Joshua went up after this thirty thousand and pitched on
the north side of Ai, (joining happily now with the five and twenty thousand
that went along with those that were to lie in ambush) but in a place where the
men of Ai could not yet discover them, there being a valley between them and
the Israelites, verse. 10, 11. fourthly, Having thus set the ambush on the west
side of the city, and the body of the army on the North, Joshua went
presently before it was day into the midst of the valley, verse. 13. purposely
that the men of Ai might see them, and therefore questionless he carried with
him into this valley but a small party, that the inhabitants might be the
readier to salley out against them, and fifthly, That when the men of Ai taking
notice thereof, hereupon came out and set upon them, and were drawn off far
from the city, by the counterfeit flight of the Israelites, hereupon Joshua
made a stand, and set upon those that pursued them, and withal the ambush rose
out of their place, surprised the city, and set it on fire.

Verse. 7. And ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city.] To
wit, upon a sign given them: concerning which, see the note upon verse. 18.

Verse. 10. And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people.]
Which it seems he did that when the people should afterward see that they had
now vanquished their enemies without any loss, they might be the more
courageous and wholly overcome their former fears. See the note also upon verse.
3.

Verse. 11. And all the people, even the people of war that were with him,
went up and drew nigh and came before the city, and pitched on the North side
of Ai, etc.] They marched first forward on the East side of the city, but then
fetching a little compass, pitched on the North side, because that place was
most convenient for them, and there they should be the nearer to those that
were laid in ambush. See the note also upon verse. 3.

Verse. 12. And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush,
etc.] See the note upon verse. 3.

Verse. 13. Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.] That is, early
in the morning when it was yet dark, verse. 10. And Joshua rose up early in the
morning and numbered the people. See also the note upon verse. 3.

Verse. 14. And the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and
all his people at a time appointed, etc.] That is, they all came together at a
time appointed from all the several parts of the city, and at the self same
time rushed all out together, and set upon the Israelites with great violence.
When Joshua came into the valley with that small company he brought with him,
he desired there should be notice taken of it, so that happily by the noise
they made they might be discovered; whereof when word was brought to the King,
he appointed that all the Garrison soldiers in the city should be in
readiness at such a time, that they might go out against the Israelites, and
accordingly at the time appointed (which shows how forward they were by reason
of their former victory) they were all met, and together with their King, did
sally forth and set upon them.

Verse. 15. And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them,
and fled by the way of the wilderness.] They fled doubtless toward the body
of their army, which they had left on the hill beyond the plain where they now
fled before the men of Ai. This wilderness therefore here mentioned was it
seems in that place, and we may probably conceive, that it was the wilderness
of Beth-aven; for that was nigh unto Bethel, chap. 18.12, 13.

Verse. 16. And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue
after them.] That is, all the soldiers, all that could bear arms: for that
others were left in the city, is evident verse. 24. All the Israelites returned
unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.

Verse. 17. And there was not a man left in Ai, or Bethel, etc.] It seems Bethel
being but a little town, and confederate with Ai, the inhabitants at the first
approach of the Israelites, had forsaken it, as having no hope to be able to
keep it, and had added their power to that of Ai, to make that the stronger.
And hence Bethel is also mentioned with Ai, the text telling of us that there
was not a man left, that is, a soldier, neither in Ai, or Bethel; because from
Bethel they were come to Ai, and now altogether were gone out in the pursuit of
the Israelites. Yet if we consider how closely the ambush of the Israelites
might be laid in some woods, or some other places of covert betwixt Bethel and
Ai, I see not why we may not conceive that the Garrison of Ai, seeing the
Israelites fly again, either by post sent thither, or by some sign given them,
called forth the men of Bethel to join with them in the pursuit of the
Israelites. How Bethel came to be long after this in the possession of the
Canaanites, see the note upon Judge. 1.24.

Verse. 18. And the Lord said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in
thine hand toward Ai.] This God enjoined him to do, as a sign to the people
that they should now make a stand, and with assurance that God would deliver
the city into their hand, should now again make head against the enemy, from
whom they had seemed to fly; as even in these times, the captain stretching
forth his spear or staff upon the face of the enemy, is a sign to the
soldiers of reinforcing the battle.

Verse. 19. And the ambush rose quickly out of their place, and they ran as
soon as he had stretched out his hand.] How they that lay covertly in the
ambush on the West side of the city, should among so many thousand discern
Joshua his spear stretched out, now especially when by a seeming flight they
had drawn the enemy so far from the city, I cannot conceive; and therefore I
rather think that upon this sign given by Joshua, his soldiers gave a shout,
or the musical instruments gave warning, for reinforcing the battle, and
hereby the spies knew it was time to enter the city.

Verse. 19. And they hasted, and entered into the city and took it, and hasted
and set it on fire.] That is, some house in the city, that by the smoke
thereof, the Israelites might perceive the city was taken. See the following
note.

Verse 24. All the Israelites returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of
the sword.] That is, the men and women and children left in the city; for they
had before only set fire on some one place of the city, that thereby it might
be known they had taken it: but now upon Joshuas coming, after they had slain
those in the field, they entered the city, slew all that were found in it, took
away the spoil, and then burnt the city wholly with fire to the ground, verse.
28.

Verse. 25. And so it was, that all that fell that day both of men and women
were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.] That is, say some Expositours,
twelve thousand of the men of Ai, besides those of Bethel, that joined with the
men of Ai, verse. 17. against the Israelites, of whom how many were slain it is
not expressed. But because the number of the slain were taken by the
Israelites, who could not distinguish betwixt those of Ai, and those of Bethel,
even those of Bethel might well be comprehended in those words even all the men
of Ai, because they were slain in this expedition of the Israelites against Ai.

Verse. 26. And Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the
spear, etc.] But still with his spear stretched forth led them on upon the
chase and slaughter of their enemies.

Verse. 28. And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it a heap for ever, even a desolation
unto this day.] It is evident, that in the days of Nehemiah this city Ai was
built again, because we find it named, Neh. 11.31. amongst the cities that
Benjamin dwelt in, though indeed it be not there called Ai, but Aijah; and
therefore by this word for ever is meant only, as in many other places of
Scripture, a long time. As for that clause, even a desolation to this day, see
the notes upon chap. 3.9.

Verse. 29. And the King of Ai, he hanged upon a tree until the even tide.]
Joshua was to execute Gods vengeance upon these inhabitants of Canaan: now as
the kings were most deeply engaged in the abominations of the land, through
whose neglect of justice they became the more rife, so the greatest severity he
still shows against them.

And as soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his
carcass down from the tree.] See the note upon Deuteronomy. 21.23.

And cast it at the entering of the gate of the city, etc.] Where was the place
of judgment, that the very place where he was buried with a heap of stones
raised upon him might intimate the justice of God in thus punishing him that
took no care to punish the wickedness that was daily committed amongst his
people.

Verse. 30. Then Joshua built an altar unto the Lord God of Israel in mount
Ebal, etc.] That is, about this time. Moses had before his death charged the
Israelites that when they came into the land of Canaan they should build a
monument of great stones and write the law thereon, and that at the same time
they should build an altar of whole stones and offer sacrifices thereon; and
that on mount Gerizim and mount Ebal (where this was to be done) the people
should in a solemn manner give their consent to certain blessings and curses
that should be read in their hearing, as we may read in the 27. Chapter of
Deuteronomy. Here therefore the story relates now how Joshua did what Moses had
commanded them. But why did he do it now? or how could he do it now, since they
were not yet come to mount Gerizim and mount Ebal? I answer: Some affirm that
these mountains were nigh to Ai and Bethel; and others say, That though this
story be inserted in this place, yet it was done long after the taking of Ai.
But because it is generally held (and not without just ground) that Gerizim was
in the tribe of Ephraim; which was much further up into the country, and
withal, that this word (then) immediately following the story of taking Ai,
Then Joshua built an altar unto the Lord, etc. seems plainly to imply, that
this was done much about this time; therefore I rather conceive that after the
sacking of Ai Joshua finding the way to these mountains clear and open, by
reason of the terror wherewith the enemies were stricken, took this
opportunity to go up with the people thither there to perform this service,
which upon the first opportunity they had, he knew they were bound to perform.
And indeed we may well think that the destroying of these two towns of Jericho
and Ai (the bulworks of their country on that side) did at first mightily
dismay the inhabitants, though within a while they began to combine themselves
together against the Israelites, as is related in the beginning of the
following chapter. What is further necessary to be known concerning this
monument of stones and the altar that was built with it, we may see in the
notes upon the 11. and 27. chapters of Deuteronomy.

Verse. 32. And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, etc.]
Not the stones of the altar, but stones erected for that very purpose that the
law might be written on them, as we may see Deuteronomy 27. where there is
several directions given first for these stones, then for the altar.

Verse. 33. Half of them over against mount Gerizim, and half of them over
against mount Ebal, etc.] See the note upon Deuteronomy. 27.12.

Verse. 34. And afterward he read all the word of the Law, etc.] That is, the
Priests, by Moses appointment: of which see again the note upon Deuteronomy. 27.12, 13.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 3. ANd when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto
Jericho and Ai, etc.] These Gibeonites were of the Hivites verse. 7. and Chap.
11.19. Their city was great and strong, Chap. 10.2. and it seems they had other
neighboring towns under their government, to wit, Chephirah, and Beeroth, and
Kirioth-jearim, verse. 17. of this chapter, who were therefore also comprehended
in the covenant made with the Israelites. It is said, verse 1. that the hearing
of that which Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai, was the occasion that moved
the kings there mentioned to enter into a confederacy of joining together to
fight with Joshua and with Israel with one accord, and yet here it is said,
that the same report of the destruction of Jericho moved the Gibeonites to come
in and submit themselves to Joshua and the Israelites, and to seek from them
conditions of peace; which shows plainly that it was of God, and not of
themselves, that these Gibeonites were thus wisely careful to provide for
their own safety. Doubtless the same report that brought the other Canaanites
the news of the destruction of Jericho, did also acquaint them how it was
taken, and told them the miraculous fall of their walls and fortresses, and yet
they resolved to fight against them, which was no other then a resolving to
fight against God; which shows, that God had hardened their hearts to their
deserved ruin. On the other side, the Gibeonites, though they had as much
reason because of the greatness of their city to trust in their strength as
any people of the land had, yet when they heard what was done to Jericho and
Ai, they concluded that there was no resisting such a people, and therefore
determined to try if they could make peace with them; and whence could this be
but of God, who taught them to make a better use of these wonderful works of
God then their neighbors had done.

Verse. 4. And took old sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles, old and rent
and bound up.] That is, mended and patched up with pieces that were sown in
where they had been broken.

Verse. 6. And they went to Joshua to the Camp at Gilgal.] This makes it evident
that even after the taking of Jericho the Camp of the Israelites was still at
Gilgal. It seems, because it was a place of some strength, and because they
desired not to remove too far from their brethren whom they had left without
Jordan till they had in some good measure cleared the country before them;
here they kept their standing Camp for diverse years, and only sent out parties
from thence against the inhabitants in several parts as occasion was offered.
As for the plea they used, to move the Israelites to make peace with them, to
wit, that they dwelt in a country far beyond Canaan, We be come from a far
country now therefore make ye a league with us, it proceeded doubtless, from
some assurance they had that the Israelites were come to drive them out, and
dwell in their land, as also from a common fame that was spread abroad, that
God had forbidden them to make any peace with the inhabitants of the land, as
appears evident verse 24. And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was
certainly told thy servants, how that the Lord thy God commanded his servant
Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
before you.

Verse. 7. Peradventure ye dwell among us, and how shall we make a league with
you?] That is, peradventure ye dwell in this land whereof we are come to take
possession, and then we may not make a league with you to let you dwell among
us. And indeed, God had expressly forbidden them the making of peace with any
of the inhabitants of Canaan; to wit, (for so I conceive we must understand it)
unless when they yielded to embrace the Religion of Israel; as we may see
Exodus 23.32, 33. Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor with their gods;
they shall not dwell in thy land, etc. and so again, Exodus 34.12. Deuteronomy. 7.2.
and in many other places. Even where God appointed them to tender peace to
other cities before they proceeded to destroy them, there is an exception made
of the cities of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 20.15, 16. Thus shall thou do unto all the
cities which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these
nations. But of the cities of these people, which the Lord thy God does give
thee for an inheritance, thou shall save alive nothing that breaths.

Verse. 8. And they said unto Joshua, we be thy servants.] The last words of the
Israelites in the foregoing verse, how shall we make a league with you? they
might understand as spoken by way of inquiring what kind of league they desired
to have with them, and that hereupon turning to Joshua, (whom they observed to
be the General for the rest) they answered, we be thy servants, that is, ready
to be commanded, and to receive whatever conditions you shall think fit to
grant us. But however these words doubtless they used to imply not only that
they were friends and not enemies, as their neighbors were, but also that they
were willing to accept of any conditions of peace.

Verse. 9. For we have heard the fame of him and all that he did in Egypt.]
Herein amongst other things they discovered their subtilty that they make no
mention of the Israelites taking of Ai and Jericho, which their citizens could
not so soon have heard of, if they lived as they pretended in a country so
far remote from that place, but only what was done in Egypt, and against
Sihon, and Og, which being long since done, the same thereof might be well in
this time carried to a land far off, beyond the borders of Canaan.

Verse. 14. And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the
mouth of the Lord.] That is, they took them and looked upon them, and through
too much credulity ran away with a conceit, that this plainly showed the
truth of what they had said; never inquiring of God what an answer they should
give them.

Verse. 15. And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them that
that they should live.] Which he might lawfully do, supposing them not to be
the inhabitants of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11. When thou come nigh a city to
fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. And it shall be, if it make thee
answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be that all the people that
is found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and shall serve thee. And
again, verse 15, 16. Thus shall thou do to the cities which are far off from
thee, which are not of the cities of these nations. But of the cities of these
people which the Lord thy God does give thee for an inheritance, thou shall
save alive nothing that breaths.

Verse. 16. And it came to pass that at the end of three days, after they had
made a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbors, etc.]
This is added to set forth the folly of their unadvised rashness, who without
any deliberation do presently make a covenant with the Gibeonites, whereas if
they had but deferred their answer even for a day or two they had found out the
truth, and had not been so gulled and abused as now they were.

Verse. 18. And the children of Israel smote them not, because the Princes of
the Congregations had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel.] That the
Israelites did well in sparing the Gibeonites, because of the oath which their
Princes had taken, and that they had sinned greatly if they had slain them, is
evident 2. Sam. 21.1, 2. where we read, that God sent a famine upon the land,
because Saul four hundred years after this had slain some of the Gibeonites,
and so brake the oath which their fathers had now obtained of Joshua and the
Israelites, and yet Saul did it too in his zeal to the children of Israel and
Judah. If it be objected that the Gibeonites had fraudulently drawn the Princes
into that oath, and therefore there was no reason why they should be tied
thereby to that which they never intended, for they had covenanted to grant
peace to a people that dwelt far off, and the Gibeonites were of the
inhabitants of the land, so that this covenant made with them under these
terms, was of it self void and of none effect: to this I answer, That though
when men are drawn by force or fraud into any promise or covenant, they are not
bound to keep that promise or covenant, and that because he to whom the promise
or covenant is made (with whom only we have to do in this case) cannot by any
rule of equity challenge any right to that which he has obtained by deceit or
violence; yet when men do confirm any such promise or covenant by oath, the
case is otherwise, because they are bound then to God, and not to the man only
that used such fraud and violence, whose wickedness in so drawing them into an
oath cannot make void the engagement that lies upon them that have sworn in
regard of God. And if it be again objected, as it is by many, That the Princes
had sworn to do that which was against the express command of God, who had
often enjoined them to destroy all the inhabitants of Canaan, and not to make
any league of peace with them, as is noted before upon verse. 7. to this I
answer too, That though an oath or vow does not bind men for the doing of any
thing that is absolutely unlawful, yet in this case it was not so, and that
because the charge which God had given them for slaying all the inhabitants of
the land was a particular command, and so far only to bind their consciences
as it might be obeyed without any breach of the Moral Law, as in Rahabs case
is also evident. But here they could not obey that command of Gods concerning
their destroying all the inhabitants of Canaan without perjury, which is
directly against the law and light of nature; and besides, it would have given
the heathen great occasion of blaspheming the name of the Lord, if they had
sworn in his name and had not kept it: all which must needs lie as a strong
bond upon the consciences of the Israelites, strictly to observe this oath
though they were deluded by the Gibeonites: for in this that rule holds good, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice.

Verse. 21. But let them be hewers of wood, and drawers of water unto all the
congregation.] That is, for the use of all the congregation to provide wood and
water which they were to use in their sacrifices: as is evident verse. 27. And
Joshua made them that day hewers of wood, and drawers of water for all the
congregation, and for the altar of the Lord: yet because it is certain that the
inhabitants of these four cities, could not dwell in any one place where the
Tabernacle was seated, nor yet in Jerusalem when the Temple was built, but were
severally dispersed throughout the land, coming up happily in their courses as
the Levites did, to do their service in the house of God; I should think it
most probable, that in the time when they waited not at the Tabernacle as
public servants, they were also employed in other servile offices for the
people. These were they that afterward were called Nethinims, 1. Chron. 9.2.
that is, Deodati, men given to God, or the public service of the Tabernacle:
for though Ezra 8.20. it is said, that David and the Princes appointed the
Nethinims for the service of the Levites; yet it is meant only of the ordering
of them, how they should in their several courses attend upon that service,
for even now they were allotted to this service, and did therein doubtless
attend upon the Levites in the service of the Tabernacle, from this time unto
the days of David.

Verse. 23. Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed
from being bondmen, etc.] These words, Now therefore ye are cursed, the most of
Expositours understand of the curse or punishment of bondage, which for their
dissembling and fraudulent dealing they were adjudged to undergo, and so they
take the following words, and there shall none of you be freed from being
bondmen, to be an explanation of the words that went before; but it is better
understood of that general curse which God had laid upon all the inhabitants
of Canaan, to wit, as if Joshua had said, The curse which God has pronounced
against the people of this land, requires that you should be cut off as well as
the rest; yet because of the oath which we have taken, this curse shall be upon
you in bondage, and not in death. And indeed here was that curse literally
fulfilled in the Gibeonites, which Noah pronounced against the Canaanites in
general, Genesis 9.25. And he said, Cursed be Canaan: a servant of servants shall
he be unto his brethren.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. ANd how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and
were among them.] This is mentioned as the last and greatest cause of the fear
of the king of Jerusalem and his people, to wit, the report they had newly
heard, that the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were
among them. Now by these last words, and were among them, two things may be
employed, to wit, First, that they were not only confederate with them, but
also had become one people with them, having incorporated themselves with the
Israelites, to live under the same laws and government with them: And secondly,
that hereupon they had peaceable intercourse one with another, the Israelites
having free admission into their cities mentioned chap. 9.17. and the
Gibeonites having liberty to go and come to and from the Israelites, as being
now reputed their subjects and servants.

Verse. 2. They feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the
royal cities, etc.] That is, both the king of Jerusalem and his people were
exceedingly afraid, because Gibeon was a very great city, very little inferior
to any of the cities that had kings reigning in them. And indeed, considering
first, what an advantage it might be to the Israelites to have these cities
delivered up to them, both for the supply they might have from thence of all
things requisite for them, and the shelter they might have there, from thence
to infest the neighboring cities: and secondly, what full information they
might receive from the Gibeonites, concerning the state of the whole land, and
all the cities therein: and thirdly, how dangerous their revolt might be, to
move other cities to do the like, no wonder it is though these tidings
concerning the Gibeonites did greatly dismay them.

Verse. 4. Come up unto me and help me, that I may smite Gibeon, etc.] These
kings together with others inhabiting in other parts of Canaan, had before
entered into a confederacy to go with their united forces against the
Israelites, chap. 9.1. But now these that dwelt ^igh to Gibeon, hearing that
the Gibeonites were fallen off to the Israelites, are first called together to
go against Gibeon. Nor need it seem strange that they should resolve thus first
to begin with them; First, because as the timely surprising of these cities of
the Gibeonites would be a notable means to secure their own cities; so the
delivering them up to the Israelites would open a way to their certain ruin.
Secondly, because it was fit that some speedy course should be taken to make
all other cities afraid to fall off to the Israelites as the Gibeonites had
done. Thirdly, because they were not so afraid to encounter with these their
neighbors, as with the Israelites, and hope that by prevailing against these,
they should both daunt the Israelites, and encourage their own people: and,
Fourthly, because their wrath against these neighbors for revolting from them
was so exceeding great, that in case they should weaken themselves by spending
their forces upon them, yet so they might be revenged upon them first, they did
not so much care.

Verse. 6. And the men of Gibeon sent to Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying,
Slack not thy hand, etc.] To wit, before they were besieged, so soon as they
heard these kings were coming against them.

Verse. 7. So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he and all the people of war with
him, etc.] Considering how little assurance Joshua could have that the
Gibeonites would not some way deal treacherously with him, and what cause he
had to fear lest his own soldiers should not be very cheerfully forward to
fight for the defense of those, whom themselves ere-while would have destroyed,
it is much that Joshua should thus readily go to aid the Gibeonites. But then
on the other side, if we consider of how great importance it was for the
Israelites, to get the cities of the Gibeonites into their power, and how also
in point of conscience Joshua was bound to relieve them, that had now yielded
up themselves to be their servants, it will easily appear that Joshua was bound
with all speed to go up and raise the siege of Gibeon, and when he had done his
duty herein, to leave the success to God. Yea, and it may be too he enquired
of God, and received from him that encouragement set down in the following
verse, before he undertook this expedition for the relief of Gibeon, And the
Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not; for I have delivered them into thine
hand, etc.

Verse. 9. Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all
night.] To wit, that he might surprise them suddenly; but yet from hence we
cannot conclude, that they were but one night a marching from Gilgal to Gibeon.

Verse. 11. And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were in
the going down to Beth-horon, that the Lord cast down great stones from heaven
upon them, etc.] It is said in the foregoing verse, that the Lord chased them
along the way that goes up to Beth-horon, and yet here now it is added, that
the Lord slew them with hailstones as they were in the going down to
Beth-horon: the reason whereof may be, because there was an upper and a nether
Beth-horon, 1. Chron. 7.24. by both which it seems the Canaanites fled at this
time, when they were chased by the Israelites: for though it be said in that
place of the Chronicles, that these towns were after built by one Sherah a
famous woman of the stock of Ephraim, yet we must know, that it is usual in
this story to speak of places in the land of Canaan by the names that were
afterward given them by the Israelites; yea, and perhaps too there might be at
this time an upper and a nether Beth-horon, though by that Sherah they were
afterward rebuilt, beautified, and fortified: as for this storm of hail that
fell upon the Canaanites, it was miraculous in a twofold regard; first, in
regard of the exceeding greatness of the hailstones, which were of such a
mighty bigness and weight, that they brained and killed the Canaanites upon
whom they fell, so that they were more which died with the hailstones, then
they which the children of Israel slew with the sword: and secondly, in regard
they were so ordered and levelled as I may say, by the hand of Gods providence,
that though the Israelites pursued the Canaanites so closely, that here and
there they must needs be mingled amongst them, yet they only fell upon the
Canaanites, and touched not one of the Israelites.

Verse. 12. Then spoke Joshua unto the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered
up the Amorites, etc.] For the better understanding of this miraculous passage
concerning Joshuas commanding the sun to stand still, we must know, first,
That whereas it is said in the first place, that Joshua spoke to the Lord,
thereby is meant, that he did first pray unto the Lord, that this miracle might
be wrought, and that to the end they might have the more time to pursue and
destroy the Amorites, and then by the same special instinct of Gods spirit
that moved him to desire this of God, being fully assured that God had heard
his prayer, and that what he desired should be done, he commanded the sun to
stand still, etc. secondly, That whereas in the next clause it follows, and he
said in the sight of all Israel, Sun stand thou still, etc. this is added to
show the assurance of his faith; because he was so undoubtedly persuaded that
God would certainly do what he had prayed for, and desired the people should
take notice of it for their future encouragement, openly in the presence of all
the people he looked up to the heavens, and speaking as it were to the sun,
said, Sun stand thou still, etc. and happily with relation to the peoples
gazing upon him, when in so strange a manner they saw him look up to the sun
and command the sun to stand still, this phrase is used, and he said, not in
the audience but in the sight of all Israel, Sun stand thou still, etc.
thirdly, That for the words themselves which Joshua spoke, Sun stand thou
still upon Gibeon, and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon; there is nothing can
be certainly concluded, but that he did as it were adjure the sun and moon by
the Almighty power of God, to stand still just in the place wherein they were
when he spoke unto them, that so the sun might still give light till they had
made an end of pursuing and destroying their enemies, and that hereby must
needs be intended the stay of the whole body of the moveable heaven, together
with the sun and the moon; for it cannot be meant of staying that peculiar
motion of the Orbs of the sun and moon, whereby they move severally from the
west to the east (for the lengthening of the day could not depend upon that)
but it must be meant of the motion of the heaven, whereby the sun and moon
together with all the other heavenly Orbs, are carried about by the motion of
the supreme Sphere, in the space of four and twenty hours from the east to
the west: Some indeed would conclude from these words, that it was at noon day
when Joshua commanded the sun to stand still, namely, because it was when the
sun was right over Gibeon, as the words they say implie, Sun stand thou
still upon Gibeon; and that therefore also it is said verse. 13. so the sun
stood still in the midst of heaven, and then they take the next clause to be
added, and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon, by way of expressing the same
thing in other words, to wit, that the moon also should stand still and not
bring in night upon them. Again, others would infer from these words that it
was toward sunneset when Joshua commanded the sun to stand still; and that
first, Because it is most probable that the fear of want of daylight to pursue
the enemy when he saw the sun decline apace toward its setting, was the
occasion that moved Joshua to desire this miraculous stay of the sun: and
secondly, Because the words seem to implie that he saw the moon also, when he
said, and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon; as indeed about the new of the
moon it is usually seen toward sunne-setting. But I say, neither of these can
be gathered from the text. The drift doubtless of Joshua was only to express
that the heavenly Orbs should stand still to the end the sun might not set
but continue still to give them light in those parts, only the more
rhetorically to set forth the wonder of the miracle, he mentions both sun and
moon the two great lights of heaven together with Gibeon and Ajalon two places
not far distant one from another; Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and
thou moon in the valley of Ajalon.

Verse. 13. Is it not written in the book of Jasher.] That is, in the book of
the upright, which seems to have been some history, or continued chronicle
of the memorable acts of Gods worthies in those times, which is now lost; it is
mentioned again, 2. Sam. 1.18.

So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down a
whole day.] So that this day was twice as long as it should otherwise have been.

Verse. 14. And there was no day like that, before it or after it, that the Lord
hearkened to the voice of a man, etc.] For though in Hezekiahs time the day was
miraculously lengthened by the suns going backward, 2. Kings 20.11. And
Isaiah the Prophet cried unto the Lord; and he brought the shadow ten degrees
backward, by which it had gone down in the dial of Ahaz; yet it was not
lengthened so much by far as this was, to wit, not above two hours and a
half; and besides that was not done upon the motion of a man desiring it, and
after prayer commanding as it were, that it should be so, as this was, which is
that which is here principally intended: and therefore is it that the prophets
do often allude to this where they speak of the great things which God had done
or would do for his people, Hab. 3.11. The sun and moon stood still in their
habitation: at the light of thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy
glittering spear, and Isa. 28.21. For the Lord shall rise up in mount Perazim,
he shall be wrath as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his
strange work* and bring to pass his act, his strange act.

Verse. 15. And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him unto the camp at
Gilgal.] It is evident, that the several passages related in the sequel of
this chapter were done before they returned to the camp at Gilgal. We must
therefore know, that here is set down beforehand the issue of this war, and
then afterward the Author proceeds to relate the particulars, and then
concludes with these very words again, verse. 43. And Joshua returned, and all
Israel with them unto the camp at Gilgal.

Verse. 21. And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in
peace.] The settled camp of the Israelites was in Gilgal, as is evident by that
which is said before, verse. 15. And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him,
to the camp at Gilgal. But because Joshua, with the greatest part of the army,
which he had brought out to raise the siege at Gibeon, was now encamped before
Makkedah, whilst the rest went further in the pursuit of the flying Canaanites,
therefore it is said here of those that had been in that pursuit of the
Canaanites, that they returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah.

None moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.] This is a
proverbiall speech; but the meaning is, that the Canaanites durst not make the
least resistance against the Israelites that pursued them: so far they were
from lifting up a hand against them, that they scarce durst mutter against
them. See the note upon Exodus, 11.7.

Verse. 24. Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings.] This Joshua
enjoined his Captains to do, not out of a cruel proud insulting mind, but
first, to teach them that they were to show no mercy to this people: secondly,
to encourage and hearten the Captains for the time to come, as by intimating
that thus they should tread all their enemies under their feet, verse. 25. And
Joshua said unto them, Fear not not nor be dismayed, be strong and of good
courage: for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies, against whom ye fight:
thirdly, to manifest Gods singular love to them, and precious esteem of them,
who was pleased to let them tread upon the necks of kings: and fourthly, that
this formidable sight might make them fear to imitate the manners of this
people against whom God had shown such severity. Yea, in this was Joshua a type
of Christ, who does tread Satan under the feet of his people, Romans 16.20. in
and through whom we are more then conquerours, Romans 8.37. yea, even over those
principalities and powers, whom having spoiled, he made a show of them, openly
triumphing over them, Col. 2.15.

Verse. 26. And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on
five trees.] See the note upon chap. 8.29.

Verse. 28. And that day Joshua took Makkedah, etc.] The same day wherein the
sun stood still; for whilst some of his soldiers were pursuing the broken
troops of their enemies, he with the chief strength of his army had encamped
about Makkedah, verse. 21. And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at
Makkedah in peace: and therefore if withal we consider, what a terror they
might be stricken with, by the report of those that fled into their cities, and
told them of his vanquishing of the five kings, I see not why it may not be
thought, that it was surprised that very day.

Verse. 31. And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto
Lachish, etc.] Whose king was one of the five that came up against Gibeon,
verse. 5.

Verse. 32. And the Lord delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took
it on the second day.] To wit, the second day after he had besieged it.

Verse. 34. And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, etc.] Whose king was also
one of the five that came against Gibeon, verse. 5.

Verse. 35. And they took it on that day.] That is, on the day they showed
themselves first before it.

Verse. 37. And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the
king thereof, and all the cities thereof, etc.] This Hebron doubtless was one
of their chiefest cities, as appears by the mention that is here made of other
cities that were under the jurisdiction of this city, and taken together with
it. The King of this city was also one of the five that came up against
Gibeon, as we may see verse. 5. so that he was slain, and hanged at Makkedah
with the other, verse. 23, 26. either therefore his death is here only again
repeated, in this relation of the sacking of this city, or else upon the
tidings of the death of their King, they chose another who was also now slain
with the rest of the people. How this city is said afterward to have been
taken by Caleb, see in the note upon chap. 15.13, 14.

Verse. 38. And Joshua returned and all Israel with him to Debir, and fought
against it.] Concerning this also, see the note upon chap. 15.14.

Verse. 40. He left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as
the Lord God of Israel commanded.] Many thousands of men, women and children,
were doubtless slain in destroying all these cities, and the country there
about, lest therefore it should be thought an act of cruelty, and inhumanity,
thus without pity to shed the blood of this people, the just warrant that he
had from Gods command is here expressed, to wit, that he did in all this as the
Lord God of Israel commanded.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those
things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, etc.]
Called Shimron-meron, chap. 12.10. Very observable was the providence of God in
that which is here related, to wit, that he did not suffer all the kings of the
Canaanites, at once to join their forces together and set upon the Israelites,
but some at one time, and some at another; which the Lord doubtless did out of
his fatherly indulgence toward his people, and the tender respect he had to
their weakness. Had these kings here mentioned joined with the other five,
whom the Israelites had before vanquished, the Israelites must needs be
stricken with great terror and fear: And therefore the Lord was pleased so to
infatuate and stupifie these, that they were quiet, and moved not till their
neighbors were destroyed; by which means the Israelites were heartned with the
conquest of the first, ere the other set upon them, and they had leisure to
refresh themselves in their camp at Gilgal, ere they were called forth to go
upon another service.

Verse. 2. And to the kings that were on the North of the mountains, and of the
plains, south of Cinneroth, etc.] That is, the plains that lay southward of the
country called Cinneroth, and Deuteronomy. 3.17. Chinnereth, afterward Gennesareth;
of which see the note upon Numb. 34.10.

Verse. 3. And to the Hivite under Hermon, in the land of Mizpeh.] It is thought
by some, that the Hivites here mentioned, to whom the king of Hazor sent that
he might draw them into this confederacy against Israel, are described by the
place of their habitation, the Hivite under Hermon, in the land of Mizpeh,
purposely to distinguish them from the Gibeonites, who were also Hivites, that
we might not think, that they were now solicited to break the league which
they had made with the Israelites.

Verse. 6. Be not afraid because of them, for to morrow about this time will I
deliver them up all slain before Israel.] It may be that Joshua was at this
time somewhat the more distressed not only because of the great number of the
enemy, who were as the sand of the seashore for multitude, verse. 5. but also
because the greatest strength of their army consisted in horse and chariots,
of which in the battles fought hitherto with the Canaanites there is no mention
made, and before whom, how the Israelites should be able to stand that were all
foot, he might perhaps doubt; and therefore the Lord does now again assure
Joshua that he should overcome and destroy them all, and that he might not
question the promise made to him, he tells him particularly the very time when
this should be done; To morrow, says he, about this time will I deliver them
up all slain before Israel.

Thou shall though their horses and burn their chariots with fire.] Thou shall
not think to reserve these for thine own use, and therefore shall altogether
make the one unserviceable, and burn up the other. In future times the
Israelites made use both of horse and chariots in war, and that no doubt
without sin. Now God would not allow it; that the worse provided they were
for the conquest of these nations, the more evident it might be that God had
thrust out these nations before them, and the less cause they might have to
glory in themselves.

Verse. 8. And the Lord delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them
and chased them unto great Zidon.] Zidon so called from Sidon the eldest son
of Canaan, Genesis 10.15. is here styled great, not to distinguish it from any
other lesser city of that name, but only because it was indeed a very great
city, and in great fame in those times, partly by reason the inhabitants were
excellent artificers for all kind of workmanship, but especially, because there
was there a goodly haven, and so they had of all other cities the greatest
store of ships and seamen; and indeed, that it was the Metropolis of that
country, afterward called Phenicia, we may the rather think, because Tyrus a
great city too, not far from Zidon is called the daughter of Zidon* Isaiah
53.12.

Verse. 10. And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor and smote the
king thereof with the sword.] Either Jabin the king of Hazor mentioned verse. 1.
escaped in the fight and fled into Hazor, and so was slain there when they took
the city; or else, hearing that their king was slain, they had presently made
another king for the better preservation of their city, the rather, because it
was the head of all those kingdoms in those parts; or else, it may be the king
was slain in the battle, only his death is related here where the story
relates how his city was taken, as is noted before upon a like passage, chap.
10.37. which last seems the most probable, because the like is said afterward
concerning all the kings that were confederate with Jabin in this war, verse
12. And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them did Joshua
take, and smote them with the edge of the sword. For it is not probable, that
all those kings did escape to their cities, and were taken and slain there, or
that there were new kings chosen in the room of those that were slain in all
those cities. As concerning the rebuilding and repeopling again of this Hazor,
whose kings were happily called by the name of Jabin, as those of Egypt were
called Pharaohs, see what is noted upon Judges 4.2. where we read of another
Jabin that reigned in Hazor, that did mightily oppress Gods people.

Verse. 13. But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel
burned none of them, save Hazor only, etc.] That is, that were not beaten down
burnt and ruined in the taking of them. Some it seems in the taking put the
Israelites to more work, and were burnt and destroyed ere they could be won;
but those that could be taken otherwise, the Israelites reserved for their own
use: Only Hazor, though after it was taken it stood still in its strength, was
burnt down to the ground, because the king thereof was the first and chief in
raising these forces, which were now overthrown, against the Israelites.

Verse. 15. As the Lord commanded Moses his servant, etc.] See the note, chap.
10.40.

Verse. 16. So Joshua took all that land, the hills, etc. and the mountain of
Israel, and the valley of the same.] Expositours guess severally what mountain
it was, that is here called the mountain of Israel: But the best and most
probable opinion is, that it is not meant of any one particular mountain, but
that it is meant generally of all the mountainous parts of the land of Canaan
which the Israelites inhabited, considered apart from the tribe of Judah.

Verse. 18. And Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.] Because the
wars which Joshua had made with the kings of Canaan mentioned in the former
chapter are succinctly related in a few words, it might therefore be thought
that they were dispatched in a few days, and therefore to prevent this
mistake, it is here expressly said that these wars lasted a long time,
though they be here briefly related one immediately after another. How many
years were spent in subduing these nations we cannot say; only it is evident
that when Caleb required of Joshua that part of the land which Moses had
promised him chap. 14.6. the wars had lasted about seven years; for that was
five and forty years, as Caleb says there, verse. 10. after he with others
were sent from Kadesh-barnea to search the land of Canaan; out of which if we
take eight and thirty years, which were after that spent in the wandering of
the Israelites through the wilderness, there will remain seven years, which
were spent in the wars of Joshua, from the time that they passed over Jordan
unto the time that Caleb desired of Joshua that peculiar portion of the land
which had been promised him. We know well that God could many ways have driven
or rooted out these kings and their people in a shorter time: But God would
have it thus done by degrees, first, That the more opposition and difficulty
they found in the work, the more the power and the love of God and his
provident care over them might be magnified, who did at last carry them
through all these difficulties. Secondly, that he might hereby exercise their
faith and patience, and teach them whenever they met with great opposition in
any thing God enjoined them, not to despair, but to wait upon God, as knowing
that in the conclusion God would not suffer their hope to make them ashamed.
Thirdly, that the obstinacy of the Canaanites might be the more clearly
discovered to render them inexcusable. and Fourthly, that he might prevent
hereby the increase of wild beasts in the land, according to that which Moses
had said to them, Deuteronomy. 7.22. The Lord thy God will put out those nations
before thee by little and little, thou may not consume them at once, lest
the beasts of the field increase upon thee.

Verse. 19. There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel,
etc.] This is added as a reason why the wars with the Canaanites lasted so
long, as it is said in the foregoing verse, it was because the inhabitants did
all so obstinately stand it out against the Israelites, none of them attempting
to procure conditions of peace from them, save only the Gibeonites.

Verse. 20. For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, etc.] See the note
upon Exodus 7.13.

Verse. 21. And at that time came Joshua and cut off the Anakims from the
mountains, from Hebron, and from Debir, etc.] Concerning these Anakims, see
what is noted before upon Numb. 13.22. where it is also expressly said, that
the Israelites that were at first sent to search the land of Canaan, saw these
Anakims about Hebron, from whence Joshua did now drive them. It is evident that
Hebron, (yea and Debir too, or else another city of the same name) was formerly
taken by Joshua and the Israelites, in that their expedition against those five
kings that had joined their forces together to besiege Gibeon, as we may see
chap. 10.36 37.38. That therefore which is said here, that Joshua cut off the
Anakims from Hebron, from Debir, etc. must be understood of his cutting them
off from the mountains that were about Hebron and Debir. It seems that these
giants, being a kind of wild salvage men, monsters rather then men, did chiefly
abide in dens and caves that were in the mountains, or at least, that when
Joshua had prevailed in that part of the land, and had taken the several towns
and cities there, and destroyed the inhabitants, many of these monsters had
withdrawn themselves to those their fastnesses and strong holds, from whence
afterward they brake forth into the countries adjoining, and so thereupon
Joshua went out against them with his forces, and cut them off, some at one
time and some at another, from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from
Anab, that is, the mountains adjoining to those cities, and from all the
mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel, that is, the
mountains in that portion of the land which fell to the tribe of Judah, and
indeed from all the mountains throughout the land of Canaan which fell to the
rest of the Israelites: for Judah, by reason of their dignity, is often
mentioned as distinct from the other tribes; and in this regard I conceive this
expression is used, from all the mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains
of Israel, and not with reference to that division of the land betwixt the
kingdom of Judah and the kingdom of Israel in Jeroboams revolt, it being most
probable that this book was written before that time, even before David had
cast out the Jebusites out of Jerusalem, as may be gathered from that place,
chap. 15.63. As for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children
of Judah could not drive them out; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of
Judah at Jerusalem unto this day. The greatest difficulty in this place is
this, that here it is said, that Joshua cut off the Anakims from Hebron, from
Debir, etc. cities that he had taken before from the inhabitants, chap. 10.36.
etc. and yet afterward, chap. 15.14. it is said, that Caleb took Hebron and
drove the Anakims thence. To this some answer, That though Joshua took Hebron,
and afterward cut off the Anakims from the mountains about Hebron, as it is
here said; yet in process of time the inhabitants, and especially these
Anakims did again seize upon Hebron and possess it, and so were after Joshuas
death driven out thence by Caleb: (for though this be related chap. 15.14. yet
that it was not done till after the death of Joshua, is evident (they say) in
the first chapter of Judges, verse. 9. where the same story is again related.)
But because it is evident in the fourteenth chapter of this book verse. 12. that
Caleb whilst Joshua was yet living desired Hebron and the mountainous country
about it to be given him for his inheritance, as Moses had promised it should
be, undertaking withal, that with Gods help he would drive out the Anakims
thence, Give me (says he) this mountain, etc. If so be the Lord will be with
me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the Lord said: nor is it
probable that ever the Lord suffered the Canaanites to recover one foot of that
land, out of which Joshua had expelled them, till after the death of Joshua,
when by their sins they provoked the Lord against them; nor that the
valourous Caleb would suffer the Canaanites to roost so long in that place
which was given him for his inheritance, as till after the death of Joshua:
therefore I conceive, that the truer answer for the resolving of this
difficulty is this, That it was Caleb that did drive out the Anakims out of the
mountains about Hebron, as is related chap. 15.14. only it is here ascribed to
Joshua, because Joshua was their chief General, and so it was done under his
government and command, though it were done by Caleb. However the destroying
the Anakims throughout the land of Canaan is here particularly recorded, that
in Gods goodness and power in cutting them now off, they might see the folly
of their forefathers infidelity, who were so scared with the sight and report
of the formidable stature of these giants, that they would not enter the land
notwithstanding all that Moses, Joshua, and Caleb could say to them.

Verse. 22. There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children of
Israel; only in Gaza, in Gath, etc.] These were cities of the Philistims,
whose land was also within the compass of the promise made to the Israelites,
Exodus 23.31. And I will set thy bounds from the red sea, even unto the sea of
the Philistims, though because of their sins they prevailed not as yet so
far. In these cities there were of these Anakims, these giants still
remaining many years after: for Goliath was of Gath: see 1. Sam. 17.4. etc. and
those four huge giants mentioned 2. Sam. 21.16. etc. were all of the
Philistims.

Verse. 23. And Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the Lord said
unto Moses, etc.] That is, he vanquished the whole land before mention^d; or he
is said to have taken the whole land, because he had so far subdued it, that
none of the inhabitants durst take up arms against them, or any way molest
them; so that they might now peaceably make a division of it amongst the
tribes, though there were some places which the Canaanites had yet in their
possession, as is largely expressed in the beginning of the 13. chapter, yet
they durst not stir against the Israelites; and therefore is that clause
added in the last words of this chapter, and the land rested from war.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. NOw these are the kings of the land which the children of Israel
smote, etc.] In this chapter there are briefly presented as it were in a table
or map, the several countries and kings vanquished by Moses, Joshua, and the
Israelites, that beholding them all thus jointly together, we might be the more
affected with the consideration of Gods goodness and faithfulness toward his
people.

From the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the plain on the east.] This
was the length of the country on the outside of Jordan; it reached from the
river Arnon, where it ran into the dead sea, unto mount Hermon.

Verse. 2. And from half Gilead, unto the river Jabbok, etc.] For the other half
of Gilead was possessed by Og, as we may see, verse. 5. See the note also upon
Number. 32.40.

Verse. 9. The king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one.] This clause which is
added concerning the city of Ai, that it was nigh unto Bethel, is to
distinguish it from another city of the same name in the country of the
Amorites, whereof the prophet Jeremy speaks, Jer. 49.3. Howl O Hesbon, for Ai
is spoiled.

Verse. 23. The king of the nations of Gilgal, one.] This cannot be that Gilgal
where the Israelites pitched their tents immediately after they had passed over
Jordan: for there was no city that had a king reigning in it, and therefore it
is probably conjectured by many Expositours, that this was some city of that
name in that part of the land of Canaan which was called Galilee, yea and
Galilee of nations, Esa. 9.1. as this Gilgal is here called Gilgal of nations;
to wit, because the inhabitants of this place were a mixed people of several
nations, or because being a place of great trading, many several nations
resorted thither for commerce, and so continued there often for many years
together. Some are of opinion, that Tidal Genesis 14.1. who was one of those kings
that fought against Sodom, was king of this country.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. NOw Joshua was old and stricken in years, and the Lord said unto him,
Thou art old, etc.] God had promised that Joshua should divide this land unto
the people, chap. 1.6. Be strong, and of a good courage: For unto this people
shall thou divide for an inheritance the land which I swear unto their fathers
to give them (and herein was he a type of Christ, who having vanquished all our
enemies, is now ascended up into heaven to prepare a place for us, John 14.2.
In my fathers house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told
you: I go to prepare a place for you.) He therefore being now old, God calls
upon him to dispatch this work before he dies, and not to defer it till they
were possessed of all, as happily he thought he must have done.

Verse. 2. This is the land that still remains: all the borders of the
Philistines, and all Geshuri.] The land of the Philistines lay along the coasts
of the midland sea; and the land of Geshuri was on the North part of Canaan.

Verse. 3. From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron
northward, which is counted to the Canaanite, etc.] That is, this land of the
Philistines belongs to Canaan, and consequently to the Israelites, though as
yet they have not taken it: For the Philistines (called Caphtorims because
thence they came, Amos 9.7. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of
Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor?) entered upon this part of Canaan,
drove out the old inhabitants and dwelt in it themselves, Deuteronomy. 2.23. The Avims
which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out
of Caphtor, destroyed them and dwelt in their stead. Concerning Sihor, see the
note upon Number. 34.30.

Also the Avites.] Or the Avims, Deuteronomy. 2.23. who being expelled out of their
land by the Philistines as is above noted, did yet it seems continue in some
portion of their land adjoining to the Philistines.

Verse. 4. From the south all the land of the Canaanites, etc.] That is, as this
land of the Philistines, which lies at the south end of the seacoasts, so also
all the land of the Canaanites from thence along the seacoasts, was not yet
possessed by the Israelites, even Mearah (or the cave) that is besides the
Sidonians and Aphek, a town in the tribe of Asher not far from Sidon, and so
to the borders of the Amorites; for there were Amorites on both sides of
Jordan: There was a town indeed called Aphek whose king was slain by Joshua,
chap. 12.18. but this it seems was not that, but another in the tribe of Asher
called Aphik, Judges 1.31.

Verse. 5. And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon toward the sun
rising, etc.] The Giblites were a people who inhabited Gebel, Psalm. 83.7. a
promontary near Sidon. All their country and all Lebanon, etc. was not yet
subdued. For now he turns to the midland sea, to show what lay unvanquished on
the northern bounds, to wit, the country about Libanus; and so easternly as
far as Hamath, where even in David's time there was a Canaanitish king, 2.
Sam. 8.9.

Verse. 6. Them will I drive out before the children of Israel.] This promise is
to be understood conditionally, if they should continue faithful in keeping
covenant with him; wherein failing they never came to possess them, though in
David's and Solomon's time they became tributary unto them.

Only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites, etc.] That is, even that land
before spoken of, not yet conquered; which God enjoins to strengthen their
faith, and that having it in their charter from God, this might be a spur to
them in future times not to neglect the seeking of it, and driving out the rest
of the nations. See the note upon Number. 26.53.

Verse. 8. With whom the Reubenites, and the Gadites have received their
inheritance, etc.] That is, with which tribe of Manasseh, (to wit, the other
half of them) the Reubenites and the Gadites had already received their
inheritance without Jordan. For these words are added, to show the reason why
in the foregoing verse, Joshua was commanded to divide the land within Jordan,
to the nine tribes and the half tribe of Manasseh, to wit, because the
Reubenites and the Gadites had already received their inheritance together with
the other half of the Manassites in the land without Jordan, which Moses had
given them. And though there may seem to be a tautology, or a vain repetition
of the same thing in the following words, which Moses gave them, even as Moses
the servant of the Lord gave them, yet if the words be well weighed we shall
find it is not so; for that second clause, even as Moses the servant of the
Lord gave them, is added, as it were, to imply the just confirming of the
former donation now by Joshua, and the rest that now divided the land; as if it
had been said, they have already received their inheritance which Moses gave
them beyond Jordan, as is fitting, because Moses the servant of the Lord did so
order it.

Verse. 9. From Aroer that is upon the bank of the river Arnon, etc.] Here first
the whole land without Jordan is described, which was by Moses given to the
Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the one half tribe of Manasseh; and then
afterward is shown what each of them had severally.

Verse. 11. And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites.] Even
the border of the Geshurites and the Maachathites are here mentioned as a part
of the land without Jordan, belonging to the two tribes and a half planted
there, because Moses had indeed given them their country together with the
rest, though as yet they had it not in their possession, as is afterward
expressed verse 13.

Verse. 12. For these did Moses smite and cast them out.] To wit, Sihon and Og
before mentioned and their people. For this cannot be referred to all the
inhabitants of the land before named, because it is expressly said in the
following verse, that the Geshurites and the Maachathites were not cast out.

Verse. 13. Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites,
etc.] Though the land without Jordan was vanquished whilst Moses was yet
living, yet they did not then drive out these Geshurites and Maachathites, who
inhabited the outmost skirts of the country, to wit, because having in their
possession enough for the present use of the two tribes and a half that were
planted there, it was not judged requisite to delay their passing over Jordan
till they had fully cleared all the utmost corners of that land. Neither was it
therefore any sin in Moses and the Israelites thus at first to forbear a
while the casting out of these people. But yet when in after times they
continued still to suffer them to roost amongst them, that was an act of base
sloth, and is noted doubtless in the last words of this verse to their just
reproach, the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until
this day.

Verse. 14. Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave none inheritance.] This, which
is in so many places repeated, is here inserted to show the reason of that,
verse 7. why God enjoined Joshua to divide the land within Jordan unto the nine
tribes and the half of Manasseh, to wit, because the tribe of Levi was to have
no part of the land; for had they been to have had a share too, there would
have been still ten tribes and a half to provide for.

Verse. 15. And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben inheritance
according to their families.] That is, proportionably according to the number
of their families. Now the bounds of each tribe are thus exactly set down to
prevent all discord and division for the time to come.

Verse. 16. And their coast was from Aroer, etc.] That is, it reached from Aroer
exclusively. Aroer indeed belonged to the tribe of Gad, Number. 32.34. And the
children of Gad built Dibon and Ataroth and Aroer. So that the city of Aroer
and the outsides of the plains of Medeba (for the plain it self was a part of
Reubens possession) are here made the bounds for this tribe.

Verse. 17. Heshbon and all her cities that are in the plain of Dibon, etc.]
This town is reckoned amongst Reubens possessions, Number. 32.37. And the children
of Reuben built Heshbon, yet Josh. 21.39. and 1. Chron. 6.81. it is reckoned
amongst the cities of Gad given to the Levites. The next city Dibon is indeed
reckoned amongst the cities of Gad, Number. 32.34. And the children of Gad built
Dibon, but the reason of this is, because they stood in the confines of both
tribes, and so were in common inhabited by both.

Verse. 21. And all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites which reigned in
Heshbon.] That is, and all the kingdom of Sihon in those parts within the
bounds before mentioned: for it is expressly said, verse 27. that the rest of
the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshon was given to Gad. And this seems added,
partly to imply that though some of these cities had been the Moabites, yet at
that time they were Sihons, and so according to Gods commandment they meddled
not with the Ammonites and Moabites country.

Whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, etc.] These five
princes of Midian were not slain at the same time, and in the same battle,
wherein Sihon was slain at Jahaz, Numb. 21.23, 24. but long after, by a party
that were purposely sent out by Moses against the Medianites, Numb. 31.8. and
therefore it is very probably conceived by Expositours, that the reason why the
death of Sihon, and these princes, is mentioned here together is, because these
princes, though they were princes of Midian, yet withal were (as it follows
here in the next words) Dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the country, to wit, in
the country of the Amorites, where Sihon reigned, and so aided him in his
war against the Israelites, and however they were not slain then together
with Sihon, but escaped away into the land of Midian, and Sihon being now dead,
took upon them the power and title of kings (for so they are therefore called,
Numb. 31.8.) in some cities of Midian, that were happily before tributary to
Sihon, yet afterward in another expedition of the Israelites, which they
undertook by the direction of Moses, against the Midianites, they were slain as
Sihon their Lord was before in a former battle, and so the cutting off both of
Sihon and these his vassals, is here mentioned together. Some Expositours do
indeed otherwise conceive of that last clause, Which were Dukes of Sihon,
dwelling in the country, to wit, that though they were the vassals of Sihon,
yet they were native Midianites, and such as dwelt in that country, and so
were the more zealous for the defense of their country against the Israelites,
and so the slaying of Sihon and these princes of Midian is here mentioned
together, only because both the one and the other were slain by the
Israelites, and much about the same time; but that where the text is discribing
the country of Sihon, it should be said of these princes, that they were Dukes
of Sihon, dwelling in the country, meaning thereby the country of Midian, may
be justly thought somewhat improbable, and therefore the first Exposition seems
to me the best.

Verse. 22. Balaam also the son of Beor the Soothsayer did the children of
Israel slay, etc. See the note upon Numb. 24.25.

Verse. 23. And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan and the border
thereof.] That is, the banks, or border, or coasts of Jordan all along was the
border, to wit, the western border of Reuben.

Verse. 25. And their coast was Jasher, and all the cities of Giliad.] That is,
all the cities of Gilead within the bounds afterward mentioned; for half Gilead
was given to the tribe of Manasseh, verse. 31.

And half the land of the children of Ammon, etc.] Which it seems Sihon had
taken away from the Ammonites, as he had also encroched upon the Moabites
country, Numb. 21.26. For Heshbon was the city of Sihon, the king of the
Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his
land out of his hand, even unto Arnon, which might be the ground of that
challenge which the king of the Ammonites made to this land, Judge. 11.13. And
the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah,
because Israel took away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon
even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again
peaceably. For otherwise the Israelites were forbidden to take any part of the
Ammonites land away from them, Deuteronomy. 2.19. And when thou come nigh to the
children of Ammon, distress them not, nor meddle with them.

Verse. 26. And from Heshbon, unto Ramath-mizpeh, etc.] Called Ramoth in Gilead,
chap. 20.8.

Verse. 29. And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh.] See the
note upon Number. 32.33.

Verse. 30. And all the towns of Jair which are in Bashan, threescore cities.]
See the note upon Number. 32.41.

Verse. 31. And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of
Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the children of Machir, the son of
Manasseh.] See Number. 32.39.

Even unto the one half of the children of Machir by their families.] For
Manasseh had only one son, to wit, Machir, whose sons had their
inheritance half within Jordan, and half without.

Verse. 33. But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance.] See the
note above upon verse 14.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse. 1. WHich Eleazar the Priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads
of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel distributed for
inheritance unto them.] Who were chosen by the Lord, and expressed by name,
Number. 34.17. See the note upon that place.

Verse. 2. By lot was their inheritance, etc.] For the manner how this was done,
see the note upon Number. 26.55. Only the place where they should have their
portion was divided by lot, and afterward the quantity of their several
portions was laid out by Joshua, Eleazar, and the heads of the tribes,
according as the tribe was more or fewer in number; the first being done by
casting of lots to prevent all murmurings and discontents, and to make it the
more evident that the prophesies both of Jacob and Moses concerning the
several inheritances of the tribes were from God.

Verse. 4. For the children of Joseph were two tribes, etc.] This is added to
show how there were still nine tribes and an half remaining (amongst whom the
land was to be divided) notwithstanding the Levites were not reckoned amongst
them. See also the note, Gen 48.5.

Verse. 6. Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal; and Caleb,
etc.] It is evident by this place, that they began the division of Canaan in
Gilgal, though they finished it afterward in Shiloh, chap. 18.1, 6. and that
because the Tabernacle was at present in Gilgal, and it was fit this work
should be done in the presence of God, both that it might be done the more
reverently and religiously, and that hereby they might be put in mind, that it
was the Lord their God that would reach forth unto each tribe the lot which he
had assigned for their portion. Now when they were met together about this
great business, it is said here, that Caleb (who is called the son of
Jephunneh, the Kenezite: because he was descended from Kenaz of the tribe of
Judah, 1. Chron. 4.13, 15. and to distinguish him from another Caleb, who was
the son of Hezron, 1. Chron. 2.18.) came to Joshua to demand that portion of
the land by way of special privilege, which God had long since promised him;
and because many of his tribe, that is, of the chief men of his tribe went
along with him, to wit, to countenance him, and to further him in his suit;
both in regard that Caleb was a man of great eminency in their tribe, and also
that the whole tribe were to be in some sort gainers by this extraordinary
portion conferred upon him, therefore it is said in the first place, that the
children of Judah came unto Joshua; and then afterward, that Caleb, attended
thus with the chief elders of Judah, propounded to Joshua the business about
which they came.

Thou know the thing that the Lord said unto Moses the man of God,
concerning me and thee, in Kadesh-barnea.] It is much questioned by
Expositours, what the thing is that the Lord said unto Moses concerning Caleb
and Joshua, which Caleb here means. Some hold that so far as it concerns Caleb,
it is meant of that particular promise, which afterward he does plainly
express, verse. 9. to wit, that Hebron and the land adjoining should be his
inheritance: and for Joshua, they say it is meant of some such like particular
promise that was then also made to him, though it be not expressed in the
story, as happily, that he should succeed Moses in the government of Israel, or
that he should choose what city or portion in the land he pleased, to be his
peculiar inheritance: and this they judge the more probable, First, because it
is not likely but that he dealing faithfully in the answer they returned
concerning the land which they had searched, as well as Caleb, the Lord also
rewarded him by some special promise as well as Caleb: and, Secondly, because
it is expressly said chap. 19.50. that according to the word of the Lord, they
gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath-serah in mount Ephraim. Again,
others hold that the thing here meant that the Lord said to Moses, both
concerning Caleb and Joshua, is that mentioned Number. 14.30. Doubtless ye shall
not come into the land concerning which I swear to make you dwell therein, save
Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun. But all things
considered, I conceive it most probable, that Caleb spoke this indefinitely, of
every thing which the Lord had spoken to Moses concerning Joshua and Caleb, to
wit, that he doubted not but Joshua knew well what God had said to Moses in
Kadesh-barnea concerning them both, when they returned thither from searching
the land; and so by affirming this in general, he makes way to the propounding
of that particular promise, verse. 9. which God had made to him, that Hebron and
the country adjoining should be his inheritance, concerning which it was
necessary that he should appeal to Joshuas knowledge, because there were none
else now living that could be witnesses of it, and in propounding this
introduction to that which he had further to say, he calls Moses the man of
God, that what God had promised by Moses his special servant might be the more
regarded by them, Thou know, says he, the thing that the Lord said unto
Moses the man of God concerning thee and me in Kadesh-barnea.

Verse. 7. Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me
from Kadesh-barnea.] See the note, chap. 11.18.

And I brought him word again as it was in mine heart.] That is, I told him
truly what I thought of the land, and of our going to possess it, nor did
either for fear or favor of any man speak one word otherwise then as in my
conscience I thought. I did not say as the other spies said, to please them,
nor did I on the other side encourage the people to enter upon the land,
thereby to currie favor either with Moses or the people, but I did it
sincerely, because I did indeed verily believe, that God would certainly
deliver it into our hands. Nor can this be counted any blemish to Caleb that he
thus speaks in his own commendation; That his brethren might not tax him either
of injustice or ambition, for that which he was now about to require of Joshua,
it was fit he should show upon what just grounds it was at first promised him.

Verse. 8. My brethren that went up with me made the heart of the people melt:
but I wholly followed the Lord my God.] To wit, by persuading the people to
enter the land which the Lord had brought them to, even when the rest of the
spies did so exceedingly discourage them; which was a singular proof of the
uprightness of Calebs heart toward God.

Verse. 9. And Moses swear on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet
have trodden, shall be thine inheritance, etc.] Hereby it is evident, that there
was a particular promise made unto Caleb at Kadesh-Barnea, that Hebron and the
land adjoining should be his, when the Israelites came to possess Canaan, and
that this place in the land was given him rather then any other, because when
the spies had seen those giants, the Anakims, and were stricken with fear, when
they saw them there, Numb. 13.22. And they ascended by the south, and came unto
Hebron, where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak were, and yet
Caleb afterward opposed these his fainthearted brethren, and when they objected
the invincible strength of the place and people, he encouraged his people, and
assured them that they should easily vanquish them; either therefore those
places in Moses his story concerning Caleb must be understood of this
particular gift, though at first reading they would not seem to import so much,
Numb. 14.24. But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him (and
has followed me fully) him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and
his seed shall possess it. And again, Deuteronomy. 1.36. Save Caleb the son of
Jephunneh, he shall see it, and to him will I give the land that he has trodden
upon, and to his children, because he has wholly followed the Lord; or else,
there was some particular promise made to him concerning this inheritance,
together with that mentioned in those places forenamed, though it be not
expressed, and that confirmed with an oath, pronounced by Moses in the name of
the Lord. For so we read it, Number. 14.21, 23, 24. But as truly as I live, all
the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord, etc. Surely they shall
not see the land which I swear unto their fathers, neither shall any of them
that provoked me see it. But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit
with him (and has followed me fully) him will I bring into the land whereinto
he went, and his seed shall possess it.

Verse. 10. And now behold, the Lord has kept me alive, as he said, these
forty and five years, etc.] As if he should have said, God has you see even
miraculously preserved my life and strength, and so reserved me as it were to
enjoy this portion of land, which was then promised me.

Verse. 11. As my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, both
to go out and come in.] See the note upon Numb. 27.17.

Verse. 12. Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the Lord spoke in that
day.] That is, the mountainous country promised him by Moses, wherein Hebron,
Debir, and some other towns stood. See chap. 11.21.

For thou heardest in that day that the Anakims were there, and that the cities
were great and fenced.] This he may speak as intimating that seeing he himself
would undertake the expelling of the giants that dwelt there, though the most
formidable in all the land of Canaan, his desire was the more reasonable,
because he was to get with so much danger and difficulty the place that he
desired of them. But I rather conceive that this is added, to clear it that
this was the place promised him, to wit, because it was the place where the
Anakims dwelt, whose huge bodies and great fenced cities were formerly so
dreadful to the other spies that went with him.

If so be the Lord will be with me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as
the Lord said.] This he says, not as doubting Gods faithfulness and
assistance, but as thereby implying the difficulty of the work: but that he
reposed himself on the help and assistance of God, see the note chap. 11.24.

Verse. 13. And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh,
Hebron for an inheritance.] That is, he commended him, approved his motion,
granted his request, and desired God to bless it both to him and his. How this
is said to be Calebs inheritance that was afterward given to the Levites, see
chap. 21.11.

Verse. 15. And the land had rest from war.] We have this clause before, chap.
11.23. Here it is repeated again, 1. to intimate, That though the foregoing
passage concerning Calebs desiring Hebron be here inserted, yet it was done
before Joshua had ended his wars, and that however all the victories of
Joshua be recorded in the tenth and eleventh chapters, because he would join
them altogether, yet many of these things hereafter expressed were done before
the wars were ended: and secondly, To make way hereby to the relation of that
which was further done concerning the division of the land, which was not till
the land had rest.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. THis then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their
families, even to the border of Edom, etc.] In this chapter the narration of
the dividing the land within Jordan by lot is continued, which was broken off
in the foregoing chapter, to show, how Caleb demanded that Hebron and the
adjacent mountain might be reserved to him, as his by an extraordinary promise
which God had long since made to him. That the lots were only to decide in
what part of the country each tribe should be planted, and that afterward the
quantity of the land which each tribe should have was set out by Joshua,
Eleazar, and the heads of the tribes, chosen to be the men that should divide
the land, is noted before upon the second verse of the foregoing chapter, as
likewise, Number. 26.55. What manner of lottery they used in this business is no
where expressed. The common opinion of the Hebrew writers is, that there were
two pots, or other vessels, set before the Tabernacle, the one having the names
of the tribes, that were to have their portion of the land assigned, the other
just so many lots, in each of which such and such a part of the land was
described, and that some man appointed to that service, happily Eleazar the
high priest, drew out of one pot one of the tribes, and then out of the other
pot one of the lots there, and so then that tribe had their portion assigned
them in that part of the land described and set forth in that lot; and so
accordingly with the rest. And indeed though this be not expressed thus any
where in the Scripture, yet the phrase that is often used in the following
chapters, that such a lot came out and such a lot came up, may seem covertly to
imply so much, as chap. 19. v. 1.10, 17, etc. Some indeed hold that there was
but one pot wherein there was so many lots as there were tribes that were to
have their inheritance in the land within Jordan, each lot having a several
portion of land described and set out therein, and that there was a lot drawn
for each tribe in their several order, as first there was a lot drawn for the
tribe of Judah, as is here said, because that tribe had the chief Prerogative
of the firstborn conferred upon them in stead of Reuben; and secondly there
was lots drawn for the two tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh that were descended
of Joseph, chap. 16.1. and that because they had also some part of the dignity
of Reubens primogeniture or birthright of the firstborn conferred upon them;
and so successively in the rest. But I see not how this can so well stand with
the expressions which the Scripture uses concerning the lots: for those
phrases which are used chap. 19. The second lot came forth to Simeon, verse 1.
and the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun, verse. 10. and the fourth
lot came out to Issachar, verse 17, etc. do methinks very probably intimate,
that it was not by appointment but by lot also, that such a tribe had the first
lot, and such a tribe the second, etc. even as the lots wherein their names
were written came first to hand; and surely herein the hand of God in ordering
the lots was the more evident and wonderful; as for instance, That Judahs lot
should come out first, and then that his lot should fall in the richest and
best part of the kingdom, how apparently were the people herein taught to take
notice of the purpose of God in exalting this tribe above the rest. As for the
dividing of the land in several lots it may be questioned, whether there were
not now at the first certain men sent out to view the land, that they might the
better know how to divide it into so many several lots, as they did afterward
when after the work had been given over for a time they set upon it again,
chap. 18.4, 5. Give out from among you three men for each tribe, and I will
send them, and they shall rise and go through the land, and describe it
according to the inheritance of them, and they shall come again to me, and they
shall divide it into seven parts, etc. But because this is so fully expressed
there and no mention is made of any such thing here, therefore we may rather
think that now at first they went not so exactly to work, but only set out to
each lot a portion of land as well as they could guess according to that
knowledge they had got of the land by several inrodes they had made into it,
till upon the three first lots that were drawn the people began to suspect that
Judahs lot being so large, there would not be a proportionable share left for
the other tribes, and so before they would set upon the work again, there were
certain men sent out purposely to make a more full discovery of the land, that
they might the more equally set out to each lot a several share. But however,
here we have the lot of Judah (which by the singular providence of God came out
first) described by the several bounds thereof, as it was in the first
division of the lots, This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of
Judah by their families, even to the border of Edom; and the last clause, even
to the border of Edom, is added to show that the description here given us of
the bounds of Judahs portion shall begin at the east end of the south coast,
which was toward the wilderness of Edom: As for the south coast which is here
largely described in the four first verses of the chapter, what is to be noted
therein you may see. Number. 34.3, 4, 5, etc.

Verse. 5. And the east border was the salt sea; even unto the end of Jordan.]
That is, their border on the east side was from the place where their south
border was drawn, verse 1. to wit, the wilderness of Zin all along the salt
sea, that is, the lake of Sodom, even unto the place where the river Jordan
runs into this lake.

And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea, at the
uppermost part of Jordan.] That is, their border on the north side (which
divided the tribe of Judah from the tribe of Benjamin) went from the bay of the
dead sea where the river Jordan ran into it, and so went up to Beth-hogla, and
then passed along on the North of Betharabah, leaving Betharabah on the South
in the lot of Judah, verse 61. Indeed, chap. 18.22. this city is reckoned
amongst Benjamins cities; But this is because it stood on the confines of Judah
and Benjamin, and so is reckoned as many others are to both tribes.

Verse. 6. And the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben.]
That is, Bohan the Reubenite. In remembrance of some remarkable passage that
concerned this man, was this stone set up and called the stone of Bohan.

Verse. 7. The border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor.] This is
not that Debir taken by Othniel, verse 17. for that was near Hebron and not so
close upon Judahs border.

And so northward looking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to
Adummim, which is on the south side of the river.] That is, and so from Debir
it turned northward at that place where Gilgal is, called Geliloth, chap.
18.17. right against Adummim, which is on the south side of the river Kidron,
so that he who should carry the line should have Gilgal before him northward,
and Adummim behind him on the south side of the river.

Verse. 8. And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the
south side of the Jebusite, the same is Jerusalem.] That is, it went from
Enrogel, or the fullers fountain (which was not far from Jerusalem; for
Adonijah and his conspiratours being at Enrogel heard the sound of the
trumpets, and the shouting of the people when Solomon was anointed king at
Jerusalem, 1. Kings 1.9, 49.) by the valley of the son of Hinnom, unto the
south side of the city Jebus, which was afterward called Jerusalem; not the
fort of Sion, for that was more southward in Judahs portion, but the city it
self which by that means was shut out of Judahs lot and left in the portion of
Benjamin, see the following note upon verse 63.

Verse. 9. And the border was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjath-jearim.] Called
Kirjath-baal, verse 60. and chap. 18.14.

Verse. 10. And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir,
etc.] That is, having before fetched a compass northward, it now turned
westward unto mount Seir, which was not that in the land of Idumea, but
another of that name.

Verse. 12. And the west-border was to the great sea and the coast thereof.] See
chap. 13.23.

Verse. 14. And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, etc.] That is, from
the mountains about Hebron. See the note upon chap. 11.21.

Verse. 15. He came up thence to the inhabitants of Debir, etc.] There was a
Debir taken before by Joshua chap. 10.38, 39. but that which Joshua took, I
conceive, was not this which lay so near to Hebron which Caleb now took, but
that mentioned above, verse. 7. in the borders of Judah, and much nearer to
Jordan, whence it is happily that Joshua is said to have taken that in his
return toward Gilgal, chap. 10.38. and that here this city is expressly said
to be that city which was formerly called Kirjath-sepher, to distinguish it
from Debir taken by Joshua.

Verse. 16. He that smites Kirjath-sepher, and takes it, to him will I give
Achsah my daughter to wife.] That is, I will give my consent that he shall have
my daughter: we cannot hence infer that he might lawfully force upon his
daughter what husband he pleased, for this he speaks as taking it for granted
that his daughter would be guided by him.

Verse. 17. And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb took it.] This
was that Othniel which was afterward the judge of Israel, Judge. 3.9. And when
the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised up a deliverer to
the children of Israel, who delivered them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz,
Calebs younger brother: and happily for this exploit he became first famous
amongst the Israelites, and we may well think that this story is here inserted
chiefly for his sake; by brother here may be meant kinsman, and so be referred
to Othniel, that he was the brother, that is, the near kinsman of Caleb; but
because of that word (younger) added, Judge. 1.13. Othniel the son of Kenaz
Calebs younger brother: and so again Judge. 3.9. I conceive this word brother is
to be referred to Kenaz, that he was the father of Othniel, and the brother of
Caleb: for though Caleb was the son or grandchild of Kenaz, and thence called
a Kenezite, chap. 14.16. yet he might have a Kenaz to his brother too.

Verse. 18. And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field, etc.] This following passage concerning the
enlarging of Achsahs dowry, by a portion of land which her father gave her, may
well be added, to show how Caleb prized Othniel because of this his taking
Debir, It came to pass, says the text, as she came unto him, that is, as she
was going from her fathers to her husbands family, she moved him to ask of her
father a field, that is, taking the opportunity of her being now to leave her
father (for then the affections of fathers are wont to be moved toward their
daughters) she persuaded her husband to ask a field of her father, to wit, over
and above that which he had already given her, as an increase of her dowry: For
Caleb had sons, 1. Chron. 4.15. and in this case it is clear, they might not
give away any part of their inheritance from their sons to their daughters,
Numb. 27.8, 9. If a man die and have no son, then ye shall cause his
inheritance to pass unto his daughter. And if he have no daughter, then ye
shall give his inheritance unto his brethren: and therefore we must know that
the land which Caleb had already given his daughter, and which she further now
desired of him, was to be given her only as a dowry for term of life, or till
the year of Jubilee. Being it seems not content with that portion of land,
which her father had already given her, verse. 19. she moved her husband to ask,
or (for so also the words may be understood) she moved her husband that she
might ask another field, to wit, as an enlargement of her dowry.

And she lighted off her ass: and Caleb said unto her, What would thou?] We
may two several ways understand this which is here said concerning Achsah
Calebs daughter, that she lighted off her ass: for either the meaning may be,
that when they had set her upon an ass, that she might ride home with her
husband Othniel to his house, she slipped down again, as in discontent and
seeming to be unwilling to go with her husband, to wit, because her husband had
not as she had moved him desired of her father an enlargement of her dowry, and
so thereupon her father demanded of her, what would thou? as perceiving that
she was discontented, and desirous to know what it was that troubled her: Or
else, that having desired her husband, as they were riding away from her
fathers house, to make suit to her father for another field to be added to what
he had already given her, when she perceived that he was loath to do it, or
persuaded her rather to undertake it her self, she lighted off her ass, as
addressing her self to make her request to her father, which her father
perceiving, demanded of her presently what she would have.

Verse. 19. Who answered, Give me a blessing; for thou have given me a south
land, give me also springs of water.] To intimate, that the portion of land
which he had given her was dry and not well watered, she calls it a south land,
to wit, either because the southern parts of Iudahs portion were dry and
barren, and hence such lands were called south lands; or else, because the
southern parts of Calebs portion in particular were such. And hereupon she
desires him to give her also springs of water, thereby intending either merely
some springs of water, which might be conveyed into the south land to make it
fruitful, or else some portion of land that was well watered.

And he gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.] That is, some
higher grounds that were well watered, and some lower; or which tends much to
one, he gave her some springs or watered grounds on each side the land he had
formerly given her for a dowry, both above it, and below it.

Verse. 21. And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah
toward the coast of Edom southward, were Kabzeel, etc.] It is called Iekabzeel,
Neh. 11.25.

Verse. 32. All their cities are twenty nine, with their villages.] There are
indeed eight and thirty cities or towns named in the foregoing verses, and
therefore for the clearing of this some hold, that because nine of these were
afterward assigned to the tribe of Simeon, therefore it is said here, that all
the cities of Judah in those parts were nine and twenty. But the better answer
I conceive is, that nine and twenty of them only were walled cities, the other
were the most famous towns and villages in those parts. And here in this first
catalogue of Iudahs cities in the Southern parts, the most noted towns are
expressed by name, as well as the walled cities, that in the following
catalogues we may conceive the same, to wit, that there were many towns of note
besides the cities there mentioned, though they be not expressed by name as
here they are.

Verse. 36. Fourteen cities with their villages.] There are fifteen named in the
foregoing verses, either therefore one of them was no city, but some noted
town, or rather it may be very probably conceived that Gederah and Gederothaim
were but one city: and therefore some read it (as it is in the margin of our
bibles) Gederah or Gederothaim.

Verse. 62. And Nibshan and the city of salt.] This city might have its name,
The city of salt, from the salt pits that were there, and the abundance of
salt that was daily made by the inhabitants of the city.

Verse. 63. As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of
Judah could not drive them out.] It is a question much argued amongst writers,
whether Jerusalem stood in Judahs or in Benjamins portion. By many places of
Scripture it seems evident that it was in Benjamins portion. For in the 18.
chapter of this book verse. 28. it is reckoned amongst the cities that were in
Benjamins lot, and we see that Moses did before his death prophecy concerning
Benjamin, that the Temple which was in Jerusalem should be built in Benjamins
portion, for that is the drift of those words, Deuteronomy. 33.12. And of Benjamin he
said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, and the Lord shall
cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders; yea and
Jer. 6.1. the inhabitants of Jerusalem are expressly called the children of
Benjamin, O ye children of Benjamin, gather your selves to flee out of the
midst of Jerusalem, and Judge. 1.21. the same that is here said of the children
of Judah is likewise there said of the children of Benjamin, The children of
Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem; but the
Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day. But
now again by other places of Scripture it seems as evident that Jerusalem was
in Judahs portion. For first, mention is here made of it as one of Judahs
cities, The Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this
day: and secondly, Jerusalem is said to have been taken by the children of
Judah, Judge. 1.8. and thirdly, it is reckoned as the great privilege of the
children of Judah, that the Lord in his Temple dwelt amongst them, Psalm. 78.67,
68, 69. Moreover he refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe
of Ephraim, but chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Sion which he loved, and he
built his Sanctuary like high places, etc. but the truth herein is, that
Jerusalem stood in the border of these two tribes, and so was part in Judahs,
and part in Benjamins portion, and therefore the places of Scripture before
cited do not any way contradict one another, the fort of Sion and some of the
south skirts of the city were in Judahs portion, but the greatest part of the
city in Benjamins, and therefore it may well be that when they went about to
expel the Jebusites that dwelt there, both Judah and Benjamin joined their
forces together, as Judah and Simeon did in a like case, Judge. 1.3. And Judah
said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight
aganst the Canaanites, and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot. As for
that which is here said concerning Jerusalem, to wit, that the children of
Judah could not drive out the Jebusites thence (and the like we see is said
concerning the children of Benjamin, Judge. 1.21.) we must know that the
Iebusites continued in Jerusalem unto David's time. Indeed Adoni-zedek the king
of Jerusalem was slain by Joshua chap. 10.23, 26. (for he was one of those five
kings that made war against Gibeon) though we find no mention there of his
taking Jerusalem; yea, and it is expressly said, Judge. 1.8. that afterward
the children of Judah took the city of Jerusalem and burnt it with fire, that
is, some part of it. Well, but yet the fort of Sion, which was the chief
strength of Jerusalem, was not at that time taken by them; for that the
Iebusites held till David took it, 2. Sam. 5, 6, 7. yea and it seems that
afterward the Iebusites did also by the help of this fort recover the city
again, at least so far, that they forced the Israelites to let the Iebusites
dwell there amongst them, as it is said here. For in the days of the Judges we
see that Iebus, that is, Jerusalem was still inhabited by the Iebusites, Judge.
19.12. We will not turn aside hither into the city of a stranger, that is not
of the children of Israel (says the Levite there concerning Iebus) we will
pass over to Gibea. But however we must not think, that this which is said
here, that the children of Judah could not drive them out, is added by way of
excusing them; no, but rather to their shame and reproach; for though the fort
of Sion was a place of great strength, so that when David set himself down with
his army before it, the Iebusites scorned him, and bragged that their lame and
blind and impotent people, should defend it against him, 2. Sam. 5.6. Yet God
would certainly have driven them out according to his promise, had they not
been wanting to themselves. But they grew slothful and faint hearted, and by
these and other their sins, provoked the Lord to withdraw himself from them,
and so then indeed they could not drive out the inhabitants, but were glad to
purchase peace upon any terms; according to that Judge. 2.20, 21. And the anger
of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he said, Because this people has
transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened
to my voice; I also will not hence forth drive out any from before them, of the
nations which Joshua left when he died, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. ANd the lot of the children of Joseph, fell from Jordan by Jericho,
unto the water of Jericho on the east, etc.] It is the opinion of some learned
writers, that there was but one lot drawn for the children of Joseph, and that
because one half of the tribe of Manasseh, being already disposed of without
Jordan, it was judged the fittest way to join the other half of the tribe of
Manesseh in one lot with the tribe of Ephraim, under the common name of the
children of Joseph; for, say they, by this means they made sure that the
children of Joseph should be seated together in that part of Canaan, which the
lot that was drawn out with that which had their name in it, did assign to
them. And this likewise, they seek to make good from the words of the text,
both here where it speaks of the inheritance of Ephraim and Manasseh, as
comprehended in one lot, And the lot of the children of Joseph, fell from
Jordan, etc. and again, chap. 17.14. where the children of Joseph seem to
complain of this, And the children of Joseph spoke unto Joshua saying, why have
thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit? But all things
considered, I think it more probable that there were two several lots for the
tribe of Ephraim and the half of Manasseh: first, because those words chap.
14.2. By lot was their inheritance -- for the nine tribes, and for the half
tribe, seems rather to imply, that there were several lots both for the nine
tribes, and for the half tribe: secondly, because the portion that fell to the
tribe of Ephraim being described in the latter part of this chapter, it follows
in the beginning of the next chapter, There was also a lot for the tribe of
Manasseh: for do not those words clearly intimate that there was one lot drawn
for Ephraim, and another for Manasseh? and thirdly, because the providence of
God in ordering the lots must needs be the more wonderful, if Iudahs lot
coming forth first, the next two lots also that were drawn should be these of
Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph, immediately one after another, upon
whom also God had transferred a part of Reubens birthright, as it is expressly
said, 1. Chron. 5.1, 2. And indeed that complaint of the sons of Joseph,
chap. 17.14. Why have thou given we but one lot and one portion to inherit? was
not meant of the drawing but one lot for them, but of the quantity of land
assigned to them for their portion, to wit, that it was no more then might well
have been assigned for one tribe. For had they taken exception that there was
but one lot for these two tribes, they would have contested about this when
they made the lots, and not after their lot was drawn. And here in this place,
the text speaks of the lot of the children of Joseph in the singular number,
not because there was but one lot drawn both for Ephraim and Manasseh, but
because the writer of this book intended, first to show jointly together where
the inheritance of these two tribes lay, and then afterward to show severally
what each of them had for their portion. So that therefore in these first three
verses of this chapter the south bounds of the inheritance of the sons of
Joseph where it bordered upon Benjamins portion is described, to wit, that they
began at that part of Jordan which was nigh unto Jericho, and so went up unto
the water of Jericho, that is, to certain streams that watered Jericho, called
afterward the waters of Elisha, because of that miracle which he wrought upon
them, 2. Kings 2.21. (it is here said to have been on the east, and chap.
18.12. on the north side of Jericho, because it lay north-east of the city) and
so to the wilderness that goes up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel,
namely the wilderness of Beth-aven chap. 18.12. and so from Bethel to Luz, and
thence to the borders of Archi, to Ataroth called also Ataroth-addar verse 5.
and again, chap. 18 12. and so on still westward by the several places here
mentioned till they ended at last at the sea, that is, the Mediterranean sea.

Verse 5. The border of their inheritance on the east side was Ataroth-addar
unto Beth-horon the upper.] Here begins the description of that portion of the
land of Canaan which was assigned to the tribe of Ephraim; which to us that
cannot have any certain knowledge of that country as it was in those times,
must needs be very difficult and hard to be understood, especially being
described here in so few words as it is. In this first clause all is said, that
is said, concerning the eastern bounds, to wit, that it reached from Ataroth in
the southern bounds, to Beth-horon in the north side; and so indeed the breadth
of Ephraims portion is only here set forth where it was broadest eastward.

Verse. 6. And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah, etc.] There
being mention made in the former verse of Beth-horon the upper, which lay on
the north side of Ephraims lot, here now the text describes how the north
border went out from the said Beth-horon first westward to Michmethah, and then
eastward by several towns here mentioned, till it ended at last at Jordan.

Verse. 8. The border went out from Tappuah westward, etc.] Here the text
returns to show what had been touched before, verse 6. to wit, how the northern
border went on westward beyond Michmethah toward the sea, namely, that it went
along by Tappuah unto the river Kanah, and so at last to the midland sea.

Verse 9. And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among the
inheritance of the children of Manasseh.] That is, besides the cities that
stood within the compass of these bounds, the Ephramites had certain cities
allotted them within the portion of Manasseh, as an addition, because this
portion here described was too little for them.

Verse. 10. And they drove not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer, etc.] See
the note chap. 17.12.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. THere was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh, (for he was the
firstborn of Joseph) to wit, for Machir the first born of Manasseh, etc.] This
clause, for he was the first born of Joseph, is added, to imply that though
Jacob had prophesied that Ephraims dignity should be the greater, Genesis 49.19.
His younger brother shall be greater then he, and his seed shall become a
multitude of nations, yet Manasseh being one of Joseph's sons, yea his first
born, he was also to have the portion of a tribe as well as Ephraim, according
as Jacob had prophesied of them, Genesis 48.5, 6. And now thy two sons Ephraim
and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt, before I came
unto thee into Egypt, are mine: As Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine. And
thy issue which thou begettest after them shall be thine. Now the lot that fell
to Manasseh is said to have been for Machir the first born of Manasseh, because
Manasseh had no other sons but Machir only, and therefore sometimes Machir
seems to be put for the whole tribe of Manasseh, Judges 5.14. Out of Machir
came down gov^rnours; and amongst his posterity it seems that Manassehs portion
was now wholly divided. But then it may be questioned by some why Machir is
here called the first born of Manasseh. To which I answer, that the child that
first opens the womb is usually in the Scripture called the first born,
though there were no more born after him.

Because he was a man of war therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.] That is,
because Machir the father of Gilead was a man of war Many conceive that
Machir had no other sons but Gilead, and that all Manassehs portion was
divided amongst Gileads posterity. But this we may well doubt, 1. Because Genesis
50.23. there is mention made of Machirs children. 2. Because Number. 26.29. we
read of a family of the Machirites distinct from those that were called by the
names of the sons of Gilead; concerning which, see the note on the place.
However, the posterity of Machir had the land of Gilead and Bashan, that is,
the half of it, settled upon them (which is here mentioned by the way, that
after he might proceed to speak of their dividing to the other half of this
tribe, their portion of the land within Jordan) and that because Machir was a
man of war, that is, because the Machirites were men of war, and did
themselves win Gilead and dispossess the enemy of it. See the notes, Numb.
32.39, 40.

Verse. 4. Therefore according to the commandment of the Lord, he gave them an
inheritance, etc.] See Numb. 27.7.

Verse. 5. And there fell ten portions to Manasseh.] That is, the land was
divided into six parts according to the number of the sons of Gilead
mentioned verse 2. and Hephers part was divided into five parts, and given to
his son Zelophehads five daughters; and so there were ten portions in all.

Verse. 7. And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, etc.] If
Asher was a town seated at the south-east end of Manassehs lot (as some
conceive it was) then in this and the following verses, we have only the
description of the southern bounds of this tribe of Manasseh, which were also
the north bounds of Ephraims portion, as is evident because Michmethah and the
other following places here mentioned, as Tappuah and the river Kanah, are the
same that were named before in the north border of Ephraim; But if Asher stood,
as others think, in the north-east of Manassehs portion, then in the first
words we have the east bounds of this half tribe of Manasseh, to wit, that they
were drawn from Asher on the north all along by the river Jordan to Michmethah
on the south that lies before Shechem, and then in the next words, we have the
southern bounds described from Michmethah to the midland sea, to wit, that from
Michmethah it went a long on the right hand turning westward to Tappuah, and so
on the south of the river Kanah, verse 9. and so right on to the sea: and thus,
as is noted in that ninth verse, the land was Manassehs both on the north and
south side of the river Kanah, though the cities that stood on the south side
of that river belonged to Ephraim, which is intended in those words, these
cities of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh, that is, the cities on the
south side of the river belonged to Ephraim, though they were within the coasts
of Manasseh.

Verse. 10. And they met together in Asher on the north, and on Issachar on the
east.] That is, the north bounds of Joseph's portion, to wit, Ephraims and
Manassehs considered jointly in one, was the tribe of Asher on the north, and
Issachar on the east. For otherwise then thus it cannot be conceived how they
should meet together in Asher on the north, since Ephraim no where could reach
to Asher, being bounded as Manasseh also was on the west by the main sea.

Verse. 11. And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Beth-shean and her towns,
etc. even three countries.] This is added, to intimate that these towns, to
wit, Bethshean, Ibl^am, Dor, and En-dor (whither Saul went to a witch) and
Taanach and Megiddo being in the confines of Asher and Issachar, and yet
belonging to Manasseh, stood not all in one place, but were in three several
tracts of ground: Or else it may be added, to show that three of the countries
before mentioned were in Ashers portion, and three in Issachars; and so
Manasseh had in each of them three countries.

Verse. 12. Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants of
those cities, etc.] This is spoken of the times after the death of Joshua, and
therefore the same is repeated, Judge. 1.27, 28. Partly through cowardlinesse,
and partly through Gods withdrawing his help, at first they could not drive
them out; afterward when their fear could not so much blind their judgments,
but that they must needs then acknowledge themselves strong enough, yet they
put them to tribute; which did much aggravate their sin.

Verse. 14. And the children of Joseph spoke unto Joshua, saying, Why have thou
given me but one lot, etc.] Here the story relates how the sons of Joseph,
that is, the two tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, came to Joshua, and made a
great complaint (and it was doubtless after they had entered upon the land
which fell to them by lot) that there was not a convenient portion of land
assigned to them for their inheritance, no more indeed then was fitting to be
the lot of one tribe: for that is the meaning of those words, Why have thou
given me but one lot, and one portion to inherit, that is, why have thou given
us no more of the land, then if we had been to be accounted but as one tribe,
and so to have but one lot? Questionless, Joshua and the rest that were
entrusted in this business had not, either through ignorance or partiality,
set forth a less portion of land for these sons of Joseph then was fitting:
But because a part of the land allotted them was overgrown with wood, and a
great part of it was still in the possession of the Perizzites, and the
Rephaims or giants, with whom through infidelity and sloth they afraid to
encounter; therefore they judging this as nothing, conclude they had no more
given them to dwell in, then might well be reckoned the portion of one tribe.
The most questionable passage in this complaint of theirs is this, that to make
good that they had not a competent portion of land assigned them, they allege
the extraordinary increase of their people in number, through the special
blessing of God upon them, Why have thou given me but one lot, and one portion
to inherit, seeing I am a great people, forasmuch as the Lord has blessed me
hitherto, since it is evident, as is noted Number. 26.37. that the sons of
Ephraim, when they were numbered the second time, a little before their entrance
into Canaan were eight thousand fewer then when they were numbered the first
time at their first coming out of Egypt; but for this we must know, that though
the tribe of Ephraim was so much decreased at that last numbering of the people,
yet since that time, under the government of Joshua, they might be greatly
increased again; but however, though at that time the sons of Ephraim were
eight thousand fewer then when they came out of Egypt, yet even at that time on
the other side, of the tribe of Manasseh there were twenty thousand and five
hundred more then at the first numbering, Number. 26.34. and therefore the sons
of Joseph speaking here of themselves jointly together, both Ephraim and
Manasseh, they might well say they were a great people, and that God had
greatly blessed them, in regard of their number.

Verse. 15. And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee
up to the wood country, etc.] Thus he covertly retorts their plea upon them,
as making more for him then for them; for, says he, being a great people, the
more able art thou to drive the Canaanites out of those parts allotted you for
your proportion, and the more shame is it that you should let them alone and
yet complain of the narrowness of your lot; Get thee up (says Joshua) to the
wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites,
and the giants, that is, cut down the woods, and drive out and destroy the
inhabitants that lurk there in their fastnesses, and strong holds, and then if
mount Ephraim be to narrow for thee, that is, the mountains out of which the
Canaanites are already expelled, whereof you have the possession at present,
you may by this means have land enough to dwell in, and need not complain that
your portion is too straight for you. It is likely, that when the sons of
Joseph came to make their complaint to Joshua, they assured themselves that
they should find the more favor, because he was of the tribe of Ephraim: But
in a point of justice, we see they found Joshua far from yielding to them in
the least degree upon that ground.

Verse. 16. And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us,
etc.] These first words seem to have been spoken with some kind of anger and
discontent. Joshua had told them what they should do, if mount Ephraim were too
narrow for them: now as men discontented are wont to do, they snap at those
last words of Joshua; yes, say they, the hill is not enough for us, meaning
that mount Ephraim whereof Joshua had spoken; and then they add, And all the
Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron: as if
they should have said, Whereas you call upon us to enlarge our dwellings in the
wood country, by cutting down the wood, by expelling and destroying the
Perizzites and the giants that dwell there, you may know that this we cannot
do, and that because the valleys we must pass through ere we can come to that
mountainous wood country, which you refer us to, are inhabited by the
Canaanites that have chariots of iron, so that there is no hope for us to
prevail over them. This I conceive to be the best exposition of this place. Yet
some understand those first words, The hill is not enough for us, of that
mountainous wood country, to which Joshua had referred them for the enlarging
of their dwellings, and so conceive the scope of this reply of the sons of
Joseph to be, that even that mountainous country, if they had it in their
possession, would not be enough for them; and for the valleys, there was no
hope to subdue them, because the Canaanites that dwelt there had chariots of
iron; that is, as all Expositours agree, chariots whose wheels were armed with
sythes, as I may say, or hooks of iron, wherewith when they broke in amongst
their enemies, they must needs mightily tear, cut, and mow down those that
stood in their way; and indeed these chariots could only be useful in the
valleys and plains, in the mountains and wood countries they could not be used.

Verse. 17. And Joshua spoke unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim, and to
Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, etc.] As if he should have said,
What I answered before I must answer again, Thou art a great people by thine
own confession, and have great power, and therefore besides Gods promise, ye
have otherwise no cause of distrust, thou shall not have one lot only, that
is, thou shall, if thou will not be failing to thy self, prevail over those
places, and then thou shall find the portion allotted thee is more then one
lot, fully enough for two such numerous tribes.

Verse. 18. But the mountain shall be thine, for it is a wood; and thou shall
cut it down: and the outgoings of it shall be thine, etc.] That is, not only
the mountain shall be thine, which when thou have cut down the wood, will be
found good ground, but also the outgoings of it, that is, the valleys round
about the mountains shall be thine too.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled
themselves together at Shiloh, and set up the Tabernacle, etc.] No doubt God
appointed them to remove the Tabernacle to Shiloh: so much may be gathered from
that which is said, Deuteronomy. 12.5. But unto the place which the Lord your God
shall choose out of all your tribes, to put his name there, even unto his
habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shall come: as also Ier. 7.12. where
it is plainly called the place where God set his Name at the first. Hitherto
both camp and Tabernacle had been in Gilgal, a place in the very first entrance
into the land of Canaan; now they removed further into the land, both the camp,
verse. 9. And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the host at
Shiloh; and the tabernacle, as is here expressed, both as a manifest sign of
their taking possession of the land they had conquered, and for the more
convenient coming of the people to the tabernacle to worship. And Shiloh God
appointed to be the place, a city in Ephraim, therein God honoring Joshua the
ruler of the people, who was of this tribe; and withal, it was brought nearer
to the place which God had decreed to be the settled place of his worship, to
wit, Jerusalem: from this time therefore the people was bound to the strict
observation of the Ceremonial Law, Deuteronomy. 12.8, 9, 10, 11. Ye shall not do
after all the things that we do here this day, every man what is right in his
own eyes. For ye are not as yet come to the rest, and to the inheritance which
the Lord your God gives you. But when ye come over Jordan, and dwell in the
land which the Lord your God gives you to inherit; and when he gives you rest
from all your enemies round about, so that you dwell in safety: Then there
shall be a place which the Lord your God shall choose, to cause his name to
dwell there, thither shall ye bring all that I command you, your burnt
offerings and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave offering of your
hands, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the Lord, etc. and here the
Tabernacle continued unto the days of Samuel, to wit, above three hundred
years.

And the land was subdued before them.] That is, the land about Shiloh was
subdued, and the inhabitants driven out of it, and those that dwelt further off
were so stricken with the terror of God, that they durst not stir to molest
the Israelites.

Verse. 2. And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which
had not yet received their inheritance.] It may seem strange that the
Israelites having begun in Gilgal to divide the land by lot, went not on in
that work, but having drawn three lots, which fell to Judah, Ephraim, and
Manasseh, gave over and intermitted this work, and that as it seems a long
time; for so much is evident by Joshua his expostulation with them, verse. 3.
(though it be not expressly said how long it was) How long, says he, are you
slack to go to possess the land, etc. why they did this no reason is given in
the text: But this by Expositours is thought the most probable reason, to wit,
that the other tribes perceiving what a large circuit of land was given to
Judah (out of which indeed more then the portion of one tribe was afterward
taken, see chap. 19.9.) they began to murmr, as supposing that there would
not be left an equal share for them; and the rather, because they heard the
sons of Joseph already complain, and therefore pretending that there could
not be any equal division made, when the remote parts were no better known to
them, as being yet in the enemies possession, they desired some stay of the
work till they had further prevailed, and might know the land they were to
divide, better then yet they could do. And thus the work being put off for a
time, by degrees they began to mind it no more, till Joshua finding them
shamefully remiss, urged them to set upon it again, and for their better
satisfaction to send forth men to search the land.

Verse. 4. Give out from among you three men of each tribe, etc.] To wit, not
only of the seven tribes mentioned verse. 2. but also of Judah, Ephraim, and
Manasseh; lest if these searchers should conceive that it was fit somewhat
should be taken from those that had their lots already, they might otherwise
complain of partiality in those that were sent to search the land. As for the
work that these men were to do, namely to describe the land according to the
inheritance of them, it is meant doubtless of some catalogue they were to
bring of the several countries and parts of the land that were not yet
divided, with the several cities, and towns, and villages that were in each of
them, that so accordingly they might the better divide it into so many parts.

Verse. 5. Judah shall abide on their coasts on the south, etc.] The meaning of
this is only that the tribe of Judah, and the sons of Joseph, Ephraim and
Manasseh, should continue seated, the one on the South, the other on the North,
in that part of the land wherein the lots that were drawn for them in Gilgal
fell, and not that they should have still the same quantity of land that was at
first assigned them: for we see afterward, that the tribe of Simeon had their
portion assigned them out of that which was at first in the lot of Judah, chap.
19.9.

Verse. 6. Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts and bring the
descrition hither to me, that I may cast lots here for you before the Lord our
God.] This some say was spoken to the men that were chosen to describe the
land. But I conceive it might as well be spoken to the whole assembly, to whom
hitherto Joshua had directed his speech, Ye shall therefore describe the land
into seven parts, and bring the description, etc. that is, ye shall take order
that by the men you send out, the land be described into seven parts, and then
that the description thereof be brought to me. However, the mention he makes in
the last words of the account they were to give of what they had done, before
the Lord in the tabernacle, was doubtless to intimate how careful the men
that were sent had need to be, diligently and carefully to carry themselves in
this great charge that was imposed upon them.

Verse. 9. And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts, etc.] They might use some likely means to prevent
danger, when they searched the countries of their enraged enemies; perhaps they
divided themselves, and went not all together; they might also go under
pretense of negotiation, and it may be disguised, that they might not seem
Isralites. But doubtless the astonishment and fear wherewith God had stricken
the inhabitants, upon the Israelites late victories, were the best means of
their safety: and by their preservation in this dangerous service, we may well
think their brethren were much encouraged to set upon the getting of the
remainder of the land into their possession.

Verse. 11. And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up, etc.]
Thus had Benjamin the honor of having the first lot amongst the seven tribes,
and was by Gods providence seated the very next to his brethren Ephraim and
Manasseh, (who likewise were of Rachel) and had also the royal city of
Jerusalem within his borders, where God dwelt in his holy Temple; wherein that
was accomplished which Moses prophesied of this tribe, Deuteronomy. 33.12. And of
Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, and the
Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders.

Verse. 12. And their border on the North was from Jordan, etc.] This North
border of Benjamin is the same with the South border of the sons of Joseph,
described before, chap. 16.1. concerning which therefore see the notes there.

Verse. 14. And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea
southward etc.] Here begins the Western border of Benjamins portion; for here
the line turns from North to South, and fetching a compass about an inlet or
creek of the sea goes on southward till it comes to Kirjath-baal in Iudahs
portion, called by the Israelites (to suppress the name of their idol-god)
Kirjath-jearim.

Verse. 15. And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjath-jearim, etc.] See
chap. 15.5, 6. where you shall find the same to be made the north border of
Judah; only that line is drawn from east to west, from the lake of Sodom to
Kirjath-jearim, this from the west to the east from Kirjath-jearim to the lake
of Sodom: concerning which, see the note there.

Verse. 18. And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and
went down unto Arabah.] Which is called Beth-arabah, chap. 15.6.

Verse. 21. Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to
their families, were Jericho, etc.] It is no wonder though in several places
of Scripture, we find mention made of some cities belonging to the tribe of
Benjamin that are not in this Catalogue; For many cities might be built in
after times. And besides, it is probable that all the cities in Benjamins lot
are not here mentioned, but such only as were requisite to be known, because
by them the bounds of their lot are described, or for the better understanding
of some other passages in the sacred history where these cities are mentioned.
And the like we must conceive of the catalogues that are given us in the
following chapter of the cities that were in the several lots of the other
tribes.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. ANd their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of
Judah.] That is, the inheritance of the tribe of Simeon; the reason whereof is
given verse. 9. Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance
of the children of Simeon; for the part of the children of Judah was too much
for them, therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance within the
inheritance of them. It seems that they that were sent to search the land not
yet divided, that they might part it into seven lots for the seven remaining
tribes, chap. 18.4. found that the portion which Joshua, and Eleazar and the
other Commissioners for the dividing of the land, had formerly at Gilgal
assigned to the tribe of Judah was far too large, considering what they now
found left for the other tribes upon this second review, and therefore agreed
unanimously with those said Commissioners for the dividing of the land, that a
whole portion for one of the tribes that had not yet their inheritance should
be taken off that which was formerly given to Judah, and so should make one of
the lots for the seven tribes (besides some other cities which they took also
from Judah to be as part of another lot, as is shown afterward, verse 40.41.)
and no doubt the children of Judah acknowledged the equity thereof, and were
well contented with it: and so when they came to draw the lots of the seven
remaining tribes, in the second place, next after Benjamins, came out this lot,
which was wholly taken out of Judahs portion, for the tribe of Simeon. And thus
by the providence of God; first, there being one tribe to be seated within that
portion formerly given to Judah, the lot fell upon this tribe, which was fewest
in number of all the tribes, as we may see by the account that was taken of
them at the last numbering of the people, Number. 26.14. and secondly, this tribe
of Simeon having their portion assigned them within the portion of Judah, and
so being as it were intermingled with them, nor having an inheritance apart by
themselves, that was now fulfilled which Jacob long since prophesied of them,
Genesis 49.7. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: concerning
which, see what is noted there.

Verse. 2. And they had in their inheritance Beer-sheba, etc.] The bounds of
this tribes portion is not described, as are the bounds of most of the other
tribes, only the chief cities and towns are named that were in their lot, and
that because their inheritance was within the inheritance of Judah, whose
bounds are formerly described chap. 15. As for Beersheba and Sheba that are
first here mentioned they are but the longer and shorter names of one and the
same city; for it is said verse. 6. that in this first catalogue there are
thirteen cities, and there are fourteen if Beersheba and Sheba be counted two
several cities, and besides 1. Chron. 4.28. where these cities of the
Simeonites are again reckoned up, there is mention made of Beersheba only.

Verse. 3. And Hazar-shual, and Balah, and Azem, etc.] Called Ezem, 1. Chron.
4.29. as the following Eltolad is called also Tolad; and Bethul, Bethuel.

Verse. 5. And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and Hazor-susah, etc.] Which is called
1. Chron. 4.31. Hazar-susim; as also in the following verse Bethlebaoth is
called, chap. 15.32. Lebaoth, and in the 1. Chron. 4.31. Bethbirei: and
Sharuhen seems to be the same that is called Shauraim.

Verse. 7. Ain, Remmon, and Either, etc.] Or Etam, 1. Chron. 4.32. this with the
rest here mentioned are there called villages, and therefore are here severally
reckoned by themselves.

Verse. 9. For the part of the children of Judah was too much for them, etc.]
See the note above, verse. 1.

Verse. 10. And the border of their inheritance was Sarid, etc.] This Sarid was
the Southwest corner of Zebuluns portion, from whence it is said that it went
Westward to Maralah, and so to Dabbasheth which stood by the sea, from whence
it went Northward by the sea coast as far as the river near Iokneam. And thus
having the midland sea on the West, and the sea of Galilee on the East, that
was truly accomplished which Jacob said concerning this tribe, Genesis 49.13.
Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea, and he shall be for a haven of
ships: and Moses also, Deuteronomy. 33.18. And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice Zebulun in
thy going out, etc.

Verse. 12. And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sun rising, etc.] As
before the western border was drawn from Sarid, verse 10. so here the south
border begins also at Sarid, and so is carried on eastward as far as Japhia.

Verse. 13. And from thence passes on along on the east to Gittah-Hepher, etc.]
That is, from Japhia a city in the south-east corner of Zebuluns portion, the
border turns northward along by the sea of Galilee, and within a while goes up
into the land as far as Remmon and Neah, where is the going out of the utmost
reach of the eastern border.

Verse. 14. And the border compasses it on the north side to Hannathon, etc.]
This is the north border which fetches a compass, and so ends in the valley
of Jiphthah-el.

Verse. 15. And Idalah and Bethlehem.] This was not that Bethlehem where Christ
was afterward born; for that was in the tribe of Judah, this in the tribe of
Zebulun.

Twelve cities with their villages.] There are more then twelve mentioned in
the foregoing verses; but it seems some of them were border towns that stood in
the other tribes, that had their lots next to Zebuluns, and but twelve of them
only were belonging to the tribe of Zebulun.

Verse. 18. And their border was toward Jezreel, etc.] Because Issachars portion
lay between Benjamins and Zebuluns, whose borders have been already described
(and so consequently Issachars also) therefore the line of their borders is not
here described as in the other tribes, but only the principal towns and cities
are named, first, those that stood in the south border, verse. 18, 19. secondly,
those in the west, verse. 20. and thirdly, those in the north, ver. 21, 22. Now
this portion set apart for Issachar being in a fat and fruitful soil, that was
fulfilled which Jacob foretold, Genesis 49.14. And he saw that rest was good, and
the land that it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulders to bear, and became a
servant unto tribute: and Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.18.

Verse. 24. And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher,
etc. Even here also the hand of God is still observable in his ordering the
lots. Hitherto the lots had come out only for those tribes that were descended
of Jacobs two wives Leah and Rachel, and the tribe of Gad, who was the eldest
of Jacobs sons by Zilpah Leahs handmaid, had already received their
inheritance without Jordan, upon special suit made unto Moses, and so now the
next lot came out for the tribe of Asher, who was also the son of Zilpah, the
handmaid of Leah Jacobs first wife, and therefore preferred before the two
tribes of Dan and Naphtali, that were descended of Bilhah the handmaid of
Rachel, his second wife.

Verse. 25. And their border was Helkath, etc.] The cities that are first here
mentioned stood on the northwest border, which is drawn all along the coast of
the midland sea, as far as to mount Carmel westward, that is, to the west side
of mount Carmel and Shihor-libnah; and so here the line turns eastward, verse.
27. and makes the south bounds of this tribes portion, and then fetches a
compass northward again, like to the bending of a bow, till it comes to Zidon
on the north end of the sea coast, and then turns southward again as far as
Tire, etc. Now by the mention that is here made of mount Carmel in the lot of
this tribe, we may see how the prophecy of Jacob concerning this tribe was
folly accomplished, Genesis 49.20. Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he
shall yield royal dainties: for mount Carmel and the land about it was a
fruitful soil, and had many mines in it, Isa. 39.9. Sharon is like a
wilderness, and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits: and Isa. 35.2. It
shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing; the glory of
Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. See also,
Deuteronomy. 33.24, 25. And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children, let
him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil. Thy shoes
shall be iron and brass, and as thy days so shall thy strength be.

Verse. 27. And goes out to Cabul on the left hand.] See the note upon verse. 30.

Verse. 29. And the outgoings thereof are at the sea, from the coast to
Achzib,] That is, all the coast from the sea even unto Achzib.

Verse: 30. Vmmah also and Aphek, and Rehob; twenty and two cities with their
villages.] That is, Ummah, Aphek, and Rehob were cities of note in the portion
of Asher, though not before mentioned in describing the borders of their lot.
So that in all the cities here named belonging to the tribe of Asher are twenty
and two. Indeed he that reckons all the names of places before mentioned shall
find them to be twenty and three; but to this it is answered by some, that
Cabul mentioned verse. 27. was not a city, but a part of the country which
Solomon gave unto Hiram, and because of the censure which was then by him
passed upon it, was called Cabul, 1. Kings 9.13. And he said, What cities are
these which thou have given me my brother? and he called them the land of Cabul
unto this day. And again others say, that some one of the bordering cities
before named belonged not to Asher, but to some of the neighboring tribes.

Verse. 33. And their coast was from Heleph, etc.] This is the east border of
the tribe of Naphtali, beginning at these towns which stood somewhat more
northerly then the fountains of Jordan; and so Jordan, even as far as the
lake of Genezereth, was the utmost southernly end of the eastern border. Thus
Naphtalies land lay along by the banks of Jordan in a large extent, and so
Jacobs prophecy was fulfilled, Genesis 49.21. Naphtali is a hind let loose: and
that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.23. And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali satisfied with
favor, and full with the blessings of the Lord, possess thou the west and the
south.

Verse. 34. Then the coast turns westward to Aznoth-tabor etc.] Here now the
south border of this tribes portion is described, to wit, that it turned from
Jordan westward; first to Aznoth-tabor, and thence to Hukkok and so went on
till it came to have, as it follows in the next words. Zebulun on the south
side, and Asher on the west side. And indeed, this last clause seems to have
reference to that prophecy of Moses, before mentioned, concerning this tribe,
Deuteronomy. 33.23. Possess thou the west and the south: for however it is noted
before upon that place (as the opinion of some Expositours) that thereby might
be signified, that the lot of their inheritance should be in the southwest part
of the land, yet it being so evident here that this tribe had their inheritance
in the utmost northeast part of the land, the meaning of that clause, possess
thou the west and the south, must needs be this, that however this tribes lot
was to be seated in the furthest northeast corner of the kingdom, yet it
should reach forth so far both westward and southward, that they should enjoy
all the benefits both of the western and southern parts, and the rather by
their commerce with those other tribes upon whom they bordered.

And reaches to Zebulun on the southside, and unto Asher on the westside, and
to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.] It may seem strange that this
tribe should be said to border upon Judah: but either the river of Jordan
belonged peculiarly to Judah, as a royalty given them of God above all the
other tribes, in regard whereof Naphtali is said to border upon Judah in
Jordan; or else this is added, to imply the convenient situation of this tribes
portion, by reason it lay along by the banks of Jordan in a large extent. For
by this means though this tribe were seated in the uttermost north part of the
kingdom, yet they might by the river have commerce with the other tribes as
far as Judah, between whom and Naphtali many other tribes were seated; and so
being the utmost north tribe, might in that sense be said to border upon Judah,
who were seated in the utmost south parts of the kingdom.

Verse. 35. And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer and Hammath, Rakkath, and
Cinnereth.] Hammath was a city standing in the utmost north-end of Canaan,
whence the length of the land is ordinarily described to be from the entrance
of Hamath to the river of Egypt, 1. Kings 8.65. See Number. 13.22. and Cinnereth
was a city in the eastern parts; whence the lake, so often mentioned in
Scripture, was called the lake of Genezereth.

Verse. 38. Nineteen cities with their villages.] For some of them mentioned
before in drawing the border of their lot stood happily in the portion of the
bordering tribes.

Verse. 40. And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan.]
Though this tribes lot was not wholly taken out of that which was given to
Judah, as Simeons was, yet that a part of it was, is manifest by some of the
cities mentioned here, that chap. 15. are numbered amongst those that were at
first in Judahs portion; it was compassed with the sea; and the borders of the
other tribes formerly described, and so the borders of this tribe are here
omitted.

Verse. 41. And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, etc.] In
this Zorah Samson was born, Judges 13.2. and between Zorah and Eshtaol he was
buried.

Verse. 43. And Elon, and Timnathah, etc.] Whence Samson took a wife, Judges
14.1.

Verse. 47. Therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, etc.]
Or Laish. The story we have Judges 18. This then happened after Joshuas death,
but here it is mentioned, lest it should seem strange how the Danites came to
inhabit the north parts of the land, when their lot fell to them in the south
parts, even close by Judahs portion; the reason was, because being not able to
drive out the Philistines out of their land, they were straightened for room,
and so went out and took Laish, a city that was in Naphtalies lot, though then
in the Zidonians possession, and transplanted a Colony thither, calling it Dan
from their father Dan, the son of Jacob: it stood almost in the furthest
north part of the land, Judges 20.1. The congregation was gathered together as
one wan from Dan to Beersheba.

Verse. 50. According to the word of the Lord they gave him the city he asked,
even Timnath-serah in mount Ephraim, etc.] To wit, the word of the Lord which
he spoke to Moses, not only concerning Caleb, but concerning Joshua (for why
indeed should he be left out?) see Josh. 14.7. to wit, that he should choose a
peculiar portion to himself where he would: yet it may be meant also of some
direction given him by Eleazar the priest upon his inquiry of God for him.
However herein, first, was the modesty of Joshua remarkable, that he was
content to stay till all the tribes had their portion ere there was any motion
made of that which by way of special Prerogative was to be conferred upon him:
secondly, That he was content to receive what God had promised him, as by way
of gift from the people, he asked, and they gave him the city he asked:
thirdly, That whereas he might have chosen the fairest and goodliest city in
all their tribes, he chose his seat in a mountainous country, nothing so
pleasant and delightful as many other places were, yea, and it seems a city
that was ruinated, so that he was fain to build it ere he dwelt in it, for so
it follows in the next words, and he built the city, and dwelt therein.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 2. APpoint out for you cities of refuge, etc.] Concerning these cities
of refuge, see the notes, Numb. 35.6. and 24, etc.

Verse. 6. And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the
congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest, etc.] That
is, until he be fetched thence to the place where the fact was done, that it
may be there tried whether it were done wittingly or unwittingly (so long he
was to abide there however) or until the death of the high Priest, if it were
found that he did it unwittingly; for then he was to be sent back to the city
of refuge and to be kept there till the high priest dyed. Concerning the
mystical reason of the man-slayers staying in the city of refuge till the
death of the high priest, see the note upon Number. 35.25. But to this some also
do add a literal reason, to wit, that hereby was employed how heinous a fault
it was to shed the blood of a man, and how displeasing to God, in that the man
that was but unwittingly defiled with the shedding of blood must be thus shut
up, lest he should happen to come into the sight of him, who did as it were
represent Gods person amongst them, to wit, the high priest, nor could be
suffered to stir from thence till he was dead.

Verse. 8. And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned
Bezer, etc.] That is, they confirmed and ratified these to be cities of refuge
without Jordan, which Moses himself had formerly chosen and set apart for that
use. See Deuteronomy. 4.41, 42, 43.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. THen came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar
the priest, etc.] It was doubtless immediately after they had made an end of
dividing the land, that the Levites came thus to Eleazer and the rest of the
Commissioners to receive from them the cities which God had appointed to be set
apart for their dwelling. For first, it is not probable that there was any
delay which might move the Levites to challenge their right: and secondly, it
is as improbable that the Israelites did first settle themselves in these
cities, and then were afterward put out to give way to the Levites.

Verse. 2. The Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, to give us cities to dwell
in, etc.] See the notes upon Numb. 35.2. etc.

Verse. 4. And the lot came out for the family of the Kohathites.] God had
expressed the number of cities that were to be given them, to wit, forty
eight, Numb. 35.7. So all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall
be forty and eight cities; he had also given them directions to take these
cities out of each tribe some, according as their proportion was greater or
lesser: and therefore the Commissioners for the dividing of the land made
choice no doubt of these cities, as in their wisdom they found them most
convenient for the Levites, and for the people; and then having divided the
cities, they had chosen, into four parts, one for the priests, a second for
the Levites of Kohaths family, a third for the Gershonites, and a fourth for
the Merarites, then was it at last decided, in which of the tribes the priests
should be placed, and so of the rest; or at least of those cities which were
judged convenient they took the number agreed upon by lot. See verse. 11.

And the children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot
out of the tribe of Judah, etc.] Thus by Gods special providence the priests
were seated partly in the tribe of Judah, where the Temple was afterward to be
built, and partly in the two bordering tribes of Simeon and Benjamin, and so
whilst they shall approve their piety and devotion to the service of God, in
being content to leave their dwellings to go up unto Jerusalem in their turns,
to attend upon the service of God, yet withal God provides for their ease,
that their journeys might not be over long and burdensome to them. As for
their assigning (as it is here said) of thirteen cities to the priests, herein
God and the governors of Israel had respect unto succeeding times, when the
posterity of Aaron should be increased; for at present there were but a few
priests, not enough to inhabit the half part of one city; but in the mean time
they were given them for their possession, which they might dispose of
according to the right they had in them. For that they might so do, and that
the cities of the Levites were given them not only for their habitation, but
also for their possessions and inheritance, is evident in several places. See
Levit. 25.32.

Verse. 9. And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of
the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities, etc.] Judahs and Simeon
cities are reckoned together, because Simeons portion lay within Judahs, Chap.
19.1. And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the
children of Simeon according to their families: and their inheritance was
within the inheritance of the children of Judah.

Verse. 11. And they gave them the city of Arbah the father of Anak (which is
Hebron) in the hill-countrey of Judah, etc.] This city with the land adjoining
was formerly given to Caleb: which makes it more probable, that the cities for
the Levites were taken by lot, because it was not likely that both Hebron and
Debir should be taken out of his inheritance without the Lords special
direction. But God requiring it, Caleb willingly yields, the rather because the
country and land about was the chief of his possession, which was not taken
from him; and besides no doubt they desired to have the Levites, who were to
instruct them in the Law of the Lord, to be seated amongst them.

Verse. 15. And Holon with her suburbs.] Called Hilen, 1. Chron. 6.58.

Verse. 16. And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, etc.] This
city Ain is not reckoned, 1. Chron. 6. amongst the cities given to the sons
of Aaron: nor Gibeon here named, verse. 17. As for Juttah it is called Ashan, 1.
Chron. 6.59. Some indeed conceive, that it is Ain that is there called Ashan:
but there is an argument against that which seems to me unanswerable, to wit,
that Ashan and Ain are in one verse distinctly named amongst the cities of
Simeon, chap. 19.7. and so also Almon verse. 18. is called Alemeth, 1. Chron.
6.60.

Verse. 22. And Kibzaim with her suburbs.] Called Jokneam, 1. Chron. 6.68.

Verse. 23. And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon
with her suburbs.] These two cities are omitted, 1. Chron. 6. And Aijalon, and
Gath-rimmon, are there joined with the cities of Ephraim: but that they were
given out of Dans portion, is evident by this place.

Verse. 25. And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs,
etc.] To wit, that half of the tribe which was seated within Jordan, next Dan
and Ephraim. Tanach here mentioned, is called Aner, 1. Chron. 6.70. as also
Gath-Rimmon, is there called Bileam.

Verse. 27. And Beeshterah with her suburbs.] Called Ashtaroth, 1. Chron. 6.71.

Verse. 28. And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, etc.]
Which is called Kedesh, as also Dabareh is called Deberath; and Jarmuth,
Ramoth; and Engannim, Anem, 1. Chron. 6.72.73.

Verse. 30. And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, etc.] Called
Mashal 1. Chron. 6.74. as also Helkath is there called Hukok.

Verse. 32. And Hammoth-dor with her suburbs, etc.] Called Hammon, 1. Chron.
6.76. as also Kartan is there called Kirjathaim.

Verse. 34. Out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, etc.] Jokneam
and Kartah are omitted, 1. Chron. 6.77. and Dimnah is there called Rimmon; and
Nahalal, Tabor.

Verse. 36. And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah
with her suburbs.] It is said that Bezer was a city of refuge, chap. 20.8.
though it be not here expressed as it is in the rest, verse. 13.20, 27. which,
why it is here omitted we cannot say. As for Jahazah, it is called Jahzah, 1.
Chron. 6.

Verse. 41. All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the children
of Israel, were forty and eight cities with their suburbs.] It may seem
strange why in the 19. chapter we read of but two and twenty cities given to
the tribe of Asher, nineteen to the tribe of Naphtali, yea, but twelve cities
to the tribe of Zebulun, and yet the Levites which were nothing so many in
number as they, have here eight and forty cities given them. I answer: first,
that besides the cities mentioned, the other tribes had many towns and villages
wherein they dwelt, which the Levites had not: secondly, that the chief cities
are only there mentioned; it is evident in several places that many cities
which were in the several portions of those tribes, are not there set down:
thirdly, others did no doubt inhabit these cities, besides the Levites: and
fourthly, it is no wonder though God deals bountifully with the Levites, that
were to be employed in his special service.

Verse. 43. And the Lord gave unto Israel all the land which he swear to give
unto their fathers: and they possessed it and dwelt therein.] Though there were
much of the land out of which the Canaanites were not yet expelled, we cannot
therefore call this truth in question; for, First, he had given them all by lot
divided amongst them, which was a kind of actual enstating them in it.
Secondly, he had put them into possession of the greatest part of it; neither
had he promised them otherwise, but that they should possess it by degrees,
See Exodus 23.29. So both clauses of that which is here said are true; to wit,
first, That God had given them all the land which he swore to give unto their
fathers: and secondly, That they possessed it and dwelt therein; only we must
conceive of them severally thus: to wit, 1. That he had already actually given
them the whole land, and enabled them to divide it amongst their tribes: and 2.
That they possessed it and dwelt therein, to wit, by degrees; a great deal of
it they had already in their possession, and the rest by degrees came into
their hands as God had promised, and sooner then they did they might have
enjoyed it, had it not been for their sins.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 3. YE have not left your brethren these many days unto this day.] That
for which Joshua here commends the Reubenites, and Gadites, and the half tribe
of Manasseh, when he was now to dismiss them and send them back to their own
inheritance, is, That notwithstanding the war had lasted so long, yet they
had not been weary of that which they had undertaken, but had continued
constantly with their brethren to help them against their enemies, till God had
given them rest from their enemies as he had promised them. It is no where
expressed how long the war had lasted, ere the Israelites were settled
peaceably in the land of Canaan; and so thereupon these tribes were set free to
return back to their own dwellings; Only by that which is said concerning
Calebs age, Joshua 14.10. at that time when they were setting themselves to the
work of dividing the land, it is evident that then the wars had lasted full
seven years; and how long it was after that ere the work was fully ended, we
cannot say. Some learned Expositours hold, that it was at least fourteen years
after the Israelites passed over Jordan, ere Joshua sent back these tribes to
their own dwellings: But if it were not so long, not happily above nine or ten
years; yet however, if we consider that they had left their wives, and
children, and estates behind them in a land newly conquered, we may well
conceive what just cause Joshua had to praise them for their faithfulness
herein, that could be content for so many years together to continue with their
brethren for their help, till they saw them peaceably seated each tribe in
their inheritance.

Verse. 4. Therefore now return ye, and get ye unto your tents, and unto the
land of your possession.] That is, from the assembly they were to go to their
tents, and so from thence to the land of their possession beyond Jordan.

Verse. 5. But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, etc.] That
is, be circumspectly watchful over your selves lest you be drawn away from
doing what God has enjoined you.

Verse. 6. So Joshua blessed them and sent them away.] See the note chap. 14.13.

Verse. 8. Divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.] That is, when
you come home let your brethren there, have share in the spoil you carry hence
with you. Now this division might be either that every one should have an
equal share; or rather, that these that had been in the war should have one
half, and the rest of their tribes that stayed behind should have the other
half. For so Moses by direction from the Lord had ordered it in the war that
was made by a party that was sent out against the Midianites, Number. 31.27. And
divide the prey into parts, between them that took the war upon them, who
went out to battle, and between all the congregation (concerning which, see
the note upon that place) and it is therefore probable that Joshua followed the
example of Moses herein.

Verse. 10. And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land
of Canaan, etc.] That is, when the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half
tribe of Manasseh came to the borders of Jordan within the land of Canaan,
before they passed over Jordan, they built there a very great altar after the
pattern of that in the Tabernacle, and this they did (as afterward verse. 24,
etc. they make known to the messengers that were sent to them about it) not
with any thought to offer sacrifices thereon, but only to the end that altar
might be in the ages to come a memorial, that those tribes that dwelt without
Jordan were of the stock of Israel as well as they within Jordan, and had a
right to come to the Tabernacle, and to offer their sacrifices on Gods altar
there as well as they, in that it would still be known by tradition from their
fathers to all succeeding generations, that that altar within Jordan was built
by the tribes without Jordan when they returned that way home from helping
their brethren against the Canaanites, when they first settled themselves in
the land of Canaan.

Verse. 12. The whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves
together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them.] God had enjoined his
people that in case any of their brethren of any city in Israel, should fall
off from the true worship of the true God, to the worship of false gods (and
consequently to any idolatrous worship whatsoever) they should then gather
themselves together and utterly destroy the inhabitants of that city, Deuteronomy.
13.13, etc. Now therefore when the Israelites heard of the altar, which their
brethren had built on the banks of Jordan in their return home, they presently
concluded, that they had done it with a purpose to offer sacrifices thereon
(which would have been a manifest rebellion against Gods Law, wherein all the
tribes of Israel were enjoined to bring all their sacrifices to that one altar
that was in the Tabernacle, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6.) and thereupon they unanimously
gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to make war against these tribes that
had built this altar; only they first sent messengers (as it follows in the
next verse) to make inquiry concerning that which they had done, according to
the direction of the law, Deuteronomy. 13.14. Thou shall inquire and make search, etc.
though they were their brethren, that did not abate their indignation against
them but rather increase it; yea the Manassites within Jordan were as forward
as the rest to fight in this quarrel, though one half of their own tribe was
amongst those they were to fight against.

Verse. 13. And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, etc.]
To wit, to enquire concerning that which they had heard, to expostulate the
matter with them, to try if by any fair means they might be drawn from the evil
which they conceived they had done. And indeed, not only because they were
brethren, but especially, because these tribes had so lately continued so many
years so faithfully with them, to help them against their enemies till they
were seated peaceably in the land of their inheritance, it had been a great
evil to have proceeded to extremities, before they had assayed to make up the
matter in a gentle way.

Verse. 17. Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not
cleansed unto this day, etc.] As if they should have said, Is it not enough
that we did many years since so highly provoke God to displeasure against us by
suffering our selves to be drawn by the daughters of Moab to the worship of
Baal-Peor, that we must now afresh provoke God again by a new rebellion against
his Law? And indeed considering how exceedingly zealous Phinehas had been in
that matter of Peor, when he slew Zimri and Cozbi in the very act of their
uncleanness; it is no wonder though he did particularly instance in this
example of their former rebellion, to show them how dangerous a thing it was,
so again to incense God against them, as he conceived they had done. But why
does he say that the Israelites were not yet unto that day cleansed from the
iniquity of Peor, since at that time when Phinehas had slain Zimri and Cozbi,
the Lord said unto Moses, Number. 25.11. Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son
of Aaron the Priest, has turned my wrath away from the children of Israel,
etc. I answer, 1. Because the stain and infamy of that sin lay still upon
them, it was a mighty dishonor to the Israelites unto that day, that they had
so basely forsaken the living God to go after the base idol-gods of the
heathen; as many as were guilty of it, yea all indeed had cause to blush at the
remembrance of it unto that day. 2. Because the infection of that sin did
still cleave unto them: The governors of the people did no doubt find that the
infection of Idolatry, which the Israelites had contracted at that time when
they were drawn by the daughters of Moab to worship their false gods, did ever
and anon still break forth in some particular persons, who were found lingering
still after that idolatrous worship: whence it was that after this, Moses gave
them that charge, chap. 24.23. Now therefore put away the strange gods that are
among you, etc. and hence it is that they now tell their brethren that they
were not thoroughly cleansed from the iniquity of Peor unto that day. Indeed the
people and state in general continued incorrupt all the days of Joshua, chap.
24.31. And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua. But they spoke here
of that which they found in particular persons, to wit, that though they did
what they might to punish and suppress idolatry, yet now and then there was
still some found, that showed they were not wholly purged from that infection
which they had taken so long since in the worship of Baal-Peor, and 3. Because
they were not fully cleared from the guilt and punishment of that sin. For
though upon that zealous act of Phinehas it is said, that he had turned away
Gods wrath from the children of Israel, yet the meaning of that was only this,
that Gods wrath was thereby staid from proceeding on any further in that
slaughter, which he had enjoined the Judges to make amongst those that had
committed fornication with that Idol Baal-Peor, Number. 25.5. Moses said unto the
Judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men that had joined themselves unto
Baal-Peor; all which notwithstanding there might be many particular persons
that God was pleased to spare at that time, whom he might afterward call to
account, and correct them sharply even for that sin; and so in this regard it
might be here said that unto that day they were not fully cleansed from that
iniquity. For just such an expression we have Number. 14.20, 23. And the Lord
said, I have pardoned according to thy word: But as truly as I live, etc.
Surely they shall not see the land which I swear unto their fathers.

Verse. 18. And it will be, seeing ye rebel to day against the Lord, that to
morrow he will be wrath, etc.] That is, immediately or forthwith, for so this
word to morrow is often taken, Matt. 6.30. Wherefore if God so clothe the
grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven,
shall he not much more clothe you. 1. Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die.

Verse. 19. Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then
pass ye over into the land of the possession of the Lord, etc.] That is, if
you think the land without Jordan unclean, because ye have not Gods Tabernacle
and Altar with you, as we have, then pass over into the land of Canaan where
the Lord dwells in his Tabernacle. Doubtless the country without Jordan was a
part of the land of promise, only the land within Jordan is peculiarly called,
the land of the possession of the Lord, because the Lord dwelt there in his
Sanctuary. Now though it would have been a great imparing to all their
inheritances that were seated within Jordan, to have admitted these two tribes
and a half without Jordan to come and have a share with them, especially at
this time when as yet the Canaanites were amongst them, and held so great a
part of their land from them: yet this they willingly offered them, rather then
they should fall off from the true worship of God: which showed how singularly
zealous they were, both for Gods glory, and their brethrens salvation.

But rebel not against the Lord, nor rebel against us.] They call their
building of an altar a rebellion, not against the Lord only, but against their
brethren also within Jordan, because thereby they had (as they apprehended)
separated themselves from having communion with them as the true Church of God,
and by this their idolatrous practice had provoked the Lord, as much as in them
lay, to destroy them all, or to cast them off from being his people.

Verse. 22. The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knows, and Israel
he shall know.] In these words, the tribes without Jordan, do first appeal to
God, who knew with what intention they built that altar, as comforting
themselves with this, that however it might be suspected, whether that which
they should say were true or no, God who was the searcher of all hearts knew,
that they had not done it with any such purpose, as their brethren suspected;
and the vehemence they use in expressing this, The Lord God of gods, the Lord
God of gods, he knows; implies how hateful the very thought of that was to
them, of which they were suspected; and then in that next clause, and Israel he
shall know, they profess that this in time to come should be clearly
manifested to their brethren too; for those words, and Israel he shall know,
are not meant thus, that they would now tell the Israelites for what cause they
had built it, but the meaning is, that in time to come, by their constancy in
the true worship of God, they would make the Israel of God know, how far they
were from building an altar, with any purpose to sacrifice thereon.

If it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord, (save us not
this day)] These words, save us not this day, are an imprecation, wherein they
desire that the Lord should not spare them, but punish them according to the
heinousness of so foul a sin, if they in setting up the altar intended any
such thing as they were charged with.

Verse. 24. In time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying,
What have you to do with the Lord God of Israel.] That is, in the generations
to come, your children might happily deny to suffer our children to offer their
sacrifices at Gods altar, alleging that they were none of the Church and
people of God, none of Abraham's seed, that Jordan was the utmost bounds of the
land of promise, and that therefore those without Jordan were no true
Israelites, nor had any thing to do with the worship of God in his Tabernacle.

Verse. 31. This day we perceive that the Lord is among us, because ye have not
committed this trespass against the Lord.] This being the greatest and surest
sign of Gods gracious presence amongst a people, when he preserves them from
falling into scandalous sins.

Now ye have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord.] Not
by diverting any punishment which the Lord was ready to inflict, but by
avoiding that sin which might have drawn some heavy judgment not only upon
themselves, but upon the whole body of the people, if they had fallen into it.

Verse. 34. For it shall be a witness between us, that the Lord is God.] This
is the reason which the tribes without Jordan give, why they called the altar
they had set up Ed, which signifies a witness, to wit, because standing in
the midst betwixt them within Jordan and them without, it should be a
witness, that they without Jordan meant to acknowledge and worship no other
God then he whom their brethren worshipped, even the Lord Jehovah only.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 2. ANd Joshua called for all Israel, etc.] That is, the representative
body of all Israel, to wit, as it is explained in the following words, the
Elders of each tribe, together with their Magistrates and Judges and Officers.

Verse. 5. And the Lord your God, He shall expel them from before you, etc.]
That is, though I die and leave the work which is begun unfinished, yet assure
your selves, if you continue steadfast to the Lord, he who indeed has done what
has been done, will perfect the work begun, and perform all that he has
promised; he shall expel the rest of the nations that are not yet expelled
before you.

Verse. 7. That ye come not amongst these nations, these that remain among you,
etc.] That is, that ye no ways familiarly converse with them: and this is
mentioned in the first place, because they that yield familiarly to converse
with Idolatours, will by degrees be also drawn to the evils mentioned in the
following words, even to make marriages with them, to swear by their gods, and
at last to bow down to them and worship them. As for making mention of the
names of their gods, the next particular here forbidden; see the note Exodus
23.13.

Verse. 8. But cleave unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day.] By
cleaving to the Lord, is meant, that they should continue constant in yielding
obedience to God, and in resting and relying upon him, yea, upon him alone as
their God alsufficient. Nor need it seem strange unto us that he should say of
a people that had been so prone to rebel against God, Cleave unto the Lord --
as ye have done unto this day. For first, the Israelites, though they were ever
and anon murmuring against God, and turning aside from the way of his
commandments, yet they had never for the generallity cast off the worship of
the true God, to go after the gods of the heathen: And secondly, this Joshua
might speak with reference to the time of his government, as ye have done to
this day, that is, since the time you entered the land of Canaan, or since the
time you came to be under my government; for indeed since that time we read
not of any notable rebellion of this people against God; it is said that the
people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, Judge. 2.7.

Verse. 12. Else if you do in any wise go back and cleave unto the remnant of
these nations, etc.] Here Joshua begins to tell them how severely God would
punish them in case they did go back, that is, revolt from that good way of
their obedience to God, wherein they had hitherto gone, and cleave unto the
remnant of those nations, that is, marry them and lie with them, for so this
phrase of cleaving to those nations is explained in the following words, and
shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you. Yet I
know that this word cleave may be meant generally of any joining themselves to
those nations either in leagues or otherwise.

Verse. 13. But they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your
sides, and thorns in your eyes, etc.] To wit, because they will be continually
by their allurements drawing you to idolatry and other sins, and by their
injuries vexing and disquieting you; yet some hold, that by being thorns in
their eyes is meant, that they should by degrees so far blind them, that they
should not be able to discern the clear light of the truth. See Numb. 33.55.

Verse. 14. And behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth, etc.] That
is, I see my death approaches; now because I cannot hope long to continue
amongst you to keep you constant in your covenant with God, therefore I thought
good to give you warning, that after my departure ye depart not from the Lord,
and to tell you beforehand what will become of you, if you transgress the
covenant of the Lord your God.

Verse. 15. So shall the Lord bring upon you all evil things, until he have
destroyed you from off this good land, etc.] That is, as the Lord has hitherto
made good all that he has promised you, so if you transgress his covenant he
will bring upon you all the evils threatened, even at last the causing of you to
be carried captive out of this good land; and this last judgment of destroying
them out of the land of Canaan he particularly insists upon, because it must
needs affect them to hear of losing so goodly a land, when after so many years
travels and difficulties they were now newly entered into it.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Verse. 1. ANd Joshua gathered all the tribes to Shechem, etc.] The assembly
mentioned in the foregoing chapter, verse. 2. (concerning which, see the note
there) and the exhortation which Joshua used then to the people, was when
Joshua apprehended he had not long to live, chap. 23.14. And behold, this day I
am going the way of all the earth; yet it seems that after that, fearing much
what the people world do after his death, he resolved again to call another
assembly of the representative body of the kingdom, that he might there again
press them to continue constant in their obedience to God after his death; and
to that purpose might cause them to renew their covenant with God, which
accordingly he did at Shechem, as it is here said. Many Expositours understand
this of Shiloh, where indeed the tabernacle was seated, chap. 18.1. (which they
say is here called Shechem because it stood in the field of Shechem) and that
because it is said in this verse, that the assembly presented themselves before
God, and because verse. 26. there is mention of the Sanctuary, near which under
an oak there was a stone erected as a witness of the covenant which the people
had made with God. But it is more probable, that this assembly was in Shechem,
and that the Tabernacle and Ark were removed hither upon this occasion: 1.
Because Shechem was in the tribe of Ephraim, as well as Shiloh, and perhaps
nearer unto Joshua his city, and so the more convenient for him to come
thither. 2. Because we no where read that Shiloh is called Shechem (which is
the only ground of the other opinion.) 3. Because it is evident that upon
special extraordinary occasions they were wont sometimes to remove the Ark, 1.
Sam. 4.4. So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the
Ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts. But why should they not have met at
Shiloh, that so there might be no need to remove the Ark? I answer, that
Shechem was a city of great note, a city of refuge, chap. 21.21. a place famous
for the abode of the Patriarchs there: yea, and there God did at first enter
into a covenant with Abraham, Genesis 12.6 7. and the people there had lately
renewed their covenant with God, upon mount Gerizim and mount Ebal: in which
regard Joshua might think it the fitter to bring the people now to renew it
again in the same place. And then besides, there might be some other special
occasion for some other business that was to be done at Shechem; as happily
the burial of Joseph's bones there, whereof mention is made in the 32. verse of
this chapter.

Verse. 2. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even
Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor.] That is, Euphrates,
which is by way of eminency usually in the Scripture called the river.

And they served other gods.] That is, their fathers, to wit, Terah, and Abram,
and Nachor (of whom they were descended by the mothers side) for they are all
mentioned in the foregoing words. Neither need it seem strange unto us that
Abraham should serve other Gods before his calling; for therein was Gods mercy
the more magnified. And indeed if Abraham had continued incorrupt in an
idolatrous family, the posterity of Abraham might have boasted in this, whereas
the drift of Joshua in these words is quite contrary, even to set forth Gods
goodness in rescuing him out of that way of danger, and choosing him to be the
father of his peculiar people, when there was nothing in him to move the Lord
to show him such special favor.

Verse. 3. And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and
led him throughout all the land of Canaan.] The mention which is here made of
Gods leading Abraham through the several parts of Canaan, is to intimate Gods
goodness to him, that he did not only preserve him being in a strange land in
the midst of so many barbarous people; but also bless and prosper him, and
cause him to be so greatly esteemed amongst them.

And multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac.] That is, gave him several
sons (to wit, Ishmael, and the sons of Keturah) and amongst the rest,
Isaac; and therefore, I conceive, mention is made of his other children, to
illustrate Gods singular favor to the Israelites, in passing by so many of
Abraham's issue, and choosing their father to be the heir of promise.

Verse. 4. And I gave unto Isaac, Jacob and Esau; and I gave unto Esau mount
Seir, etc.] Esau is here also mentioned, to intimate the free grace of God, in
passing by Esau (though his posterity grew presently great, and inhabited mount
Seir) and establishing his covenant with their father Jacob his younger brother.

Verse. 7. And your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt.] Many might be now
living as well as Joshua and Eleazar, that came out of Egypt; for only those
that were above twenty years old when they came out of Egypt, did the Lord
threaten to destroy in the wilderness, Number. 14.29. As for the next clause, and
ye dwelt in the wilderness a long season, it is added, to intimate Gods
wonderful providence, in feeding them and preserving them for so many years in
their travels there.

Verse. 9. Then Balak the son of Zippor king of Moab, rose and warred against
Israel, etc.] That is, prepared to make war against them, intending to have
set upon them, if he could have gotten Balaam to curse them, Number. 22.11.
Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt which covers the face of the
earth, Come now, curse me them; peradventure I shall be able to overcome them,
and drive them out.

Verse. 11. And the men of Jericho fought with you, etc.] That is, made
preparation to resist you, shutting up their city against you, and fortifying
themselves, which is a kind of defensive war; though indeed they never durst
stir out of their gates to fight against the Israelites, nor had the heart once
to lift a weapon in defense of themselves, when they saw their walls so
miraculously to fall down before them.

Verse. 12. And I sent the hornet before you, which drove them out from before
you, etc.] See the note upon Exodus 23.28.

Verse. 14. And put away the gods which your fathers served, etc.] So likewise
verse. 23. he says, Put away the strange gods that are among you. Their zeal
against their brethren for building that altar on the banks of Jordan, chap.
22.16. Thus says the whole congregation of the Lord, What trespass is this
which ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn this day from
following the Lord, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel
this day against the Lord, and that which is said of them in this chapter,
verse. 31. And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, sh^ws plainly,
that for the general they were not yet corrupted, and that there was no
idolatry publicly allowed. Besides, had Joshua known any particular families
or persons that had worshipped idols, no doubt he would have punished them
according to the Law: but it seems in his government he had found that many of
them were still lingering after these superstitions of their fathers, and
therefore feared that though they durst not openly do it, there were some that
secretly were worshippers of idols, whence it is that he admonishes them in
this wise, to put away the strange gods from amongst them; and indeed, that in
the wilderness many secretly did worship idols is evident by that place, Amos
5.25, 26. which is cited by S. Stephen, Acts 7.42, 43. Then God turned and gave
them up to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the
Prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye offered to me any beasts and
sacrifices, by the space of forty years in the wilderness? Yea, ye took up
the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your God Remphan, figures which you
made, to worship them.

Verse. 15. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day
whom ye will serve, etc.] Not that Joshua did now lay the reins upon their
necks and give them liberty to change their Religion, and to serve strange gods
if that way liked them best: Had they revolted from God doubtless he would
have punished them severely: But he uses this kind of speech, first, as a
powerful persuasion to keep them constant to God, by implying that there is
such a difference betwixt these two, the worshipping the Lord that had
delivered them out of Egypt and done so many great things for them, and bowing
to Idol-gods, that one would not think it possible that they should forsake the
Lord to follow them, though it should be left to their choice: as if one should
say, choose you whether you will go to heaven or to hell. So that this is much
like that speech of Elijahs, 1. Kings 18.21. How long halt ye between two
opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.
Secondly, to sift them how they stood inwardly affected, and to imply that
unless they served God willingly without any constraint, so that if it were
left to their choice, they would take no other way, God would not regard their
outward obedience. And thirdly, that having now of their own accord accepted
the Lord to be their God, they might hereby be the more tied to cleave
constantly unto him.

But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.] This Joshua added, not so
much to make known to them what he was resolved to do, to wit, that though they
should all forsake the Lord, yet that should not one whit move him; but
principally, that his resolute determination herein, of whose wisdom and piety
they had had so great experience might covertly, but yet sweetly and
effectually, persuade them to keep constant in that way of religion wherein
they found him so zealously and settledly resolved to continue.

Verse. 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God: He is a jealous
God, etc.] This is spoken upon supposition, not only of Gods holiness and
severe jealousy against all those that are not faithful in keeping covenant
with him, but also of the perverse refractary disposition, and untamed
stubbornness of this rebellious people; as if he should have said, Consider
well what you say, God will not be content with a profession of being his
people, if ye take liberty to live as you list, as you have done; No, God is a
holy God, etc. so that this is added not to discourage them, but rather by way
of caution, to awake them out of their security, and to let them know that they
must be more careful of walking uprightly with God, if they meant to serve
him; as if when a company of soldiers that had not so well behaved themselves
in former times, should untertake some special service, and the General
should answer (not to beat them off from it, but rather to inflame them and
make them go through it with the more courage and care) why should you think of
undertaking such a piece of service? you cannot do it; implying only thus
much, that they must be more valiant and constant then they had been, if they
would meddle with it.

Verse. 23. Now therefore put away, said he, the strange Gods which are among
you, etc.] See the note above, verse 13.

Verse. 25. So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a
statute and an ordinance in Shechem.] That is, as Gods servant and minister he
caused the people to renew their covenant with God (and doubtless it was done
in a solemn manner, being accompanied with sacrifices and other usual rites of
that sacred service) and so he set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem,
that is, he established it as a thing fully settled and ratified for future
times, that they should constantly continue in the service of the Lord God
alone, as became his peculiar people, and to that end did fully make known and
confirm all the conditions of the covenant which they had made with God. To
which purpose happily the whole law of God was at this time distinctly read
amongst them; which some conceive is one of the principal things intended in
this last clause.

Verse. 26. And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God.] That
is, these promises of the people and the whole carriage of this business when
they did with such solemnity renew their covenant with God, that knowing there
was such a record kept of this business even in Gods Tabernacle, they might be
careful to keep their covenant. But yet withal, hereby may be meant that this
book of Joshua was now added to the book of Moses law which was laid up long
since before the ark, Deuteronomy. 31.26. (saving only those passages which are
apparently since inserted;) for no doubt that which Joshua wrote was written
for all future times; Now we have in the Church no other records, of it but
this book of Joshua.

And took a great stone and set it up there under an oak that was by the
Sanctuary of the Lord.] This stone was also set up as a memorial of this
covenant now thus solemnly renewed between God and the people. The place where
it was set, to wit, under an oak that was by the Sanctuary is thus precisely
expressed for the better evidencing of the certain truth of that which is here
related. Some indeed suppose that this was the very oak under which Jacob had
many years since buried all the Idolatrous trash which he found amongst those
of his family, Genesis 35.4. And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods that
were in their hand, and all the earrings which were in their ears, and Jacob
hid them under the oak which was by Shechem; and that Joshua for that cause did
purposely set up this stone under that oak. But though it be certain and well
known that oaks will continue many hundred years, yet that this was that oak we
cannot certainly determine. As for the Sanctuary of the Lord here mentioned,
some conceive it is the place only where all this was done, that is so called,
and that because of the ark that was there; but I think it is far more
probable, that the Tabernacle was brought thither together with the ark, and
that this it is which is here called the Sanctuary of the Lord. However certain
it is, that in future times this place where this stone was set up by Joshua
was from hence called the plain of the pillar, or the oak of the pillar, Judges
9.6.

Verse. 27. Behold this stone shall be a witness unto us; for it has heard all
the words of the Lord which he spoke unto us.] This is a figurative speech, and
implies thus much, that it should as truly witness against them if they should
falsify their promise, as if it had heard the words that were spoken; an
expression this is therefore much like that, Jer. 2.12. Be ye astonished O ye
heavens at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord.

Verse. 29. Joshua the son of Nun the servant of the Lord dyed, being an
hundred and ten years old.] It is manifest there were but four hundred and
eighty years betwixt the building of the Temple and the Israelites coming out
of Egypt, 1. Kings 6.1. And it came to pass in the four hundred and
fourscore years, after the children of Israel were come out of the land of
Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Zif,
which is the second month, that he began to build the house of the Lord, of
which yielding forty years to their travels in the wilderness, and then to
Othniels government forty years, Judges 3.11. to Ehuds eighty years, verse 30.
to Shamgars some few months, verse. 31. to Deborah and Barak forty, Judges
5.31. to Gideon forty, Judges 8.28. to Abimelech three, Judges 9.22. to Tolah
three and twenty, Judges 10.2. and to Jair two and twenty years, verse 3. to
Jephthe six, Judges 12.7. and Ibzan seven, verse 9. and Elon ten, verse 11. and
Abdon eight, verse 14. to Samson twenty, Judges 15.20. to Elie forty, 1. Sam.
4.18. to Samuel and Saul forty years, Acts 13.21. to David forty, 1. Kings
2.11. and then four to Solomon ere he began the temple, all together, make
four hundred sixty and three, and then the most left for Joshua will be
seventeen, though there should be no interregnum between the Judges.

Verse. 32. And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out
of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, etc.] Joseph had commanded the Israelites to
carry his bones with them out of Egypt, Genesis 50.25. which accordingly they did,
Exodus 13.19. Here now we are told where they buried his bones, to wit, in
Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor, the
father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver. Which was doubtless the
parcel of a field, mentioned Genesis 33.19. which Jacob bought of Hamor the
father of Shechem, and which when he lay upon his deathbed he gave to Joseph as
a special legacy, Gen, 48.22. and this might well be the reason why they
buried Joseph's bones here, whereas it is evident that his forefathers and their
wives too were buried in the cave of Machpelah, Genesis 49.29, 30, 31. I am, says
Jacob, to be gathered unto my people; Bury me with my fathers in the cave, that
is in the field of Ephron the Hittite, In the cave that is in the field of
Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan which Abraham bought
with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a burying place. There
they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife, there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his
wife, and there I buried Leah, to wit, because it was the inheritance
peculiarly bequeathed him by his father. Indeed by the words of Stephen, Acts
7.15, 16. it might seem that all the Patriarchs, the sons of Jacob (and so
Joseph's bones amongst the rest) were buried not in the field which Jacob
bought, Genesis 33.19. but in the burying-place which Abraham bought of Ephron in
Machpelah, Genesis 23.17, 18. For though Stephen says, they were buried in a
field, bought of the sons of Emor the father of Sichem, yet withal he says
expressly, that they were buried in a Sepulcher purchased by Abraham, Acts
7.15, 16. So Jacob went down into Egypt and died, he and our fathers, and were
carried over into Sichem, and laid in the sepulcher which Abraham bought for a
sum of money. Now we read of no burying place which Abraham bought, but that
of the cave of Machpelah, which he bought of Ephron the Hittite. Genesis 23.16.17.
etc. wherein it is evident, Genesis 49.29, 30, 31. that Abraham and Sarah, and
Isaac and Rebekah, and Jacob and Leah were buried: but to this I answer, that
many of our best Expositours are of opinion that this place in the Acts of the
Apostles is corrupted by the carelessness, or rather the mistake of those that
transcribed the copies; yet because it is dangerous to allow that the Greek
copies of the new Testament are generally falsified in any one passage, I think
it is better answered, that though Stephen said, that the fathers were laid in
the sepulcher of Abraham, bought for a sum of money of Emor the father of
Sichem, yet he meant only thereby, that they were laid in the Sepulcher, which
the posterity or the son of Abraham bought of the sons of Emor, and that
was Jacob, because that which the son does the father may be said to do in
him; and if so, then it seems that the bones of the other Patriarchs, the
sons of Jacob, were buried here together with Joseph's. At what time they
buried Joseph's bones here, it is not expressed, yet by the last clause of this
verse where it is said of this parcel of ground, and it became the inheritance
of the children of Joseph, it appears that it was done after they had rest in
the land, and had divided the whole country of Canaan amongst the tribes; and
so this part of Canaan where this parcel of land lay, falling then by lot to
the sons of Joseph (to whom Jacob at his death had bequeathed it) here they
buried the bones of their father.

Verse. 33. And they buried him in a hill that pertained to Phinehas his son,
which was given him in mount Ephraim.] Because the cities that fell to the
priests by lot were taken out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of
Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, chap. 21.4. and thence it might seem
strange that Eleazar or Phinehas his son should have any inheritance in mount
Ephraim, wherein for that cause Eleazar the high priest should be buried, since
mount Ephraim belonged to the sons of Joseph, therefore in the last clause of
this book it is expressly said, that it belonged to Phinehas by warrant of a
special and extraordinary gift, and not by the designement of the lot which
was drawn forth for the priests, it was given him in mount Ephraim. Whether
this hill was given to Eleazar or Phinehas, it is not fully and clearly
expressed, the words seem rather to imply, that it was given to Phinehas, they
buried him in a hill which pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him
in mount Ephraim; but yet it may be that the place where Eleazar was buried, is
here said to be the hill of Phinehas, or a hill that pertained to Phinehas, not
because it did not first pertain to Eleazar, but with relation to future times,
whence it seems it was usually called the hill of Phinehas; and the reason that
Expositours give, why this place in mount Ephraim was by extraordinary gift
conferred upon the high priest, whereas the priests had their dwellings by lot
in the other tribes above mentioned are these: first, that he might be near
hand to Joshua who dwelt in mount Ephraim, to the end that by him he might
enquire of the Lord upon any special service. Secondly, that he might be the
nearer to the Tabernacle, which at this time was in Shiloh a city in Ephraim.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the book of JUDGES.
CHAP. I.
NOw after the death of Joshua, etc.] In this book the history of the
Commonwealth of Israel is continued from the death of Joshua to the days of
Eli, all which time, at least the most of which time, they lived under the
command and government of certain Judges whom God successively raised up to
rule over them, as his deputies and vicegerents; and therefore is this book
called the book of Judges: for though Eli and Samuel may well be numbered
amongst the Judges of Israel, because they commanded in chief after the same
way of government as these did, whose history is recorded in this book; yet
because the change of the government from that of Judges to that of Kings,
happened in the days of Samuel, and the story of Samuel must needs be begun
from the days of Eli; therefore the acts of their times are not recorded here,
but are reserved to another book. Who wrote this book is no where expressed; it
suffices us to know that it has always been kept in the Church amongst those
Oracles of God, whose penmen were guided by the infallible inspiration of his
Spirit, and indeed one passage of this book, to wit, that concerning Sampson,
chap. 13.7. the child shall be a Nazarite to God, is, by the judgment of many
learned Expositours, principally intended by the Evangelist S. Matthew, where
he undertakes to allege a testimony out of the writings of Gods Prophets,
Matt. 2.23. And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, He shall be called a Nazarene.

The children of Israel asked the Lord, saying, Who shall go up for us against
the Canaanites first to fight with them?] In the last years of Joshua his
government the Israelites had lived in peace, Josh. 21.44. And the Lord gave
them rest round about, according to all that he swear unto their fathers, and
there stood not a man of all their enemies before them: the Lord delivered all
their enemies into their hand, the Canaanites not daring to provoke them, and
the Israelites not yet attempting any further upon the Canaanites, partly
because the land they had already vanquished was as much as they could well
people; partly, perhaps out of an over-eager desire to, and love of the rest
they now enjoyed: and indeed they knew it was agreeable to the will of God,
that they should not drive out all the inhabitants at once, but by degrees,
Deuteronomy. 7.22. And the Lord thy God will put out these nations from before thee by
little and little; Thou may not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the
field increase upon thee. But now Joshua being dead, who a little before his
death had encouraged them to go forward in expelling the Canaanites, though
they had no man chosen of God, to command over them in chief, as Moses and
Joshua did; yet finding that indeed it was now fit they should proceed on in
the war, they assembled themselves together (as it seems at Shiloh) and there
resolved to renew their battles against the inhabitants of the land; only,
because the success of their first attempts would be a matter of great
consequence, either for the encouragement or disheartning the people, therefore
they would first enquire of the Lord, which accordingly they did: they asked
the Lord, as it is here said, to wit, by Phinehas the high priest (or Eleazar
if he were yet living, which is doubtful, because he died immediately after the
death of Joshua, Josh. 24.33.) before the propitiatory or mercy-seat, who shall
go up for us against the Canaanites first to fight against them? that is, which
of our tribes shall first begin and set upon the inhabitants that still abide
in their lot? for this is doubtless the meaning of this question they asked.

Verse. 2. And the Lord said, Judah shall go up, etc.] That is, the tribe of
Judah; because that was the most populous and the strongest of the tribes, and
had their portion in the chief of the land, which it was therefore fit should
be first cleared of the enemy, therefore they were appointed first to begin
the war: and besides, thus was that still accomplished which Jacob prophesied
concerning the pre-eminence this tribe should have above the rest, Genesis 49.8.
Judah thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck
of thine enemies, thy fathers children shall bow down before thee.

Verse. 3. And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me, etc.] The
Simeonites were brethren to those of Judah both by father and mother; but
besides, their cohabitation was another tie betwixt them, in regard whereof
they lived in the same lot, as brethren in one and the same house, and in this
respect chiefly, is Simeon called Judahs brother.

Verse. 4. And Judah went up, and the Lord delivered the Canaanites, etc.] That
is, one particular people of this country so called.

And they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men.] That is, in and about Bezek,
to wit, in taking the town, or after they had taken it, when the king fled
thence to save his life, as is more particularly after related.

Verse. 6. But Adoni-Bezek fled, and they pursued after him and caught him, and
cut off his thumbs and his great toes.] And thus as he had done to many other
kings, as himself confesses in the following verse, to wit, either out of a
kind of barbarous sporting cruelty, or else to render them thereby unfit for
war ever after, that by the al-ruling providence of God is now done to him by
the Israelites that had now taken him prisoner. Indeed we read not that Gods
people were wont to inflict any such strange kind of punishment upon those that
were vanquished by them, nor does it stand with piety thus to torture and
afflict those that are taken in war, with such studied and uncoucht ways of
punishment; and besides, the Israelites had an express command not to spare
the lives of any of these nations, but presently to cut them off; and therefore
as it is likely that some special reason moved the Israelites to inflict this
unusual punishment upon him, so I conceive it most probable, that either when
they took the city they found some of these poor captive kings that had been
thus inhumanely used by him, a spectacle that might well stir their spirits
against him; or at least that they might receive information from others
herein, and so might be moved thereby to deal with him as he had dealt with
others, as judging it consonant to that Law of retaliation which God
established amongst his people, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand,
foot for foot, Exodus 21.24. Some Expositours indeed conceive that the
Israelites knew not of this particular cruelty that he had used to others, till
himself acknowledged the just hand of God upon him herein, verse 7. Threescore
and ten kings having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered their
meat under my table; and so they ascribe this which the Israelites did wholly
to the secret providence of God, who moved them thus to return his cruelty upon
himself, they not knowing why they did it. But no such thing can be necessarily
inferred from his acknowledgement of that which he had done to the kings that
he had conquered; for either to confess how many kings he had used so, or out
of remorse of conscience being as it were constrained to confess that it was
the just vengeance of God upon him, he might well say what he did, though he
knew the Israelites had purposely done thus to him because he had formerly done
so to others.

Verse. 7. Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and great toes cut off,
gathered their meat under my table, etc.] This need not seem strange to us if
we consider, first, what petty kings there were in those times; and secondly,
that this may be understood of so many kings who at several times had been
thus used, not that there were seventy all at one time thus waiting upon him:
though even that is not so incredible, considering that in those days every
city almost had a several king. And as for their gathering or gleaning their
meat under his table, the meaning is not that they lay like dogs under the
table, but that they were kept as slaves in such a manner, that for hunger they
were glad to gather up the crumbs and scraps that fell under the kings table,
as having nothing allowed them to eat but that; and happily the king to please
himself with this cruel spectacle, did sometimes cause them to be fetched in,
when he was in his cups feasting himself, that he might see them in this
piteous plight whereunto he had brought them, and insult over them.

And they brought him to Jerusalem and there he died.] To Jerusalem I conceive
they brought him as a spectacle worthy to be beheld, that men might learn by
him, how just God is in punishing men according to the nature of their
wickedness; and therefore it is most likely also that he dyed there presently
of the wounds he had received in the war, in that severe punishment that was
inflicted on him: or else, that he was kept there upon this extraordinary
occasion, purposely that men might see in him how God abhorres such cruelty as
his was, he being otherwise one of those accursed nations that might not be
spared.

Verse. 8. Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken
it, etc.] That is, before Joshuas death: for this is added, to show the reason
why they carried him to Jerusalem, to wit, because Jerusalem, that is, that
part of Jerusalem that was in Judahs lot, was now in their possession, though
not the fort. So that most Expositours hold, that both this and the following
verses unto verse 17. are a repetition of the memorable acts done by the tribe
of Judah whilst Joshua was now living: Indeed before the land was divided, all
Israel fought as in one army against the Canaanites; but after the tribes were
seated in their several portions, each tribe made war against the
inhabitants in their several lots; and thus the men of Judah are here said to
have done these things here related; for it is not necessary to hold that
Jerusalem was taken when the king thereof was slain, Josh. 10.23. See the note,
Josh. 15.63.

Verse. 9. And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the
Canaanites that dwelt in the mountain, etc.] That is, from Jerusalem, which
stood in a mountainous country, Psalm 125.2. As the mountains are round about
Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people.

Verse. 10. And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron, etc.]
That is, against the Canaanites that dwelt in the mountains about Hebron, which
they did in the days of Joshua, and under the conduct of Caleb, who then
commanded in chief. It is evident that Hebron was taken by Joshua, concerning
which see the note, Joshua 10.37. and that afterward Caleb drove out the
giants that had possessed themselves of the strong holds in and about Hebron,
Joshua 15.13, 14. Concerning which see the note, Joshua 11.21. But because the
Author of this history was here to relate the memorable exploits that were
done by the men of Judah, therefore together with those noble acts which they
did after the death of Joshua, he repeats also those that were done by them
whilst Joshua was yet living, under the command of Caleb, both against Hebron,
and against Debir in the following verses, so to set forth the glory of this
tribe the more fully.

Verse. 11. And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir, etc.] See
the notes that concern these following verses, Joshua 15.15, 16, etc.

Verse. 16. And the children of the Kenite, Moses father in Law, went up out of
the city of palm trees, etc.] That is, out of Jericho, Deuteronomy. 34.3. the plain of
the valley of Jericho, the city of palm trees. Concerning these Kenites, see
the note upon Numb. 10.31. in tents they always dwelt, chap. 4.17. Howbeit
Sisera fled away on his feet, to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite:
it seems therefore that being appointed to have their lot with Judah, having
formerly dwelt in their tents in the country about Jericho (for Jericho it
self was many years ago destroyed, Josh. 6.24.) after Judahs portion was
cleared, they removed with them to the wilderness of Judah, there to dwell
with the men of Judah, as Moses had promised to Hobab the Kenite, Number. 10.32.
And it shall be if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what goodness the
Lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.

Verse. 17. And Judah went with Simeon his brother.] To wit, to help Simeon in
the clearing his lot, as before Simeon had helped Judah, verse. 3.

And they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephah, and utterly destroyed it
(and the name of the city was called Hormah)] That is, utter destruction; they
were not wont thus utterly to destroy all the cities they took; it is therefore
probable, that they did thus destroy this place because of the vow which the
Israelites had made long since, when Arad the king of the Canaanites made war
against them; see the note Numb. 21.3. and the mention of Arad in the foregoing
verse, makes this opinion the more probable.

Verse. 18. Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, etc.] Yet it seems soon
after the Philistines recovered these cities with the coasts thereof, and drove
out the Israelites, ere they could well settle themselves therein, to wit,
because they began presently to provoke the Lord with their sins. For it is
evident that these cities were not long after this inhabited by the
Philistines, chap. 3.1, 2, 3. Now these are ^he nations which the Lord left to
prove Israel by them, etc. Namely, five Lords of the Philistines, etc. and so
again, 1. Sam. 6.17. Now these are the golden Emerods which the Philistines
returned for a trespasse-offering unto the Lord: For Ashdod one, for Gaza one,
for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one. As for Ekron one of the cities
here mentioned, it was in Dans lot, Josh. 19.43. therefore it seems that the
tribe of Judah joined with those of Dan as well as with those of Simeon for the
clearing of their coasts; the rather, because they could not hold those cities
they had gotten from the Philistines, if they had let them alone in this
neighboring city.

Verse. 19. And the Lord was with Judah, and he drove out the inhabitants of the
mountain.] This clause, and the Lord was with Judah, is added to show of what
difficulty their attempts were if the Lord had not been with them; and withal,
to condemn their cowardice, that durst not proceed in their conquests against
the inhabitants of the valleys, having had such encouraging experience of Gods
assistance.

But could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had
chariots of iron.] Their own fears disabling them, and God for their sins
withdrawing himself from them. Concerning these chariots of iron, see the note
Josh. 17.16.

Verse. 21. And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that
inhabited Jerusalem, etc.] See Josh. 15.63.

Verse. 26. And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city.]
Whence it seems probable that the Israelites did not only spare his life and
the life of his family, but also gave him a rich reward, to wit, for showing
them the way into Bethel, as is before said.

Verse. 27. Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean, etc.]
See the note Josh. 17.12. Thus in the days after the death of Joshua, when it
seems they had no one set over them in chief, but were only governed by the
joynt-authority of the Elders in each tribe, they began to be remiss in
endeavoring to drive out the remainder of the Canaanites that dwelt in the
land, but were content to make peace with them; and this was the first step of
their defection from God, which did by degrees lead them into grosser sins,
and greatly provoked the Lord to displeasure against them.

Verse. 35. Yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became
tributaries.] That is, though the Danites were sorely for a time oppressed by
the Amorites as is expressed before, verse. 34. And the Amorites forced the
children of Dan into the mountain: for they would not suffer them to come down
to the valley; yet afterward with the help of the sons of Joseph, who
bordered upon Dans portion, and came up to aid them, they prevailed against
them, so that they became tributaries.

Verse. And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim, from
the rock and upward.] This is added, to show how the Israelites through their
own sloth suffered themselves to be hemmed in with these accursed enemies.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ANd an Angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim.] It is very
hard to determine whether this were an Angel indeed, or some man, either priest
or prophet, that by special commission was sent at this time from God unto the
people to reprove them for their sins. The word in the original may well be
translated either angel or messenger, as it is in the margin of our bibles,
and the reasons are very considerable, which have moved many to think that it
was some man of God that was sent to them, to wit first, because it is said
that he came up from Gilgal, not that he came down from heaven, and so appeared
to them: and secondly, because he spoke in a general assembly, as is evident,
verse. 4. where it is said, that he spoke unto all the children of Israel,
whereas the apparitions of Angels have been usually only to some particular
men in private. But yet the most of Expositours conceive, that it was a true
Angel, and that having assumed for this present service the body of man, the
Scripture therefore speaks of him as a man, that he came up from Gilgal to
Bochim, and this they hold, 1. Because he speaks after the manner of Angels,
not thus says the Lord, as the prophets were wont to speak, but as in the
person of God, I made you to go up out of Egypt: and 2. Because the Author of
this book elsewhere speaks differently of the prophet and the Angel, as chap.
6.8. The Lord sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them,
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you
forth out of the house of bondage. But then verse. 12. And the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto him, that is, to Gideon, and said unto him, The Lord is with
thee, thou mighty man of valor. Yea, some hold that it was the son of God,
the Angel of the covenant, who was wont thus to appear to the fathers, and that
because he ascribes here to himself that which was the work of God, as the
bringing this people out of Egypt, and the making of a covenant with them.
However, most probable it is, that this was done in the days of the Elders
that outlived Joshua, and that before they began to worship the Gods of the
nations they dwelt amongst; for else doubtless this Angel or messenger of the
Lord would have reproved them for their idolatry, as well as for making a
league of peace with the land. It seems therefore that finding themselves
sorely annoyed by the Canaanites in several parts of the land, there was an
assembly of the people called of all the tribes, that they might consult what
was fit to be done, and so thereupon the Lord sent his Angel to them with a
message; and very likely it is, that it was some place about Shiloh, where the
people were now met together, which upon occasion of the peoples weeping here
was called Bochim, that is, weepers. For first, thither the tribes used to
assemble themselves, especially at their three solemn feasts, (and some
general assembly of the people there was at this time, as is before noted:)
and secondly, the people did offer sacrifices there, verse. 5. and that they
might only do where the altar and tabernacle was.

Verse. 2. But ye have not obeyed my voice; why have ye done this?] That is,
consider how great and inexcusable your sin is: for these words why have ye
done this are as much in effect as if he had said, that they had not the least
color for that they had done, and that if they were challenged to give a
reason why they had done it, they could have nothing to say for themselves.

Verse. 3. But they shall be as thorns in your sides.] See the note Numb. 31.55.

Verse. 5. And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed
there unto the Lord.] Though by divine dispensation, or at least Gods conniving
at it, the faithful servants of God did sometimes sacrifice in other places
then the Tabernacle (for so did Samuel at Mizpeh, 1. Sam. 7.6. and Gideon in
Ophrah, Judge. 6.24.) yet there is no necessity that can force us to say it was
so here. For this Bochim might be in Shiloh, or near about it, where the
Tabernacle was, as is noted above, verse. 1.

Verse. 6. And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went,
etc.] In the following part of this chapter is laid down in general the sum
of the whole book, to wit, Isreal's idolatry, and Gods dealing with them both
in punishing them, and delivering them again. But the death of Joshua and the
Elders which had seen the works of the Lord made way to this defection of
Israel; and therefore the story first begins with that, and tells us how Joshua
dismissed them from the camp where they had as yet continued together, and sent
them every tribe to their own portion, which by lot in the late division of the
land, God had given them.

Verse. 9. And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnath-heres.] Josh. 24.30. it is called Timnath-serah.

Verse. 10. And there arose another generation after them, which knew not the
Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel.] We need not inquire
whether there were none now alive that knew the works of the Lord; for there
might be some that did, (as doubtless there were some likewise that did not
fall away with the rest to the worship of idols) and yet it might be said, that
there arose another generation that knew not the Lord, etc. namely, because the
greatest number was of that generation that had not seen the works of the Lord,
to wit, those works which he did in Egypt, yea, many of them, not those works
which he did at their entrance into Canaan, the dividing of Jordan, etc. and
these they were that knew not the Lord, that is, effectually, as the other
generation had done, who by the sight of Gods wondrous works were brought truly
to fear the Lord.

Verse. 11. And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
served Baalim.] That is, the several gods of the nations; whom they called
Baalim. For Baal signifies a Lord, (hence were those names so frequent amongst
the great men of Carthage, of Hannibal, and Asdrubal, and many others)
whereupon they called God by way of excellency Baal, that is, the Lord, and
when they came by degrees to fall to idolatry, every man of renown that after
his death was worshipped as a god, was called Baal, and by some of those eastern
nations Bell, Esa. 46.1. Bell boweth down, Nebo stoopeth; yea, and the several
planets, which by the Chaldean Astrologers were said to rule in their several
houses in heaven, were called Baalim, that is, Lords or rulers: and so all the
several gods of the Chaldeans, Syrians, and Canaanites, yea, and several
idols and images of these gods were called Baalim.

Verse. 13. And they forsook the Lord, and served Baalim and Ashtaroth.] The
goddess of the Sidonians, 1. Kings 11.5. And Solomon went after Ashtaroth the
goddess of the Sidonians, 2. Kings 23.13. And the high places that were before
Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption, which
Solomon the king of Israel had builded for Ashtaroth, the abomination of the
Sidonians, and of the Philistines, 1. Sam. 31.10. And they put his armor in
the house of Ashtaroth: yet it seems as Baalim was the common name of all their
gods, so was Ashtaroth the common name of all their goddesses.

Verse. 10. And he delivered them into the hand of the spoilers, that spoiled
them, and he sold them into the hand of their enemies round about, etc.] That
is, not only suffered the enemies to enter upon the land and carry away their
goods, (whereby as with a gentler rod he did at first chastise them) but at
last he gave their persons also into the hands of those that made war with
them to be their bondslaves; as a man should sell his child to be a servant or
slave, so did the Lord pass away the right which he had in them, and put them
under the power of the enemy, who also sold them away here and there when they
pleased, Psalm. 44.12. Thou sellest thy people for naught, and do not increase
thy wealth by their price.

Verse. 16. Nevertheless God raised up judges that delivered them, etc.] That
is, God stirred up men to undertake the avenging of them upon their enemies,
and to govern them according to the Laws of God, and advanced them above others
with the gifts of his Spirit that they might be fit for those great employments.

Verse. 17. And yet they would not hearken unto their Judges, but they went a
whoring after other gods, etc.] That is, for a while they hearkened unto them,
but not constantly; within a while after they returned unto their evil ways,
as it is more fully expressed, verse. 18, 19. As for this phrase of going a
whoring after other gods, it is used frequently in the Scripture, to imply men's
unlawful and base joining of their souls to idols, that were formerly entered
into a covenant with God, and therefore should have kept themselves solely to
him, as a wife to her husband; and the rather doubtless, is the blind, mad,
and unreasonable zeal of idolaters compared to the violent and incorrigible
lusts of whoremongers, because, as they that are once inflamed with those lusts
are as men bewitched, no counsel or persuasion does any good upon them, they
care not what they spend, what pains they take, into what inconveniences they
cast themselves, so they may satisfy their lusts; so it is with idolaters, so
bewitched they are, that there is no dissuading them, no charge, toil, or
danger, can make them give over this abominable sin.

Verse. 18. For it repented the Lord because of their groanings, etc.] See the
note, Genesis 6.6.

Verse. 19. And they returned and corrupted themselves more then their fathers.]
Before it was said, verse. 19. that they returned quickly out of the way which
their fathers walked in, which was meant of that generation which was
immediately after those that in the days of Joshua and the godly Elders after
him, continued constant in the true Religion; but this is now spoken of the
children of those that in the following generation did apostatize from the true
worship of God; these their children, though for a time during the life of
their Judges they made a show of repentance, and forsaking their idolatry, yet
when their Judges were dead, they soon returned again to the wicked ways of
their idolatrous fathers, yea and did worse then they; indeed as relapses in
regard of sickness bring men usually into a more dangerous condition then they
were in before, so it is with relapses to idolatry; a Church and people that
have been reformed, and fall back to idolatry, are usually far worse, and
more grossly superstitious then they were before.

Verse. 22. That through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way
of the Lord, etc.] These words may be understood two several ways: for first,
they may have reference to that clause in the latter end of the foregoing verse
(where there is mention made of Joshua his leaving the Canaanites unexpelled)
the nations which Joshua left when he died; and then the meaning must be, that
the nations were not wholly driven out in Joshua's time, but were left for the
trial of Israel, to wit, to see whether they would be drawn away by their
idolatries or no: And secondly, they may have reference to all that which is
said in the two foregoing verses, Because this people have transgressed my
covenant, etc. I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them, of
the nations which Joshua left when he died. That through them I may prove
Israel whether they will keep the way of the Lord, etc. and then the meaning
must be, that God for the sin of the Israelites resolved not to cast out any
more of the Canaanites that remained in the land, that they might continually
oppress and vex the Israelites, and so thereby he might prove them, namely,
whether by these afflictions they would be brought to repent and turn to the
Lord, and so again to walk in his ways. And indeed both these may be well here
comprehended.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 2. Only that the generation of the children of Israel might know to
teach them war, etc.] Two reasons were given in the latter end of the
foregoing chapter, why the Lord did not wholly cast out the Canaanites out of
the land in the days of Joshua, and here now a third is added. Some conceive
indeed the meaning of this clause to be this, that by leaving the Canaanites
amongst them, God would now let this wicked generation know to their cost what
war is; their fathers, by the extraordinary help which the Lord afforded
them, did soon vanquish their enemies, and knew not the misery that war
usually brings with it, but this their degenerate posterity, being now forsaken
of God, should know to their sorrow what war is. But according to our
translation, I conceive the meaning of the words to be rather this, that God
left these inhabitants of the land unexpelled, that the future generations
might hereby be made careful to train up their people in martial discipline,
that so they might be the better able to perform what God had enjoined them, in
not suffering any of the Canaanites to remain in the the land. And this it is,
I conceive, that in these words the holy Ghost does chiefly aim at, not so much
their teaching the people the skill of the war, as their intention therein,
to wit, that they might obey the Lords command in driving out the remainder of
this people.

Verse. 3. Namely, five Lords of the Philistines, etc.] Here the nations are
reckoned that were not cast out of Canaan; and the first mentioned are the five
Lords of the Philistines, to wit, the Lords of Ashdod, Gaza, Askelon, Gath, and
Ekron; indeed three of these cities were at first taken by the men of Judah
after the death of Joshua, to wit, Gaza, Askelon, and Ekron; but it seems the
Philistines soon recovered them again. See chap. 1.18.

Verse. 5. And the children of Israel dwelt amongst the Canaanites, etc.] from
the eleventh verse of the foregoing chapter unto this place, we have had a
summary description of the state of Israel in the days of the Judges; and here
now the Author of this story enters upon the particular story of Othniel, the
first of the Judges, telling us in the first place what their sins were that
brought them into that bondage, out of which Othniel delivered them.

Verse. 7. And served Baalim and the groves.] That is, the idols which they set
up and worshipped in the groves.

Verse. 8. And he sold them into the hand of Cushan-rishathaim king of
Mesopotamia.] See the note chap. 2.14.

And the children of Israel served Cushan-rishathaim eight years.] It seems to
me evident, that for some years after the death of Joshua the people continued
constant in the worship of the true God, chap. 2.7. And the people served the
Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that outlived
Joshua, etc. and doubtless some few years it was after they fell to idolatry
ere God sold them into the hand of this king of Mesopotamia; and therefore how
long after the death of Joshua these eight years began, of Isreal's bondage
under the king of Mesopotamia, we cannot say.

Verse. 9. And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised
up a deliverer, etc.] The word in the Hebrew signifies a savior, but thereby
is meant, one that delivered them from the bondage they were in, and this was
Othniel, who was the son of Calebs brother, and withal his son in law, as
being married to Achsah his daughter, chap. 1.13. for that noble exploit of his
in taking Debir; and this was the honor of the children of Judah, that the
first judge after Joshua, was of their tribe, the Lord therein making good that
prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49.8. Judah thou art he whom thy Brethren shall praise,
thine hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies, thy fathers children shall
bow down before thee. Many hold that Othniel became Judge of Israel immediately
after the death of Joshua; but me thinks it is clear in this place that it was
not till toward the end of the eight years of Isreal's bondage under
Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia; for it is said, that then the children
of Israel cried unto the Lord, and thereupon God raised up Othniel to be a
deliverer, that is, God did then, by a special instinct of his Spirit, stir
him up to make war against this tyrant, for the deliverance of his people,
and furnished him with all necessary gifts and graces of his Spirit, both for
the vanquishing of the enemy, and for the government of the people, which it
seems upon this occasion he took upon him. But yet, if Othniel took Debir, and
thereupon married Calebs daughter whilst Joshua was yet living, as many
Expositours hold he did, hereby we may probably gather, that it was not many
years after Joshuas death ere the Israelites were thus oppressed by this king,
and so thereupon Othniel was raised up of God to be their Judge.

Verse. 10. And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him.] That is, God by his
Spirit did pour forth upon him an extraordinary measure of all gifts requisite
for the service he was to undertake; and withal, did secretly but mightily
work upon his spirit, in moving him to undertake that service for which he had
fitted him.

Verse. 11. And the land had rest forty years.] That is, unto the expiration of
forty years, to wit, from the death of Joshua. It is a great question amongst
Expositours, whether the years wherein the Israelites are said in this book to
have been in bondage under those nations that prevailed over them, and the
years wherein the Judges are here said to have judged Israel, and wherein the
land is said to have been in rest, are to be accounted as several distinct
years, or no; and so it is in this particular place, some holding that the land
had rest forty years under Othniels government, after those eight years
wherein the king of Mesopotamia had tyrannized over them, and others holding
that both the eight years of the bondage of Israel under Cushan-rishathaim, and
the foregoing years wherein the Israelites lived without a Judge, under the
joynt-government of their Elders, and had not yet by their sins brought
themselves into bondage, are to be all comprehended under the forty years here
mentioned; and indeed these last I conceive are in the right, unquestionably,
as may be thus made evident. It is expressly said, that from the Israelites
going out of Egypt, to the building of the Temple in the fourth year of
Solomon's reign, there were but four hundred and eighty years, 1. Kings 6.1.
And it came to pass in the four hundred and fourscore year, after the
children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of
Solomon's reign, etc. that he began to build the house of the Lord. Now first,
if to the forty years of the children of Isreal's wandering in the wilderness,
and the seventeen years of Joshua, we add the several years of Isreal's
bondage mentioned in this book of Judges: and secondly, the years wherein the
land is said to have rested: and thirdly, the several years of the Judges from
Abimelech to Eli: and fourthly, the years of Eli, Samuel, and David, we must
say then, that there were well nigh six hundred years from the Israelites going
out of Egypt, to the building of the Temple in the fourth year of Solomon's
reign, (yea though we allow no time of distance between the death of Joshua
and the eight years of Cushan-rishathaims tyranny, which would be absurd) and
this cannot stand with that place, 1. Kings 6.1. Besides, in one place of this
book it is plain, that the years of the Judges are confounded with those of the
enemies oppressing the land, namely, chap. 15.20. where it is said of Samson,
that he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years, and why
therefore may it not be so with the other Judges too? I make no question
therefore, but under the forty years here mentioned, And the land had rest
forty years, we must comprehend both the eight years of Isreal's bondage under
the king of Mesopotamia, and all the years before that bondage of the
Israelites, even from the death of Joshua. The main objection against this is,
how the land can be said to have rested forty years, if part of those forty
years it was wasted with war, and the people held under a miserable bondage?
But to this I answer, 1. That it is not unusual in the Scripture to denominate
a full number of years, from that which is properly true only of the greater
part of that number, as we see Genesis 35.26. where after the naming of the twelve
sons of Jacob, this clause is added, These are the sons of Jacob that were
born to him in Padan-Aram, and yet Benjamin is mentioned amongst them, who was
not born in Padan-Aram, but in the land of Canaan; and so likewise, Acts 7.14.
where it is said, that Joseph sent and called his father and all his kindred,
threescore and fifteen souls, and yet indeed there went but threscore and ten
of them at that time into Egypt, Genesis 46.27. and so again, Exodus 12.40. where
it said, that the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was
four hundred and thirty years, and yet they were not in Egypt above two
hundred and fifteen years. And 2. that the meaning of these words, And the land
had rest forty years, may be, that the land had rest unto the end of forty
years, to wit, counting the forty years from the death of Joshua to the death
of Othniel; and so indeed Junius translates these words usque ad quadragesimum
annune, unto the expiration of forty years, for so the like expression we
find, chap. 14.17. where it is said of Samsons wife, that she wept before him
the seven days while the feast lasted, and yet the meaning is only, that she
wept to the ending of those seven days, to wit, from the time he refused to
tell her the meaning of his riddle.

Verse. 12. And the Lord strengthened Eglon the King of Moab against Israel,
etc.] That is, he gave him courage and strength to invade Israel, and prospered
his attempts against them, whereas otherwise happily they would have been
afraid to meddle with a people that had been so victorious.

Verse. 13. And went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.]
That is, Jericho, Deuteronomy. 34.3. Jericho was indeed wholly burnt by the
Israelites, Josh. 6.24. and was not rebuilt till Ahabs days, 1. Kings 16.43.
but the meaning therefore is, that this Eglon King of Moab, having vanquished
the Israelites in battle, possessed himself of the land and territory
thereabouts where the city Jericho formerly stood; and either built some strong
fort there, or possessed himself of some fort that might he there before, and
that to the end he might have the command of the foords of Jordan, both because
there was the passage over toward his own country the land of Moab; and
because by this means he should be the better able to keep the Israelites
within Jordan, and those without, from joining their forces together against
him: and hence it was, that when Ehud began to raise the country against the
Moabites, after he had slain Eglon their king, the first thing they did was to
take the foords of Jordan, verse. 28. They went down after him, and took the
foords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over.

Verse. 14. So the children of Israel served Eglon King of Moab eighteen years.]
How long it was after the death of Othniel ere these eighteen years of the
Israelites bondage under Eglon began, it is not expressed; only this is clear,
that first the Israelites revolted to idolatry after Othniels death, and then
the Lord brought Eglon against them for it. However, observable it is, that
whereas their first bondage under Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia
continued but eight years, ver. 8. this next under Eglon continued eighteen
years; and so the next too after that under Jabin king of Canaan, continued
twenty years, chap. 4.3. Twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of
Israel: and thus when lighter corrections did no good the next were sorer and
of longer continuance; and because they abused Gods readiness to repent and
withdraw his hand when they cried unto him, he continued the next judgments
the longer upon them.

Verse. 15. The Lord raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a
Benjamite, a man left handed.] Some conceive, that this last particular of his
being left handed, is purposely expressed, to intimate by what weak means and
despised instruments God is wont many times to effect his greatest works; but
because it is generally held, that no men are ordinarily more able and strong
and fit for any service then left handed men, (whence it is noted, chap. 20.16.
that amongst the children of Benjamin there were seven hundred chosen men
left handed, every one could sling stones at an hairs breadth, and not miss,)
therefore I conceive that this is here noted of Ehud, the second judge that God
raised to the Israelites, to imply rather the fitness of the instrument whom
God chose for this service of killing Eglon, to wit, in that the stroke of such
men is far the more harder either espied or guarded. When Ehud began first to
be judge of Israel, it is not expressed: Some conceive that Ehud was judge
immediately after Othniels death, and that he was their judge both in the time
of their apostasy after Othniels death, and likewise all the eighteen years
that the Israelites were in bondage under Eglon king of Moab; and whereas it is
here said, that when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord
raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera; they take the meaning
hereof to be only this, that God raised up the spirit of Ehud their judge, to
undertake the deliverance of the Israelites from their bondage, and not that he
was then first raised to be their judge. But methinks, according to the plain
order of the words, it should rather seem that upon the crying of the
Israelites to the Lord, when they had been eighteen years under the bondage of
Eglon, the Lord stirred him up to undertake their deliverance; and thereupon
afterward he became their judge.

And by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon king of Moab.]
Which Ehud embraced as a fit opportunity for the killing of Eglon, because it
would make him to be the less suspected.

Verse. 16. But Ehud made him a dagger (which had two edges) of a cubit length,
and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.] Having resolved
with himself to kill Eglon, he provided him a dagger accordingly; concerning
which it is noted, 1. That it had two edges, that it might pierce the more
readily, and make the more deadly wound. 2. That it was but of a cubit length,
to wit, that it might be the better carried unseen under his garment. and 3.
That he did gird it upon his right thigh, namely for the convenience of drawing
it forth with his left hand; as for the same reason those that are right-handed
use always to wear their weapons on their left side.

Verse. 17. And Eglon was a very fat man.] This is expressed to intimate, that
hereby Ehud had the better advantage to do what he intended; for being such a
corpulent and unwieldy man, he was the less able to decline the stroke which
Ehud gave him; and besides the wound was like to be the more deadly.

Verse. 18. And when he had made an end of offering the present, he sent away
the people that bare the present.] These words, he sent away the people, may
imply the greatness of the present, because there were so many to bear it to
the king: he sent them away before he would do the act he intended (going
himself along with them till he came to Gilgal, and then returning again) both
that being alone he might the more conveniently accomplish his design, and
also that they might be out of danger, and himself not be encumbered with care
for them, when he was to sly for his life.

Verse. 19. But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal,
and said, I have a secret errand to thee, O king.] The word translated
quarries, may also be traslated graven images, as it is in the margin of our
bibles; and indeed it might well be that this Moabitish king had set up certain
idols in Gilgal, either to vex the Israelites therewith, (who happily esteemed
Gilgal the more, because there their forefathers had been circumcised, and
there the Tabernacle was for many years together,) or else that the Israelites
might be won to worship them; or else by way of honoring his idol-gods, as
it were testifying hereby, that by their help he had entered successefully upon
the land of Israel; and then the mention that is here made of these images may
be, to intimate one reason amongst other, wherewith God stirred the spirit of
Ehud against Eglon, namely, because he had set up his idol-gods in the land of
Israel. But if we read the word as it is in our bibles, quarries, that is,
pits out of which they cut hewed stones for their buildings, then doubtless
the drift of this clause is only to show how far Ehud went back with those
that went with him, before he returned again to the king of Moab. As for those
first words which he spoke to Eglon when he came back to him, I have a secret
errand to thee, O king, it might be truly said in relation to that which he had
to do; an errand he had which was to be delivered to him in secret, though not
by word of mouth, but by the stroke of his dagger; and it was from God from
whom he had his commission. Yet surely Ehud intended that Eglon should
understand him so, as if in his return home he had been sent back with some
message of great secrecy, which he was now come back to deliver. Neither yet
can we say that Ehud did evil in this his dissembling with Eglon, and that
because he had no doubt his call and warrant from God for what he did.

Who said, Keep silence, etc.] That is, he bad Ehud forbear delivering his
errand, till his servants and attendants were gone out of the room.

Verse. 20. And he was sitting in a summer parlour, which he had for himself
alone.] That is, wherein Eglon used to be private by himself; which is added,
that it may not seem strange that his servants waited so long without after
Ehud was gone, it was because it was a room wherein he used ordinarily to be
alone by himself.

And Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And he arose out of his
seat.] Ehud had told the king before, ver. 19. that he had a secret errand unto
him, (concerning which see the note there:) now he adds that the message he
brought him was from God, partly perhaps that being astonished with that word,
he might take the less heed to the drawing out of his dagger; but especially
no doubt, because whilst the king was sitting he could not so certainly give
him such a sure and deadly wound with one stroke as he desired to do; and he
hoped that at the mention of a message from God, either out of astonishment or
in reverence to God, from whom the message was brought, he would not fail to
arise out of his seat; as indeed it proved, And he arose, says the Text, out
of his seat. So far did those blind superstitious heathens reverence the very
name of God, that though Eglon was a king, and withal a gross unweildy man,
yet hearing of a message from God, he arose out of his seat.

Verse. 21. And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger, etc.] Ehud
was extraordinarily called of God to do this, verse. 15. When the children of
Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son
of Gera, a man left handed. Nor is this therefore any warrant for the
assassination of Princes, though tyrants and oppressors of the people.

Verse. 22. And the dirt came out.] It is rendered in the margin of our bibles,
It came out at the fundament, thereby meaning, that he struck with such
strength that the dagger that went in at his belly, came out behind at his
fundament; but because the dagger was but of a cubit length, verse. 16. and the
king was such a fat gross man, I rather think that it is better translated as
it is in our text, that the dirt came out, meaning his excrements; for though
this be usual with men that die any violent death, yet I conceive it is noted
here to the reproach of this tyrant, who by the just judgment of God was now
left tumbling in his own dung, that had so many years oppressed the people of
God.

Verse. 23. Then Ehud went forth through the porch.] This his going out the way
that he came is expressed, to note the composedness of his spirit after this
that he had done; as one that knew well that he had done nothing but what was
pleasing to God, and that having done nothing but what God had called him to
do, God would secure and shield him in his way, he went quietly through the
kings guard and other servants, not discovering in his countenance the least
disquiet or perplexity of mind.

And shut the doors of the parlour upon him, and locked them.] That is, he
pulled too the door and locked it, to wit, either by clapping too the door,
as spring-locks use to shut, or with the key which he might carry away with
him: for that which is said verse. 25. may be meant of another key which the
kings servants might have in their keeping; and this he did that whilst his
servants waited long for the opening the door, he might have the more time to
escape away, before they came to know their master was slain: as we see it fell
out, verse. 26. And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the
quarries, and escaped unto Seirath.

Verse. 24. They said, Surely he covers his feet in his summer chamber.] Or,
he does his easement, as it is in the margin: the long garments which the
Hebrews wore loose about them, when they sunck down with their bodies to the
ground for that purpose, covered their feet: and hence is this phrase, surely
he covers his feet: and again, 1. Sam. 24.3. And he came to the sheep-cotes
by the way where was a cave, and Saul went in to cover his feet. Yet there is
another exposition of this phrase, Surely he covers his feet in his summer
chamber, that is, surely he has laid himself down to sleep in his summer
chamber; and many reasons move me to approve of this rather then the former,
though the whole current of Expositours take the former to be unquestionably
the meaning of the words: For first, it is most probable that the kings summer
chamber was a place where he used sometimes in the daytime to lay himself down
to rest a while: secondly, there was more reason why his servants should wait
long for the opening of his doors (as it is said they did, verse. 25. even till
they were ashamed) out of an opinion that he was laid to sleep in his summer
chamber, then out of opinion that he was all that while easing himself:
thirdly, the reason given why it should be said of him that in easing himself
he covers his feet, to wit, because in doing that, as they sunk down with
their bodies their long garments covered their feet, seems far more forced,
then that which is given why those that are laid down to sleep in the day time,
should be said to cover their feet; to wit, because they used to cast some
covering over their feet when they laid themselves down to sleep, and went not
into a bed, whence it is said of Ruth when she went to lie down by Boaz, as he
lay sleeping at the end of his heap of corn, Ruth 3.7. that she uncovered his
feet, and laid her down: and fourthly, because where the same phrase is used in
speaking of Saul's going into a cave where David and his men were, 1. Sam. 24.3.
Saul went in to cover his feet; it may best of all be understood that Saul went
in to lie down and sleep there for a while, because it is hard to say how David
should there cut off the skirt of his robe and not be perceived, if he had not
been asleep.

Verse. 25. And they tarried till they were ashamed.] That is, till they were
ashamed they had tarried so long, or that they were so perplexed that they knew
not what to think or say or do.

Verse. 30. And the land had rest fourscore years.] That is, to the end of
fourscore years, to wit, from the death of Othniel. See the note above, verse
11.

Verse. 31. And after him* as Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the
Philistines six hundred men with an ox-goad.] That is, say some Expositours,
with ox-goads; for conceiving it improbable that one man with an ox-goad should
slay so many hundred Philistines, they hold the meaning of this clause to be
only this, that the Philistines making some in road into the land of the
Israelites, Shamgar did on a sudden raise the country thereabouts, and that
they having no other arms did with their ox-goads set upon the Philistines and
slew six hundred of them; but because it is not probable that the Israelites
that bordered upon the Philistines should be thus unprovided of arms, nor is it
any more incredible that Shamgar should make such a havoc amongst the
Philistines with an ox-goad, then that Sampson should do the like with the
jawbone of an ass, therefore I rather think that as the letter of text runs,
Shamgar by the wondrous help of God did alone perform this admirable exploit.
It is not expressed whether Shamgar judged Israel or no, yet because it is said
And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, therefore it is commonly held
that he was the next Judge after Ehud: only they say it was but for a very
short time, and thence it is that there is no mention of the lands resting
under him, and the story of Deborah in the following chapter begins as if she
were the next after Ehud, there being no mention made there of Shamgar at all,
verse. 1. And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord when
Ehud was dead. However this miraculous deliverence which he wrought for the
Israelites was certainly after Ehuds death, for then, it seems, the people
returned to their former sins, and the Lord suffered the Philistines
thereupon to invade the land, but then he also delivered them miraculously by
this worthy, till finding that they would not be warned by these things he sold
them into the hands of Jabin, as it is expressed in the following chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. ANd the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord
when Ehud was dead.] In none of the Judges days did the Israelites enjoy so
long a peace, as in the days of Ehud, as is evident in that clause (however we
understand it) chap. 3.30. Moab was subdued under the hand of Israel, and the
land had rest fourscore years; and here we see what effect this long peace
wrought amongst them, and how ill they requited the Lord for so great a mercy;
even as standing waters are wont to putrify, so they were corrupted by their
long peace, and by degrees fell off from God, as they had formerly done.

Verse. 2. And the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that
reigned in Hazor.] See the note chap. 2.14. There was a Jabin that reigned in
Hazor formerly (who it is likely was called as this is here king of Canaan; for
Hazor is there said to be the head of all the neighboring kingdoms, Josh.
11.10.) the same who was the chief in that confederacy against Joshua, Joshua
11.1. but he was slain by Joshua and his city burnt with fire, Josh. 11.11. It
seems therefore that this was some one of that stock who afterward recovered
from the Israelites that part of the land, and repaired the city Hazor, and so
reigned there again as his predecessors had done. When this was done we cannot
say, but doubtless it was not in Joshuas time as some think; for it is not to
be thought that the Lord ever suffered the Canaanites to recover any part of
the land which the Israelites had taken from them, till they by their sins
had provoked the Lord to anger against them. But now at last not contented with
his own kingdom, it seems he made war with the Israelites in general,
brought them into bondage, and no doubt oppressed them the more cruelly in
revenge of that Joshua had done to Hazor and Jabin king thereof, Josh. 11.11.
who perhaps was his father or grandfather. And besides, it must needs be most
terrible to the Israelites to be oppressed by the Canaanites of all other
nations, because God had promised to cast them out before the Israelites; so
that their prevailing over them was in a special manner a sign that God had
cast them off.

The Captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the
Gentiles.] So called (as it is probably thought) because in the time of the
Israelites prevailing against the several nations of the Canaanites, many of
them fled thither as to a place of great strength, and there fortified
themselves unto this time; or else for the reasons given in a like case, Josh.
12.23.

Verse. 3. For he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he
mightily oppressed the children of Israel.] Concerning these chariots of iron,
see the note Josh. 17.16. This clause, and he mightily oppressed the children
of Israel, is no where else inserted, where mention is made of the bondage of
Israel under other kings, and therefore it seems this king did far more
cruelly oppress them then the rest had done, which might be, partly from the
deadly hatred which the Canaanites above other nations did bear to the
Israelites, because the Israelites had taken their land from them; and partly
from the just vengeance of God upon the Israelites, because God had afforded
them so long a peace in the days of Ehud, chap. 3.30. and they had made so ill
an use of his long-suffering and goodness therein. See the note also, chap.
3.14.

Verse. 4. And Deborah a prophetess, etc.] A woman, the weaker sex, that the
glory of the work might be given to God, and not to the instrument he used.

Verse. 6. And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam, out of
Kedesh-naphtali, etc.] That is, Kedesh in the tribe of Naphtali, to distinguish
it from other towns of the same name in other tribes, as Kedesh in Issachar, 1.
Chron. 6.72. Kedesh in Judah, Josh. 15.23. and others. Now Deborah did thus
send for Barak, not of her own head choosing him as a man of eminency for the
undertaking of the service, but by special direction from God, as the words
she spoke to Barak when he came to her do imply, Has not the Lord God of
Israel commaded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, etc? Deborah was a
prophetess, and therefore no doubt God had revealed unto her that which now
she imparted to Barak, to wit, either by secret instinct of his Spirit, or
perhaps, by the ministry of an Angel: for that some Angel did appear to her,
either before or after the battle which they fought with Sisera, seems evident
in that clause of Deborahs song, chap. 5.26. Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of
the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof.

And take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali, and of the
children of Zebulun.] To wit, first, because they were nearest at hand:
secondly, because Naphtali was likely to be the forwardest in this work,
because Barak was of that tribe, and they were most oppressed, Hazor and
Harosheth being both in their tribe.

Verse. 8. And Barak said unto her, If thou will go with me, then I will go,
etc.] Barak, no doubt, believed what Deborah had told him in the foregoing
words as from the Lord, namely, that Sisera should be vanquished by him, and
therefore we see that he was willing to hazard his life and all that he had in
rising against this mighty king that had brought the Israelites into bondage;
whence it is that Barak is commended for his faith by S. Paul, and reckoned
amongst those who through faith subdued kingdoms, Heb. 11.32, 33. But why then
did he refuse to undertake the service enjoined him unless Deborah would go
along with him? I answer, partly because he considered that Deborah being a
prophetess, he should have a great advantage in having her with him to pray
for them, to give them counsel, and to advise them what to do upon every
occasion; but partly also no doubt, because his faith was also accompanied and
assaulted with doubtings and fears, as we may see by Deborahs answer in the
following verse, wherein she discovered what a fault it was so doubtfully to
yield to what God had enjoined him.

Verse. 9. The journey that thou take shall not be for thine honor; for the
Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman.] Thus she yields to go with
him, but withal shows him, that because of his distrustfulnesse and fear the
Lord would now deprive him of a great part of that glory he should otherwise
have had: Because he would not undertake the enterprise without the support and
encouragement of a woman's presence, therefore a woman should carry away a great
part of the honor of this victory, to wit, Jael the wife of Heber, into whose
hands Sisera should fall, and by whom he should be slain.

Verse. 10. And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh, etc.] The chief
strength therefore of the army consisted of those that by Barak were gathered
together out of these two tribes; whence also is that, chap. 5.18. Zebulun and
Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high
places of the field: where yet that some of the other tribes did also
voluntarily join in this war made against Sisera, Deborah in her song does
plainly acknowledge, verse. 14. Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against
Amalek, after thee Benjamin among thy people: Out of Machir came down
governors, etc.

Verse. 11. Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the father
in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, etc.] Because the
Kenites were seated amongst the children of Judah, chap. 1.16. lest we should
wonder at the mention that is made in the following part of this chapter of
Heber the Kenite, dwelling near Kedesh in the tribe of Naphtali, this is here
premised concerning this Heber, to wit, that for some reasons not expressed in
the text, he had severed himself from the rest of the Kenites, and pitched his
tent amongst the tribe of Naphtali, as indeed the Kenites it seems did always
dwell not in houses, but in tents.

Verse. 15. And the Lord discomfited Sisera, etc.] For though the Israelites
prevailed by force of arms, yet it was of God that they did prevail, Prove.
21.31. The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but safety is of the
Lord. Besides, Josephus reports that the Lord sent a terrible tempest,
wherewith the Canaanites being both terrified and disordered, the Israelites
did the more easily put them to flight; and indeed, some such thing those words
seem to intend, chap. 5.20. They fought from heaven, the stars in their
courses fought against Sisera.

Verse. 17. For there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor, and the house
of Heber the Kenite.] Though the Kenites came in with the Israelites, and were
in a manner incorporated amongst them, professing the same religion, and
worshipping the same God, and living with all love and amity with them, yet
Jabin was willing to grant peace to them (only perhaps taking some certain
tribute of them, by way of acknowledging his sovereignty) whilst he oppressed
the Israelites with all manner of cruelty: First, because they lived as
sojourners amongst the Israelites, and laid no claim to the land. Secondly,
because they were found to be given to a peaceable pastoral kind of life, and
not like to rise up in rebellion against him. Thirdly, because the Lord turned
the heart of this heathenish king toward them; and that happily, because they
had kept themselves pure from those idolatrous and sinful courses, whereunto
the Israelites had plunged themselves, that so in them his people might see
wherefore it was that the Lord had brought such miseries upon them.

Verse. 18. And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in my
lord, turn in to me, fear not.] The event discovers plainly that she intended
his ruin; and therefore though her words may be interpreted so, as if she
intended that she would not have him be afraid, but commit himself to her
custody; yet since she could not but know that her words would be understood by
him, as if she intended that in her tent he might and should be safe; I see not
what can be said herein to quit her from sin, but only that what she did
herein she did by virtue of an extraordinary warrant and authority from God.

And when he had turned in unto her into the tent, she covered him with a
mantle.] To wit, as pretending herewith to cover him, and hide him, in case any
of those that pursued him should come in thither; or else to keep him warm
being now in a great heat by reason of his flying on foot from those that
followed him; or else that he might the more readily fall asleep, that she
might do to him what no doubt already she had purposed with her self.

Verse. 19. And she opened a bottle of milk and gave him drink.] Though he asked
for water, which men in great heat and thirst do especially desire, yet she
fetched a bottle of milk and gave him of that, either thereby to testify her
great respect of him, that so he might the more securely confide in her; or
else because milk, when men that are hot drink largely of it, does naturally
incline men to sleep, and that she desired to bring him to, that then she might
do to him what whilst he was awake she could not hope to do: and therefore
when Deborah commends Jael this is particularly expressed as an act of special
prudency and policy, chap. 5.25. He asked water and she gave him milk, she
brought forth butter in a lordly dish.

Verse. 21. And Jael Hebers wife took a nail of the tent, etc.] That is, a pin
or nail of iron, or pointed with iron, wherewith the tent being stretched forth
was fastened to the ground. And for this act of hers she is pronounced blessed
by the Spirit of God, chap. 5.24. and therefore there is no question to be made
of the lawfulness of that she did: for though it is said, verse. 17. There was
peace between Jabin and the house of Heber, yet that is not to be understood of
any mutual league (for princes do not use to enter into treaties of that
nature with men of such inferior rank, whom they have no cause to fear) but
only that Jabin had (happily upon the promise of some yearly tribute) yielded
that his house should live in peace. However Jael might know of the prophecy of
Deborah, that God had now determined to put an end to his tyranny; and besides,
she might now be moved by a special and extraordinary instinct of the Spirit
of God, which must needs be a sufficient warrant for her, both to ensnare this
captain by policy, and afterward to take away his life, as an enemy appointed
to destruction: and the rather, that hereby she might approve her self a true
member of the Church and people of God, and that she preferred their welfare
before any thing that concerned her self.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. THen sang Deborah, and Barak the son of Abinoam, etc.] Deborah is
first named here, because she was a prophetess, and (as upon this ground it is
probably thought) the composer of this song, and in every respect the chief in
this business, as we see in the former chapter; yet with her Barak is joined
too, who as he was the chief Commander in the victory gotten, so he was also
one of the prime in singing Gods praises; and he being of the tribe of
Naphtali, we have in this sweet song one instance of the accomplishment of that
prophecy of Jacob concerning the tribe of Naphtali (though it were not intended
of this only) to wit, that this tribe should give goodly words, Genesis 49.21.
Naphtali is a hind let loose, he gives goodly words.

Verse. 2. Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people
willingly offered themselves.] Principally hereby are meant those of the tribe
of Zebulun and Naphtali, of whom Baraks army did chiefly consist, though such
of the other tribes as did put too their helping hand are not excluded: and
these are said to have offered themselves willingly; because they did readily
yield to follow Barak when he called them together, though he had no authority
to constrain them to take up arms, God working their hearts thereto, to whom
therefore the praise is principally given, Praise ye the Lord for the avenging
of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves.

Verse. 3. Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes, etc.] Deborah undertaking
in this song to ascribe to the Lord the glory of that victory which she and
Barak had gotten over Sisera, to show what a glorious work God had therein done
for his people, in the first place in a poetical strain she calls upon kings
and princes to hearken to her, Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes;
thereby only to imply, that in the ecstasie of her joy, she could be glad if
all the kings and princes of the earth could hear what she had now to say
concerning this great work which God had done for his Israel, and she
addresseth her speech particularly to kings and princes, First, because they
are most ready to ascribe to themselves the glory which is due to the Lord
only: and secondly, because they are wont in their pride to oppress others,
and to think they may do whatsoever they please; and therefore she desired they
might know what God had done to Jabin and Sisera, and so beware of provoking
God by oppressing others as these had done.

Verse. 4. Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchest out of the
field of Edom, the earth trembled, etc.] The most of Expositours understand
this to be a poetical expression of the terrors werewith the neighboring
nations were affrighted, when the Lord carried the Israelites from the borders
of Edom toward the land of Canaan, to wit, that there was then a trembling on
every side, so that not men only but even the heavens and mountains and hills
seemed to tremble and melt away, and that even as Sinai trembled and shook at
the Lords coming down upon it when the Law was given (for to that end they
conceive the melting or shaking of Sinai is mentioned, verse. 5. The mountains
melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai, before the Lord God of Israel, to
wit, by way of similitude) so when the Lord in a pillar of fire marched before
the Israelites against the Amorites, the neighboring nations were terribly
amazed, the Lord casting such a fear upon them, as if the earth had trembled,
and great storms and tempests intermixed with thunder and lightnings had been
showred down from the clouds, yea as if the mountains had melted, etc.
according to that, Deuteronomy. 2.24, 25. Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass
over the river Arnon, etc. This day will I begin to put the dread of thee, and
the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the whole heavens, who shall
hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee. But
I rather conceive, that it is to be understood of those thunders, lightnings,
earthquakes, tempests, and such other terrible expressions of Gods majesty,
wherein he manifested himself unto his people at the giving of the Law; for
then he is also said to come from Seir, Deuteronomy. 33.2. And he said, The Lord came
down from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them, he shined forth from mount
Paran, and he came with ten thousand of saints: from his right hand went a
fiery Law for them, and the shaking of Sinai we see is expressly mentioned,
verse. 5. The mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai before the
Lord God of Israel, as it is also, Psalm. 68.7, 8. O God when thou wentest forth
before thy people, when thou did march through the wilderness. Selah. The
earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God; even Sinai it
self was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel; and though there be
no mention of the clouds dropping water at the giving of the Law, yet there is
of thunders and lightnings, which are usually accompanied with violent showers.
But why should Deborah mention this here? I answer, first, because Gods entering
into covenant with them is the ground of all that he does for his people: and
secondly, because she would the better express how terrible God had been now
to their adversaries, by comparing the terrors of this day with those when the
Law was given on mount Sinai; and to intimate, that God continued to do the
same things still for his people that he had done for them from their first
coming out of Egypt.

Verse. 6. In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael the
highways were unoccupied, etc.] That is, even from the death of Ehud, whom
Shamgar succeeded (though he was a worthy champion, and did miraculously avenge
the Israelites upon the Philistines) unto this present time, wherein Jael lived
(though she were a woman of an heroical spirit, and one that grieved to see
the poor people of God so miserably oppressed, as was evident by that which
she had now done for them) the land was held in miserable desolation, the
people not daring to travel in the highways, nor to dwell in the villages,
but only in the walled cities, whither they all fled to secure themselves,
till God was pleased by me a poor woman to set on foot this work of their
deliverance.

Verse. 8. They chose new gods, then was war in the gates.] That is, then was
there war in every city, the Lord letting loose the neighboring nations to
make war against the several cities of Israel, because they were corrupted
with their idolatry. Because a great part of the strength of their cities was
in their gates, therefore Deborah sets forth the war that was made against
the Israelites cities, by this expression, then was war in the gates; but
withal, it may also imply the prevailing power of the enemy when they made
inroads into their land, to wit, that they many times came up to the very gates
of their cities.

Was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel.] This may be
meant either of the scarcity of arms amongst them, the enemy wherever they
prevailed disarming them, that they might not afterward be able to attempt any
thing against him: or rather (because we see not but Baraks troops were armed
for war) that the Israelites were so quelled that not a man amongst the many
thousands of Israel durst take up a shield or spear against them, according to
that, Levit. 26.36. And upon them that are left alive of you, I will send a
faintness into their hearts in the land of their enemies, and the sound of a
shaking leaf shall chase them, and they shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and
they shall fall when none pursues.

Verse. 9. My heart is to the governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly amongst the people.] That is, I cannot but highly love and honor the
governors of Israel, that were as willing to hazard themselves in this war
against Jabin as any of the people, yea and to undergo the same travel and
hardness together with them; and indeed this in the heads and rulers of the
people was most to be admired and extolled: first, because such men have
usually the fairest estates, and for them therefore to hazard all they enjoyed
in rising up with Deborah against this great tyrant, as willingly as those of
the poorer sort that had scarce any thing to lose, was a sign of an heroical
spirit, for which they deserved to be highly honored: secondly, because men
that had been formerly employed in offices of peace are not men usually fit for
the service of war, and therefore it must needs be a singular zeal for Gods
glory and the good of Gods people, that made them lay by their gowns to gird on
a sword: thirdly, because such men are usually puffed up with their greatness,
and it was therefore a rare thing for such to stoop to join with meaner men,
yea to put too their helping hand amongst the meanest for the cause of God and
his people against their enemies: and fourthly, because the examples of men of
such rank was no doubt a mighty means to draw on the meaner sort to come
flocking in to the service.

Verse. 10. Speak ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and
walk by the way.] That is, let all those that are men of honor, and eminency,
above others, that use to ride up and down upon white asses, all magistrates
and Judges that sit in the seat of justice, and so likewise all the common sort
of people that travel on foot from one place to another, let them all in their
several places speak of this great deliverance, which God has wrought for his
people. Riding on asses it seems was a note of great and honorable persons in
those times and countries, and therefore it is noted of Jair, who was one of
the Judges, that he had thirty sons that rode on thirty asse-colts, and they
had thirty cities, chap. 10.40. and so likewise of Abdon who was another of the
Judges, chap. 12.14. that he had forty sons and thirty nephews that rode on
threescore and ten asse-colts: and (unless by white asses here, nothing else
be meant but slick and goodly asses) it seems that white asses were principally
used by such persons; and though the most Expositours limit this first clause
to merchants, who, they say, used to ride on white asses, yet I conceive we may
better understand it of all men of eminency that used to ride in pomp and
State; and so likewise by those that sit in judgment, are meant their Judges
and chief Magistrates; and by those that walk by the way, are meant the meaner
and common sort of people, and the reasons why Deborah stirs up these men
under these expressions to praise God for the vanquishing of Jabin and Sisera,
is to intimate the just cause they had to speak with joy of this great mercy of
God, to wit, because whereas formerly all the ways of the land were pestred
with cutthroat soldiers, so that there was no stirring in safety from one
place to another, and all course of justice was in a manner stopped up, the
sword having silenced the Laws, now the Judges might sit in Judgment as
formerly; the great ones might now ride up and down upon their white asses
according to their wonted manner, which before they could not; and the common
people of all sorts might now pass to and fro, and travel about their
businesses, from one place to another without fear.

Verse. 11. They that are delivered from the noise of the archers in the place
of drawing waters, there shall they rehearse, etc.] This may be meant of the
Israelites that followed Barak and fought against Sisera and his archers at the
river Kishon, see chap. 4.7. And I will draw unto thee, unto the river Kishon,
Sisera the Captain of Jabins army, with his chariots and his multitude; but the
most of Expositours understand it of the meaner sort of people that were wont
to be slain or taken captives by the enemies that lay in wait for them at the
place of drawing waters. Fountains and wells of water were rare in those dry
countries, and of great esteem; they went in many places far to fetch water,
here therefore the Canaanites used to ly in wait for them, so that no sooner
could the poor people come thither, but presently the Canaanites with a great
outcry were ready to set upon them, and their arrows came presently singing
about their ears, and often struck them dead (for both these may be intended by
the noise of the archers) but now, says Deborah, these poor wretches being
delivered from this danger may go freely to those places, and there declare the
righteous acts of God in destroying these their enemies.

Then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.] Hereby many things
may be employed: first, their freedom to go forth at the gates of their cities,
within which they were in a manner cooped up before: secondly, the restoring of
the people to the gates, as places of judicature, from which they were
restrained; before there was war in the gates, now there was Law and
judgment there: thirdly, their returning to the cities that were thence
banished or fled, and the country peoples resorting thither upon their
several occasions.

Verse. 12. Awake, awake Deborah, utter a song.] This expression Deborah uses
only to imply the exceeding greatness of the mercy which God had afforded
them, which required that she should rouse up her self to praise the Lord for
it, with all her might, and with all the strength of her soul.

Arise Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.] That is,
lead them in triumph: for though the lives of the Canaanites might not be
spared, yet they might be led in triumph before they were slain; and besides,
those of other nations that were now taken prisoners might be reserved for
slaves.

Verse. 13. Then he made him that remained have dominion over the nobles, etc.]
That is, God caused the poor despised remainders of his people to have
dominion over their noble and mighty adversaries.

Verse. 14. Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek, etc.] Here
Deborah commends those tribes from whom there came any considerable party to
Barak to help them against Jabin and Sisera: as, First, she begins with
Ephraim, and in showing that there were some of that tribe, she uses this
expression, Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek: for the
understanding whereof we must know, 1. That Amalek is here named because it
seems the Amalekites came out to help Jabin and Sisera against the Israelites:
It is evident in many places that the Amalekites bordered upon the Canaanites,
and indeed dwelt amongst them, and therefore is it that they are often joined
together; as Numb. 14.25. Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the
valley: and again, verse. 43. The Amalekites and the Canaanites are there
before, and ye shall fall by the sword, etc. and verse. ^5. Then the Amalekites
came down, and the Canaanites that dwelt in the hill, and smote them, etc. Now
therefore as the Amalekites were always ready to aid the Canaanites against
the children of Israel, so it seems it was now; and hence it is that Amalek is
here mentioned as the enemy against whom they fought, though the war was
made against Jabin king of Canaan to wit, because the Amalekites sent some few
forces from them; and perhaps too, because the Ephraimites were nearer to the
Amalekites, then those of Zebulun and Naphtali, of whom the chief strength of
Baraks army did consist, it may be probably thought, that those of Ephraim that
armed themselves for this war, were assigned of Barak to the service of going
out against the Amalekites, to keep them from coming to join their forces with
those of Jabins, whilst he with his army went against Sisera. And 2. for those
words there was a root of them, Out of Ephraim there was a root of them against
Amalek, that phrase I conceive is either used, I. because this rising up of the
Israelites against Jabin, did first spring up from Ephraim, to wit, in Deborah
who dwelt in mount Ephraim, chap. 4.5. and some of her neighboring Ephraimites
that went out with her: or II. with reference to Joshuahs fighting against
Amalek, when the Israelites came out of Egypt, to imply that there was a root
of Joshuahs zeal against Amalek in his brethren the Ephraimites, which now
sprung up and showed it self in their forwardness and zeal against the
Amalekites that were at that time in arms to help Jabin: or III. to intimate
that there were but few of this tribe (one root amongst many) that did rise up
and help Barak in this notable attempt; which as it was a stain to that tribe
in general, so it was the greater honor to those of the tribe that did appear
in the business, to wit, because the backwardness of their brethren did not
discourage them. Secondly, there were many also of the tribe of Benjamin that
bordered upon Ephraim, which is thus expressed, After thee Benjamin among thy
people; the drift whereof is, I conceive, to note that the tribe of Benjamin
came in more freely then those of Ephraim, there was but a root of Ephraim, but
Benjamin came in with good numbers of his people. And again, the Benjamites
came first in, and then some of the Ephraimites that followed their example
came in also, and joined with them; yea if we conceive (which we may most
probably as I said before) that these tribes of Ephraim and Benjamin were
designed by Barak to go against the Amalekites, to keep them from coming to the
aid of Jabin; then is this expression most fit, from Ephraim there was a root
against Amalek, After thee O Benjamin amongst thy people, to wit, because the
tribe of Benjamin lay nearest to the Amalekites, and so the Ephraimites came in
after and joined with them to go against Amalek. Thirdly, there were some also
of the tribe of Manasseh, Out of Machir came down governors. Machir was the
only son of Manasseh, and so by the children of Machir are commonly meant
the tribe of Manasseh: See Josh. 13.31. But yet in this place it must be meant
of that half of the tribe of Manasseh that was seated within Jordan, to wit,
that some of them, yea of their governors, came down to help Barak against
their great oppressors: for in the 17. verse we see plainly that Deborah
complains of the other half of Manasseh, that were seated in Gilead without
Jordan, that none of them would hazard themselves in this cause, Gilead, says
she, abode beyond Jordan. And fourthly, out of Zebulun they came in so
unanimously, that even their Doctors, and Scribes, and Lawyers, and others
that were better at their pen then their sword, came yet amongst the rest to
fight against the enemies of Gods people, And out of Zebulun they that handle
the pen of the writer.

Verse. 15. And the Princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar and
also Barak he was sent on foot into the valley.] That is, both the Princes and
indeed the common people too of the tribe of Issachar did readily come in to
Deborah, together with Barak their Commander in chief, with whom he went on
foot into the valley, that is, the valley by mount Tabor where the river Kishon
ran, chap. 4.12, 13. And this last clause is added, to show the zeal and
forwardness of Barak and the other Princes of Issachar, in that they did not
only come in to the help of their brethren, but also were content to endure
any trouble, and to expose themselves to any danger for the furtherance of the
cause, serving on foot, and that in the valley, a place of greatest advantage
for Sisera that came against them with chariots and horsemen.

For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.] This clause
with a very little alteration is repeated in the next verse, for the divisions
of Reuben there were great searchings of heart, and in both places by the
divisions of Reuben are meant, either the Reubenites dividing themselves from
their brethren, that had combined together against that proud tyrant, that had
so cruelly oppressed them, in that they stood aloof from them, and would not
join to help them; or else rather, the divisions that were amongst the
Reubenites, whereby they were kept from sending any aid to their brethren in
that just war of theirs against the Canaanites, though some were for the
casting off the yoke of Jabin, and therefore judged it meet to join with Barak
and their brethren that were risen up against him; yet others on the other side
opposed this vehemently, and alleged that they had submitted to be tributaries
to Jabin, and might not therefore take up arms against him; and a third sort
that could have been glad to be eased of Jabins yoke, yet judged it best for
them to stand as neuters, and wait what the issue of the war would be, and
that because Jabin was too mighty for the Israelites, and all they did was by
the encouragement of a woman; if they sided with their brethren, then if Jabin
prevailed they should be surely ruined, but if they sat still and did nothing,
though the Israelites did prevail they should do well enough; and so because of
these factions and divisions amongst them, they could not agree together. Now
whereas it is said, that for the divisions of Reuben, or (as it is in the
margin of our Bibles) in the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of
heart; or as it is verse. 16. great searchings of heart, if we read it in the
divisions of Reuben, then it may be meant of the plotting and contriving
thoughts which the Reubenites had in their hearts, by way of considering how
they should carry themselves in this rising of Barak and their brethren against
Jabin and Sisera: But if we read it (as it is in our Bibles) for the divisions
of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart, and verse. 16. great searchings of
heart, then it must necessarily be understood of their brethren the Israelites,
that had taken up arms against Jabin, to wit, that when they perceived that
there were such divisions amongst the Reubenites, and that thereupon they
deserted them in this cause, and came not out to help them, they had great
thoughts of heart, that is, great swelling thoughts of discontent against them,
of murmuring and heart-burnings, and of sharp censures which in their minds
they passed upon them, and so likewise great searchings of heart, that is, of
wondering and musing in their minds, why they that were such a rich and potent
tribe should so desert their brethren in so just a cause, and not put too their
helping hand for the suppressing of a tyrant, who had so mightily oppressed
them.

Verse. 16. Why abodest thou among the sheep-folds, to hear the bleating of the
flocks?] Because the Reubenites were exceeding rich in cattle, Number. 32.1. The
children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great multitude of
cattle, therefore they forbore to take up arms against Jabin, for fear of
being plundered if he should prevail; but withal, to excuse themselves for not
going out with Barak, that was engaged against this Canaanitish king that had
so sorely oppressed them, they pretended they could not be spared from
attending on their flocks; and therefore does Deborah here upbraid this tribe
for staying at home among the sheep-folds, to hear the bleating of the flocks,
thereby implying what a poor and mean thing it was, and what a base and sordid
spirit it argued, for them to stay at home for such mean employments, when such
a great work was in hand as the vanquishing such a potent tyrant as Jabin was,
and the breaking of that yoke that had been so heavy upon the necks of Gods
people, willing them as it were to consider, whether the complaints, the cries
and groans of Gods oppressed people had not been more worthy their regarding,
and whether the sounding of trumpets and other warlike instruments had not been
more worth the hearing at such a time as this, then the bleating of their
flocks.

Verse. 17. Gilead abode beyond Jordan, etc.] Here Deborah reproves diverse other
tribes that came not in to afford any help for the suppressing of Jabin, and
that in such a manner as if she should say, that the very mentioning of the
reasons that moved them, or which at least they pretended for their not taking
up arms, was enough to condemn them; as first, the Gileadites, that is, the
tribe of Gad and the other half tribe of Manasseh (for they had the country of
Gilead for their lot, as we see Josh. 13.24, 25, 31. Deuteronomy. 3.12, 13. and Number.
32.40.) Gilead, says she, abode beyond Jordan, that is, they pretended that
they dwelling so far off could not come in to the help of Barak, at least time
enough; and because Hazor and his captain Sisera had not yet broken over Jordan
against those tribes that dwelt there, they hoped that they should be safe
enough, and that he would let them alone if they did not engage themselves in
this war against him; not considering that the Israelites within Jordan and
those without being all brethren, united together under one God as
fellow members of the same body, it was not fit that they should so slight the
preservation of those that dwelt furthest off from them, and that it was a
folly to think that Jabin would spare those without Jordan, if the other tribes
within Jordan were once destroyed, Secondly, the tribe of Dan, Why (says she)
did Dan remain in ships? the meaning is, That the Danites having their lot
close upon the Mediterranean sea, (for Japho or Joppe, and much besides of the
Western coast was in their lot, Josh. 19.46.) they pretended that they were
seamen and merchants, and could not therefore be spared to go to this war,
because of their traffic and voyages that they had in hand; and perhaps they
hoped, that if things proved never so ill, they could the most of them secure
themselves and their estates by flying away in ships; and therefore they would
not meddle with so dangerous an attempt as this was of making war against such
a potent king; and what a high degree of wickedness was this, to prefer
their own private profit before the public good, and so to mind their own
private safety, as not to care what became of their brethren so they could
shift for themselves, and that too not without the loss of their interest in
that land which God had given them for their inheritance. And thirdly, the
tribe of Asher, Asher continued on the seashore, and abode in his breaches,
that is, they dwelled also nigh to the sea, pretending the same necessity of
staying, to mind their voyages, and merchandise; and besides, they alleged
their breaches, that is, either the breaches which the sea had made in their
banks, that were to be immediately made up, unless they would see their
country over-flown; or else, the breaches and ruinate places in the walls of
their cities, pretending that they durst not leave their cities in such a weak
condition, lest in their absence the neighboring Canaanites should set upon
their cities, and at those breaches enter and take them; all which were excuses
as weak as the rest to keep them from so brave a service as this was, of
suppressing this king of Canaan, that had so mightily oppressed them,
especially when God promised that he would prosper them therein.

Verse. 18. Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto
the death in the high places of the field.] That is, in mount Tabor, whither
Barak was sent to fight with Sisera, chap. 4.6. Go and draw toward mount Tabor,
and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali: and where,
though they saw how great a disproportion there was betwixt their forces and
the strength of the enemy, yet they were content to hazard their lives in this
cause of God and his people, how desperate soever their attempts might seem in
the eye of reason.

Verse. 19. The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in
Taanach by the waters of Megiddo.] That is, Jabin and his confederate kings who
came to help Jabin against the Israelites, either in their own persons, or by
their forces: and this is here expressed, to note the base faithlessenesse of
those tribes that were not so forward to aid their brethren as the heathens
were to help one another, and yet they were many of them of different
religions, and served several gods. Nor need it seem strange that these kings
are said to have fought against the Israelites in Taanach by the waters of
Megiddo, whereas before, chap. 4.6, 7. the story seemed to imply, that the
battle was fought about mount Tabor and the river Kishon, which is also
confirmed Psalm. 83.9. Do unto them as to the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to
Jabin at the brook of Kishon: for to this I answer, first, that Taanach and
Megiddo were not far from mount Tabor and the river Kishon: for though
Taanach and Megiddo belonged to the half tribe of Manasseh within Jordan, chap.
1.37. Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and her
towns, and Taanach and her towns -- nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her
towns; yet they stood within the compass of Issachars portion, and that
bordered upon Zebulun where mount Tabor was; Josh. 17.11. And Manasseh had in
Issachar, and in Asher, Bethshean and her towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach
and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns. And secondly, that
it may well be that the Canaanites being put to the worst about mount Tabor,
where they did first pitch battle, they might retire or fly to Taanach, and
there making a stand might renew the battle again, and so were there wholly
discomfited.

They took no gain of money.] The meaning of this clause may be, that these
Canaanites came for the love of the cause, and not for gain, and so proffered
to serve freely without pay, as thirsting for blood more then money, or at
least resolving to pay themselves out of the riches of the Israelites, and that
withal it proved truer then they were aware of, because that in stead of
gaining any thing, they lost all.

Verse. 20. They fought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against
Sisera.] It seems (and so Josephus reports this battle) that there was some
terrible extraordinary storm of thunder, hail and rain, which being by the
ordinary course of nature from the influence of the stars, they as Gods host,
Deuteronomy. 17.3. are here said from their several places and courses (like
soldiers that observed both rank and file) to have fought against Sisera, and
that from heaven, as soldiers that have gotten the advantage of the ground.

Verse. 21. The river Kishon swept them away, that ancient river the river
Kishon.] That is, that river so famous of old, the river Kishon: and it may be
said to have swept them away, either because in their flight they attempted to
get over the river, and so were drowned and carried away by the stream; or
else, because through the inundation of the river caused by the storm that God
sent at that time, their dead carcases that lay on the land about the river,
were by the sweeping flood carried away.

O my soul, thou have trodden down strength.] That is, O Deborah, thou have
trodden down strength, to wit, the strength of the enemy; for the Hebrews do
usually put the soul for the whole man; and happily she might also have respect
herein to the success of her prayers.

Verse. 22. Then were the horse hoofs broken by the means of the pransings of
their mighty ones.] The drift of this clause may be, either to set forth the
mighty strength of the enemy, in regard of the goodly troops of horses which
they had, horses that were so lusty and full of mettle and courage that they
even brake their hoofs sometimes with their pa wings and pransings, that so the
greater glory might redound unto God, who had made them victorious over so
potent an enemy; or else, to set forth the violence of their flight when they
were routed by the Israelites, which was such that they brake their very hoofs
with running.

Verse. 23. Curse ye Meroz (said the angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof, etc.] This Meroz is probably thought to have been some
city or town near the place where the battle was fought, the inhabitants
whereof might have been many ways helpful to the Israelites in the battle
which they fought with Sisera Jabins General; and that therefore whereas the
other tribes that sent no aid to Barak are only reproved, there is a curse yea
a bitter curse pronounced against these, and that by warrant of an express
command which Deborah had received from an Angel, who had it seems amongst
other things revealed this unto her either before or immediately after the
battle, Curse ye Meroz, (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ^e bitterly the
inhabitants thereof. And because they might be ready to allege, that there was
no hope that the Israelites should prevail against such a mighty Prince, and
for them to have risen up against him, without hope of prevailing, would have
been only to provoke him to their utter ruin: to take away this excuse from
them, this is expressly mentioned as the reason why this curse is denounced
against them, because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against
the mighty. The more mighty their adversary was, the more need had their
brethren of their help, and to hide themselves from their brethren because they
were so puissant argued manifest distrust of Gods assistance. How this curse
here denounced against this people fell upon them we read not; but that it was
not without effect even this affords some probable ground of conjecture, that
of this Meroz we find not after this the least mention in any story of
succeeding times.

Verse. 24. Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be etc.]
That is, she shall be highly extolled and applauded, and many blessings shall
be wished to her.

Verse. 25. She brought forth butter in a lordly-dish.] That is, cream in a
goodly great bowl, suitable to his greatness and dignity.

Verse. 31. But let them that love him be as the sun when he goes forth in
his might.] That is, as the sun when it rises in a clear morning does shine
most brightly and gloriously, and that too as Solomon says, Prove. 4.18. more
and more unto a perfect day; so let them that love the Lord become prosperous,
glorious and renowned, and let their prosperity grow and increase daily.
Because the power and strength of the suns light and heat is not so much seen
or felt when it is covered with clouds, it is said to go forth in his might;
and indeed the expression here used is much like that 2. Sam. 23.4. He shall be
as the light of the morning when the sun ^iseth, even a morning without
clouds.

And the land had rest forty years.] That is, unto forty years, counting them
from Ehuds death. See chap. 3.11.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. ANd the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
the Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.] By the evil
which the children of Israel did, is principally meant their fearing and
worshipping the gods of the Amorites, verse. 10. And I said unto you, I am the
Lord your God, fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose land you dwell, but
ye have not obeyed my voice; but yet when the Lord undertook to punish them for
this, whether it were because they had not proceeded so far herein as in
former times, or for some other reason known only to the Lord, evident it is
that he laid not his hand upon them so heavily now, as he had done formerly,
both because the misery that God brought upon them lasted but seven years; and
also, because we read not that these Midianites did bring the Israelites into
bondage as other their oppressors had done, but only made inroads every year
into the land, and so robbed and pillaged their country: whence it may be it
is, as some have observed, that it is not said here (according to the
expression elsewhere used) the Lord sold them into the hand of Midian, but that
the Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian.) What it was at this time that
moved the Midianites to invade the land of Israel we need not enquire. The
Israelites indeed in the latter days of Moses had made war with the
Midianites, and destroyed multitudes of them, of which see the note, Numb.
31.17. and it may be that the Midianites pretended now the taking revenge upon
the Israelites for that; but however, the Midianites (though the posterity of
Abraham) were always deadly enemies to the Israelites: and besides, when the
Lord means to punish a people for their sins, he can bring against them what
nation he pleases.

Verse. 2. And because of the Midianites, the children of Israel made them dens
which are in the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.] That is, many of
those dens, and caves, and strong holds which are in the land of Canaan, the
Israelites made at this time, to wit, to hide themselves and their estates
therein from the Midianites, the poorer sort the dens and the caves, and the
other the strong holds and forts: and thus at first they only thought to
shelter themselves by these outward means, and did not seek to make God their
hiding place, but all in vain, and therefore at length they saw their folly
herein, and then as it is said, verse. 6. They cried unto the Lord.

Verse. 3. And so it was when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came, and
the Amalekites, and the children of the East.] That is, and other the children
of the East, to wit, of Arabia that lay eastward of Canaan. Even the Midianites
were of these eastern nations (for they passed over Jordan that was on the east
side of Canaan when they invaded the land, and therefore when Gideon had
overcome them, he sent to the inhabitants of mount Ephraim, chap. 7.24.25. to
stop them from returning over Jordan) but they were aided it seems by other of
these eastern nations that bordered upon them, as the Ishmaelites, mentioned
chap. 8.24. For they had golden earings, because they were Ishmaelites, and
some others. Now it is noted that these nations came up every year into the
land of Canaan when Israel had sown, because the end of their coming was to
eat up with their cattle the green corn, that so they might impoverish and
samish the Israelites. For the most of these eastern people dwelt not in cities
and towns, but in tents only, which they used to remove from one place to
another, carrying their cattle along with them, whence is that of the Prophet,
Esa. 13.20. It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from one
generation to another, neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there, neither
shall the shepherds make their fold there: and so it was it seems with the
Midianites, and therefore every spring when the Israelites had sown they came
up with their tents and cattle that they might eat up all the increase of the
land, and therefore partly are they compared to grassehoppers, or locusts,
verse. 5. they came up with their cattle and their tents, as grassehoppers for
multitude, etc.

Verse. 4. And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the
earth, till thou come unto Gaza, etc.] Gaza lay on the coast of the midland
western sea; and so they entered on the east, and went quite through the land,
even as far as Gaza that lay on the Western coasts, destroying all as they
went, so that they left no sustenance for Israel, that is, none in a manner,
they took from many of the Israelites all their sustenance, and impoverished
all by taking away the greatest part of that they had.

Verse. 8. The Lord sent a Prophet unto the children of Israel, etc.] This was
to prepare them for the deliverance he intended them by Gideon, by calling them
to repentance and amendment of life.

Verse. 10. I am the Lord your God, fear not the gods of the Amorites, etc.]
That is, worship not the Gods of the Amorites; because religious worship is
always accompanied with the fear and reverence of that God whom men worship,
therefore fear is often put for the whole worship that is to be yielded to God.

Verse. 11. And there came an Angel of the Lord, and sat under an oak, etc.]
This Angel was the son of God, who is therefore called Jehovah, verse. 24. And
Gideon built an altar there unto the Lord, and called it Jehovah-Shalom, but
not desiring to seem to Gideon any other then some Prophet sent unto him from
the Lord, he sat down as a man wearied with travel, and desirous to rest
himself (and therefore as a traveller he had a staff in his hand too, verse. 21.
Then the Angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff that was in his
hand) and that under an oak, that was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the
Abi-ezrite: that is, who was of the posterity of Abiezer, Josh. 17.2. and
consequently of the tribe of Manasseh, as verse. 15. And he said unto him,
Wherewith shall I save Israel? Behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, which is
added partly to distinguish this Ophrah from another that was in the tribe of
Benjamin.

And his son Gideon threshed wheat by the wine press, to hide it from the
Midianites.] This Gideon was doubtless the next that judged Israel, after
Deborah; yet I do not conceive that he was now Judge when the Angel appeared
unto him, and so had been all the seven years of the Israelites oppression by
the Medianites but rather that he was called now thereto when he was called to
deliver the Israelites from the Midianites. However, that he was a man of rank
in the city where he lived is evident by the mention that is made, verse. 27.
of his taking ten of his servants along with him when he went to do that which
God enjoined him: and the more observable therefore is that which is noted of
him, that the Angel found him threshing his wheat. For hereby was plainly
discovered that he was a man of an humble spirit, not disdaining any honest
labor (and indeed we often find that when God has afforded any special
favor to his servants, he has as it were to testify his approving of this,
conferred it upon them still when they were so employed:) and withal this does
plainly show what a sad condition the poor people of God were in at this time,
when such a man as Gideon was glad to thresh his corn to hide it from the
Midianites, not daring happily to trust his own servants with the doing of it:
for which cause also it seems he threshed it out with a rod or flail, and did
not tread it out with oxen, as the custom of those times was, because this way
it might be done both more closely and speedily, and that too by the wine
press, where corn would not be looked for, and where perhaps he might thresh
it out and not be heard when he was doing it.

Verse. 12. And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, etc.] That is, was seen
of Gideon, and then spoke to him as follows, The Lord is with thee, thou
mighty man of valor; the title here given to Gideon, thou mighty man of
valor, may imply that he had been employed in military affairs; but however it
implies that God now had and would still indue him with strength and courage to
withstand the enemies of his people: and this salutation, the Lord is with
thee, though it implies Gods favorable presence, and all the comfortable
effects thereof, yet here it has reference chiefly to that employed in the
title given him, that God would be with him in his courageous opposing of the
Midianites.

Verse. 14. And the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, etc.]
The Lord by fixing his eyes so seriously upon him, as it were with affection
and admiration, did doubtless silently intimate the same that he expressed
immediately in the words he said unto him, to wit, that he was the man chosen
of God to deliver his people from these grievous calamities that now they
endured, Go, says he, in this thy might, that is, in the might of which he had
formerly spoken, when he called him thou mighty man of valor, the might
wherewith God had now fitted him, to be a worthy instrument of saving his
people, and thou shall save Israel from the hand of the Midianites; have not I
sent thee? that is, know that the Lord has sent thee, and has imposed this
task upon thee, and therefore having both authority and a promise of success
from him, thou may courageously undertake this service.

Verse. 15. And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel?
etc.] Because Gideons faith is commended, Heb. 11.32, 33. and because withal,
the Angel did not reprove him for this he now spoke, but only satisfied him
concerning that he now inquired of, it may seem probable that he spoke not
these words, wherewith shall I save Israel? as not believing what was promised,
but because knowing his own insufficiency for so great a work, and being
conscious to himself of the weakness of his faith, he desired to be informed
how this should be done that was promised, as being glad to have his faith
strengthened, lest those unlikely hoods which his reason discerned should be any
hinderance to him, either in believing what was promised, or undertaking what
was commanded: and so the like may be said concerning his desiring of signs,
verse. 17, 36, 37.

Verse. 16. Surely I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as
one man.] That is* as easily as thou may smite one man.

Verse. 17. If now I have found grace in thy sight, then show me a sign that
thou talkest with me.] That is, thou speak to me in the name of the Lord,
saying, I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as one man:
now therefore make it manifest to me by some sign or other that thou talkest
with me, that is, that thou art that same Lord, that great Angel of God, at
whose command I may safely undertake this enterprise. See the foregoing note
upon verse 15.

Verse. 18. Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring
forth my present and set it before thee.] Because the word here translated my
present may also signify a meat offering, (and so therefore it is rendered in
the margin of our Bibles) therefore many Expositours conceive that Gideon
meant to fetch out a sacrifice, which he meant should be offered by himself, or
by the Angel; but there is no just ground for this conceit in the Text. The
Hebrew word, which commonly signifies a meat offering, is frequently also used
for any present, or gift in general, as before chap. 3.15, 17. where there is
mention made of a present that Ehud carried; the Hebrew word is the same that
is used here, and which ordinarily is translated a meat offering: and so it is
in many other places. Besides, had Gideon intended to fetch out a sacrifice,
would he have brought out a kid ready boiled, together with the broth, as in
the following verse we see he did? when do we read of any such sacrifice?
Questionless therefore Gideon intended no sacrifice, but only meant to bring
forth some provision or other for this messenger sent from God unto him, that
he might eat thereof and refresh himself, as Abraham did for those Angels that
appeared unto him, Genesis 18.5. and that the rather, because he expected some
sign from him, whereby he might know whether he were the great Angel of God,
or whether he were some Prophet or other messenger sent unto him from God,
concerning which he was not yet fully satisfied.

Verse. 19. And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid and unleavened cakes, etc.]
To wit, because these might suddenly be made ready.

Verse. 20. And the Angel of the Lord said unto him, Take the flesh and the
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth, and he
did so.] Though Gideon brought these things forth for the repast of this man of
God (for such he conceived him to be) yet at his command he thus disposed of
them, as perceiving that he intended to show some sign thereby, as he himself
had desired, ver. 17.

Verse. 21. And there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh,
etc.] So soon as the Angel had touched these things with the end of his staff,
fire out of the rock consumed them, notwithstanding the broth was poured forth
upon the rock, and the flesh that was laid thereon, which was doubtless
enjoined that the miracle might be the greater, as for the same cause Elijah
poured water upon his sacrifice, 1. Kings 18.33. and thus he made a kind of
sacrifice of that which Gideon brought for him to eat; and by causing fire to
come miraculously out of the rock to consume it, did both make known to Gideon
who he was, and also might signify, first, Gods acceptance of that offering
(for the miraculous burning of sacrifices was an usual sign of Gods accepting
them:) secondly, that God would accept of the service which Gideon should
afterward do him: thirdly, that it was as easy for the Lord to consume his
adversaries, as to burn up that his offering. And besides, we may look upon
this as a sweet representation of our Evangelicall sacrifices. The rock whereon
our sacrifices must be laid is Christ, and the Spirit which is as fire, from
him derived to us, is that which must make our services pure and holy, and fit
to be offered to the Lord.

Verse. 22. Gideon said, Alas, O Lord God! for because I have seen an Angel of
the Lord face to face.] It seems that in those days they apprehended that the
seeing of an Angel of God was very perilous for the life of a man: for thus
also Manoah was affrighted upon the same occasion, chap. 13.22. And Manoah said
unto his wife, We shall surely die because we have seen God. Gideon therefore
perceiving now that it was an Angel, partly by the miraculous and sudden
burning up of the provision he had brought forth, with fire that came out of
the rock; but especially, by the sudden vanishing of the Angel out of his
sight, he was so far overborn with fear, that he could scarce think he should
live, notwithstanding the Angel himself had immediately before told him, that
he should smite the Midianites as one man. And thus by this grievous
affrightment, he that ere-while was saluted by the Angel as a mighty man of
valor, was taught what the most valiant men are if they be but a little left
to themselves, and not supported by God.

Verse. 23. And the Lord said unto him, Peace be unto thee, fear not, thou shall
not die.] It is said before, ver. 21. that the Angel departed out of his sight;
this therefore he spoke unto him out of the air immediately after his
vanishing away; or else, the meaning may be, that he said this to him the next
night: for so long his fear might well continue, and therefore it is happily
said, verse. 15. that the same night the Lord said unto him, Take thy fathers
young bullock, etc. that is, the same night wherein he had comforted him
against this his fear.

Verse. 24. Then Gideon built an altar there unto the Lord.] That is, in the
place where this sign had been wrought, it was therefore the same altar
mentioned verse. 26. for that was built upon the top of this rock; only here it
is generally set down (as it is usually in the Scriptures) and afterward the
warrant he had from God, and the manner how he did it, is expressed.

Verse. 25. And it came to pass the same night that the Lord said unto him,
etc.] In this and the following verse we have the relation of the Lords
appearing to Gideon the second time, and the directions he gave him for some
things he was to do, before he undertook the deliverance of the people from the
oppression of the Midianites: But whether this were by a visible apparition of
an angel as the former was, or only in a dream, it is not expressed, only it
is said that it was in the night, (which may make it probable that it was in a
dream, or nightly vision) yea, the same night, that is, either the same night
wherein the Angel had comforted him, as before-said, verse. 23. And the Lord
said unto him, Peace be unto thee, fear not, thou shall not die: or rather the
same night after the Angel of the Lord appeared to him, of which the story has
hitherto spoken. The first direction given him may be diversely read, to wit,
Take thy fathers young bullock, and the second bullock of seven years old (for
so it is in the margin of our Bibles) or, Take thy fathers young bullock, even
the second bullock of seven years old. If we read it as it is in the margin,
then it is evident that there were two bullocks that Gideon was commanded to
seize upon, and doubtless both were to be sacrificed, though there be express
mention made of his sacrificing but one of them, verse. 26. Only it is then
questionable, whether the words were intended to imply, that one of them only
was his fathers, and the other happily the peoples, known by the name of the
second bullock, and provided for the public service, to be offered as a
sacrifice to Baal; or to imply only the difference of their age (both being
his fathers) the one his young bullock, the other the second bullock, of seven
years old. But now if we read it as it is in our Bibles, Take thy fathers
young bullock, even the second bullock of seven years old, then there was but
one bullock he was to seize upon, to wit, his fathers young bullock, even the
second bullock of seven years old; which seems most probable, because there is
afterward no mention made of the sacrificing any other but one bullock, to
wit, the second bullock of seven years old; but why was this called the second
bullock? I answer, it might be so called in diverse respects, as because it was
the second in their order of standing in the stall, or of their drawing in the
plow or wain, or because it was the second in regard of age or worth, or
because it was the second in order of those that were prepared and set apart
for Baals sacrifice; and indeed this last seems to me the most probable, for
though there be nothing in the text whereby we can certainly conclude for which
of these reasons it was called the second bullock, yet because it is evident
that this bullock was devoted to Baals service (for verse. 28. we see the
inhabitants of Ophrah reckoned this as a main part of Gideons sacrilege,
Behold the altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was by
it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built) we may
the rather think that in respect of something that concerned Baals sacrifice it
was called the second bullock; and that this bullock was chosen by the Lord
rather then another, because it was seven years old, and hereby might signify
that the Midianites tyranny which had lasted seven years should now have an
end, together with the suppressing of Baals worship in the land.

And throw down the altar of Baal that thy father has, and cut down the grove
that is by it.] This is the second direction that is given here to Gideon, to
wit, that he should throw down Baals altar, and cut down the grove by it. That
all the inhabitants of Ophrah had an interest in this altar and grove we may
see by their contestation with Gideons father about it, verse. 30. Then the men
of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son that he may die, because he
has cast down the altar of Baal, and because he has cut down the grove that
was by it. It seems therefore that Joash Gideons father as being the chief
magistrate of that place had built this altar at his own expense, and upon his
own ground (though not for his use only, but for the public use of all the
inhabitants of Ophrah) and that therefore the Lord calls it here his fathers
altar. However observable it is: first, that ere Gideon might go to fight
against the Midianites the enemies of God and his people, he was enjoined to
set on foot the reformation of Religion, and the extirpation of superstition
and idolatry, which had provoked the Lord to displeasure against them, thereby
as it were to make way for a happy victory: secondly, that he was enjoined to
begin this work of reformation, in the throwing down of his fathers altar, etc.
Take thy fathers young bullock, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy
father has, the Lord thereby teaching him, that he that would reform public
abuses must begin with his own family and friends, and that in yielding
obedience to God he might not fear to offend his father, or any other that was
dearest to him; and that his affection to his father should make him most
careful to win him from every way of false worship:thirdly, that before that
charge is given him which follows in the next verse, concerning his building
an altar to the Lord, he is first here appointed to throw down Baals altar.
Gods altar and Baals, the Ark and Dagon cannot stand together, the true worship
of God will not be accepted of God, where Baals altars are not first thrown
down.

Verse. 26. And build an altar unto the Lord thy God upon the top of this rock
in the ordered place.] Or as it is in the margin, in an orderly manner. This is
the third direction given to Gideon, that when he had thrown down Baals altar,
and cut down the grove, he must build an altar unto the Lord in that very place
upon the top of the rock, whereat the Angel first appearing to him, the Lord
had given him a sign, by causing fire to come out of that rock to consume the
provision that was laid thereon, brought forth for the Angel. Here therefore we
have the command for the building of the altar, the building whereof is related
before; and that place was no doubt purposely chosen for the building of this
new altar, to signify that it was built to the honor of that God who had
there appeared to him; and that both by way of thankfulness for the mercy
there promised, and by way of imploring the accomplishing of that promise in
the deliverance of his people from the oppression of the Midianites. As for the
last words, if we read them as they are in the margin, in an orderly manner,
then the meaning may be, either that he was to build the altar of earth and
unhewen stones, as was ordered in the Law of Moses, Exodus 20.24, 25. or else,
that he was to build it in such a manner, that it might be convenient for the
service that was to be done upon it, the laying of the wood in order upon it,
and then the burning of the sacrifice thereon. But if we read it as it is in
our text, in the ordered place, then thereby I conceive is only meant, that
the altar was to be built in that very place of the rock, which was before
ordered to be the place whereon the provision was to be laid, that Gideon had
brought out for the Angel, verse. 20. and which was chosen as being plain, and
fit for this service.

And take the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the
grove which thou shall cut down.] It was not lawful for any but the priest to
offer sacrifice, or to build any altar, or to offer sacrifice any where but
only in the Tabernacle; but here Gods special command was a sufficient
warrant for Gideon.

Verse. 27. Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the Lord had
said unto him.] He took so many of his servants, that it might be the more
speedily dispatched, because it was to be done before morning; and observable
it is, that Gideon, being a man that feared God even in those corrupt times,
had ten servants that were ready to join with him in suppressing the idolatry
of Baal.

And so it was, because he feared his fathers household, etc.] That is, because
he feared them lest they should hinder him in that he had to do. He was not
afraid of any evil that they could do to him, for he might well know that it
would be known who had done it, and this would prove as dangerous for him, as
if he had been taken in the doing of it; but which he feared was, lest he
should be interrupted by them, and kept from doing what God had charged him to
do. So that it is the wisdom and prudence of Gideon, that is here commended
that taking the advantage of the night and setting as many hands together at
work as he could, no body knew any thing of it to make head against him, ere
the work was done.

Verse. 29. They said, Gideon the son of Joash has done this thing.] He might
soon be suspected, because he was known to be no friend of Baal; but many other
ways also it might be discovered.

Verse. 30. Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son that
he may die, etc.] Herein was discovered the violent rage wherewith they were
carried in their zeal for Baal. Joash it seems was either their chief
Magistrate, or at least a man of chief note and esteem amongst them, and well
they might think that it would go much against him to deliver up his son to
such an enraged multitude; but so far were they transported with fury when they
saw the altar of their idol-god thrown down, that they regarded Joash no more
now then another man; nor will they stand to examine the cause, nor to hear
what Gideon can say for himself, he had pulled down Baals altar and therefore
he must suffer for it, yea the father must deliver his own son to death; this
they demanded peremptorily, and nothing else would serve their turn, wherein we
see how God tried the faith of Gideon, in this first act of his obedience to
Gods command.

Verse. 31. And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for
Baal? etc.] It seems that Joash had hitherto himself been a worshiper of Baal:
either therefore God did now extraordinarily change his mind, and move him thus
to plead against Baal; or else Gideon had acquainted his father with the vision
he had seen, and so won him to approve of his fact, and to desire the
suppressing of that idol-worship, which formerly himself had practiced; or
else, being a man indifferent for matters of Religion, he says this to save
his son, not being very zealous for his idol-god, as pretending it a wrong to
plead for Baal, as if he could not plead for himself.

Verse. 32. Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal
plead against him, etc.] As it were in memory of this fact, and to testify
his resolution to defend him in it. For Jerubbaal is by interpretation, Let
Baal plead for himself. In 2. Sam. 11.21. he is called Jerubbesheth.

Verse. 33. Then all the Midianites, and the Amalekites, and the children of the
East were gathered together and went over, and pitched in the valley of
Jezreel.] That is, they came over Jordan: (for they came out of the east) and
pitched in the valley of Jezreel, which was in the tribe of Manasseh, Josh.
17.16. And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us; and all
the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley, have chariots of iron,
both they which are of Bethshean and her towns, and they who are of the valley
of Jezreel, and borders upon Issachar, Josh. 19.18. and not far therefore
from Ophrah, where Gideon was: there was another Jezreel in the tribe of Judah,
Josh. 15.56. But the city which gave the name to this valley, was in the tribe
of Manasseh, where the kings of Israel had a stately palace, 1. Kings 21.1.
And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had a
vineyard which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.

Verse. 34. But the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon.] That is, God by his
Spirit did work upon him in an unusual manner, by stirring up in him a zealous
desire to go against the Midianites, and furnished him with all gifts requisite
for the service he had called him to; and because happily his carriage of
himself in the business was such, that every one might plainly see, that it
was a Spirit above that of man's that carried him on in this work; therefore is
it, that in the Hebrew the word is clothed. But the Spirit of the Lord clothed
Gideon.

And he blew a trumpet, and Abiezer was gathered after him.] That is, his own
family the Abiezrites, who now saw their folly in opposing him in Baals behalf;
or if not so, were at least in their necessity glad to cleave to him.

Verse. 35. And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh, etc.] That is, both
those within and those without Jordan.

And he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali, and
they came up to meet them.] The meaning is, that he sent messengers to all the
neighboring tribes, except Ephraim, (which occasioned that quarrel related
afterward in the eight chapter) and so from all these tribes there came many
in to Gideon; for that is the meaning of the last clause, And they came up to
meet them, that is, from these tribes there came many to meet and to join
themselves with those forces he had already gathered.

Verse. 37. Behold, I will put a fleece of wool on the floor, etc.] See the
former note, verse. 13. No doubt Gideon had respect in these two following
signs which he desired, only to be assured of Gods will concerning the event
of his fighting with the Midianites, and happily thereby to encourage his
followers and soldiers whom he gathered together: yet herein also we have a
sweet resemblance of Gods dealing with the Jews first, and afterward with the
Gentiles; the doctrine of salvation and spirit of grace are often in the
Scripture compared to a dew, distilling down from heaven, Deuteronomy. 32.2. My
doctrine shall drop as the rain: my speech shall distill as the dew, as the
small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass. Hos. 14.5.
I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lilly, and cast forth
his roots as Lebanon. A long time the Jews were filled with this dew, whilst
all the nations of the earth besides were dry and barren, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He
shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and judgments unto Israel. He has
not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have not known
them. But now since Christ's coming, this fleece, the people of the Jews are
become dry, whilst all nations of the earth about them, are continually watered
with this dew of grace: Psalm. 107.33, 34, 25. He turns rivers into a
wilderness: and the water springs into dry ground: A fruitful land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. He turns the
wilderness into a standing water: and dry ground into water springs. Esa.
35.6, 7. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb
sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert:
Esa. 43.19, 20. Behold I will do a new thing: now it shall spring forth, Shall
ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the
desert. The beasts of the field shall honor me, the Dragons and the Owls,
because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give
drink to my people^ my chosen.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. THen Jerubbaal (who is Gideon) and all the people that were with him,
rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod.] Which signifies fear;
probable it is therefore that it was so called from the fear of those cowardly
Israelites which here forsook their Captain and brethren.

Verse. 2. The people that are with thee, are too many for me to give the
Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves, etc.] The whole army
that Gideon had gathered when they were all together, was but two and thirty
thousand, and the Midianites on the other side were at least a hundred thirty
and five thousand; for there were an hundred and twenty thousand of them slain
in the first overthrow, and the remainder that were left with Zebah and
Zalmunna were fifteen thousand, chap. 8.10. So that the Midianites were above
four times so many as the Israelites when Gideon had his whole army together.
Now considering, first this great disproportion that was already betwixt the
forces of Gideon, and the host of the Midianites: and secondly, how
unexpectedly the Lord had raised the spirit of Gideon to undertake this
attempt, and made the people so willing to follow him, that ere while had hid
themselves in caves and dens of the earth, chap. 6.2. and thirdly, that God
had beforehand told Gideon that he would deliver the Midianites into their
hands, and confirmed his promise with many miraculous signs; I say,
considering these things, one would have thought, that had the Israelites
vanquished the Midianites with these two and thirty thousand that were now come
in to Gideon, they would never have attributed their victory to themselves, and
robbed God of his glory. But the Lord knew well how prone men are upon any
success in this kind to vaunt themselves, and to forget God; and therefore
being very tender of his glory this way, he would not let the Israelites be so
many as they were, but would have them brought to a handful of three hundred
men, that they might be the more abundantly convinced, that their victory was
merely of God, and not of themselves.

Verse. 3. Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him depart early from mount
Gilead.] That the Israelites should make such a proclamation as this when they
were to go out to battle, God had formerly enjoined in his Law, Deuteronomy. 20.8.
Concerning which, see the the note in that place. Now for the mount Gilead from
which they were now to depart, because that mount Gilead which is so frequently
mentioned in the Scripture, was without Jordan, and Gideon and his army were
now within Jordan, chap. 6. it must needs be yielded that this mount Gilead
here spoken of, was another mount of the same name in the tribe of Manasseh
within Jordan, near the valley of Jezreel where the Midianites now lay: which
is probable enough considering that we may well think, that a great many of
this half of Manasseh within Jordan were also descended from Gilead the son
of Machir the son of Manasseh, and night therefore call this mountain Gilead,
either in remembrance of their father, or else, as a witness that though they
were parted from their brethren by Jordan, yet they were of the same tribe with
those of their brethren the Manassites that inhabited mount Gilead without
Jordan.

And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand, and there remained
ten thousand.] For though they had before of their own accord, as volunteirs,
courageously proffered their services against the Midianites, yet now when they
came to see the power and strength of the enemy, their hearts began to fail
them, and thereupon they soon embraced this liberty given them to depart away.

Verse. 4. The people are yet too many: bring them down unto the water, and I
will try them for thee there.] That is, I will discover who they be that are
indeed fit for this service.

Verse. 5. Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue as a dog lappeth,
him shall thou set by himself, etc.] That is, every one that takes up water in
the palm of his hand, and so laps it up. Those that were to be dismissed were
such as kneeling down upon their knees, bowed their heads down to the river,
and so putting their mouths into the water drunk and sucked up their fill; the
other sort that were to be retained were such, as only bending their bodies a
little, did with their hands snatch up a little water for the refreshing of
themselves, and so lapping it up, went away. And these are said to lap as a
dog lappeth, because this kind of drinking in such a snatching manner, without
thrusting their mouths into the water as horses and other cattle do, is most
like the lapping of dogs, who put not their mouths into the water, but snatch
it up with their tongues, nor drink so soakingly as other cattle, especially
when they are hunting, but only lap a little and make have presently away:
and why were these chosen and the other sent away? because that other kind of
drinking argued weakness and faintness, sloth, and a greedy desire of filling
themselves, as men impatient of the thirst they had endured; this on the other
side argued strength and ability of body, and that they were content with a
little refreshing, more minding the business they had in hand then the filling
themselves.

Verse. 7 By the three hundred men that lapped, will I save you, etc.] Whereas
of the enemy there were at least a hundred thirty five thousand, chap. 8.10. so
that for every soldier Gideon had left, there were four hundred and fifty of
his enemies: and in this poor remainder of Gideons troops which he brought, we
see a shadow of that Christ says, Matt. 22.14. Many are called, but few are
chosen.

Verse. 8. So the people took victuals in their hands, and their trumpets.]
That is, the trumpets of the whole army, even those that were dismissed; for
amongst thirty two thousand, there might well be three hundred trumpets.

Verse. 9. And it came to pass the same night the Lord said unto him, etc.]
That is, the same night after he had dismissed all his soldiers, save only
those three hundred men that lapped the water; so that it seems, this also the
Lord revealed to him in a nightly vision or dream. The like is noted before in
the foregoing chapter.

Verse. 10. But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down to
the host.] That is, if thou fear to go down and set upon the enemy, because
thy army is reduced to so small a number, then go first with thy servant
privately to their army, and there thou shall hear what shall further stregthen
thy faith.

Verse. 12. And the Midianites, and the Amalekites, and all the children of the
east, lay along in the valley, like grassehoppers for multitude.] There is
express mention made of a hundred thirty five thousand of them, chap. 8.10.
Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their host with them, about fifteen
thousand men, all that were left of the children of the east: for there fell a
hundred twenty thousand men that drew sword.

Verse. 13. Behold, I dreamed a dream, and lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled
into the host of Midian, etc.] The analogy betwixt Gideon and this barley cake
consists chiefly in this, that being a man comparatively base and of no esteem,
nor likely in the eye of reason, with those poor weak troops, which he had so
suddenly scrambled together, to ruin the whole army of the Midianites (no more
then that the fall of a barley cake should overthrow one of their strongest and
goodliest tents) but rather likely to be devoured by them, so soon as ever he
should show himself amongst them, even to be eaten up by them, as men eat
bread, Psalm 14.4. he should notwithstanding, utterly ruin and overthrow that
huge army of the Midianites, and lay their pomp and glory in the dust.

Verse. 15. And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the
interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, etc.] That is, he bowed himself to
God by way of thankfulness for bringing him to hear this for the
strengthening of his faith: for first, hereby it was manifest that God had
already stricken them with a fear of him and those forces which he had raised
against them: and secondly, he might plainly see that Gods hand was in this
business to comfort and encourage him, that just at this time one of the
soldiers should be telling this dream, and another of his fellows should in
this manner expound it.

Verse. 18. And say, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon.] Thus was Gideon
careful in the first place to ascribe all their success to the Lord,
acknowledging thereby that Gideons sword would have been of no power to
vanquish their enemies, if the Lord should not fight for them, and cause the
sword of Gideon to be victorious; but yet withal he appointed them to join his
name with the Lords, the sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, because he perceived
by that which he heard in the camp of the Midianites, that the Lord had made
his name terrible amongst them.

Verse. 19. So Gideon and the three hundred men that were with him, came to the
outside of the camp, in the beginning of the middle watch.] If the Hebrews in
these times did (as some conceive) divide the night into three watches, the
meaning of the words is plain, that this was done in the beginning of the
second watch; but it is evident that in future times they had four watches,
allowing three hours to every watch, Matt. 14.25. And in the fourth watch of
the night, Jesus went unto them walking on the sea. If it were so now also, the
meaning must be, that Gideon came upon them in the beginning of the third
watch, which is called the middle watch, because it begun about midnight; but I
should rather think that they had not four watches, till they came to be under
the Roman government, and so followed their custom in the ordering of their
night-watches.

And they blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers that were in their hands,
etc.] Besides the terror of the suddenness of seeing so many lights burning
about them, and of hearing so many pitchers broken, so many trumpets sounding,
and so many men crying out, the sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, and that in
the dead of the night when they lay sleeping securely, the first thoughts which
advised reason could suggest must needs be, that it could not but be a mighty
army that had so many trumpets and lights attending them, and hence it was,
that the Midianites ran and cried and fled, verse. 21. Yea besides, we may well
think this was the rather appointed that herein we might have a sweet type of
the spiritual conquest of Satan by Christ and his elect. For how did Christ
vanquish hell and death, but 1. by being broken for our transgressions, and
bruised for our sins, Heb. 2.14. For as much therefore as the children are
pertakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the devil: and 2. by his resurrection, wherein the splendor of his divinity
did shine forth most gloriously, Romans 1.4. and 8.34. And how do the Saints
prevail, but 1. by the preaching, and the free profession of the Gospel, the
treasure we have in earthen vessels, 2. Cor. 4.7. that the excellency of the
power may be of God, and not of us: 2. By showing forth the power of the word
in the light of a holy conversation: and 3. By a willing suffering for the
truth, Rev. 12.11. They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.

Verse. 21. And they stood every man in his place, round about the camp.] As if
they had come only to be torch-bearers to the rest of the army; and indeed
thereby testifying also, that this victory was to be the sole work of God,
according to that, Exodus 14.14. The Lord shall sight for you, and ye shall hold
your peace.

Verse. 24. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and took
the waters unto Beth-barah, and Jordan.] That is, the foords and passages of
the river Jordan, even unto Beth-barah, or Bethabarah, John 1.28. or else,
these waters unto Beth-barah, were some other rivers they were to pass over,
ere they came to Jordan, and therefore distinguished from them; and indeed, by
this means many of the Midianites did they here intercept, and amongst the
rest, two of their princes, Oreb, and Zeeb, and the other that escaped over
before the passages could be taken Gideon pursued; now hereby the Israelites
might have seen the humble spirit of Gideon; namely, that he desired not to
ingrosse the glory of the victory wholly to himself, but was willing that his
brethren should have their share in it too.

Verse. 25. And they slew Oreb at the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the
winepresse of Zeeb, etc.] That is, the rock and winepresse which were
afterward called, upon this occasion, the rock Oreb, and the wine press of
Zeeb; namely, because there these princes were taken and slain, the very places
where it may be they had hid themselves for fear of the Israelites. As for the
next clause, where it is said, that they brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to
Gideon, on the other side Jordan, though this be here inserted, that so the
whole passage of that which the men of Ephraim did might be related together,
yet it was not done (as is expressed in the words) till Gideon had passed over
Jordan to pursue those Midianites that were escaped; which must be noted,
because we see that after this there is mention made of Gideons passing over
Jordan, Chap. 8.4. And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he and the three
hundred men that were with him.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. ANd the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why have thou served us thus,
etc.] See the last note of the foregoing chapter. As afterward they quarrelled
with Jephthah, chap. 12.1. And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together,
and went northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to
fight against the children of Ammon, and did not call us to go with thee. So
here now they contended with Gideon. Jacob had given this tribe of Ephraim the
pre-eminence above that of Manasseh, which might happily make them the more
impatient of this dishonor which was now done them as they conceived, and the
less able to brook that the Manassices, of whom Gideon was, should become so
renowned for this victorious exploit of theirs against the Midianites. But
however being puffed up, partly with the potency of their tribe, and partly
with the pre-eminence they had above the other tribes, in that the Tabernacle
was settled amongst them, to wit, in Shilo, which was one of their cities; but
especially with their good success in that late service they were called to of
taking the passages of Jordan, where the flying Midianites were to pass over,
when they came to Gideon with the heads of Oreb and Zeeb, they quarrelled with
him, because they were not called out, as well as some other of the tribes,
when he first raised forces to go against the Midianites, pretending it to be a
great disregard, yea, contempt of them, that other tribes that were not so
nearly allied to them as they were (both these tribes being of Joseph's
posterity) should be called in by Gideon and his Manassites to the first onset,
which was the greatest exploit; and they only left to snatch up here and there
some of the flying Midianites, after others had routed them.

Verse. 2. Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better then the vintage
of Abiezer?] Because the men of Ephraim quarrelled against Gideon, who was of
the family of Abiezer, was chiefly from this, that they looked upon the service
which they were called too, in taking the passages of Jordan from the flying
Midianites, as so poor and mean a business in comparison of that which
Gideon, and his Manassites had done, (Gideon and his soldiers had hewn down
the great army of the Midianites, and then they were called in to gather up the
chips; or Gideon had gathered in the vintage, and then they were called in to
come and gather up their gleanings) therefore does Gideon answer them thus, Is
not the gleaning of Ephraim better then the vintage of Abiezer? as if he had
said, Suppose it be so as you conceive, surely considering that you have had
the killing and pillaging of such multitudes of them, and especially, that you
have taken and slain two of their kings; you must needs yield that your
gleanings (if they be but gleanings) are better then our vintage; now because
Gideon could not have said this so well after he and his three hundred men had
slain Zebah and Zalmunna, the other two princes of the Midianites, therefore it
is probably thought by some, that this expostulation of the Ephramites with
Gideon, was before he had discomfited those princes of Midian, though it was
after he was gone over Jordan, as is expressly noted in the last verse of the
foregoing chapter.

Verse. 4. And Gideon came to Jordan and passed over, etc.] This was before the
men of Ephraims contending with him, though here it be mentioned after it. See
the note chap. 7. verse. 25.

Verse. 5. And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give I pray you, loaves of
bread, etc.] This was not that Succoth in Egypt, Exodus 12.37. whether the
children of Israel removed from Rameses, but a city in the tribe of Gad, Josh.
13.27. which had it name from the boothes which Jacob made there, at his return
out of Mesopotamia, Genesis 33.17. And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him
an house, and made boothes for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is
called Succoth.

Verse. 6. And the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna
now in thy hands, etc.] They saw that many, even fifteen thousand, of the
Midianites were escaped, verse. 10. these they thought might soon ralley
themselves together again, and become too strong for Gideon and his three
hundred wearied men, at least they might escape, muster new forces, and then
entering the land again, might wreak their teene upon those that should afford
Gideon any succor now in this his necessity; and upon these grounds they
reject his motion with scorn, as judging it most unlikely, if not impossible,
that he should wholly subdue the Midianites, and save the Israelites out of
their hands.

Verse. 7. I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness, and with
briers.] See verse. 16.

Verse. 8. And he went up thence to Penuel, and spoke unto them likewise, etc.]
Which was a city in that very place where Jacob wrestled with the Angel, Genesis
32.30. And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel.

Verse. 9. When I come again in peace, I will break down this tower.] It is most
probable that Gideon in his treating with the men of Penuel, perceived that the
confidence they had in a strong tower which they had built, and in which they
stood upon their guard, made them answer him with such scorn and disdain as
they did, and that thereupon he threatened them, that at his return he would not
only destroy them, but break down their tower too.

Verse. 11. And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in te^ts, etc.]
That is, of the Arabians, who lay eastward of the Israelites; so that it seems
Gideon fearing to be discovered if he had followed right on forward, fetched a
compass about, and came upon them on the east side where they never feared any
enemy, to wit, on the east of Nobah and Jokbeah. Now Nobah was a city in the
land of Manasseh, Number. 32.42. but happily in the confines of Gad; for Jokbeah
was one of their cities, Number. 32.25.

Verse. 14. And he discribed unto him the Princes of Succoth.] That is, he gave
him their names in writing, as the Hebrew word signifies, happily withal
telling him where they dwelt, and how they might be known and found. For
because Gideon knew that the Magistrates only were in fault that he was so
scornfully denied a little refreshing for his soldiers, therefore was he so
careful to inquire after these princes of Succoth, that so none might suffer
but those that were guilty.

Verse. 16. And he took the Elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness,
and briers, and with them be taught the men of Succoth.] In what manner they
were torn with these thorns and briers it is not expressed; that they were
slain, it is most probable, because the men of Penuel were slain, verse. 17.
Some conceive that they were cast out naked upon briers and thorns, and then
that carts and wains were drawn over them, as they used in those countries to
beat out hard corn with a cart wheel, Esa. 28.27. For the fitches are not
threshed with a threshing instrument; neither is a cart wheel turned about upon
the cummin: but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a
rod. Whence is that phrase of turning the wheel over the wicked, Prove. 20.26. A
wise king scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them; which is,
because they thus read this clause, with them he threshed, or beat out the men
of Succoth. But others conceive they were beaten or scourged to death with
them, or at least that they were beaten with these, and afterward were
slain some other way. But hovvever, the meaning of that expression, with them
he taught the men of Succoth, is, that thereby he taught them to know what it
was to use him and their brethren as they had done.

Verse. 17. And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city.]
That is, the Magistrates of the city, as before he did in Succoth.

Verse. 18. Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they
whom ye slew at Tabor.] Because it seems Gideon had heard that these kings had
slain certain men of the Israelites that had retired themselves for shelter to
some strong holds or caves in mount Tabor, and feared they were his brethren,
because they amongst others sought to provide for the saving of their lives in
those dangerous times as others did, chap. 6.2. And the hand of Midian
prevailed against Israel: and because of the Midianites the children of Israel
made them the dens which are in the mountains and caves and strong holds; and
had not been since heard of, therefore he inquires thus concerning the men
whom they had there slain.

And they answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the children
of a king.] This may be meant of that likeness of feature which is usually
amongst brethren, but plainly it intends that they were of a goodly and comely
personage, even as Gideon was, and such as might well beseem men of a princely
and Royal stock.

Verse. 19. As the Lord lives, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay
you.] The meaning is, that he would have spared them, because they had shown
mercy to his brethren; and hereby he expresses his sorrow for his brethren,
and shows what little cause they had now to expect any mercy from him.

Verse. 20. And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up and slay them.] Upon him
he imposes this work rather then any other, first, that he might train him up,
even from his young years, to draw his sword against the enemies of Israel, and
to be severe to those that should rise up against God, and against his people:
secondly, that it might be done by way of avenging the death of his brethren:
thirdly, because it would add, if not to the pain, yet to the dishonor of
their death, to die by such a hand

Verse. 21. Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as
the man is, so is his strength.] In this reply of theirs, first, they descant
in a kind of scornful manner upon that command of Gideons setting a child to
take away their lives; whereas indeed, this his young heir had scarce courage
enough to look them in the face: secondly, they provoke Gideon (as impatient of
delay) to rise upon them himself, and rid them out of the way, thereby
discovering their contempt of death, and how much they scorned to beg life,
and withal happily being loath to die by the hand of a child.

And took away the ornaments that were on their Camels necks.] As the memorials
of this great victory.

Verse. 22. Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both
thou and thy son, etc.] That is, they offered to receive him to be their
king, and to settle the kingdom successively upon his posterity.

Verse. 23. And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, etc.] That is,
not as a king; he judged Israel unto his dying day, but it was the kingdom of
Israel, the regal power, which they proffered, and he now refused, and that
upon this ground, because the accepting of this would have been in a manner a
taking of the government out of Gods hand, the Lord (says he) shall rule over
you. Not that God rules not by kings, as well as by other kind of Magistrates;
but because God had established this way of governing them by Judges, who had
not so great a degree of sovereignty and power over the people, as kings
usually have, and were extraordinarily called of God; and withal, because God
had in his Law expressed, that in case they should desire a king, they were to
take him whom the Lord should choose, Deu. 17.14, 15 When thou art come to the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall dwell
therein, and shall say, I will set a king over me, like all the nations that
are about: Thou shall in any wise set him a king over thee, whom the Lord thy
God shall choose. One from among thy brethren shall thou set over thee: thou
may not set a stranger over thee which is not thy brother. Therefore he
takes this rash proffer of changing the government, to be a shaking of Gods
government, because they went about to change it without Gods leave, and
refuses to give any consent to it; all which is evident by that which the Lord
said of the Israelites desiring a King in Samuels days, 1. Sam. 8.6, 7. But
the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a King to judge us: and
Samuel prayed unto the Lord, And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the
voice of the people, in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

Verse. 26. And the weight of the golden earrings which he requested, was a
thousand and seven hundred shekles of gold, etc.] Which is esteemed to be
according to the account of our weight, 2380 pounds; it is not impossible that
all this should be spent in the making of one ephod, as it is said, verse. 27.
especially if it were made as that of Aarons, with a brestplate, set with so
many precious stones of great value, Exodus 28.15, 16.17. But the words will
well enough bear, that of part of this gold now given him, he made an ephod.

Verse. 27. And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city.] Not a
linen ephod, but such a one as that which was made for the high priest, of
gold, blue, purple, scarlet, etc. Exodus 28.6. It is probable enough that he
intended it, only as a memorial of this their victory over the Midianites
(the monument being of the very prey which was there taken) though afterward
it became a snare both to him and to his house. But why then did he make an
ephod rather then any other monument? this indeed seems to imply, that his
purpose was, to make use also of this ephod either in offering sacrifices in
his own house (and then under this ephod, all the priestly garments may be
comprehended) or else, thereby to enquire what the will of the Lord was,
according to the judgment of Urim. Not considering that this previledge was
only annexed to Aarons ephod, wherein was the brestplate of judgment with the
Urim and Thummim; and therein therefore he sinned greatly, and brought Gods
wrath upon his posterity.

And all Israel went thither a whoring after it, etc.] Either they went thither
as to a famous Oracle, to inquire concerning the will of God in any doubtful
cases, or else drawn with the superstitious conceits they had entertained of
this ephod, they set up there a place of sacrificing, contrary to the express
letter of the Law of God; or else, they resorted to it, as to an idol or holy
relic, to fall down before it and worship it; or happily, they did at length
make use of it, as a most holy vestment, in the service of Baal; hovvever some
way they abused it idolatrously, and are therefore said to have gone a
whoring after it. Concerning which phrase, see the note, chap. 2.17. and
therefore too it is said in the follovving words, that it became a snare unto
Gideon, and to his house, that is, it ensnared his posterity by degrees,
dravving them to do that which was most displeasing to God, and at last
plunging them deeper, it became the utter ruin of his whole house.

Verse. 28. And the country was in quietness forty years in the days of
Gideon.] That is, unto forty years, to wit, from the death of the former
Judge, or the beginning of the Midianitish oppression, unto the death of
Gideon. See chap. 3.11.

Verse. 31. And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son,
whose name he called Abimelech.] These words his concubine that was in Shechem,
seems to imply, that there she was bred and lived, and that there amongst her
friends she chose to live, even after Gideon had taken her to be his concubine
(that is, his wife, though in an inferior degree, as having been before his
maidservant, chap. 9.18.) and that happily, because Gideon was wont to come up
frequently to Shechem about matters of judgment, as Expositours conceive. Now
of this concubine it is said, that she bare him a son, whose name he called
Abimelech. Abimelech signifies my father is a king, or a kingly father; and it
was the usual title of the Philistine kings; a fatal name it was, discovering
some proud and ambitious thoughts in his mother, who it is likely moved her
husband upon some other fair pretense to give him this name.

Verse. 33. And made Baal-berith their God.] That is, the Lord of the covenant.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. ANd Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his mothers
brethren, etc.] To wit, his uncles by his mothers side. After Gideons death the
children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, as it is said
before, chap. 8.33. and therefore as in former times the Lord still punished
their idolatry and apostasy from him, by some of the neighboring nations that
invaded their land, and sorely afflicted them, so now he punished them by the
tyranny of one of their own people, even by Abimelech, the son of their late
Judge Gideon, by a concubine which he kept in Shechem, who upon his fathers
death resolved immediately to attempt the taking to himself that regal power
which the people had lately offered to settle upon his father, and his
posterity successively, but that he rejected it, chap. 8.22, 23. To make way
thereto, he went presently to Shechem, and there as it is here said, he began
to tamper first with his uncles, his mothers brethren and the rest of her
kindred, and employed them as his instruments, who happily were of good rank
and esteem in Shechem, to see if they could draw all the inhabitants of that
city to aid him in this his project, not doubting but that if he could effect
this, he should be able well enough to accomplish the rest of his plot. And
thus by the misery which this son of a concubine brought both upon his
fathers house and the whole kingdom, we may see that God did even in those
times testify his displeasure against their having several wives and
concubines, though he did not openly by his prophets contest with them about it.

Verse. 2. Whether is better for you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal
(which are threescore and ten persons) reign over you, or that one reign over
you?] These are the words which Abimelech put into the mouths of his mothers
kindred, whereby they were to persuade the men of Shechem to make him king.
Wherein first, he takes it for granted that though his father had in modesty
refused the kingdom, yet it was fitting that now according to their proffer
they should settle it upon his posterity: and secondly, he labors to persuade
them that his brethren had a plot upon the kingdom to divide it amongst them;
and therefore willed them to consider (as pretending the public good, when he
aimed only at his own ambitious ends) whether they might not do better, to do
what in them lay to settle him alone in the kingdom, then to suffer themselves
to be under the command of all Gideons sons; especially, considering there
were so many of them, as there were. Indeed, we find not that any of Gideons
sons, had the least thought of any such thing; yea, Jotham in that parable of
the fruit trees refusing the sovereignty over the trees, which follows in this
chapter, did plainly enough imply that both himself and his brethren were
content with the condition wherein they lived, and desired not to reign as
kings; but whether this were so or no, it was all one to Abimelech; measuring
the mind of others by his own, he might be jealous that they intended this; and
however if the possessing of the people with this conceit might further his
project, that was all he cared for; only, as slanderers are wont to do, he
would not flatly and in downright terms say they had a plot upon the kingdom,
but contents himself cunningly and closely to intimate so much; Whether (says
he) is better for you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal (which are
threescore and ten persons) reign over you, or that one reign over you?

Remember also, that I am your bone and your flesh.] That is, of the same city
and family, for doubtless those that planted themselves in the same city, were
ordinarily not only of the same tribe, but more nearly allied together, and
this Abimelech must needs intend in these words, I am your bone, etc. though
elsewhere indeed the more general relation of being Israelites, is the only
ground of this speech, 2. Sam. ^.1. Then came all the tribes of Israel to David
unto Hebron, and spoke saying, Behold we are thy bone and thy flesh; and thus
he intimates what an honor, and what an advantage many ways it might be to
them, to have a king so nearly allied to them.

Verse. 4. And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver, out of the
house of Baalberith, etc.] Considering that this money was given Abimelech,
that he might be enabled to suppress his brethren the other sons of Gideon,
it may well be, that there was some superstition in their telling out to him
just so many pieces of silver, as there were of his brethren, to wit,
threescore and ten. But however, observable it is, that the money which they
had given to their idol-god became the very first fuel, (as I may say) for
the kindling of that fire in the land wherewith the Lord intended in his
judgment to punish the idolatry and other sins of this people; and that
because herewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons, that is, worthless
and unsettled men, men of no wisdom nor grace, nor yet ability for their
outward estate, idle, giddyheaded, loose and wandering rascals, of the froth
and scumme of the people, that for a little hire were easily drawn to undertake
any cause though never so bad; and these he armed, that with their aid he might
by force accomplish what he had projected with himself.

Verse. 5. And slew his brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and
ten persons upon one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham, etc.] That is, there
being seventy of his brethen, he slew all but Jotham, and that doubtless under
some pretense of Justice, as if they had some plot upon the state tending to
the utter ruin of the whole land.

Verse. 6. And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of
Millo, and went and made Abimelech king, etc.] By the house of Millo, may be
meant either the Magistrates of the city, who were wont to meet in a
townhouse, or common hall, called the house of Millo, or else the inhabitants
of some village, or town adjoining that belonged to Shechem; or else the
Garrison of some fort, happily the same which verse. 17. is called the tower of
Shechem; or it may be meant of his mothers family, who are named a part by
themselves, because they had been and were still the chief stirrers in this
business. However when Abimelech had slain his brethren, the men of Shechem,
and this house of Millo joined together, and chose and proclaimed him king of
Israel, and happily anointed him; for so ancient was the custom of anointing
kings, as Jotham in his parable does plainly imply, verse. 8. The trees went
forth on a time to anoint a king over them. Manifest it is, that he was made
king not of Shechem only, but of all Israel in general, verse. 22. When
Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel. Indeed it may seem strange that
the inhabitants of one city, should dare to do this alone of themselves, it
being expressly too against the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. Thou shall in any
wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose; but the wonder
of this may be removed by considering, first, that though the Shechemites be
only here mentioned, because they were the ringleaders in this business, yet
it may be that many other Israelites both of other towns and tribes did come
in, moved by their example and persuasion, and joined in the election of
Abimelech: and secondly, that they well might hope to carry it, now his
brethren were slain, though some should oppose it, both because of his
pretended title, to wit, that proffer of settling the kingdom upon Gideons
posterity, chap. 8.22. Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over
us, both thou and thy son, and thy sons son also: and likewise, because
they might know that generally the people began to be weary of the government
God had established over them, and longed to be like other nations in having a
king to reign over them, as was manifest by the proffer they made to Gideon,
and that which Jotham says in his parable, verse. 8. and if they would have a
king, who so likely to be the man as Gideons son? and thirdly, because
however by those forces he had suddenly raised, he was able to effect it by
constraint. As for the place where he was made king, called here the plain of
the pillar, or as some read it, the oak of the pillar that was in Shechem, see
Josh. 24.25, 26.

Verse. 7. And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of
mount Girizim, etc.] The Lord intending to punish Abimelech, and the
Shechemites for their changing of the government which God had established in
Israel, and especially for the bloody murder committed upon the sons of
Gideon, it seems by a special instinct of his Spirit, he moved Jotham, who
alone of the sons of Gideon escaped the hands of Abimelech, to go to the
inhabitants of Shechem, when the tidings was brought him that they had made
Abimelech king, and to give them warning before hand of the calamities and
judgments that were likely to befall them if they did not repent of this their
wickedness; and therefore it was, that he began his speech with those words,
Hearken unto me you men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you, intimating,
both that God had sent him with that message to them, and that if they would
not now hearken to the admonition that was given them, God would not hear them
in the time of their distress when they called upon him. As for mount Girizim,
from the top whereof Jotham spoke to the Shechemites, it seems it stood very
close upon Shechem, and was purposely chosen by Jotham as a place convenient,
whence he might speak in the audience of the inhabitants, at that time perhaps
upon some occasion assembled together, and likewise as a place of safety,
whence he might presently fly and escape away if they should offer to surprise
him (for so it is said he did, verse. 21. And Jotham ran away and fled) but
withal, it may seem to be not without a mystery, that Girizim the mountain
whence the blessings were to be pronounced by the tribes of Israel, Deuteronomy.
11.29. was chosen for this work rather then mount Ebal; for what a terrible
token was this, that they were to expect no mercy from God, when from the
mountain of blessings, they heard nothing but Gods curses denounced against
them?

Verse. 8. The trees went out on a time to anoint a king over them, etc.] The
drift of Jotham in propounding this fable to the men o Shechem, was to show,
first, the folly of the Israelites in going about to change the government
which God had established amongst them, out of a fond affectation of having a
king to reign over them: secondly, the vain and causeless pride and ambition
of that tyrant Abimelech in exalting himself to be their king: and thirdly, the
misery that would certainly befall both the men of Shechem, and their new made
king, for their casting off Gods government, and their dealing so wickedly with
the sons of Gideon. So that first, by the trees that went to make them a
king, he intended the Israelites in general, that were fond to have a king
reign over them, but more particularly the men of Shechem that had actually
made Abimelech king; secondly, by the olive tree, fig tree, and vine, that are
good, noble, and useful trees that yield yearly sweet and pleasant fruit, and
that refused to accept of being king over the trees, may be meant not only
Gideon who had refused the kingdom when the Israelites proffered it to him and
his posterity successively, chap. 8.22, 23. but also the foregoing Judges,
Ehud, and Deborah, and happily too the other sons of Gideon (for though we
read not that they refused the kingdom, or had it ever proffered to them; yet
it was sufficient that they were content to be serviceable to God and man in
their places, and desired not this sovereigne power; and fables need not answer
in every particular, that which they are intended to shadow forth) and
generally indeed all men of worth, good men and fearing God, that are content
to do good in their places, and no way ambitious of being exalted to high
places: and lastly, by the bramble, that is a dry, fruitless, base shrub, the
curse of the earth, good for nothing but to be cast into the fire, may be meant
all worthless ambitious persons, but Abimelech in particular, who grew out of
the baser hedgegrow of a concubine, and had not been able to lift up his head
so high as he did, but that he was supported by the men of Shechem, and by
their help scrambled up to be king of Israel, one that was always as
fruitless, as base, that had no substance in him, nor was likely to yield any
comfort to those that trusted in him, but rather to vex, and to tear, and to
fetch blood from the people by his tyrannous government, as he had done already
from his brethren the other sons of Gideon.

Verse. 9. But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness,
wherewith by me they honor God and man, etc.] To wit, God in his offerings,
lamps, and other services of the Tabernacle; and man, both in anointing men to
be kings, priests, and Prophets, and likewise in many other civil uses,
wherein great, and rich, and honorable persons were wont to refresh themselves
with oil, especially in oderiferous costly ointments. Now in this passage of
this fable (and the like must be conceived of the answer returned by the
figtree and vine too) Jotham seeks to imply, not only that good men and men of
worth are best contented to be servicable to God and man in their places, and
desire not to be exalted to places of magistracy, and sovereignty over others,
(as they had seen in Gideons refusing to be king) and likewise the reasons why
as Gideon had, so other wise and good men, would refuse thus to be promoted,
namely, first, because the place of sovereignty, though it might seem most
glorious, yet would certainly bring them greater cares, and deprive them of
much of those comforts, which in their private condition they did formerly
enjoy: and secondly, because such great promotion, does usually make vines and
fig trees, and olive trees fruitless and barren, that is, it makes them far
less serviceable to God, and man, then formerly they were.

Verse. 14. Then said the trees unto the bramble, etc.] See the note above,
verse. 8.

Verse. 15. Come and put your trust under my shadow, etc.] That is, come under
my government and protection, and thus tyrants are wont to pretend the common
good of the people, when they seek themselves only. He that thrusts himself
under a bramble shall be in an ill case, not able to stir hand or foot, but
he is in danger to be torn and scratched; and such is the misery of those that
live under a tyrants government, they shall not live as free subjects, but
shall ever and anon be in danger to have their clothes torn from their backs,
yea their skins from their bones, and if the greatest of them anger their
lord never so little, nothing but fire and destruction is to be expected; and
therefore is that clause added, Let fire come out of the bramble and devour
the Ceders of Lebanon, that is, the nobles and men of greatest renown amongst
the people, as indeed tyrants are wont principally to seek the destruction of
them.

Verse. 20. And let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of
Millo, and devour Abimelech.] This was accomplished, when his scull was broken
by a piece of a millstone thrown down upon his head by a woman from the tower of
Thebez, verse. 50.53. (for Thebez was doubtless a place of strength belonging
to the Shechemites (why else did Abimelech in the quarrel he had against the
Shechemites, go up and encamp against Thebez?) and so losing his life by means
of the war raised betwixt him and the Shechemites, it might well be said that
a fire that came out from them devoured Abimelech.

Verse. 21. And Jotham ran away and fled, and went to Beer, etc.] This may be
that city in the tribe of Simeon which is called Baalath-Beer, Josh. 19.8.
where he saved himself, either by living there unknown, or by the aid of the
inhabitants, who perhaps with other cities had not yet stooped to the tyrannous
yoke of Abimelech.

Verse. 22. When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel, etc.] A while
therefore he prospered in his usurped sovereignty; but it was but a while: for
just when he might now begin to hope that his kingdom was established, and the
curse of Jotham might seem vain and not likely to have effect, then on a sudden
God brought that upon him, which Jotham had prophetically foretold. See Hab.
2.6. Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb
against him, and say, Woe to him that increases that which is not his: how
long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay.

Verse. 23. Then God sent an evil spirit betwixt Abimelech and the men of
Shechem, etc.] That is, a spirit of envy, malice, and discord, to wit, not by
inst^lling any evil motions into their minds, but in a way of just revenge, as
by letting loose Satan upon them, the great kindle-cole and makebate of the
world, to raise jealousies, and grudges, and discontents between them, by
giving them up to the lusts and corruptions of their own wicked hearts, and by
giving occasions of enraging them more and more one against another. For in
this regard, though the wickedness of these things were wholly of themselves
and not of God (as the stink of the dunghill rises not from the sun, though
the sun shining upon it be the occasion of it) yet because these things were
also through the concurring providence of God, it may well be said that God
sent this spirit of division between them, especially if we consider that God
did all this as a judge, raising these divisions and combustions that hereby he
might punish them for their former damnable agreeing together for the ruin of
others, and so making their treachery one against another, the just reward of
their joint treachery against others, as it follows in the next words, And the
men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech, that is, they revolted from
him whom themselves had chosen for their king

Verse. 25. And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of the
mountains, etc.] Thus at first by these men set to lie in ambush, they
attempted secretly, ere their purpose of casting off his government was
discovered, to have killed, or at least to have seized upon the person of
Abimelech; only these liers in wait, as such men employed in such services are
wont to do, under pretense of that service they were then sent about, took
liberty beyond their commission to make a prey of others too, and robbed all
that came along that way by them; by which means it seems all was discovered,
as the last words of this verse seem to imply, and it was told Abimelech, and
so Abimelech escaped their hands, and now prepared to make open war against
them, whence it was that the Shechemites durst not stir into the fields to
gather their vineyards, till Gaal came to them, as is employed, verse. 27.

Verse. 26. And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, etc.] Both he and
his, brethren it seems were captains of great renown, and so came now either
sent for, or voluntarily to be leaders of the Shechemites in their war
against Abimelech.

Verse. 27. And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and
trod the grapes, etc.] This it seems before they durst not do for fear of
Abimelech, but now in the confidence they had in their new captains they did
it, and withal made merry (as the custom was in the time of vintage) whence
is that, Esa. 16.10. In the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall
there be shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses, I
have made their vintage-shouting to cease. And that the rather, now because
they were in a way of recovering their liberties too, and went into the house
of their God, to wit, Baal-Berith, verse. 4. namely, to praise him for that
which was done, and did eat and drink, to wit, of their sacrifices, and so in
their cups cursed Abimelech, that is, spoke evil of him with many railing and
reviling speeches.

Verse. 28. And Gaal the son of Ebed said, who is Abimelech, and who is
Shechem that we should serve him, etc.] Gaal perceiving the Shechemites in
their jollitie to grow very violent against Abimelech, he takes this occasion
to see if he could at least win them to put the government of the city into
his hand; and to this end he does first labor to provoke them more and more
against Abimelech, Who says he, is Abimelech, and who is Shechem that we
should serve him? intimating, that being but the son of a concubine, and
withal, so unworthy a man as he was, there was no reason in the world, why so
great an honor should have been put upon him. But why is that clause added,
and who is Shechem? I answer it is indeed very hard to say, what the intent of
adding that clause should be; and therefore some would have it read and what is
Shechem? understanding by Shechem the city it self, and thereupon concluding
that this is spoken to imply, that such an honorable and ancient and glorious
city as Shechem, was too good to be in subjection to such a worthless man as
Abimelech was; as if he should have said, if you compare together what
Abimelech is, and what your city Shechem is, you will find cause enough to
disdain to be in subjection to him; but the words being according to our
translation, And who is Shechem? it cannot be meant of the city; and therefore
the most probable exposition that can be given of them is this, that it is
Shechem the son of Hamor, who was so many hundred years ago, the Lord of this
city, Genesis 34.2. of whom Gaal here speaks, and that by disavowing and
disclaming any title which from him any of his posterity could pretend for
having any dominion over them; he does by consequence strongly imply that much
less was was there any reason why Abimelech should exalt himself over them*
Who is Abimelech? yea indeed, who is Shechem? as if he should have said, if
Shechems posterity should challenge any dominion over us, we should slight and
abhor their challenge, for what have we to do with Shechem, being as we are a
free city, a free people planted here by the Lords own hand, and therefore not
subject to any sovereign power, but the Lords only, who has seated us here?
and why should Abimelech then think to Lord it over us?

Is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer.] As if he should have
said, I know the most that can be said for him, to wit, that he was the son
of Jerubbaal, who Judged Israel and delivered them from the hand of the
Midianites. But what is that to give him a title to the kingdom which his
father refused? or why might not the other sons of Gideon whom he slew, have
challenged the crown more justly then he? And besides, the very name of
Jerubbaal may put you in mind what an enemy he was to Baal, the God whom with
one consent we worship and serve, and what cause have you then to serve his
son? Besides, you do not indeed serve him but his man Zebul, for that is
employed in those words, and Zebul his officer, so that of a free city you are
plunged into a miserable slavery, made to stoop to every domineering officer,
whom this son of a concubine shall set over you: and thus by this particular
glance at Zebul, (which implies their folly in putting any confidence in him
who was Abimelechs sworn servant) he no doubt labored to wring him out of the
peoples favor, that he might wind himself into that place which he held, of
being governor over the city.

Serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem; for ^^y should we serve him?]
Some conceive that Gaal here pretends, at least that he and his brethren were
descended of Hamor the ancient lord of Shechem, and so thereupon persuades
them, that if they would have a lord to govern them, they should rather choose
him or some of his family. But first, it is altogether improbable, that Gaal
and his brethren were of that cursed race of the Canaanites; and secondly, if
he were, it is no way likely that he could hope that they would admit of one of
those nations whom they had driven out of their possessions, to rule over them.
It is therefore far more probable, that Gaal spoke this by way of deriding
the sovereignty of Abimelech, Serve says he, the men of Hamor the father of
Shechem, for why should we serve him? as if he should have said, if you long to
give away your liberty and to be in bondage, you shall do better to call in the
old lords of this soil, and to serve them, then to serve this upstart
Abimelech, in whom there is nothing worth the least respect.

Verse. 29. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army and come out.] To show
the Shechemites how little reckoning he made of the greatest power that
Abimelech could raise against him, as men in their cups are wont to do, in a
boasting insulting manner he cries out to Abimelech being absent, as if he had
been present, Increase thine army and come out, that is, Come Abimelech muster
all the forces thou can possibly make, thou shall soon see that having Gaal
for their captain, the Shechemites have no cause to be afraid of thee: and
withal it may be he sent this challenge to Abimelech by some messenger.

Verse. 30. And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal, etc.]
It is evident that Zebul did either truly adhere to the Shechemites in this
their conspiracy against Abimelech, or else made a show to them that he did:
for else no doubt they would not have trusted him so far as they had done. If
therefore he were truly on their side before, it may seem that Gaals scornful
speeches against him, verse. 28. Is not he the son of Jerubbaal, and Zebul his
officer? (which also discovered a desire that he had to supplant him, and to
get into his place) had now enraged him, and so caused him by giving secret
intelligence to Abimelech, to seek to betray them into his hands.

Verse. 32. Now therefore up by night thou and the people that is with thee, and
lie in wait in the field, etc.] The sum of this counsel which he gave
Abimelech is, that he should come by night against Shechem with all his army,
and having laid the greatest part of them in ambush, should the next morning
show himself with the rest of his army, against whom when Gaal should go forth,
falling unexpectedly into this snare, Abimelech might do to him as occasion
should serve.

Verse. 36. Then Zebul said unto him, Thou see the shadow of the mountains as
if they were men.] Which is all one as if he had told him that he was afraid of
a shadow.

Verse. 38. Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou
said, Who is Abimelech, etc.] When he saw that Gaal had plainly discovered
Abimelechs troops, that he might not turn back again into the city, he
endeauours by these scornful taunts to provoke him to go forward to fight with
him, where is thy mouth, that is, where is thy great brags, for shame turn not
back, but let it be seen that thou can fight as well as talk bigly when no
enemy was nigh.

Verse. 39. And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with
Abimelech.] Zebuls taunts had made him ashamed to retire; besides, he saw but
two companies of Abimelechs forces, verse. 37. which might encourage him; the
other two being it seems laid in ambush, for at first Abimelech divided his
army into four companies, verse. 34.

Verse. 41. And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah.] That is, he retired thither after he
had beaten Gaal and his soldiers, and pursued them to the very gates of
Shechem. Some conceive this of his dwelling there for some good time, without
any further attempting any thing against the Shechemites, and that he did this
purposely to dissemble the mischief he intended to the Shechemites, to make a
show that his quarrel was only against Gaal and his brethren, for raising
those tumults in the city, being otherwise willing enough to forbear the
offering any violence to the inhabitants of the city; but because it is evident
that this Arumah was nigh to Shechem (for else he could not come thence so
suddenly upon the Shechemites, as it is said afterward he did, verse. 42, 43.)
and the Shechemites had no reason to be out of fear of his intending them any
hurt, so long as he lay with his forces in a place so near their city, but did
therefore come out again to fight with him, verse. 42. therefore I conceive it
far more probable, that the meaning of these words is only this, that after
Abimelech had pursued Gaal and his forces to the very gate of Shechem, he
stayed not there before the city, but withdrew his forces to Arumah, a place
not far from Shechem, and abode there.

And Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in
Shechem.] No doubt he took this advantage when the people were enraged for
their loss, to accuse them either of cowardice or treachery, and so procured
them to be thrust out of the city: for though before Zebul might not have
spoken against Gaal and his brethren, yet now it was an easy matter to work
them out of the peoples hearts.

Verse. 42. And it came to pass on the morrow, the people went out into the
field, etc.] Some conceive, that this going forth of the people into the field,
was to make an end of their harvest or vintage, or for some other their
country employments, and that because, they were persuaded by Zebul, that now
they had thrust out Gaal, Abimelech would be pacified toward them, and not
attempt any thing against them; but because first, they had already finished
their vintage, and with great joy had already thereupon kept a feast, by way of
thankfulness in the house of their god: secondly, it had been an incredible
security to be so confident, that Abimelech would give over his quarrel
against them, considering how highly they had provoked him, and that he lay
still with his forces in a town so near hand, from whence he might so easily
surprise them: and thirdly, Abimelechs dividing his soldiers into three
companies, and laying some of them in ambush (whereof mention is made in the
following verses) argues, that he went not against a naked unarmed people,
scattered here and there about their country business; I rather think, that
there going forth now into the field, was to renew the battle, to revenge
their former loss, when they fought under the command of Gaal and his
brethren, and to drive Abimelech out of their coasts.

Verse. 43. And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, etc.]
To wit, as intending with one of these companies, which he kept with himself,
to lie in ambush and to surprise the city on a sudden, so soon as the
Shechemites were gone out with their army, and with the other to set upon their
army when it was gone forth a little way from the city, that so those without
the city, and those within the city, might all be destroyed.

Verse. 45. And beat down the city, and sowed it with salt.] Salt is both a
cause, and sign of barrenness and desolation; whence it is said, Psalm.
107.33, 34. that God many times turns a fruitful land into barrenness, or
saltness, as the word is in the original, and Moab is threatened in these
words, Zeph. 2.9. As I live, says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely
Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the
breeding of nettles, and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation. And as a sign
of desolation, it was no doubt therefore here sowed. Abimelech thereby desiring
to express the deadly hatred he bare to this place of his birth, that he
desired if it were possible, that it might ever be desolate and without an
inhabitant; yet it was afterward rebuilt, as is evident, 2. Chron. 10.1. and
Jer. 41.5, but by whom we read not.

Verse. 46. And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they entered
into an hold of the house of the God Berith.] This tower of Shechem, was some
fort or castle in some adjoining village, belonging to Shechem, but not in the
city, as is evident, because the men of this tower saw not the destruction of
Shechem, but heard of it, and most probable it is, that it was the same which
was called verse. 6. the house of Millo, the ruin whereof is here related, to
show that Jothams curse, verse. 20. did fall as well upon the house of Millo, as
upon the inhabitants of Shechem: for hearing what Abimelech had done to Shechem
they retired to a strong hold in the house of Baal-Berith, to wit, as resting
not only in the strength, but also in the holiness of the place, and the help
of their god: and this it may be was the fort from which the village was called
the tower of Shechem, or perhaps, some other place nearer hand of greater
strength then that, and so there they were all burnt by Abimelech, about a
thousand men and women as is expressed afterward, verse. 49.

Verse. 50. Then went Abimelech to Thebez, etc.] This was also some place
belonging to Shechem, for how else was Jothams prophecy fulfilled, verse. 20.
that a fire should come out from the men of Shechem and devour Abimelech.

Verse. 53. And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelechs head,
etc.] Thus he receives his deaths vvound with a stone, who had slain his
brethren all upon one stone, verse. 5.

Verse. 56. Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his
father in slaying his seventy brethren.] To wit, because Gideon his father was
wronged though dead, in the murder of his children; and this was the
circumstance that did most aggravate Abimelechs sin, and provoke the Lord,
that he could so far forget his father, as to imbrue his hands in the blood
of his children.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. ANd after Abimelech, there arose to defend Israel, Tola the son of
Puah, etc.] Though there be no mention made of any enemies that invaded the
land of Israel in the days of this Tola, the seventh Judge of Israel, if
Abimelech be reckoned for one, yet it need not seem strange that it should be
said of him, that he arose to defend Israel, or to deliver Israel, as the word
in the original may also be translated: for it may well be that the land was
invaded in his time by some of the neighboring nations, though it be not
expressed; and indeed considering that idolatry and superstition were so rise
in the land, all the time of Abimelechs three years tyranny, as is evident,
chap. 8.33. and 9.4, 46. it is like enough that God did raise them up some
adversaries or other to plead the quarrel of his covenant, as in former times;
but then besides it might be said, that he did desend or deliver Israel, either
because he did happily compose the factious tumults and combustions that were
raised in the land in Abimelechs time; or else, because he retained them from
their idolatry, which was a great deliverance, and thence it is said that
afterward, the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord and
served Baalim, etc. verse. 6. or else, because being raised of God to be Judge
of Israel consequently he was to desend or deliver them in case any enemy
should rise up against them, and oppress them. As for the last clause of this
verse, where it is said of this Tola, that he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim,
though he were a man of Issachar, we need not stumble at that neither; for
besides, that the Israelites did not always live in their own tribes, it is
probable that in this place Tola lived for the more convenience of executing
judgment amongst the people, Shamir in mount Ephraim being near upon in the
midst of the tribes within Jordan, and not far too from the Tabernacle in
Shiloh, which was another considerable advantage.

Verse. 3. And after him arose Jair a Gileadite, etc.] To show that this Jair,
the eighth Judge of Israel was a man of great renown before he was raised to be
Judge, it is noted in the following verse, that he had thirty sons, to wit,
by several wives, that rode on asse-colts, as being princes and men of great
place. See chap. 5.10. and that they had thirty cities called Havoth-Jair, that
is, the villages of Jair. Now though there was one Jair, who at the first
entering of the Israelites into Cannaan, above three hundred years before this,
took all the country of Argob in the land of Gilead, and so the towns therein
were called after his name, Havoth-Jair, Number. 33.41. And Jair the son of
Manasseh took the small towns thereof, and called them Havoth-Jair. Deuteronomy. 3.14.
Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob, unto the coasts of
Geshuri, and Maachathi, and called them after his own name, Bashan Havoth-Jair;
yet this must needs be another Jair, and so perhaps these were other towns
which had their names from this Jair the Judge of Israel, as the other had
their names from the other Jair in Moses time; and indeed, of those that were
called Havoth-Jair in Moses time, there were but three and twenty, 1. Chron.
2.22. And Zegub begat Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land of
Gilead; yet most probable it is, that this man was descended of that Jair, and
that coming to inherit so many of those towns, which his Ancestors had taken
from the Amorites, the possession or government whereof, he divided amongst his
thirty sons, they were also in this regard called Havoth-Jair, the old name
on a second ground, being now renewed and confirmed on them, as we see the like
in the note upon Genesis 26.33. However, this Jair was of that half tribe of
Manasseh, that inhabited without Jordan, though he were raised to be Judge of
all Israel; and doubtless, one out of those parts was purposely raised of God
to be Judge, because those tribes without Jordan were to suffer so much in his
days by the invasion of the children of Ammon, verse. 8. and therefore it was
most sit that he that was to be Judge, should live amongst them.

Verse. 6. And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord,
and served Baalim, etc.] Concerning Baalim and Ashtaroth, see the Notes, chap.
2.9, 13. The heinousness of the Apostasy of the Israelites at this time, above
that of their forefathers is noted, first, by setting down not only generally
that they worshipped the idol-gods of the nations that were about them, Baalim
and Ashtaroth; but also particularly what a multitude of false gods they had
now entertained, even the gods of all the nations about them, the gods of
Syria, Sidon, Moab, the children of Ammon, and the Philistines, as indeed we
find elsewhere, that these nations had for the most part some particular gods,
as Rimmon was a god amongst the Assyrians. 2. Kings 15.18. and Chemosh the god
of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, 2. Kings 11.23.
and Dagon the god of the Philistines, 1. Sam. 5.2. and secondly, that by
degrees they did so wholly give themselves to the worship of these false gods,
that at length they quite laid by the worship of the true God in the Tabernacle
built by Moses, they forsook the Lord, and served not him. When the Israelites
began thus to Apostatize, it is not expressly said, only thus much we may
certainly conclude from the text, that though the death of Jair be mentioned in
the verse before, yet it was long before his death, even immediately after the
death of Tola the former Judge; and that because about four years after this,
Jair began to be Judge of Israel (through the just hand of God upon them for
their idolatry) the Ammonites began their incursions into their land, as is
evident in the 8. verse of this chapter.

Verse. 7. And he sold them into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand
of the children of Ammon.] So that they were invaded both on the east and west;
on the west by the Philistines, and on the east by the children of Ammon, chap.
2.14.

Verse. 8. And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel:
eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side Jordan,
etc.] That is, the Ammonites having eighteen years before in the days of Jair
oppressed the Israelites, by many incursions and inrodes made upon them, and
especially those tribes that lay without Jordan in the land of the Amorites,
that year that jair died, they did again invade the land, and happily in a more
sore and grievous manner, then ever before did oppress and crush the poor
people in all parts of the kingdom; or else the meaning may be, that having
eighteen years before by several incursions oppressed the tribes without
Jordan, that year that Jair died, encouraged by the death of their Judge, they
began to vex and oppress the Israelites in general, even those within Jordan
also, as it is in the following verse, Moreover the children of Ammon passed
over Jordan, to sight also against Judah and against Benjamin, and against the
house of Ephraim, so that Israel was sore distressed. However the eighteen
years here mentioned, must necessarily be referred to the years of Jairs
government, for that place 1. Kings 6.1. will not suffer the years of
oppression to be reckoned apart from the years of the Judges; as is before
noted, chap. 3.11. and to the years following they cannot be referred, if we
consider, first, Isreal's repenting at present, verse. 10. and verse. 16. And the
children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, We have sinned against thee,
both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim -- And they put
the strange gods from among them, and served the Lord: and secondly, that
Jephthah judged the people but six years, chap. 12.7. and did in the beginning
of his government wholly vanquish the Ammonites, chap. 11.32, 33. and therefore
in his time the people could not be under the oppression of the Ammonites
eighteen years.

Verse. 11. And the Lord said unto the children of Israel, etc.] To wit, either
by an Angel, or by some Prophet, or perhaps by the high priest, who after
inquiry made for them, returned this answer from the Lord; many deliverances
are here mentioned which God had given them, which if they be not before
particularly expressed, it is because the Lord did many great things for them
which are not written.

Verse. 12. The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites did
oppress you, etc.] We read of a city called Maon, in the mountains of Judah,
Josh. 15.55. and of a wilderness also so called, 1. Sam. 23.24. And they arose
and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his men were in the wilderness of
Maon. It is therefore likely that the Canaanites inhabiting there, or in the
parts adjoining, are here called Maonites.

Verse. 13. Wherefore I will deliver you no more.] God speaks here after the
manner of men: the meaning is, that they deserved no more help, and that he
would deliver them no more, to wit, except they did truly repent and amend
that which was amiss; for the condition of conditional threatenings, is not
always expressed.

Verse. 15. Do unto us whatsoever seems good unto thee, deliver us only we
pray thee this day.] Thus, first, they acknowledged, that for their sins God
might justly destroy them: secondly, they did willingly stoop under his hand,
and submit themselves to whatsoever he would do: and yet thirdly, they besought
the Lord, that if it might be, he would try them once more.

Verse. 17. Then the children of Ammon were gathered together and encamped in
Gilead.] That is, in the land of Gilead, as in verse. 18. which they now claimed
to belong to them, chap. 11. verse. 13.

Verse. 18. And the people and the Princes of Gilead said one to another, What
man is he that will begin to fight, etc.] Thus at first they proffered the
principallitie of Gilead to any one that would undertake to lead them forth
against the children of Ammon, till finding that no body would accept of it,
they then sent to Jephthah, as is related in the next chapter.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. NOw Jephthah the Gileadite, was a mighty man, etc.] Though he were
the son of one Gilead, as is evident in the last words of this verse, And
Gilead begat Jephthah (not the same who was the son of Machir the son of
Manasseh, Josh. 17.1, 2. of whom the greatest part, if not all of that tribe
were descended, but another of his posterity, and called by his name) yet
doubtless he is here called a Gileadite, either from the land or city of
Gilead, the place of his birth and education; for the most of Gilead was
possessed by Manassehs tribe.

Verse. 2. And they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shall not
inherit in our fathers house, etc.] This his brethren did by the help and
decree of the Magistrates of Gilead, as appears by Jephthahs answer to the
Elders, verse. 17. And Jephthah said unto the Elders of Gilead, did ye not hate
me, and expel me out of my fathers house? Whether they only cast him one from
having any share in the inheritance of their father, or whether also they
denied him any portion for his livelihood amongst them, we cannot from the
words certainly conclude; yet because being a bastard he could not challenge
any part of his fathers inheritance, and his complaint verse. 7. seems to imply,
that he apprehended himself greatly wronged, therefore the last is thought most
probable.

Verse. 3. And Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob.]
Where this land of Tob was, we read not, but their sudden fetching Jephthah to
be their Captain, shows plainly that it was a place not far off from them.

And there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him.] That is,
they went with him out of the land of Gilead, to wit, to serve under him in
other countries where he should be employed.

Verse. 5. The Elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah, out of the land of Tob.]
After that consultation in the Assembly at Mizpeh, whereof chap. 10. verse. 18.
when and where the government was proffered to any man that would begin the
fight against the Ammonites, none being found either so fit or willing to
undergo the charge, at last it seems the whole Assembly, moved with the great
renown that Jephthah had got with his valor in the land of Tob, resolved to
send for him, and to make him their captain and head: and so he became the next
Judge in Israel. At first it seems he was only chosen to be the head of the
inhabitants of Gilead, but afterward it is evident he was Judge of all Israel,
chap. 12.7. And Jephthah judged Israel six years. The Law indeed says that no
bastard should be admitted to any place of Magistracy amongst the Israelites,
as you may see in the note upon Deuteronomy. 23.2. A bastard shall not enter into the
congregation of the Lord: but necessity now forced them to do, what they do,
and that not without the special providence of God, who might dispense with
his own Law.

Verse. 8. And the Elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again
to thee now, etc.] That is, we acknowledge this thou say to be true, but
therefore now we come to seek thy favor, and to make amends for the
unkindnesse then proffered thee, we desire thine aid upon no other condition,
but that thou shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.

Verse. 9. If ye bring me home again to fight against the children of Ammon, and
the Lord deliver them before me, shall I be your head?] That is, will you be as
good as your word to make me governor of the land of Gilead? because they had
formerly dealt injuriously with him, he was the more careful now to look to
the agreement he made with them: nor was Jephthah to be blamed for an ambitious
and greedy desire to rule over them, in that he labored thus to make sure that
he might be their head; as will be evident, if we consider, first, that he
might the rather desire this, lest if he should have lived afterward amongst
them in a private condition, his brethren not yet forgetting the old quarrels
that had been between them, might offer him some injury: and secondly, that he
might be careful to secure the government which they tendered him, out of a
desire to do good to the people; and doubtless, as he might lawfully embrace
it, when it was proffered him, as beleiving that he was called thereby of God
to it, so he might also as lawfully provide, that when he had hazarded his life
for them, they should also make good their promise to him, and the public good
might be his chief aim in all this he did.

Verse. 11. And Jephthah uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh.] That
is, Jephthah coming to the assembly of the people and princes at Mizpeh, there,
as in Gods presence he repeated all that he had before spoken unto the
messengers that were sent unto him, both he and they solemnly binding
themselves to perform that which they then agreed upon, and that happily by
oath, mutually taken as in the presence of God.

Verse. 13. Because Israel took away my land when they came out of Egypt, etc.]
A great part of that land which the Israelites took from Sihon king of the
Amorites; yea, and from Og king of Bashan, had been before by those kings taken
from the Ammonites, especially from the Moabites, as we may see in the note
upon Number. 21.26. For Heshbon was the city of Sihon king of the Ammorites, who
had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out of his
hand, even to Arnon. Josh. 13.25. And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities
of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon. Deuteronomy. 3.11. For only Og
king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold his bedstead was a
bedstead of iron: is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon: all which the
king of the Ammonites claims now as belonging to him, being also it seems king
of the Moabites: whence Chemosh the idol of Moab is called his god.

Verse. 15. Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children
of Ammon.] Hereby also it seems probable that the king of the children of
Ammon, did at this time also command over Moab in chief, and thereupon
challenged all that land which Sihon had first taken from the Moabites, and
then the Israelites from him; for why is it else that Jephthah here answers,
that the Israelites meddled not either with the land of Moab, or with the land
of the children of Ammon.

Verse. 16. But when the Israelites came up from Egypt, and walked through the
wilderness unto the red sea, and came to Kadesh.] Not Kadesh-Barnea, but that
Kadesh bordering upon the land of Edom, whence they sent messengers to the king
of Edom to desire a passage through his land, Number. 20.14. And Moses sent
messengers from Kadesh unto the King of Edom.

Verse. 17, And Israel abode in Kadesh, etc.] That is, there they stayed till
they sent messengers to the king of Edom, and received an answer back from him,
resolving not to enter his land; yea, and when he denied them a passage, they
put themselves to the trouble of fetching a great compass about his land,
rather then they would be any way injurious to him, as is expressed in the
following words, verse. 18. Then went they along through the wilderness, and
compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of
the land of Moab, and pitched in the north side of Arnon, but came not within
the border of Moab: all which Jephthah now relates, to let them see how fairly
the Israelites dealt with all the nations they passed by, and how far they
were from offering violence to any of the nations that bordered upon the land
of Canaan,

Verse. 18. And pitched on the north side of Arnon, but came not within the
border of Moab, etc.] Hereby they prove that the Israelites were so far from
taking any of the land of the Moabites from them, they that came not within
their border.

Verse. 20. But Sihon gathered all his people together and pitched in Jahaz, and
fought against Israel.] This discovers the just cause they had to fight against
the Amorites; and the justness of their cause herein tends strongly to
justify their interest in that land, which through Gods assistance, in this
war they recovered from them.

Verse. 24. Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god gives thee to
possess? etc.] Molech or Melchom was the idol-god of the Ammonites, 1. Kings
11.7. Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab
in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech the abomination of the
children of Ammon: and verse. 33. Because they have forsaken me, and worshipped
Ashtaroth the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites and
Milcom the god of the children of Ammon: see also 2. Kings 23.13. but Chemosh
was the god of the Moabites, Number: 21.29. Woe to thee Moab, thou art undone O
people of Chemosh. Jer. 48.13. Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh. Now in that
Jephthah speaking to the king of the Ammonites, calls Chemosh his god, it seems
hereby also not improbable that this king of the Ammonites was at present king
of the Moabites; and because the Moabites (yea the children of Ammon too) had
formerly taken their land from other people that had anciently inhabited it,
Deuteronomy. 2.9, 10. And the Lord said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither
contend with them in battle; for I will not give thee of their land for a
possession, because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a possession.
The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and tall as
the Anakims: and verse. 19, 20. And when thou come nigh over against the
children of Ammon, distress them not -- because I have given it unto the
children of Lot for a possession (that also was counted a land of giants)
giants dwelt therein in old time, and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims; and
were ready enough to ascribe this to the help they had received from their god
Chemosh; hence Jephthah wishes the king to consider whether it were not as
just that the Israelites should keep that land which the Lord their God had
given them to possess, as that the Moabites should hold that which they
pretended their god Chemosh had conferred upon them.

Verse. 25. And now art thou any thing better then Balak the son of Zippor,
king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, etc.] That is, art thou wiser
or more puissant, or have thou any better title then Balak had that was king of
Moab; now if he would never strive against Israel, nor fight against them, to
wit, to recover that land out of their hands, which they had taken from the
Amorites, why then should thou so many years after, pretend a title and
think by force to carry it away? indeed Balak opposed the Israelites, for fear
they would have entered his land, but neither he nor any of his posterity did
ever make war with them after they were settled in the land of the Amorites,
under pretense the land was theirs; of which only Jephthah speaks, as is
evident by the words of the following verse.

Verse. 26. While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and Aroer and her
towns, and in all the cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon, three
hundred years?] Here he pleads prescription: having peaceably enjoyed the land
so many years, it was a silly thing in the king of the Ammonites, now to
pretend a title to it. For the computation of these three hundred years, it is
hard to say how they must be reckoned. They that reckon the years of the
Ifraelites oppression, apart from the years of the Judges, must needs find from
the Israelites conquest of this land, to this time, at least three hundred
thirty six years; which discovers this computation to be erroneous; no doubt
Jephthah would have made the most he could of the years they had enjoyed the
land. But now reckoning only the years of the Judges, allowing to Joshua
seventeen years (see the note upon Josh. 24.29.) to Othniel forty, to Ehud
eighty, to Barak forty, to Gideon forty, to Abimelech three, to Tola three
and twenty, and to Jair two and twenty, we find less then three hundred years,
to wit, but two hundred sixty five. But to this we answer, either that Jephthah
to help his cause made the most of the time, this being usual in the
Scripture, yea and in men's ordinary speech, to reckon a full round number, when
the years of which they speak are not exactly so many, but near about so many;
or else, that these two hundred sixty five years, wherein the Israelites had
possessed it, must needs be made up three hundred by the addition of those
years wherein Sihon and Og held it, after they took it from the Moabites and
Ammonites, whose right the Israelites had by the law of conquest.

Verse. 27. The Lord the Judge, be Judge this day between the children of
Israel, and the children of Ammon.] That is, by giving victory at this time to
the innocent party, may the Lord the great Judge of all the world make it
manifest, whether the Israelites have unjustly detained from the Ammonites,
that which belonged to them, or whether the children of Ammon do not most
unjustly upon a groundless pretense, make war now against the children of
Israel.

Verse. 29. Then the spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah, etc.] See the note
chap. 3.10.

Verse. 31. Whatsoever comes forth of the doors of my house to meet me, etc.
shall surely be the Lords, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.] It is
a great question, whether Jephthah did by this vow intend to bind himself to
offer as a burnt offering, whatsoever should first come out of his house to
meet him; and indeed according to the Hebrew, the words may be read
disjunctively, as it is in the margin; It shall surely be the Lords, or I will
offer it up for a burnt offering; and then his meaning must needs be, that
whatsoever should first meet him out of his house, should some way be
consecrated to the Lord, and if it were any thing fit for Gods altar, it should
be offered for a burnt offering. But I conceive that Jephthah did absolutely
intend that which he vowed for a burnt offering, and that for these two
reasons; first, because the first clause being general, It shall surely be the
Lords, and comprehending that which follows of offering a burnt offering, it
cannot with any propriety of speech be read disjunctively, It shall surely be
the Lords, or I will offer it up for a burnt offrring, no more then he could
have said, I will offer a clean beast or a sheep: and secondly, because the
bitter lamentation which he made, when he saw his daughter come forth to meet
him, is a strong argument to prove that he apprehended himself bound by his vow
to offer her for a burnt offering; yea, indeed I make little question but he
meant what he said merely concerning a humane sacrifice, to wit, that
whatsoever it were either man or woman that came first out of his house to meet
him, it should be sacrificed to the Lord, as indeed the manner of speech here
used does plainly imply; for what else but a man or woman could come out of his
house of purpose to meet him, by way of congratulating the great victory
wherewith God had honored him? It is indeed strange, that an Israelite, yea a
faithful good man (for he is reckoned by S. Paul, Heb. 11.32. amongst Gods
worthies that through faith did accomplish great things) should be so ignorant
of Gods Law, as to think to please God with that which was so expressly there
forbidden, Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by
following them, etc. for every abomination to the Lord which he hates, have
they done unto their gods: for even their sons, and their daughters, have
they burnt in the fire to their gods. Yea besides, had he been never so great a
stranger to the Law of God, as being a man trained up in the war, and that
too a great part of his life amongst heathens out of the land of Israel, yet
the sacrificing of men and women, is a sin so much against the light of
nature, that one would think it should not come into the thought of a man that
had any spark of grace in him: Well, but yet the letter of the text being so
express for this, I see not how it can be determined otherwise, but that in
this vow of his he did intend a humane sacrifice; and that we may not stumble
too much at the strangeness of it, we must consider, first, that the people of
Israel were for the generallity never so far fallen away from the knowledge
and worship of the true God, or so far corrupted with the abominations of the
heathens, as they were now; we see that it is said before, in the sixth verse
of this chapter, that they forsook the Lord, and served not him, but were
wholly gone aside after the idolatry of the heathen: secondly, that Jephthah
had hitherto perhaps, lived in as much darkness as the rest, and that the
rather, because he had spent so much of his time out of the land of Israel, and
therefore though at this time God had called him, and so the spirit of the Lord
came mightily upon him, that for the present he should make such an uncouth and
unwarrantable vow in such dark times, is not at all incredible: thirdly, that
there being a sort of vows mentioned in the Law of God, wherein the persons
devoted to be put to death, Levit. 27.29. None devoted which shall be devoted
of men shall be redeemed; but shall surely be put to death, this Jephthah might
take to be a j^st warrant for his vow, though indeed it were not: and fourthly,
that Jephthah made this vow rashly, not considering the mischief that might
follow upon it, being at that time transported with the fervency of his zeal
for the rescuing Gods people from the oppression of the Ammonites; for to this
end, that he might have the Ammonites delivered into his hand, he sought as it
were to demerit Gods favor by promising this extraordinary gift, and by
binding himself solemnly to do that for God, which the heart of man would
startle at.

Verse. 33. And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, even
twenty cities, etc.] That is, the inhabitants of twenty cities, and those in
the land of the Ammonites, for they were beyond Aroer, which was the bounds
betwixt Israel and Ammon: of Minnith there is mention made, Ezekiel. 27.17. Judah
and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants, they traded in thy market,
wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm.

Verse. 35. Alas, my daughter, thou have brought me very low, and thou art one
of them that trouble me, etc.] That is, God having raised me to a high pitch of
honor by this glorious victory which I have now attained over the Ammonites,
thou who might have reaped a great share in mine honor, and thereby have
added unto my joy, have now humbled me, and deprived me of all the glory and
comfort of my victory, and have brought more trouble upon me, then all mine
enemies could have done.

Verse. 36. And she said unto him, my father, if thou have opened thy mouth,
etc.] By those words of her father mentioned in the former verse, Alas, my
daughter, etc. for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back,
she might conceive that he had made some vow concerning her but could not know
what that vow was; and therefore it is evident, that besides what is expressed
in the foregoing verse, her father had also acquainted her what the vow was
that he had made, and thereupon being erroneously persuaded, that he was bound
to make good his vow, she freely offers her self to undergo what he had vowed,
as being ready to die, rather then he should sin against God by breaking his
vow, and desirous, by discovering her willingness to consent thereto, to
appease and mitigate his sorrow as much as in her lay.

Verse. 37. Let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the
mountains and bewail my virginity, etc.] She chose the mountains to do this in,
because those unfrequented and solitary places were fittest for the bitter
lamentations and mournful expressions of their grief, wherewith she resolved
with her companions in a solemn manner to bewail this heavy affliction that was
fallen upon her, and happily, withal, she desired by retiring to those
unfrequented places, to fit and prepare her self for that death, which within a
short time she was to undergo, for though she spoke only of her bewailing her
virginity, yet thereby is meant that she would bewail her dying a virgin,
implying how much this did aggravate her sorrow, that she should die without
leaving any posterity behind her; and indeed to die childlesse, was in those
times esteemed one of the greatest of earthly miseries. There are many learned
Expositours that conceive that Jephthahs vow was, that whatsoever should first
meet him, should be the Lords, and that if it were a creature which by the Law
might be offered in a sacrifice, then he would offer it for a burnt offering;
and so many of them read his vow disjunctively, as is noted before, verse. 3. It
shall surely be the Lords, or I will offer it up for a burnt offering: and so
they conceive that his daughter was not sacrificed, but only shut up there in
perpetual virginity, to spend all her time in the service of God, and
therefore she desires not respite to bewail her death, but to bewail her
virginity. But many things make this opinion less probable: for first, we
read not the least touch in the Scripture, of any such separating men or women
to the service of God, in a monastical life, much less, that parents should
have this power over their children, to vow them to virginity without their
consent. Samuel, that was consecrated to God from his infancy was yet married,
and had many children: secondly, if his vow must be understood of any thing
that should first meet him (whereof see verse. 31.) we may demand what if a dog
or a swine had met him, yea, what if his wife or any of his married servants
had met him, that could not have been devoted to perpetual virginity; for to
avoid this it cannot be reasonably answered, that such might have been
redeemed, for if they speak of redemtion in these cases, then we reply, why
might not his daughter have been redeemed too, that being also allowed by the
Law, Levit. 27.5. And if it be from five years old, even to twenty years old,
then thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten
shekels: and thirdly, the bitter lamentation of Jephthah, verse. 35. Alas, my
daughter thou have brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble
me, shows, that there was something more in his vow, then the consecrating of
his daughter to perpetual virginity.

Verse. 39. She returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow
which he had vowed.] That is, he sacrificed her, it is indeed strange, that
having two months liberty to deliberate about it, he was not all that time,
either by the priests, or some other resolved, both how unlawful his vow was,
and how lawfully he might now break it. But much must be ascribed to the
ignorance, corruption, and confusion of these times.

And she knew no man.] These words are added to imply, that this did much
aggravate Jephthahs loss, that his daughter died childlesse.

And it was a custom in Israel, etc.] To wit, that four days every year the
daughters of Israel went into the mountains to bewail Jephthahs daughter, as it
follows, verse. 40. at first happily they met only that were her companions,
but at last it grew to be an anniversary custom, and it may be was the rather
taken up and continued, that it might be a memorial to warn men to take heed
of all such rash and unlawful vows.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went
northward.] That is, having passed over Jordan, they then turned northward
into the land of Gilead.

Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of Ammon, and did
not call us to go with thee, etc.] Upon the same ground they quarrelled before
with Gideon, chap. 8. verse. 1. Jephthah, as is evident by his answer, verse. 2.
had sent unto them to desire them to come and expel the Ammonites out of their
coasts, and could not persuade them to undertake it; yet now himself had done
it, they envy his victory, and quarrel with him, because he did not call them
to go with him, to wit, as pretending that though he called them to expel the
Ammonites out of their coasts, yet he did not make known to them his own
resolution to go against them, nor did desire them to join with him, and so
made this the ground of their quarrel: and withal gave the Gileadites many
opprobrious and reviling speeches, verse. 4. And the men of Gilead smote
Ephraim, because they said, ye Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim, etc.

Verse. 3. And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my hands,
and passed over against the children of Ammon, etc.] All expositours agree,
that by this phrase, I put my life in my hands, Jephthah meant, that he exposed
his life to manifest danger, to wit, because he went against the children of
Ammon, with forces no way answerable to theirs, and that thereby Jephthah
intended to intimate to the men of Ephraim, that he would have been glad of
their assistance, that he might not have gone out upon so much hazard of his
life as he did. But whence was that phrase, that when a man exposed his life to
manifest peril he was said to put his life in his hands? I answer, the reason
of this phrase some conceive to be this, that when a man carries any precious
thing that is brittle in his hands, it is in danger to fall, or to be snatched
away suddenly from him. But I rather conceive the ground of it to be, because
when a man intends to lay down or deliver up any thing to another, he takes it
into his hands, that he may deliver it up, and therefore he that exposes his
life to manifest peril for any cause, is said to take his life into his hands,
because for that cause he is ready to lay down his life, according to that, 1.
John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. And indeed it may
well be, which a learned divine has observed, that they were wont in former
times to picture the Martyrs of the Primitive Church with their heads in their
hands, only to express this by way of Hieroglyphick, that they laid down
their lives for the cause of Christ, which the ignorant people not
understanding in the succeeding dark times of Popery, they thence raised those
absurd and ridiculous tales and legends of diverse Martyrs, that when their
heads were cut off, did notwithstanding walk a certain way with their heads in
their hands.

Wherefore then are ye come up unto we this day, to fight against me?] As if he
should say, Do you thus reward me for the good service I have done to the whole
land of Israel?

Verse. 4, And the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites
are fugitives of Ephraim, among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites.]
These were the reviling speeches wherewith the Ephraimites had enraged the
Gileadites, and provoked them to deal so rigourously with them: for the
understanding whereof we must note that Jephthah and the Gileadites, with whom
the Ephramites did now contend, were of that half of the tribe of Manasseh that
were planted in the utmost coasts northward of the land without Jordan. Now the
Ephraimites and the other half of Manasseh which were seated within Jordan, and
that next to the tribe of Ephraim, they lived lovingly together, and kept good
correspondence the one with the other, as being both descended of Joseph, and
having continually commerce together, by reason of their neighborhood: but
having no commerce with the other half tribe of Manasseh without Jordan,
because they dwelt so far off from them, even their brethren the Manassites
within Jordan began to grow strange to them, and at last to despise and scorn
them, as if they had been no better then fugitives that were run away from
them, the very scumme and refuse of their tribe cast out into the utmost bounds
of that land without Jordan, as unworthy to live with the rest of their
brethren in the heart of the land of Canaan: and this is that which in their
fury these Ephraimites do with scorn cast into the teeth of the Gileadites:
that both themselves and their brethren of Manasseh, did esteem the Gileadites
no better then fugitives of Ephraim, etc.

Verse. 6. Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth, etc.] Which signifies
the stream of a river; it seems they chose this word to discover them by, upon
their desire to pass over the foards of the river Jordan.

And there fell at that time of the Ephraimites, forty and two thousand.] This
was done in the land of the half tribe of Manasseh without Jordan, and because
we read of a place in their country that was called the wood of Ephraim, 2.
Sam. 18.6. we may well conceive that it was so called, because of this notable
slaughter of the Ephraimites there.

Verse. 15. And was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mouth of
the Amalekites.] So called as it seems, because the Amalekites had formerly
(...) that mountain.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. ANd the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord,
etc.] This Apostacy of the children of Israel was doubtless in the days of
Ibzan the next Judge after Jephthah, chap. 12. verse. 8. as may appear by the
computation of those forty years wherein the Philistines oppressed Israel,
mentioned in the following words. And the Lord delivered them into the hand of
the Philistines forty years; for the twenty years wherein Samson judged
Israel must necessarily be accounted one half of these forty years of the
Philistines oppression, as is evident chap. 15. verse. 20. And he judged Israel
in the days of the Philistines twenty years: and the other half to wit the
other twenty years must needs begin before Samson was born, to wit, about the
fifth year of Ibzans judging Israel; for when the Angel appeared to Samsons
mother, the Philistines oppressed Israel: whence he tells her for her comfort,
verse 5. that he should deliver Israel out of the hands of the Philistines. And
indeed Jephthahs slaying two and forty thousand of the Ephraimites, chap. 12.
verse. 6. must needs be a great weakening to the Israelites in those parts, and
was like enough to encourage the Philistines to invade their land within a
short time after Jephthah was dead.

Verse. 2. And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites,
whose name was Manoah.] So that Samson the son of this Manoah, was of the
tribe of Dan: This tribe bordering upon the land of the Philistines was most
exposed to their incursions, and therefore God was pleased now to raise up a
Judge for the Israelites out of this tribe, to wit, Samson the son of this
Manoah, to whose exploits against the Philistines, some conceive that Jacob had
respect in that his prophecy concerning this tribe, Genesis 49.16, 17. Dan shall
Judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel; Dan shall be a serpent in the
way, an adder in the path that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall
fall backward.

Verse. 3. And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto her,
behold now thou art barren, etc.] He first mentions her barrenness, that the
following tidings concerning her conceiving with child, might be the more
joyfully received by her; it is a great question among Expositours, what this
Angel of the Lord was, that now appeared to Manoahs wife, some conceiving that
it was a created Angel, and that because as they say, he afterward charge
Manoah not to sacrifice to him, but to the Lord, verse. 16. If thou will offer a
burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord. And others again conceiving,
that it was the very son of God, that great Angel of the covenant, and that
because, verse. 18. he says, his name was secret, or wonderful, but
especially, because verse. 22. Manoah says, they had seen God, and verse. 23.
his wife calls him the Lord, that is, the Jehovah; and indeed, though these be
not unanswerable proofs, yet considering that it is unquestionably evident in
other places, that in these times the son of God did usually appear to other
the servants of God, I should judge it most probable, that it was he that did
now also appear in the shape of a man to the wife of Manoah.

Verse. 4. Drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not unclean any thing.
Because her child was to be a Nazarite from the womb, as it follows, verse. 5.
therefore she might not eat or drink those things that were unlawful for the
Nazarites, to wit, neither whilst she was with child, nor whilst she gave suck,
in regard that all that time, that which she did eat or drink was for the
nourishment of her child too. Indeed by the unclean meat forbidden her, may be
meant any meat forbidden in the Law, Levit. 11. for it is no wonder though the
Angel charges her to beware of such meats which were unlawful for any
Israelite to eat, as well as Nazarites; first, because it is likely in these
times so full of confusion and disorder, both this and many other of Gods Laws,
were altogether disregarded by the people in general: and secondly, because
though such meats were unlawful for any Israelite, yet much more for
Nazarites. But yet here I rather think such meats are meant, as were unclean
for the Nazarites though not for others, such as were grapes moist or dried,
yea any meats that were made of the vine tree, from the kernel even to the
husk: Number. 6.3, 4. He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and
shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he
eat any liquour of grapes, nor eat moist grapes or dried. All the days of his
separation, shall he eat nothing that is made of the vine tree, from the kernel
even to the husk. Concerning which Law, see the note there.

Verse. 5. The child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb. This is a
commandment not a prediction, as is also the other clause before, no rasour
shall come on his head; for we see his hair was afterward cut off, chap.
16.19. And she made him sleep upon her knees, and she called for a man and she
caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head, and she began to afflict
him, and his strength went from him.

And he shall begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.] It
is said here that Samson should begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the
Philistines: first, because the Israelites were many years oppressed by the
Philistines, and the Lord sent them no savior, till at length Samson when he
came of age, was stirred up by the spirit of God to undertake this work, and so
he was the first that did any thing toward the foiling of the Philistines:
secondly, because though he did not wholly vanquish them (for after Samsons
death they did often infest and annoy the Israelites) yet did he so far
weaken them, especially by the last blow that he gave them at his death, when
he slew all their Princes and many of the people, that they scarce ever
recovered their former strength: and thirdly, because the work of shaking off
the yoke of the Philistines that was begun by Samson, was followed on
afterward in the days of Eli, Samuel, and Saul (for they never were after
this in bondage to the Philistines) till at length they were perfectly subdued
by David.

Verse. 6. A man of God came unto me, and his countenance was like the
countenance of an Angel of God, very terrible.] That is, his countenance was
very venerable, and full of reverend Majesty, and such as wrought a kind of
astonishment and fear in me.

Verse. 7. For the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the womb, to the day of
his death.] Others that took upon them the vow of a Nazarite, were only such
for a time, namely, so long as they had vowed to consecrate themselves unto the
Lord, in this strict way of singular holiness, which was therefore called the
days of their separation; see the notes Number. 6.3, 4, 5. But now Samson was in
an extraordinary way separate to be a Nazarite, to wit, by the appointment and
command of God, and not by his own voluntary vow, and therefore he was to be a
Nazarite all his life, from the womb to the day of his death; and herein was
Samson above other Nazarites, a type of Christ, who was from his first
conception perfectly sanctified: Luke 2.35. That holy thing which shall be born
of thee (says the Angel to the virgin Mary) shall be called the son of God,
and so continued all his days, holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from
sinners, Heb. 7.26. and that to the end he might be the savior of Gods people:
for the better manifestation whereof, it was that God by his providence did so
order it, that he was (though upon another occasion) called a Nazarene, Matht.
2.23. And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.

Verse. 10. And the woman made haste, and ran and showed her husband, etc.]
Knowing how earnestly her husband had prayed unto the Lord, that he would again
send that man of God to them, that had at first brought her the tidings of her
conception; no sooner did she now see him again, but as taking this to be an
answer of his prayer, and therefore not doubting but he would stay till she
came back again, and withal longing to make glad the heart of her husband, she
made haste and ran, as the text says, to tell her husband of it.

Verse. 16. Though thou detain me, yet I will not eat of thy bread; and if thou will offer a burnt-offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord.] Manoah had said
in the foregoing verse, I pray thee, let us detain thee until we shall have
made ready a kid for thee: now because those words may be meant, especially as
they are in the original, either his preparing a kid merely for him to eat, or
else for preparing a kid for a sacrifice, to wit, of a peace offering (for with
such sacrifices they used to feast their friends, after they had offered the
fat unto the Lord) accordingly the Angel of the Lord answers Manoah in these
words: for first, he absolutely refuses to eat of any provision that he should
make ready for him, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread; and
this he says, not because Angels in those assumed bodies wherein they appear
to men, cannot eat; for we see the contrary expressly affirmed, concerning the
Angels that appeared to Abraham, when as yet they would not be known to be any
other but men, Genesis 18.8. He took butter and milk, and the calf which he had
distressed and set it before them -- and they did eat, but because he now
desired to lead on Manoah by degrees, to apprehend him to be more then a man,
which as yet Manoah had not conceived: and then secondly, he adds, and if thou will offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it to the Lord: wherein he
intimates to Manoah, that he would not have him think of providing a
sacrifice, that he might eat of it; yet if he had a mind to offer a burnt
offering, he should approve of that; only he then gives him warning to take
heed of having any other thought then to offer it to the Lord Jehovah only. As
concerning the reason why he gives him that express caveat, that he should be
sure that he did not think of offering his burnt offering to any but the Lord;
I conceive it to be only, because many of the Israelites did at this time
worship the idol-gods of the heathens, and therefore the Angel took this
occasion to bid him to beware of that. Many Expositours indeed conceive, that
the Angel that now appeared to Manoah, being a created Angel, spoke this
purposely to beat off Manoah from thinking to offer any sacrifice to him: and
others that hold it was the Son of God that now appeared to him, understand
these words as if he had said, If you think of offering me a burnt offering,
you must offer it to me as the true God, not as to a created angel: but first,
because there is nothing said before, whereby it may be gathered that Manoah
intended to offer a sacrifice to the Angel: and secondly, because it is
manifest that as yet he took him to be a man as himself was, some prophet sent
unto him from God, as it follows in the next words, Manoah knew not that he was
an angel of the Lord: I see not why we should think that the angel spoke these
words with respect to himself, but rather to give him warning of the idolatry
that was then too rise in the land.

Verse. 17. What is thy name, that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee
honor?] That is, that we may make report to others concerning this thy
foretelling future things, and so both we and they may esteem and honor thee
as a prophet of the most high God. This I conceive is chiefly intended; though
withal it may be meant of some bountiful reward wherewith (by way of
gratitude) he meant to honor him, that is, to testify their honorable and
high esteem of him.

Verse. 18. Why ask thou thus far after my name, seeing it is secret?] Or
seeing it is wonderful, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, for the word in
the Original signifies both secret and wonderful. If we hold that this was a
created angel that now appeared to Manoah, there is no necessity that we
should thereupon make inquiry, as many Papists have very busily done, whether
the holy angels in heaven have all of them their several names, whereby they
are distinguished and known, when the angels would impart any thing one to
another concerning any particular angel. For though there is no question to be
made but the angels both can and do impart what they would make known both one
to another and one concerning another, yet because they do this not by words or
vocal expressions, but as spirits in a spiritual manner, and such as we are
not able to conceive; how is it possible that we should determine any thing
concerning their names? Sufficient it is for us to know that even in this
regard the angel might well answer Manoah, that his name was secret or
wonderful, that is, that it was a thing not to be revealed, and therefore not
to be enquired into; or a thing too wonderful for him to understand, or that
as the other angels so he also had no other name but this, that he was one of
those ministering spirits whom God did continually employ in the effecting of
many wonderful works for his people, with respect whereto therefore it may
well be that verse. 19. it is expressly noted, that the angel did wondrously.
But now granting what was formerly said, that this angel of the Lord was the
Son of God, the great angel of the Covenant, it must needs seem the less
strange that he should tell Manoah that his name was secret and not to be
searched into, or wonderful and incomprehensible: and that because first, as
he is very God, his name, that is, his essence or being is infinitely above our
understanding, it is a secret we must not pry into, it is too wonderful for
us, only we know of him what by his word and works he has been pleased to
reveal to us, and that is enough to astonish any man that will seriously ponder
it with himself: and secondly, as he was appointed of God to be in our nature
the mediator between God and man, there was nothing in him nor nothing that
was to be done by him, but was every way wonderful; whence it is that the
prophet said of him, His name shall be called wonderful, Isa. 9.6.

Verse. 19. So Manoah took a kid with a meat offering, and offered it, etc.]
Neither the person sacrificing, nor the place where they offered this sacrifice
were warrantable by the law; but the allowance of the angel, verse. 16. If thou will offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord, was warrant
sufficient.

Verse. 20. For it came to pass when the flame went up toward heaven from off
the altar, etc.] Because there is no mention made either of wood or of fire
that was brought by Manoah for the offering of this sacrifice, therefore many
Expositours hold, that by the ministry of the angel there came fire out of
the rock to consume the burnt offering, as it was before in Gideons sacrifice,
chap. 6.21. But that cannot certainly be concluded from thence. However, it was
doubtless the angels ascending up in the flame of the altar, that was the
principal miraculous work, whereby the angel did discover what he was to
Manoah and his wife; and methinks too, this is one of the strongest evidences
to make it most probable that this angel was the Son of God, and that because
his going up to heaven in the flame of the sacrifice, did most sweetly
represent and shadow forth the office of Christ, the great Angel of the
covenant, whose work it is to present all our services before God, and to
procure them to be graciously accepted of him.

Verse. 22. And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, etc.] See the
note chap. 6.22.

Verse. 23. But his wife said unto him, If the Lord were pleased to kill us* he
would not have received a burnt offering, etc.] By three several arguments
does Manoahs wife comfort him: first, from Gods accepting of their sacrifice;
and that she takes for granted, because the angel advised them to offer that
their sacrifice, verse. 16. If thou will offer a burnt offering, thou must offer
it unto the Lord: and secondly, because he had made known Gods accepting of it,
both by that his miraculous ascending up to heaven in the flame of it, whereby
they might see that their sacrifice went up with him into the presence of God;
and also (as Expositours generally conceive) by causing fire miraculously to
ascend out of the rock, and consume the sacrifice as formerly in that of
Gideons. Judge. 6.21. The angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff that
was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and there
arose fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes:
secondly, from those wonders God had showed them; neither, says she, would he
have showed us all these things, that is, all these miraculous signs of Gods
favor toward us, to wit, the strange burning of the sacrifice, and ascending
of the angel in the flame thereof: and thirdly from his imparting those secrets
to them concerning their child, Nor, says she; would he as at this time have
told us such things as these, that is, neither would he thus beforehand in a
time of such great distress, have told us such comfortable tidings concerning
the birth and education of our child, and the worthy service he should do for
the deliverance of his Church and people.

Verse. 24. And the child grew, and the Lord blessed him.] That is, he endued
him with admirable strength of body, courage of mind, and all other gifts
requisite for those worthy services God had appointed him to do.

Verse. 25. And the spirit of the Lord began to move him at times in the camp of
Dan, etc.] The camp of Dan was either the place of Samsons dwelling, so called
by occasion of that which we find written, concerning the expedition of the
Danites against Laish, which it seems was before the days of Samson, chap.
18.11, 12. And there went from thence of the family of the Danites out of
Zorah, and out of Eshtaol six hundred men appointed with weapons of war. And
they went up and pitched in Kiriath-jearim in Judah: wherefore they call that
place Mahaneh-Dan unto this day: or else it may be meant of a camp which the
Danites had formed at present in this place, having raised an army to withstand
the incursions of the Philistines, who did sorely now oppress them; where
Samson serving in his young years, began to give proof of the noble acts he
should afterward do. For the spirit of God began now and then at times to come
upon him, and to put him upon strange and admirable exploits, even beyond the
ordinary courage and strength of man.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. ANd Samson went down to Timnath, etc.] A city that was at first in
the lot of Judah, Josh. 15.57. and afterward was separated for the tribe of
Dan, Josh. 19.43. but was often (if not always) in the possession of the
Philistines, in the confines of whose land it stood; and so now it seems it was.

Verse. 2. I have seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines,
now therefore get her for me to wife.] It was unlawful for any Israelite, much
more for a Nazarite, to marry with a daughter of the Philistines, Deuteronomy. 7.3.
but it seems Samson did this not without a special warrant from God, either by
revelation, or by a strong instinct of the spirit, which he knew well was of
God; as appears, first, because it is said verse. 4. that he sought an occasion
against the Philistines; secondly, because it is expressed there also, that his
father and his mother knew not that it was of the Lord; which implies that
Samson knew it well enough: and yet though he had a special warrant from God,
he would not do it without desiring the consent of his parents.

Verse. 3. Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among
all my people, etc.] That is, neither amongst thy kindred, nor amongst all the
people of Israel; thus his parents at first sought to dissuade him from this
match because it was against the Law of God.

And Samson said unto his father, Get her for me, for she pleases me well.] In
these words Samson might have respect to this, that it pleased him well to
marry with a daughter of the uncircumcised Philistines, because he had a
warrant from God thereby to pick a quarrel against them; but doubtless he
could not intend that his father, by those words of his, should think of any
such thing, but only that he was pleased with her person, and had thereupon
set his affection on her; yea it is evident that he did purposely conceal this
from his parents, that he sought an occasion against the Philistines, lest that
should have made them the more eager to oppose him herein. Indeed it is
strange, that his godly parents should yield (as we see verse. 5. they did) to
make such a match for him with a Philistines daughter, only because he had a
mind to her; but godly parents are many times too fond and indulgent to their
children, and so it seems it was with Manoah and his wife.

Verse. 4. But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the Lord that
he sought an occasion, etc.] This last clause many Expositours refer to the
Lord, to wit, that he sought an occcasion against the Philistines, by suffering
Samson thus to fall in love with a daughter of the Philistines; but first,
because if the meaning of these words had been, that the Lord sought an
occasion against the Philistines, it might as well have been said, that neither
Samson nor his parents knew it, as that his father and his mother knew it not:
secondly, because it is manifest in the sequel of the story, that Samson did
indeed seek an occasion against the Philistines, as we may see by the riddle he
propounded to them at the wedding, and his careful concealing of that which he
did to the lion from his very parents, that so the meanning of his riddle might
not be known; and especially by that which he said when he addressed himself to
be revenged on the Philistines, because his wife was given to another, chap.
15.3. Now says he, shall I be more blameless then the Philistines, though I
do them a displeasure: as if he should have said, now have I gotten a just
occasion to be revenged on the Philistines: and thirdly, because Samson is
numbered by the Apostle, Heb. 11.32. amongst those, that by faith did notably
subdue the enemies of God; which seems to imply, that he had a word and warrant
from God for it, therefore I rather conceive, that the meaning of these words
is, that his father and his mother knew not that that it was of the Lord, that
he, that is, Samson sought an occasion against the Philistines: and then it is
manifest by this place, that Samson knew that it was Gods will, that by seeking
a wife amongst the Philistines, he should take some occasion to be revenged on
them, though his parents thought not of any such thing. But may some say,
Considering that the Philistines were of those nations whom God had commanded
the Israelites utterly to destroy, and so to take their land into their
possession; and likewise, that the Philistines had for many years oppressed the
Israelites, what need was there that Samson should seek any other occasion
against them to be revenged on them? Now to this I answer, first, that it might
well be, that the Israelites had by covenant submitted themselves to be in
subjection to the Philistines, and in that regard Samson was to seek an
occasion against them, that he might without breach of covenant be revenged on
them, and thence it may be, that those words are added immediately upon these,
for at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel: and secondly, that
Samson not being called of God to undertake the rescuing of the Israelites in a
public way out of the power of the Philistines, by raising up an army against
them, but being only appointed in his own person to make havoc amongst them,
and by that means to weaken their power, and abate their pride; he was in that
regard to take occasion from some private personal wrong, to set upon them.

Verse. 5. And behold, a young lion roared against him, etc.] Either therefore
Samson was upon some occasion turned out of the way, or else his parents being
either before or behind, Samson was at present going alone by himself; and thus
God encouraged him for those encounters against the Philistines, which
afterward followed; as David was prepared in the like kind to fight with
Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.36. Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them.

Verse. 6. And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, etc.] That is, on
a sudden the Lord by his Spirit did endue him with such an exceeding measure of
courage and strength, that though he had nothing in his hand, not so much as a
staff to defend himself, yet with his naked hands he said hold on the lion, and
rent him as he would have rent a kid; and herein was Samson a notable type of
Christ in his victory over the devil, that roaring lion, as S. Peter calls him,
1. Pet. 5.8. that is continually walking about, seeking whom he may devour. As
for that which is added in the next words, that he told not his father or his
mother what he had done; the reason of this might be, lest it should prove
perilous to have the Philistines hear of an Israelite endued with such
admirable prowess and strength; but withal it was an argument of Samsons
singular modesty, that having performed such a strange and heroical exploit,
he could presently go away after his parents, and when he overtook them, never
spoke the least word to them of it; and herein too was there some shadow of
that which is related concerning Christ, that when he had wrought many
miraculous works, did often give charge that there should be no speech of it;
as when he had cured a blind man, he sent him away to his house, saying,
Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any in the town, Mark 8.26.

Verse. 8. And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see
the carcass of the lion, etc.] Having it seems formerly concluded the ma^ch
between him and the woman of Timnath, he went now thither again to solemnize
the marriage, his father and his mother as we see, verse. 9. going along with
him as formerly, and so coming near to the place where he had in his last
passing that way, slain the lion, he turned aside to see the carcass of the
lion; no doubt that the sight of the lions carcass, might affect him the more
in the thankful remembrance of that great mercy of God to him, in enabling him
so miraculously to kill that ravenous beast when he flew upon him, and so by
the providence of God he came to take notice of that, which God intended should
be the occasion of the ensuing quarrel between him and the Philistines; for
when he came to the place, behold, there was a swarm of bees and honey in the
carcass of the lion, that is, in the bones of the carcass as they lay fastened
still together, the flesh being eaten or dried away, (for otherwise a swarm of
bees would not have settled there); and this shows, that there was some good
distance of time between his first going down with his parents to Timnath to
make the match between him and the woman of Timnath, to whom he had taken a
liking, and his going now down with them the second time to take her to wife.

Verse. 11. And it came to pass when they saw him, that they brought thirty
companions to be with him.] The most of Expositours by far, understand this
place thus, That when the Philistines saw Samson, perceiving him to be a man of
wonderful strength, and full of terror, they brought thirty companions to be
with him under pretense of respect, and the custom of their marriage
solemnity, but indeed that they might set a guard upon him, lest he should
suddenly do them any mischief. But first, because they had seen him before, and
were not then afraid of him: secondly, the Scripture does not any where make
the least mention of any thing extraordinary in Samsons body, or the terror of
his countenance; but ascribes his strength merely to the coming of Gods spirit
upon him: and thirdly, Samson by the guidance no doubt of Gods spirit,
purposely concealed the killing of the lion, that the Philistines might not be
afraid of him: therefore I think it far more probable, that the meaning of
these words is only this, that when the brides friends and kindred saw that
Samson was come to take his wife, they provided thirty young men, according to
the custom of those times, as his companions and bridemen, children of the
bride-chamber, as they are called, Matt. 9.15. to attend upon him, and to
rejoice with him.

Verse. 12. And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you,
etc.] It was it seems the custom of those times by way of exercising their
wits, especially at feasts to strive for the masterie one with another, in
point of resolving dark and intricate questions and riddles, whereto some apply
that, 1. Kings 10.1. that when the Queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon,
concerning the name of the Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions; and
so hereupon it was that Samson the first day of his wedding feast propounded a
riddle to his bride-men; however his aim doubtless therein was to take an
occasion of picking a quarrel with the Philistines; to which some Expositours
do add this too, that as Samson in his marrying with a daughter of the
Philistines was a type of Christ in his calling the Gentiles to be his people,
and so marrying them to himself as his bride and spouse; so also this riddle
propounded by Samson was a figure of the doctrine of the Gospel, published to
the world by Christ, when the time of the calling of the Gentiles was come,
which indeed was a riddle to flesh and blood, according to that of the Apostle,
1. Cor. 1.23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to
the Gentiles foolishness: as concerning the seven days of the wedding feast
here mentioned, see the note Genesis 29.27. and concerning the thirty change of
garments which is a part of the wager propounded by Samson, see the note Genesis
45 22.

Verse. 14. Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness.] The honey which Samson found in the carcass of the lion was the
ground of this riddle; but withal we may well think, that meditating by
himself concerning this observable passage of Gods providence, in yielding him
food to eat out of the carcass of that lion that a while before thought to have
eaten up him, he called to mind how usually God is wont after the same manner
for his children, to bring them good out of evil; and so did the rather
propound this riddle because it was a notable enigmaticall expression of Gods
dealing with his people in this regard. For when Satan's temptations, yea the
sins of the godly turn to their advantage, what is this but honey out of that
roaring lion that seeks to devour us? When the cruel enemies of Gods people
are made their friends, or that God turns their malicious practices to the
furtherance of the Gospel and the good of the Church, what is this but meat out
of the eater? When afflictions, yea death it self yields matter of much sweet
comfort to the godly, and opens a way to a better life for them, what is this
but sweetness drawn forth for them out of the carcass, as it were, of their
strong enemies. Yea principally did this shadow forth that mystery of the
sweet and saving food of our souls in the ministry of the Gospel, which we
have from Christ's victory over hell and death, by his own death, according to
that of the Apostle, Heb. 2.17. Forasmuch therefore as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took a part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is
the devil: and that of our Savior, John 6.51. I am the living bread which came
down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever, and the
bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. The more unexpectedly good comes to us out of evil, the more thankful
his people must needs be for it; and therefore God loves to store up comforts,
where his people would least expect to find them.

And they could not in three days expound the riddle.] And thus it was with
the Philistines, as it is with all other natural men in regard of the mystery
of the Gospel which Christ has published to the world; they are not able by
any wisdom and endeavors of their own to comprehend it, unless by the spirit
of God it be revealed to them, according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.14,
15. The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are
spiritually discerned; but he that is spiritual judges all things.

Verse. 15. And it came to pass that on the seventh day they said unto Samsons
wife, Entice thy husband, etc.] Two passages in this story make it evident,
that these men set the bride on work upon the fourth day, to try underhand if
she could get the meaning of the riddle from him: first, because it is said
verse. 14. that they could not in three days expound the riddle; which implies,
that so long only of themselves they tried to find it out, and then began on
the fourth day to take another course, to wit, to persuade his wife to get it
from him: secondly, because it is said, verse. 17. that she wept before him the
seven days while the feast lasted: which shows that she began to press her
husband about this, before the seventh day came. The meaning therefore seems to
be this, that three days they assayed of their own heads to find out the
meaning of the riddle, but then beginning to suspect themselves, on the fourth
day they persuaded his wife to see if she could fish it out of him; but when
the seventh day came, despairing to find it out of themselves, they came again,
and by threatening speeches labored to terrify his wife, that so she might be
constrained to use all her skill to wring it from him: entice thy husband (say
they) that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy fathers
house with fire: Indeed it is not likely that they durst have proceeded to such
an outrage upon so weak and trivial a ground, only they speak this to scare
the timorous woman, that she might be the more importunate with her husband.

Verse. 16. Behold, I have not told it my father nor my mother, and shall I tell
it thee?] Though a wife be nearer to a man then his parents, and therefore may
expect from him more freedom in the communication of his secrets; yet here
Samson considers the reverence that was due to his parents, and the long
experience that he had of their faithfulness, in both which respects there was
more reason he should have told it them then her.

Verse. 17. And she wept before him the seven days while the feast lasted.]
This may be meant of the remainder of the seven days after his companions had
set her to win it from him, that from that time she wept to the end of the
seven days; yet it is likely, that from the first, out of her own desire to
know it, she was importunate with him. See the note above verse. 15.

Verse. 18. And he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye had
not found out my riddle.] These words, If ye had not plowed with my heifer,
seems to implie some jealous thoughts in Samson, of some secret and unchaste
dealing of the Philistines with his wife; whom therefore in regard of her
suspected wantonness he calls his heifer; and if so it were with Samson, no
marvel though in his jealousy his spirit was stirred up with great
indignation against them. But however, because by plowing the earth is opened,
and that discovered which was hidden before, as in that regard a man may be
said to dig for a secret, so also to plow for it, and so the meaning of these
words may be only this, that if they had not by the help of his wise sought
out and discovered the meaning of his riddle, they had never found it out.

Verse. 19. And he went down to Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, etc.]
Some Expositours have sought what might be imagined concerning the cause why
Samson passed over so many places where the Philistines dwelt, and went to
Ashkelon to fetch this spoil, which was so far off from Timnath; as that
there was there some solemn assembly of the Philistines held, etc. But it
suffices us to know that by the Spirit of God he was carried thither, and the
cause being not expressed, why should we enquire after it? As for the spoil he
took from the Philistines he there slew, we must know, that though they that
took upon them the vow of a Nazarite only for a time, might not come at any
dead body, Numb. 6.6. All the days he separateth himself unto the Lord, he
shall come at no dead body. And if they were casually defiled by any such
means, they were anew to begin the days of their consecration; yet those that
were set apart of God to be perpetual Nazarites, were not it seems tied to
these things, to wit, because they could not always avoid them. And besides,
what Samson did, he did by the special motion of Gods Spirit; and therefore he
made no scruple of taking the garments of these slain men, which he gave to his
companions; and under them must be comprehended the sheets or shirts also
mentioned in the bargain they made, verse. 12.

And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his fathers house.] In his anger
leaving his wife behind him.

Verse. 20. But Samsons wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his
friend.] That is, one of those his thirty companions or bridemen mentioned,
verse. 11. Some also add that it was he that was chosen to be the first of the
bridemen, the next to the bridegroom himself, who according to the custom of
those times, was called the bridegrooms friend: to which custom they say the
Baptist does allude, John 3.29. He that has the bride, is the bridegroom, but
the friend of the bridegroom, which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly
because of the bridegrooms voice.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. But it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat
harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid, etc.] The time is thus noted
when Samson returned to his wife, because afterward there is mention made of
the burning of their corn in the fields, partly cut down and partly standing;
and doubtless though Samson did really intend reconciliation with his wife,
and to that end carried a kid with him, the better to express the love he bare
her, and the desire he had to be reconciled to her; yet the Lord was pleased to
incline his heart this way purposely, that finding his wife given away to
another man, he might take that occasion to be revenged on the Philistines.

Verse. 4. And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took firebrands,
etc.] It appears by many places of Scripture, that there were great store of
foxes in the land of Canaan; for hence are those expressions, Cant. 2.15. Take
us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines: and Psalm. 63.9, 10. But
those that seek my soul to destroy it -- they shall fall by the sword, they
shall be a portion for foxes: and again, Neh. 4.3. Even that which they build,
if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall. Now considering that
this country did so abound with foxes, and that withal it was summer time,
wheat harvest, verse. 1. when foxes, because they are fat, are the more easily
taken, it is not a matter of so great wonder, that Samson should take three
hundred foxes, especially if withal we do observe, that it is not expressed,
either how long they were taking, or whether he took them himself alone, or by
the help of others. But however, the Lord that put him upon this way of
revenge, could easily supply him with this number of foxes in a short time: The
wild beasts of the field are his, Psalm. 50.11. and if we remember how by the
al-ruling providence of God, there came in of all kinds of living creatures to
Noah, that they might be preserved in the ark, Genesis 6.20. and how such a
multitude of quails were brought in to the Israelites, Number. 11.31. it will not
surely seem incredible, that with the special help of Gods providence, Samson
should by nets or otherwise, take three hundred foxes within some short time.
Now for the exploit he performed with these foxes, it is punctually here
expressed, and the reason of each particular we may thus conceive: first he
made choice to do it with foxes rather then dogs, etc. because they are
creatures that still seek to hide themselves, and to lie lurking in secret
places, and therefore being let loose, especially being scared with the fire at
their tails, were like to run into the shocks, and standing corn, which being
fully ripe, would soon be set on a light flame, and so they would be scared too
from one place to another: secondly, he did not let loose each fox single with
a firebrand or torch tied to his tail (for the word in the original signifies
both a firebrand and a torch) because then they might have run speedily into
their holes, and the brands or torches drawn on the ground through dirt or
water would soon have been quenched but he tied two foxes together, tail to
tail, and a firebrand or a torch between their tails, and so the foxes could
not fly speedily away, but must needs go straggling up and down, one drawing one
way, and another another way, and the brands or torches were for the most part
born above ground, that they might not be quenched: and thirdly, though the
corn might have been set on fire without this, yet it pleased the Lord to
direct Samson to do it this way, that their punishment coming upon them in such
a ridiculous way, and by an act of such scorn, even this might be withal some
aggravation of their misery. And then again we have by this means in this
exploit of Samsons, a notable figure of the divisions that are usually amongst
the crafty adversaries of Gods people, heretics especially, whereby Christ
accomplisheth what he foretold, Luke 12.49. I am come to send fire on the
earth, and what will I if it be already kindled? Heretics are like foxes
cunning and crafty, hurtful to the places where they live, and noisome by
reason of their unsavory and abominable errors; yea they are like foxes tied
tail to tail with firebrands betwixt their tails, they differ in many things
and cannot agree, one draws one way and another another: only in this they
agree together, that they are all incendiaries, that where ever they come set
all on a light flame, and so prove the destruction of the places where they
live; yea, thus it is usually with all other the enemies of Christ and his
people, the Lord usually letting loose some such amongst them, that will be
sure to make divisions where they come, that so by a fire of discord amongst
themselves they may be devoured through Gods just judgment upon them, that
sought so unjustly to devour Gods people.

Verse. 6. And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire.]
And thus that fell upon Samsons wife, which by evil means she sought to avoid,
when at her wedding she was threatened with burning, chap. 14.15. Entice thy
husband that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy
fathers house with fire: according to that of Solomon, Prove. 10.24. The fear of
the wicked, it shall come upon him: and withal, both she and her father were
justly destroyed, for breaking the bond of marriage betwixt her and Samson.

Verse. 7. Though ye have done this, yet will I be avenged of you, and after
that I will cease.] That is, though ye have been the instruments of God, in
executing vengeance upon those that wronged me; yet because ye have done this,
not in a way of justice, but out of a rage and fury for the loss you sustained
in your corn, I will proceed a little further in executing vengeance upon you,
the enemies of God and his people, and then I will cease, to wit, for this
time, till I be further provoked; which shows, that what he did was done, not
by way of private revenge, but because he knew that God had raised him on
purpose, to be a scourge to the Philistines.

Verse. 8. And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter.] That is,
some in one place, and some in another, as his blows casually lighted, he
pursued them and laid on load upon every one as they came in his way, and some
he smote in some one part of the body and some in another, but wherever his
blows fell they malled them, and made them sure for stirring any more. This I
conceive to be the meaning of this proverbiall speech, he smote them hip and
thigh; though others expound it that he smote both horsemen and footmen, as we
may see in the margin of our Geneva bibles; but that cannot be the meaning of
it according to our translation.

And he went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.] A place belonging to
the tribe of Simeon, whose lot was within the land of Judah, 1. Chron. 4.32.
called also Either. Josh. 19.7. It seems it was a place of some strength (and
therefore fortified and made a city of defense by Rehoboam) 2. Chron. 11.5, 6.
Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defense in Judah. He built
Bethlehem and Etam) and that therefore Samson went thither, as expecting the
Philistines would come up against him; yet not to secure himself from the
Philistines, as being afraid of them; but rather lest (as it proved) his
brethren the Israelites, being enraged for his provoking the Philistines
against them, should attempt to offer him any violence, and so he should be
constrained to stand upon his guard against them.

Verse. 9. Then the Philistines went up and pitched in Judah, and spread
themselves in Lehi.] That is, in a place afterward called Lehi, which
signifies a jaw bone, and that by occasion of the exploit done there by Samson
with the jaw bone of an ass, verse 17. And it came to pass, when he had made
an end of speaking, that he cast away the jaw bone out of his hand, and called
that place Ramath-Lehi. As for this phrase, and spread themselves in Lehi, it
is purposely used to imply how great an army of the Philistines it was that
came up against him.

Verse. 12. Swear unto me that you will not fall upon me your selves.] Thus by
yielding up himself to be bound by them, that he might be delivered to the
Philistines, he discovered how careful he was, that the Philistines should not
hurt the Israelites for his sake, and by agreeing beforehand with them, that
they should not fall upon him themselves, he sought to prevent the danger of
being constrained to resist them, or do them any hurt in his own defense.

Verse. 13. And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the
rock.] And herein was Samson a type of Christ, that was bound by the Jews his
own brethren, and so delivered up to Pilate and the Romans, Matthew. 27.2.

Verse. 14. And the cords that were upon his hands, became as flax, etc.] Thus
our Savior also, of whom Samson was a type, being by the treachery of the
Jews, the people whom he came to save, yea his own disciples, delivered over
into the hands of his enemies, and so to death, Matthew. 26.21, And as they did
eat, he said, Verily, one of you shall betray me: yet not without his voluntary
yielding thereto, Joh. 10.18. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my
self: the pains of death could not hold him, Acts 2.24. but he rose again, and
by the jaw bone of an ass, that is, weak and contemptible means in the eye of
reason, the foolishness of preaching, 1. Cor. 1.21. he beat down the kingdom
of Satan before him, and has subdued the world under him.

Verse. 18. And he was sore a thirst, and he called on the Lord, etc.] How sore
Samsons thirst was, appears in this, that he was also through faintness ready
to die, and so not able to stir from the place where he was, to seek water
else where. Though therefore his thirst and faintness, might partly proceed in
a natural way, from the violent stirring of himself, in such an extraordinary
work as this was, of slaying a thousand Philistines with the jaw bone of an
ass; yet we may well think that there was a special hand of God besides in
it: first, that he might herein, as in many other things, be a type of Christ,
who in the heat of his agony upon the cross, and when he had now in a manner
vanquished all the powers of hell and death, did also cry out of thirst, John
19.28. After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that
the Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst: and secondly, that he might
hereby see his own weakness, and so might be kept from being proud of his
former victories, and might be taught to acknowledge, that it was merely of God
that he had thus beaten down his proud enemes before him: and thus indeed God
is usually wont to humble his servants when they have done any memorable act,
that they may not be puffed up therewith, as seeing how weak they are in
themselves, if they had not been endued with power from on high; as for the
words here which Samson spoke when he cried upon. God in his thirst, Thou have
given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant, and now shall I die
for thirst, etc. therein, first, he does not only intimate his assurance that
God would not now suffer him to perish, and that because God had so
miraculously enabled him to destroy his enemies; but even from this he pleads
with God for help, as concluding, that all this great work would, come to
nothing if after all this he should perish for thirst, and so should fall into
the hands of the Philistines: and secondly, he intimates, that it was in Gods
service that he had thus wearied himself, and thereupon desires the Lord to
remember him in this his extremity. For so much is clearly enough employed in
those words, thy servant. Thou have given this great deliverance into the hand
of thy servant, and now shall I die for thirst? For indeed, as long as men are
employed in Gods service, they may boldly call upon God in all their wants and
need, not doubting but he will supply them.

Verse. 19. But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came
water thereout, etc.] Some read this place as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, But God clave an hollow place that was in Lehi, and there came water
thereout: So that the meaning may be, either that God clave an hollow place
that was in the jaw bone of the ass, wherewith Samson had before made such
havoc amongst the Philistines; or else, that God clave some hollow place in
that field, which in memory of this miraculous act of his done with an asses
jaw bone, he had called Lehi, that is, the jaw bone: and so accordingly also,
we must understand the last words of this verse, wherefore he called the name
thereof Enhakkor, that is, the well of him that called or cried, which is in
Lehi unto this day, to wit, either that Samson called that particular place
where the water came out of the jaw bone, Enhakkor, and that this place hence
called Enhakkor, was in that field or tract of ground, which he had formerly
called Lehi; or else, that Samson called the fountain, which sprung out of the
hollow place in Lehi, Enhakkor; and that this well, or spring of water
continued afterward, and was to be seen in Lehi, at the time when this
History was written: and indeed, because the words do seem plainly to implie,
that there was a well or spring that continued in that place called Enhakkor,
that is, the well of him that called or cried: (insomuch that some hold that
the water which God miraculously gave Samson for the quenching of his thirst,
was a well that sprung out of the earth, only it came through the tooth, or
the hollow place where the tooth had been in the asses jaw) therefore I rather
think that God clave an hollow place in the field called Lehi, whence a
fountain sprung called Enhakkor; which continued until the time of writing
this History; then that it was an hollow place out of the very jaw bone of the
ass, out of which God brought water, that Samson might drink thereof and be
refreshed.

Verse. 20. And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.]
See the note, chap. 13.1.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. THen went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto
her.) This mention that is made of his seeing the harlot, to whom he went in,
implies, that he went not thither for that purpose, but going secretly thither
with some other intent, he was on a sudden entangled with the sight of this
harlot, and so drawn to commit folly with her.

Verse. 2. And they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the
gate, etc.] That is, hearing by some that had taken notice of him, that he was
come into the city, but not knowing into what house he was entered, they took
order that the gates should be shut, and narrowly watched, to make sure that he
should not escape away in the night, and then at each gate, especially at that
gate out of which his way lay, being to go to his own country, they set
certain men who should the next morning diligently wait for him, and as he came
out, should suddenly kill him, as being afraid any other way to set upon him.

Verse. 3. And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the
doors of the gate of the city, etc.] Knowing it seems by the secret instinct of
Gods spirit, that he was descryed, and that there was wait laid for him, in the
dead of the night he arose, and going to the gate of the city, which was fast
shut to prevent his escape, took the doors of the gate of the city, and the
two posts, and went away with them, bar and all, and put them upon his
shoulders, and carried them up to the top of the hill that is before Hebron,
and it is thought by some, that Hebron was at least seven Germane miles from
Gaza, the city whose gates he carried away, which was not far from the
seacoast; an act of the greatest wonder that ever Samson did, and wherein he
was a notable type of Christ, in that glorious act of his resurrection; when
being shut up dead in the grave, the sepulcher being sealed, and a company of
soldiers set to watch it, notwithstanding all these bars of death, because,
as the Apostle said, Acts 2.24. it was not possible that he should be holden of
it; early the next morning the stone was removed; and so he arose again by his
own Almighty power, carrying away, as it were, the gates and posts of hell and
death, and so within a while, ascended up triumphantly into heaven. Indeed, it
may seem very strange, that Samson arising newly from the bed of fornication,
should have such wonderful assistance from God, as to be enabled to do so
glorious and admirable a work: but we must consider, first, that God suffered
his holy Nazarite to fall into this sin, to show the weakness of the best
and strongest, if left unto themselves: secondly, that God is not wont always
to deal with his servants according to their sins; nor presently to withdraw
the gifts of his Spirit, though they sometimes greatly provoke him: and
thirdly, that God had respect herein to glorify himself, in this triumph of
his servant over the Philistines, though afterward he took his time to correct
him, and that sharply too for his sin.

Verse. 4. And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley
of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.] It is plainly enough employed, though it be
not expressed, that this Delilah was a Philistine Harlot, as the other was, and
not his wife, or of the stock of Israel, as some have thought; first, because
this story is so immediately brought in, just as another story of the like
nature that went before; And it came to pass that afterward he loved a woman
in the valley of Sorek, etc. even as if it were purposely added to show how
prone the best are, if once entangled in this sin, to proceed still to
further degrees of uncleanness; and what misery God suffered his progress in
this sin to bring upon him, though he spared him at first: secondly, because
the phrase the Spirit of God here uses, he loved a woman in the valley of
Sorek, does not sound as spoken of the love of a wife, but of the love of a
harlot: thirdly, because the free intercourse that was betwixt her and the
lords of the Philistines, and her hiding the Philistines that were to seize
upon him, again and again in a chamber in her house, makes it clear, that
Samson was there as a stranger, not in his own house, and amongst his own
family: and fourthly, because her whorish; qualities in that she was so
readily wone by the hire of money to betray him into the hands of the
Philistines, and that by dandling him upon her l^p, does proclaim her to have
been neither wife, nor Israelite, but a Philistine and harlot.

Verse. 6. Tell me I pray thee, wherein thy great strength lies, and wherewith
thou might be bound to afflict thee.] She asked him this question doubtless
in such a manner, that he might not suspect any thought she had of delivering
him into the power of his enemies: It is likely, that with many flattering
speeches she told him, how much not her self only, but the whole land of the
Philistines were astonished, at the report of his admirable strength; and those
wonders which he had wrought thereby amongst them, and how happy she thought
her self in having such a lover, that was the wonder of the world for strength
of body; and then withal, as only out of a desire to satisfy her own
curiosity (and the rather because the great affection she bore him, made her
long to know as much as she might concerning him) she desires him to tell her
wherein his strength lay, and whether any thing could weaken his strength, and
make him like other men.

Verse. 7. And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs,
etc.] Thus he answered her, thereby to evade the telling of that which he meant
not to discover, and that either as thinking she would be satisfied with this
answer, and not attempt to make proof whether it were so indeed or no; or else,
as intending to make himself sport with her, if she would make trial of the
truth of what he had told; but whilst he thus dallies with her, and assayes to
put her off with a jest, and did not resolutely deny her as he might have
done, at last she prevailed over him, and in good earnest bound him, and
delivered him up into the hands of the Philistines.

Verse. 9. Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the chamber.]
They durst not come near him to take him, no not when he was asleep, no more
then men dare venture upon a sleeping lion; Delilah hid them therefore in some
place near at hand, intending to call them forth, if she found he could not
break his bands, if otherwise to laugh it out, and make merry with him, as if
all done, had been done in sport, to see whether he had told her true.

Verse. 10. And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou have mocked me, and told
me lies: new tell me, etc.] This doubtless Delilah said, not immediately upon
his breaking the green withes, but at some other time; for had all this been
done at one time, it might have bred some suspicion in Samson; and besides, it
is evident she did appoint the Philistines several times to come unto her, as
we may see verse. 18. And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart,
she sent and called for the lords of the Philistines saying, Come up this once,
etc.

Verse. 11. And he said unto her, If they bind me with new ropes, etc.] Though
he had now found by experience that she would not take what he said for truth,
but would try the truth of what he said; yet either because he was content to
make himself sport in deluding her, or rather because her importunity was such,
that without pretending to satisfy her, he could not be rid of her, (for that
he was troubled with her importunity, is evident, verse 16.) he again fained a
false way how he might be bound; and so again a third time, verse. 13.

Verse. 14. And she fastened it with the pin, etc.] That is, having woven his
locks with the web, and so rolled the web whereunto his locks were woven about
the beam, as Samson had appointed her, she fastened the beam with the pin, that
so the beam might not turn back, when he should lift up his head, and then
wakened him, etc.

Verse. 16. When she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him so that his
soul was vexed unto the death, etc.] The meaning of this is, either that
through the distraction of his thoughts and affections, being exceeding loath to
reveal this secret unto her, and yet as loath still to deny her, he was indeed
ready to faint, or at least was even weary of his life, so that he had rather
have died then have continued still in such perplexity; or rather, that it was
even death to him to deny her any longer; especially when she began to upbraid
him now with mocking her as he had done, and to challenge him that he did not
love her, and so thereupon he told her all his heart, as it follows in the next
verse. Indeed considering the usual unfaithfulness and treachery of harlots,
it is strange, that neither her importunate desiring to know a secret, the
discovery whereof might prove so perilous to him, nor her assaying three
several times, to bind him in those ways which he had propounded, only to
deceive her, should not make him begin to suspect her, or fear some mischief
plotting against him; but for this we must remember, that the love of harlots
does usually besot men, and make them very slaves to those their mistresses;
especially when God intends to bring some mischief upon them, as now he
intended to have Samson punished for his sin.

Verse. 17. If I be shaven then my strength will go from me, etc.] Thus Samson
at last told her the truth of that secret, which he was so loath to disclose.
Yet this was not because his strength proceeded from his long hair; (for it was
merely the gift of God in a supernatural way; and therefore, verse. 20. where
the reason is given, why he lost his strength upon the cutting of his hair; it
is said, that the Lord was departed from him) nor was it, because by the
ordinary law of a Nazarite, if his head were shaven he was to lose his strength
(for neither had all Nazarites this gift of such admirable strength as Samson
had, nor was there any such thing in the law of the Nazarite, that those that
had their hair cut off, should lose such gifts as God by his Spirit had
conferred upon them): But it seems God had bestowed this as a singular gift
upon Samson; and that upon condition of his strict observing this law of the
Nazarite, in keeping his hair uncut (to wit, that he might be herein a type of
Christ, in regard of his invincible strength, and to signify also that the
Spirit of grace deprived from Christ to his members, is a Spirit of power, 2.
Tim. 1.7.) and it seems too, either by revelation or otherwise, God had
expressly declared thus much to Samson; and hence it was, that he told Delilah
now, that if he were shaven, he should become weak like any other man.

Verse. 18. When Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, etc.] Before
she persuaded her self, or was at least in great hopes that he had dealt truly
with her; but now it seems, she might perceive by his countenance, gesture, and
the manner of his expressing himself, that he did indeed tell her the truth
from his heart.

Then the Lords of the Philistines came up to her, and brought money in their
hand.) That is, the money promised, verse. 5. that is, each of them eleven
hundred pieces of silver, which was five thousand and five hundred pieces of
silver, if there were five Lords of the Philistines, as afterward, 1. Sam.
6.16. it is said there were. Perhaps they conceited that hitherto she had
dallied with them, because she saw not the reward promised tendered to her, and
therefore they brought the money now with them the more strongly to tempt her.

Verse, 19. And she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.] That
is, she shock him to awake him out of his sleep, and scared him with crying out
as formerly, the Philistines be upon thee Samson; yea, it is likely that she
bound him whilst he slept: for how else could she perceive that his strength
was gone from him, that she might call the Philistines that were lying in wait
to come in and set upon him.

Verse. 20. And he wist not that the Lord was departed from him.] To wit,
because on a sudden, at his first waking, he perceived not that his locks were
cut off. As for this expression, the Lord was departed from him, thereby only
is meant, that God had withdrawn himself from yielding him that supernatural
strength, which formerly he had given him; for it is evident, that it cannot be
understood of the total loss of Gods favor, or the graces of his sanctifying
Spirit.

Verse. 21. But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him
down to Gaza, etc.] Thus no doubt, God by his providence did dispose of it,
that his eyes might first smart for his sins, by means whereof he was first
entangled and drawn into sin; and that thither he might be carried away
captive, where first his lustful eyes had made him a slave to an harlot. As
for the Philistines, first they put out his eyes only by way of revenge, and
to make sure he might not hurt them, if he recovered his strength: secondly,
they carried him to Gaza, a sea coast town, because being carried so far
through the land of the Philistines, the more of the people might come out to
see him, and rejoice in the shameful captivity of that their invincible
enemy: thirdly, because he should be there furthest out of the reach of the
Israelites, if they should think to attempt his rescue: and fourthly, that they
might wipe off the stain of that dishonor, which lately he had there done
them; by carrying him as a prisoner through that gate, which he had ere while
to their great infamy, taken up in his arms and carried away. As for their
putting him to grind in the prison house, that was according to the custom of
those times: for then, it seems, they would not suffer their prisoners to live
idely, but made them grind at the mill; and thence is that expression, where
Babylons captivity is threatened, Isa. 47.2. Take the milstones and grind meal,
uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, etc. Yet withal it is likely, they
chuckered themselves, to think what good use they should make herein of his
great strength.

Verse. 22. Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again, after he was
shaven.] This shows that Samson was kept a good while in prison, ere he was
brought out to this their solemn festivitie; and it is noted, not as if his
strength lay merely in the length of his hair, but to implie his repentance,
the reassuming of his vow of the Nazarite, which he had broken, the recoverie
of Gods former favor, and the restoring of his former strength, together with
the sign of his reassumed vow, his Nazarites hair.

Verse. 23. Then the Lords of the Philistines gathered themselves together, for
to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god.] This Dagon was an idol-god
amongst the Philistines, and his image was in the upper part like a man, and in
the nether part like a fish (as many gather from 1. Sam. 5.4. concerning which
see the note upon that place) and that, because happily the Philistines, whose
land lay altogether on the seacoast, did worship him as the god of the sea; he
had a temple in Ashdod, 1. Sam. 5.4. And by this which is said here, that all
the lords of the Philistines met here together, from all the several lordships
of their country, to offer a great sacrifice to Dagon; to wit, for delivering
Samson into their hands; it seems he had another temple in Gaza too.

Verse. 25. And they called for Samson out of the prison house, and he made them
sport.] To wit, passively, as being abused, derided, buffered, and happily
forced to run up and down, that he might dash his head against the pillars;
yea, and generally by suffering whatever such a poor blind prisoner can expect
from enraged, proud, insulting enemies, when they were now flushed with wine
and good cheer; and herein was Samson also a type of Christ; for thus did they
sport themselves with our Savior, Matthew. 26, 67, 68. Then did they spit in his
face and buffeted him, and others smote him with the palms of their hands:
Saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee: and Matthew.
27.29. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head,
and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked
him, saying, Hail King of the Jews.

And they set him between the pillars.] To wit, because there he might be most
conveniently seen by the princes and people that were met together; but
withal, by the secret providence of God this was so ordered, that he might by
thrusting away those pillars, pull down the house upon the heads of the
Philistines.

Verse. 26. Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house stands,
that I may lean upon them.] This he spoke to the lad that led him, that the lad
might think it was only weariness; partly through his continual grinding at
the mill, and partly through their turmoyling him at present to make themselves
sport, that made him now desire to rest his hands upon the two pillars.

Verse. 28. And strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may
be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.] Thus by his calling
upon God for help, it was evident, that he relied not upon his grown hair, but
expected the renewing of his strength merely from God, Neither did Samson by
seeking to revenge his own wrong, take Gods work out of his hand; contrary to
that precept, Romans 12.19. Avenge not your selves, but rather give place to
wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, says the
Lord; and that because he was a public person raised of God, to punish those
that wronged his people; and besides, what he did now, it is likely, he did it
by the special instinct of Gods Spirit.

Verse. 30. And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines, and he bowed
himself, etc.] This is only an expression of his contempt of death, upon this
consideration that he should execute such a remarkable judgment upon the
Philistines. His primary and direct intention was not such as is theirs that
make away themselves, but his direct aim was to destroy the Philistines; only
he was content to lose his life in an action so advantageous to the people of
God, and whereby he should give such a deadly blow to their enemies; which is
expressed in the following words; so that the dead which he slew at his death,
were mo then they that he slew in his life; and herein doubtless, he was a
type of Christ, who by death overcame death, Heb. 2.14. And him that had the
power of death, which is the devil. To which some add also, that dying thus,
with one hand reaching out to one pillar, and the other to another, and so
bowing himself, he did the more fitly shadow forth Christ dying with his hands
stretched out upon the cross; John 19.30. When Jesus therefore had received
the vinegar, he said, It is finished, and he bowed his head, and gave up the
ghost.

Verse. 31. Then his brethren, and all the house of his father, came down and
took him, etc.] It is indeed strange that the Philistines should yield his body
to his kindred to be buried by them. But for this we must consider; first, that
happily the Philistines did not know, or would not acknowledge that this house
fell by Samsons means, but rather by some other casualty: secondly, that the
power of the Philistines, as also their pride and wrath against Gods people,
must needs by this fatal blow given to all their princes, and so many of the
people, be much abated and pulled down, so that this was no time to domineer
over the Israelites, or to provoke them by any harsh answer, but rather to
provide by all means for their own safety: thirdly, that the hearts of all men
are in Gods hands: Prove. 16.1. The preparations of the heart of man, and the
answer of the tongue, is from the Lord: who might therefore move them to yield
Samsons body to his brethren, as he did Pilate to yield to the like suit
concerning Christ, John 19.38. Joseph of Arimathea (being a disciple of Jesus
but secretly for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate, that he might take away the
body of Jesus; and Pilate gave him leave.

And he judged Israel twenty years.] See the note chap. 13. verse. 1.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. ANd there was a man of mount Ephraim, etc.] All the particular
passages related from hence to the end of this book, were certainly in the time
of some of the forementioned Judges, and that not long too after the death of
Joshua, and not according to the order of time, as they are here inserted,
after the death of Samson. Concerning which see the note upon verse. 6.

Verse. 2. And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver,
that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst. etc.] To wit either by
cursing those that had stolen it, through the violence of her passion; or by
adjuring those she spoke to under a curse to reveal what was become of it, if
they knew any thing of it. Now the bitterness of his mothers spirit in cursing
thus, was doubtless the greater, because she had superstitiously devoted it to
a religious use, to wit, the making of images for her son. But yet Micah
mentions it as being touched in conscience by way of aggravating his sin, and
implying the reason why he could no longer detain it, In mine own hearing,
says he, thou did curse those that had taken thy silver from thee, or that
did not discover where it was, yet wretch as I am, hitherto I have detained it,
but no longer dare I lie under a mothers curse, and therefore am I now come to
confess my sin, and to restore again the money to you.

And his mother said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my son.] That is, free be
thou from my curse, my son and may thou be blessed of the Lord, and not
cursed, because thou have repented of this fact, and so ingeniously do offer
to restore, what unadvisedly before thou had taken away from me.

Verse. 3. His mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto the Lord,
etc.] Micahs mother here tells him, that she had wholly dedicated the silver
unto the Lord, Jehovah as it is in the Hebrew, and yet withal she adds, that
it was to make idols for him, to make a graven image and a molten image;
whereby it is evident, that in these times, when many of the Israelites were
become idolaters, yet they pretended and intended the worship of the true God
in their idol-service, not esteeming those dumb and dead images gods, but only
representations and remembrances of the true God. Some question whether this
which she spoke, of a graven image, and a molten image, was meant of two
several images, that she intended should be made of her silver, one graven and
another molten; or of one image which is called a graven and a molten image,
only because they did melt their silver, and cast it into the form of an
image, and then did afterward polish and finish it with graving tools; but
that two several images are here intended, is evident in the following
chapter, verse. 18. where it is plain that they are named severally, And these
went into Micahs house, and fetched the carved image, the ephod, and the
Teraphim, and the molten image.

Verse. 4. Yet he restored the money unto his mother.] Though she now gave it
him freely, yet he would not keep it, as fearing the disquiet of his
conscience, if she would bestow it as she vowed, she might, but he would be
sure to rid his hands of it.

And his mother took two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the
founder, who made thereof a graven image, and a molten image, etc.] The other
nine hundred shekels were therefore it seems laid out in providing an ephod and
other ornaments for the priest in providing their teraphim, and whatsoever else
was requisite for the idolatrous worship o^ the^ false gods.

Verse. 5. And the man Micah had an house of gods, etc.] That is, a chapel
consecrated to these superstitious devotions; and made an ephod, under which
are comprehended all other garments for the priests; and teraphim, now these
teraphim were a special sort of images, distinguished by that name from all
other sorts of images: 2. Kings 23.24. Moreover the workers with familiar
spirits, and the wizards, and the images, (the teraphim it is in the original)
and the idols, and all the abominations that were spied in the land of Judah,
and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away. It seems they had the shape of men: 1.
Sam. 19.13. And Michael took an image and laid in the bed (for there also
Michaels image is in the original called teraphim) and that they made use of
them as oracles, and received from them answers what to do in doubtful cases:
Ezekiel. 21.21. The king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head
of the two ways, to use divination: he made his arrows bright he consulted
with images, or teraphim: Zach. 10.2. The idols (or teraphim) have spoken
vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams: and it
may well be, that this made the Danites enquire at Micahs house concerning the
success of their journey.

Verse. 6. In those days there was no king in Israel, etc.] That is, in those
days when Micah did this before related: But when was this? The time is not
expressly set down; some conceive this was done after Samsons death, and that
therefore it is next related in the course of the history; but the most
probable opinion is, that both this, and all that follows to the end of this
book, were done long before Samsons death, and are here only related apart by
themselves, that the story of the Judges, the main thing intended in the former
part of the book, might not be interrupted: first, because it is not probable
that the Danites being a populous ^^be, and straitened in their dwelling, by
reason of the Amorites so long before, Judge. 1.34. And the Amorites forced the
children of Dan into the mountain, for they would not let them come into the
valley; would stay so many years ere they would look out to enlarge their
borders, which how they did, and how they stole away Micahs gods, is related in
the following chapter But especially because in the war of Israel against
Benjamin (which is largely related in the three last chapters of this book)
Phinehas ministered before the Lord, chap. 20.28. And Phinehas the son of
Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days, saying, Shall I
yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, who
killed Zimri and Cozbi, Numb. 25.7. above three hundred years before Samsons
death: It seems therefore, either this was done immediately after the death of
Joshua, and those elders, who all their time kept the people from revolting
from God, Judge. 2.7. And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua,
and and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua; who had seen all the
great works of the Lord which he did for Israel: and then the meaning of the
words may be (there was no King in Israel) that there was no ordinary supreme
magistrate, neither King nor Judge, to restrain the people from these wicked
courses, or else that it was done in the time of some of the Judges, that
followed next after Joshua; and then the meaning of the words must be, that in
those days there was no King in Israel; that is, no supreme Magistrate armed
with such sovereigne authority, to punish offenders that transgressed the law,
as the Kings afterward had; the Judges rather governing the people by
counsel, showing them what was the law and will of God, then by the sword of
justice, at least, in those times of the Judges, when they were in subjection
to those neighboring nations that tyrannised over them.

Verse. 7. And there was a young man out of Bethlehem-Judah, etc.] That is,
Bethlehem in the tribe of Judah, (which was called Bethlehem Ephratah, Mich.
5.2.) to distinguish it from that Bethlehem which was in the tribe of Zebulun,
Josh. 19.15. But why is it said in the next words that he was a Levite, and yet
withal too of the family of Judah? I answer, because though he was a Levite,
yet he was born and bred up amongst them of the family of Judah. It may be
true which some conceive, that his father being a Levite, and sojourning there,
married a wife of the family of Judah: but it is not usual in Scripture, to
style men by the mothers family, and therefore the meaning is, that there he
had his birth and breeding: for which cause, he is also said to have sojourned
there; because he was not of that tribe, neither was Bethlehem one of the
Levites cities, but there he lived as a stranger, as the Levites it seems did
in many other places. Afterward his name is expressed, and of what family he
was; to wit, that his name was Jonathan, and that he was the son of Gershom,
the son of Manasseh.

Verse. 8. And the man departed out of the city from Bethlehem-Judah, to sojourn
where he could find a place, etc.] This shows the corruptions of those times;
God had provided liberally for the tribe of Levi; but in these idolatrous
times, the people had in a great measure forsaken the Tabernacle; and so their
appointed maintenance of tithes, it seems, was not yielded them; for then this
Levite needed not have wandered up and down, to procure means of livelihood.
See the like, Neh. 13.10, 11. And I perceived that the portion of the Levites
had not been given them; for the Levites, and the singers that did the work,
were fled every one to his field. Then I contended with the rulers, and said,
Why is the house of God forsaken? and I gathered them together, and put them in
their places.

Verse. 10. And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father, and
a priest, etc.] Though he had consecrated his son to execute the priests
office, in his idolatrous chapel, yet because he thought it would be a great
honor to his idol-worship, to have one of the tribe of Levi to his priest;
either he was content to put his son out of that place, and to put in this
Levite in his room; or else meant to join him with his son; and so began to
treat with him to this purpose. But yet observable it is, that though he
promised to reverence this Levite as a father (notwithstanding his youth) if he
would be his priest, be unto me says he a father and a priest: yet it was but
a poor salarie that he tendered him for his service. I will give thee ten
shekels of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals:
eleven hundred shekels of silver were set apart, to make their idols, and the
appurtenances thereto belonging, and yet ten shekels of silver were thought
enough for the priests wages. Indeed had not the time when this was done been
extremely corrupt, a Levite would never have prostituted himself to such a base
service, as to be a priest to their idol-dunghill-gods, and that too upon such
base terms; but hunger will snap at any thing, when there is no grace to
restrain men; for so it follows in the next verse, and the Levite was content
to dwell with the man, etc.

Verse. 11. And the young man was unto him as one of his sons, etc.] Though he
reverenced him as a father, as he had promised him before, verse. 10, yet it is
said here, that the young man was unto him as one of his sons, that is, he
loved him, and used him as if he had been his own child.

Verse. 13. Now I know that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to
my priest.] But how much he was deceived, the following chapter shows.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. IN those days there was no King in Israel.] See the note, chap. 17.
verse. 6.

For unto that day, all their inheritance had not fallen unto them, among the
tribes of Israel.] By reason of the Amorites, who cooped them up in the
mountains, chap. 1.34. And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the
mountain; for they would not suffer them to come into the valley.

Verse. 3. When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the
young man, the Levite.] The Danites had part of their inheritance in that part
of Canaan, which was at first assigned to the tribe of Judah, and therefore it
is not unlikely, that some of these spies were formerly acquainted with this
Levite, whilst he sojourned in Bethlehem-Judah, and so now knew his voice.
However by the different dialect, or manner of speech and pronunciation, which
the men of Judah used, from that which was used by the inhabitants of mount
Ephraim, they might know him to belong to Judah, though he now sojourned in
Ephraim; as we may see in that instance, chap. 12.6 where the men of Ephraim
said Sibboleth in stead of Shibboleth. And besides, if they heard him speak
concerning the employments of his calling, by that they might know he was a
Levite.

Verse. 5. And they said unto him, Ask counsel we pray thee of God, etc.]
Hearing from the Levite, that Micah had there a chapel of gods, and amongst
the rest, an Ephod and Teraphim, which were the Oracles, whereby in those
idolatrous times they were wont to enquire of God; and that he was hired to be
Micahs priest, they desired him that he would enquire of God, concerning the
success of that great business they were going about.

Verse. 6. Go in peace; before the Lord is your way wherein ye go.] That is, the
eye of the Lord it upon your way to remove all difficulties, and to make your
journey prosperous; he will go out before you, and take care of your journey.
Now this answer he might return of his own head, flatteringly, as false
Prophets are wont to do. But yet God might permit Satan, by his Teraphim, or
some such Oracle, to foretell this concerning the success of their journey,
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a prophet or a dreams of dreams,
and gives thee a sign, or a wonder, and the sign, or the wonder come to
pass whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods (which
thou have not known) and let us serve them; thou shall not hearken unto the
words of that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: For the Lord your God proves
you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with
all your soul. And this seems the more probable, because his answer, as the
devils Oracles had wont to be may be interpreted two several ways; either
that God saw what they were going about, or that God would prosper them in
their journey. But the event answering that promise or prediction of success
which he had given them, this made them highly esteem both the priest and his
idols.

Verse. 7. Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, etc.] Or Leshem. Josh.
19.47. which afterward by these Danites, when they had destroyed the
inhabitants, and taken it for themselves to dwell in, was called Dan, verse. 29.
And they called the name of the city Dan: four particulars are here
mentioned, which the spies of Dan noted, and whereby they concluded, that they
should easily take this place; the first is, that the people dwelt carelessely,
after the manner of the Sidonians, quiet and secure. The Sidonians, in regard
of the strength of their city, and their excessive wealth, lived securely and
voluptuously, without fear of any enemy that should invade them; the rather,
because neither the Israelites, since their entering the land of Canaan, nor any
other of the neighboring nations, had ever attempted any thing against them;
and after the same manner lived the inhabitants of Laish; yea, and it may well
be as some think, that in this their careless security, they are compared to
the Sidonians rather then to any other people; because that having some
relation to the Sidonians, either by some strict league that was between them,
or rather some dependence they had upon them, as their lords in chief; (which
seems also to be the reason, why they had no magistrates of their own) hence it
was, that they lived so carelessely and securely; not only in confidence of
their aid, but as being infected by their example, and so brought to live in
such a kind of sensual, voluptuous, secure course of life, as they observed in
them. The second is, that there was no magistrate in the land, that might put
them to shame in any thing. For where there is no magistrates (who are called
the shields of the earth, Psalm. 47.9.) either to restrain the people from that
looseness, and manifold wickedness they are ready to run into, or to provide
for their defense, they must needs lie naked and open to all manner of
mischief; and the magistrates punishing offenders, is here called a putting
them to shame; because the shame does more curb men from evil, then the smart
of punishments. The third is, that they were far from the Sidonians, and
therefore could not on a sudden have any aid from them; and yet they were the
only people from whom they were like to have help, as is before noted: And the
fourth is, that there was neither league nor commerce between them and their
neighbors; either of which might have won their neighbors to help them.

Verse. 10. For God has given it into your hands.] This they grounded, partly
upon that which they had observed in Laish, and partly from the encouragement
which Micahs priest had given them, verse 6. And the priest said unto them, Go
in peace: before the Lord is your way wherein ye go.

Verse. 12. And they went up and pitched in Kiriath-jearim, in Judah; wherefore
they call that place Mahaneh-Dan, etc.] Mahaneh-Dan, that is, the camp of Dan,
see chap. 13.25. it may well be, that this was the place where Samsons parents
dwelt; for Kiriath-jearim stood in the very confines of Judah, Dan, and
Benjamin.

Verse. 14. Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and
a graven image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do.]
That is bethink your selves whether these things will not be a good booty for
us; by them we enquired of the Lord, when we went to spy out the land, and
received an answer that our journey should be prosperous, and doubtless we may
carry the business so, as to make them our own; and therefore consider whether
it will not be our best way to take them with us, that we may make the same use
of them in future times.

Verse. 15. And they turned thitherward and came to the house of the young man
the Levite, etc.] Micahs house may be here called the Levites house, because he
dwelt there, but besides though he was of Micahs family, yet he might dwell
apart by himself, to wit, in that part of the house which joined to the
chapel, where these idols were, and with respect to that it may be said, that
they came to the house of the young man the Levite.

Verse. 17. And the five men that went to spy out the land, went up, and came in
thither, and took the graven image, etc.] First, no doubt they brought out the
priest to their brethren the Danites that stood at the gate, with whom whilst
the priest staid, happily saluting some of the chief of them, wishing them good
success in the enterprise they were going about, or otherwise showing them
such courtesy, as to strangers is wont to be afforded; in the interim the five
men went back into his house, and fetched away the images, etc. and therefore
it is added in the following words, that the priest stood in the entering of
the gate, with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons of war.

Verse. 18. And these went into Micahs house, etc.] That is, the five men
mentioned before, verse. 17. see the former note.

Verse. 20. And he took the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and
went in the midst of the people.] For all the respect that Micah had shown him,
now he hoped to have a place of more advantage, away he goes: as for his going
in the midst with his idolatrous trash, he did it either for the better defense
both of them and his person, or in a kind of apish imitation of the arks being
carried in the midst of the tribes.

Verse. 21. So they turned and departed, and put the little ones, and the
cattle, and the carriages before them.] The bringing of their wives, little
ones, and cattle with them, shows with what assurance of success they went
against Laish; and these going away from Micahs house, they place before their
army, as not fearing any enemy before them, but suspecting that Micah with all
the strength he could raise, would pursue after them, as indeed he did.

Verse. 24. And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the
priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? etc.] As if he should have
said, that he esteemed all that they had left him as nothing, now his gods were
gone.

Verse. 27. And they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city
with fire.] This is mentioned before, Josh. 19.47. concerning which, see the
note there. It may seem strange why the Danites should burn this city, seeing
they surprised it purposely that they might dwell in it, and it must needs be a
great work, and of great charge to rebuild it again; but this we must consider
is usual when cities are stormed and taken, partly through the fury of the
soldiers in the heat of the assault, and partly that they may the more easily
destroy the inhabitants, whilst they are forced to busy themselves in
quenching the fire: cities are seldom taken by force, but that some part of
them is burnt with fire.

Verse. 28. And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Sydon, etc.]
See the note above, verse. 7.

And it was in the valley that lies by Beth-Rehob, etc.] Rehob was a city in
the utmost north part of the land, near unto mount Libanus, and Hamath, Number.
13.21. So they went up and searched the land from the wilderness of Zin unto
Rehob, as men come to Hamath: it was within the portion assigned to Asher.
Josh. 19 28. and appointed for the Levites in that tribe, Josh. 21.31. but is
reckoned amongst those cities, whose inhabitants the Asherites did not drive
out, Judge. 1.31. who are called Syrians of Beth-Rehob, 2. Sam. 10.6. It is
evident therefore that Laish, which was also now in the possession of the
Canaanites or Syrians, and was nigh Rehob, stood also in the utmost north parts
of the land, near to the fountain of Dan, one of the heads of that river which
was therefore called Jordan, whence was that proverbiall speech, from Dan even
to Beersheba.

Verse. 29. And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan
their father, etc.] Because the Danites that seated themselves here, so far
off from the rest of their brethren, might fear lest in future times their
reference to their brethren should be questioned, they named their city Dan,
which was before called Laish, that it might be known to what tribe they
belonged; yet withal it is probable they so named their city too in honor of
their father the Patriarch, of whom they were descended; but in the mean time
they were idolaters and robbers, and this their father Dan did not do, as
Christ speaks in a like case, John 8.40. But now ye seek, to kill me, a man
that has told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham.

Verse. 30. And the children of Dan set up the graven image, etc.] The good
success which they had in their attempt upon Laish, according to the answer
which they had received from this Oracle, made them highly esteem both this
priest and his images, and accordingly they established this idolatrous worship
of their false gods amongst them; and so this Levite Jonathan the son of
Gershom, etc. and his posterity, were priests unto these idolatrous Danites,
until the captivity of the land. The most of Expositours understand this of
that captivity, when the ark was taken and carried away by the Philistines, 1.
Sam. 4.10, 11. And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they
fled every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for there
fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen. And the Ark of God was taken, and the
two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas were slain; for then we see there was a
great slaughter amongst the Israelites, and no doubt, many of them were carried
away captive, together with the ark; and all this befell them, because of the
idolatry that was then in the land, Psalm. 78.58, 59. They provoked him to
anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven
images. When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel. So that
he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh; the tent which he placed among men, etc.
Besides, Micahs graven image, upon which depended the service of this
idolatrous priest, and his successors, stood up only till the remove of the
Tabernacle from Shiloh, verse. 31. And they set them up Micahs graven image
which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh; which was
doubtless about that time, when the Ark was taken by the Philistines; so that
hence it may seem very probable, that the priesthood of these men continued no
longer; and that this is the captivity here spoken of. Besides, if it be
understood of that captivity, when the ten tribes were carried away captives
into Assyria, by Shalmaneser, 2. Kings 17. it may be judged very unlikely, that
these idolatrous priests should in Samuels time be suffered, especially in
David's, who was so holy, and potent a King. But yet, because the captivieie of
the land, cannot well be understood, otherwise then of a general captivity, I
see not why it should not be understood of that captivity when the people were
carried away into Assyria by Shalmaneser. It is indeed manifest by the
following verse, that Micahs image was pulled down, not long after the
Tabernacle was removed from Shiloh; and in Saul's time, it is manifest, that the
Tabernacle was in Nob, 1. Sam. 21. But yet, though the idol was suppressed, these
idolatrous priests might (in secret especially, though not openly) continue to
do this impious service for the Danites, unto the time of Jeroboam; and then
might be employed as priests for his golden calf, which was erected in this
city Dan, 1. Kings, 12.29. He set the one in Bethel, and the other he put in
Dan: for though he made priests of the lowest of the people that were not
Levites, verse. 31. yet that does not hinder but that these idolaters, though
Levites, might be of the number of his priests too: and so they might continue
till that general captivity of the ten tribes.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass in those days, etc.] Concerning the time when
these things were done, see chap. 17. verse. 6.

There was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount Ephraim, who took
to him a concubine out of Bethlehem-Judah.] Some concubines there were amongst
the Hebrews, that were esteemed lawful wives; as concerning the right of the
bed, who yet were not esteemed in the rank with other wives, principally and
most properly so called; for they had not the honor of being accounted the
mother of the family, their children did not inherit with the rest, etc. and
that either because they were before such as lived in a servile condition, as
Hagar; or because they were taken in a second place, and were not with the same
rites and solemnities married to them, as the others were; concerning which see
the note, Genesis 22.24. and 25.6. and such a concubine it seems this was; and
therefore is the Levite called her husband, both here verse. 3. And her husband
arose, and went after her to speak friendly unto her, and again, chap. 20.4.
And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered, etc. and her
father, his father in law, in several places. Why Bethlehem from whence this
Levite had his concubine, is called Bethlehem-Judah. See in the note, chap.
17.7.

Verse. 2. And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away from him
unto her fathers house, etc.] It seems, upon some discovery of her whoredom,
or at least some suspicion the Levite had of it, there arose some quarrel
betwixt him and his concubine; and thereupon she left him, and went home again
to her fathers house, who was too ready to entertain her. The sad effects that
followed upon this Levites taking a concubine, makes it manifest, that even in
those times, though it were an ordinary thing amongst all sorts of men, even
amongst the Levites, to have concubines, yet God was not pleased with it: from
the beginning it was not so, says our Savior, Matthew. 19.8.

Verse. 3. And her husband arose, and went after her to speak friendly unto her,
and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple of asses.) To
wit, to carry their provision, and happily, that both himself, and his
concubine, if she would return with him, might sometimes ease themselves by
riding as occasion served.

Verse. 11. Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in unto this city of the
Jebusites, and lodge in it.] For though the children of Judah had taken from
the Jebusites that part of Jebus that is, Jerusalem, which was in their tribe,
chap. 1.8. The children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken
it, and had smitten it with the edge of the sword: yet out of that part which
belonged to Benjamin (on which side the Levite was now traveling) the
Jebusites were not wholly expelled, chap. 1.21. The children of Benjamin did
not drive out the inhabitants of Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell in
Jerusalem with the children of Benjamin unto this day.

Verse. 14. And the sun went down upon them, when they were by Gibeah, which
belongs to Benjamin.] There was a Gibeah in the tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.57.
to distinguish this from that, it is here called Gibeah, which belongs to
Benjamin, and else where Gibeah of Saul, 1. Sam. 11.4. it is thought to be the
same, which Josh. 21.17. is called Gebah, which was a city given to tho
Priests, the sons of Aaron. Against which it makes nothing, that here it is
said, verse. 16. the men of the place were Benjamites: for the priests did not
dwell alone in such cities, though they were the lords and owners of them.

Verse. 15. And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah.]
Though it were a pious resolution in the Levite, rather to chose to lodge in
Gibeah then in Jebus, and that because Jebus was a city wherein the idolatrous
and uncircumcised Jebusites dwelt; yet this proved fatal both to him and his,
as the best counsel may have the worst success, and that because there is a
secret overruling hand of God, that may by this means bring about what he has
determined for the punishment of some other sins which we mind not.

Verse. 16. And behold, there came an old man from his work, out of the field at
even, which was also of mount Ephraim.] Though he were an old man, yet he
followed his work in the field, and that until the even, which is doubtless
noted to his praise. As for that last clause, that he was also of mount
Ephraim, that no doubt is expressed to intimate, that this amongst other things
made the old man the readier to entertain the Levite, when he heard him say
verse. 18. that he was of mount Ephraim too.

Verse. 18. But I am now going to the house of the Lord.] The Tabernacle at this
time was in Shiloh, Josh. 18.1. and Shiloh was in the tribe of Ephraim: either
therefore there the Levites dwelling was; or else, he meant first to go to the
house of the Lord, to do his service there; and then afterward to pass
forward on his journey homeward. However, it is probable, that he mentions his
going to the house of the Lord, that he might know him to be a Levite.

Verse. 22. Behold, the men of the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the
house round about, etc.] A like fact to this we have formerly related,
concerning the Sodomites; of which see the note, Genesis 19.4. as for this term
Sons of Belial, see Deuteronomy. 13.13.

Verse. 24. Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine, them I will
bring out now, etc.] See the note, Genesis 19.8.

Verse. 25. So the man took his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and
they knew her, etc.] In the foregoing words it is said, that when the old man,
the Levites host, proffered these varlets his daughter, a virgin, and the
Levites concubine, thereby to take them off from that unnatural uncleanness,
wherewith they meant to satisfy their lust upon the Levite himself, the men
would not hearken to him; yet when immediately by the Levites means, his
concubine was indeed brought out unto them, and left amongst them, they fell
upon her and defiled her, and that in such an outrageous barbarous manner, that
she died of it; which was doubtless, because having once an object for their
lust in their power, they could not forbear; and so forgetting their former
resolutions, they laid hold on her, and abused her in a most inhumane and
execrable manner.

Verse. 26. Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the
door of the man's house* etc.] That is, she fell down dead at the door of the
man's house, and there lay till break of day, when her husband going forth to
see what was become of her, found her dead; and thus though her husband had
pardoned her whoredom, yet God punished it, and that too with her own sin;
adultery was her sin, and adultery was her death; she had dealt
treacherously against her husband; one would not satisfy her, but she exposed
her self to the lust of a stranger; and now she was abused to death, by the
lusts of so many barbarous wretches, whom she knew not, that by so abusing her
they murdered her.

Verse. 27. And her hands were upon the threshold.] This is added, to implie the
reason of that which follows, why the Levite spoke to her to rise, verse. 28.
And he said unto her, Up, let us be going; to wit, because she lay in such a
manner, her hands laid upon the threshold under her head, as if she had been
asleep.

Verse. 29. He took a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her,
together with her bones into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of
Israel.] That is, to each of the twelve tribes a piece (for to the tribe of
Levi that was dispersed through all the land, there was none sent) and this was
done, that the fight of her dead limbs might affect them the more, and stir
them up to be the more zealous for the punishment of this horrible villainy,
that had been committed upon his concubine, Some conceive, that there was none
sent to the tribe of Benjamin, but that there was two pieces sent to the tribe
of Manasseh, because that tribe dwelt half within Jordan, and half without. But
this is altogether a groundless conceit; for there was most reason for sending
a piece to Benjamin, in regard the fact was committed in a city of their
tribe; and there was as much reason why they should have sent two pieces to the
tribe of Dan, as to the tribe of Manasseh; since the tribe of Dan was also
seated in two several parts of the land; some in the portion of Judah, and
some northward at Laish, as in the former chapter was related.

Verse. 30. And it was so, that all that saw it, said, There was no such deed
done nor seen, etc.] The messengers relating the cause why the Levite had done
this, not only the elders of each tribe, (to whom these parcels of her body
were sent, because there was no magistrate armed with regal power to punish
this fact) but even all that came to the hearing of it, cried out against it as
a matchless vill^nie; and stirred up one another not to let it pass
unrevenged. And hence is that expression of the prophet, Hos. 9.9. They have
deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. THen all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was
gathered together, etc.] All the children of Israel, that is, the chief of all
the people, as it follows in the next verse, all the elders and officers,
captains, and men of war, except only they of the tribe of Benjamin went out
from their own habitations severally, and were gathered together as one man,
that is, unanimously, as readily, as if one man only had been appointed to
come to any place: and thus was there an assembly of all the land, to wit,
those within Jordan from Dan to Beersheba, and together with them also of the
land of Gilead, that is, those without Jordan, and that in Mizpeh; Mizpeh was a
place where the Israelites did usually hold their public assemblies, 1. Sam
7.5. And Samuel said, Gather all the children of Israel to Mizpeh; and so also,
chap. 10.17. and Jer. 40.7, 8. It is very probable, that it stood in the
confines of Judah and Benjamin, and is therefore reckoned amongst the cities of
both tribes, see Josh. 15.38. and 18.26. neither could there be therefore, for
the business they met about, a fitter place chosen: now here they are said to
be gathered together unto the Lord, not because the Tabernacle was there, as we
shall after see, verse. 27. but either because they were assembled in Gods name,
and to hear what God would give them in charge; or because in all judicial
assemblies, the Lord is in a special manner present; Psalm. 82.1. God stands
in the congregation of the mighty, he judges among the gods; or else, because
they met in a synagogue, a house set apart for public prayer, and teaching the
people, which seems the more likely, even because of that which we read in one
of our Apocryphal books, 1. Macc. 3.46. Wherefore the Israelites assembled
themselves together, and came to Maspha, over against Jerusalem: for Maspha was
the place where they prayed aforetime in Israel. Some conceive I know, that the
Ark was at present removed to Mizpeh; but of that see verse. 27.

Verse. 2. Four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.] The number of these
men of war is expressed, both to show their zeal in seeking to punish this
abominable fact of the men of Gibeah and also to show how evidently the hand of
God was against these Israelites, when they were twice beaten by the
Benjamites; and yet were so many more in number then they.

Verse. 3. (Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were
gone to Mizpeh)] This is added to implie, how resolved the Benjamites were to
stand out in defense against the rest of the Israelites, who hearing of the
Israelites assembling themselves about this business, neither went to the
assembly themselves, nor sent any messenger to them.

Verse. 5. And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round
about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me.] To wit, by their
unnatural lust, as they had slain his wife; or at least he means, that they
thought to have done that to him, which rather then he would have endured, he
would have lost his life.

Verse. 7. Behold, ye are all children of Israel, etc.] And therefore ought to
take to heart, that so foul an abomination should be committed in Israel; it
concerns you all, and therefore look to it.

Verse. 8. We will not any of us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn
in to his house.] This is added, to show how zealous they were in seeking to
punish this horrible sin, they vowed that they would not so much as go home
to their houses, till they had executed judgment upon those that were guilty
of it; yea not only so, but also at the same place and time; at least when the
report was brought them, that the Benjamites would not deliver the malefactors
into their hands, but were resolved rather to defend them; they vowed also,
that having slain the Benjamites, they would not give any of their daughters in
marriage to any that were left alive, chap. 21. verse. 1. Now the men of Israel
had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall not any of us give his daughter to
Benjamin to wife: and that they would likewise destroy every town throughout
the whole land of Israel, that had not sent some of their people to this
assembly, to help them in this war, chap. 21.5. They had made a great oath
concerning him that came not up to the Lord, to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely
be put to death.

Verse. 9. We will go up by lot against it.] That is, we will by lot determine
it, who shall go up to fight against Gibeah, and who shall go forth to fetch in
victuals, and other provisions for the people: one in ten had need to be set
apart for this service, and who they shall be, the lot shall decide.

Verse. 12. And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin,
etc.] Though the Benjamites absenting themselves from the assembly of all
Israel at Mizpeh, was a just ground of suspicion, that they meant not to yield
up the malefactors to be punished; yet would not the Israelites thereupon make
war presently against them, but first they sent messengers to all the
families of the tribe of Benjamin, to desire the deliverie of those sons of
Belial to deserved punishment, that so if it were possible, bloodshed and
civil war might be prevented.

Verse. 13. Deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which are in Gibeah,
that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel.] That is, make
others afraid to commit such horrible sins, and do what we can to divert the
evil of punishment, which God may else justly lay upon us, even by cutting them
off which have committed this crying villainy.

But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brethren
the children of Israel, etc.] That is, though the Israelites were their
brethren, whose advice therefore they might well think, tended equally to the
good of them all, and against whom to fight in the defense of such wretches,
must needs be counted a most unnatural and ungodly course; yet because they
thought it a dishonor to them, that the other tribes should intermeddle with
punishing any within their territories, and were so proud of their strength,
and highly conceited of their abilities for martial affairs, that they thought
themselves able enough to make good their part against all the tribes of Israel
beside, they would not hearken to their brethren but prepared to fight it out.

Verse. 15. And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of the
cities, twenty and six thousand, etc.] This is added, to imply what it was that
made them despise the counsel of their brethren, to wit, their confidence in
their own strength; of this six and twenty thousand and seven hundred, there
were slain by the Israelites twenty five thousand and an hundred, verse. 35. and
there were only six hundred of them that saved themselves in the rock Rimmon,
verse. 47. It seems therefore, that the other thousand were slain in the two
first battles wherein the Benjamites overcame the Israelites; for it is not
likely they should vanquish the Israelites in two set battles, and kill so
many thousand of them without any loss in their own army.

Verse. 18. And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God.
etc.] The house of God was at this time in Shiloh, see verse. 27. and thither
therefore they went to ask counsel of God, saying Which of us shall go up
first to the battle, etc. It may seem strange that the people of God,
undertaking so just a war as this was against the Benjamites, out of a zeal
to punish those that had committed so foul a sin and because the Benjamites
did undertake the defense of them that they might not be punished, should
notwithstanding be twice beaten and vanquished by those Benjamites, as we see
afterward they were, not without the loss of forty thousand of their men,
especially if we consider this which is here said, that before they went to
fight with them, they were so careful to go to the house of the Lord, that
there they might ask counsel of God; but to remove this scruple, we must know
that God is wont in great wisdom, and without any stain either to his justice
or mercy toward his people, to suffer a while, those that have a just cause to
go by the worst: as first, to prevent the ascribing of their victory to their
own prowess or strength, by letting them see how little good their great
armies could do, if the Lord should withhold his help from them: secondly, to
beat them off from that confidence in their great strength and in the justness
of their cause, which beforehand he perceives in them: till men have learnt to
go out of themselves, and to rely only upon God, they are not fit for his aid:
thirdly, to punish them for some sins, wherein he perceives them to run on
without fear; that so by their loss, they may be brought to see, bewail, and
forsake those sins. And for these reasons doubtless God did suffer these
Israelites to be so shamefully beaten by the Benjamites; for both idolatry and
many other sins were rife amongst them, as we see, chap. 17.6. and
particularly in the idolatry of Micah and the Danites: 2. trusting in the
justness of their cause, and the multitude of their men, in regard of whom the
Benjamites were but a handful: their spirits were too much puffed up with
assurance of victory, and hence it was that they never asked God whether they
should go against the Benjamites, or whether they should prevail; they never
prayed to God for his help, they never sought by fasting and humiliation, by
repenting of their own sins, and by offering up sacrifices of atonement, to
make their peace with God; but only as men assured of victory, to prevent
variance amongst themselves, they desired to know which of the tribes should go
up first against Benjamin; they concluded, that having eleven tribes against
one, four hundred thousand against six and twenty thousand, they must needs
prevail.

Verse. 21. And destroyed down to the ground, of the Israelites that day, twenty
and two thousand men.] See the note before on verse. 18.

Verse. 23. ( And the children of Israel went up, and wept before the Lord
until even, etc.] But they did not fast and afflict their souls, and offer up
sacrifices to make an atonement with God, as afterward they did, verse. 26. It
seems their weeping now was more for their loss in the former battle, then
for their sins, or at least that they were not so thoroughly humbled, and so
truly penitent as was fitting; and therefore again after this their enemies
prevailed. Indeed now they began to see that their multitude and strength was
vain without Gods help, and therefore enquired whether they should go forth to
battle against the Benjamites or no; but withal they pitched upon a wrong
cause of their ill success, supposing it was only because God was not pleased
with their making war against their brethren, never thinking of their sins;
and therefore God answers them accordingly, Go up against him: which was no
more in effect then this, though he be your brother you may fight against him.

Verse. 26. All the people came up, and came unto the house of God and wept, and
sat there before the Lord and fasted, etc.] Now they not only wept as they did
before, verse. 23. (which might only be for the loss they sustained) but also
fasted and offered burnt-offerings, and peace offerings before the Lord: which
shows that now they perceived that though God liked the cause they had
undertaken, yet he was displeased with their persons, and that therefore they
fasted and afflisted their souls in a most solemn manner, repenting them of
their sins, and turning to the Lord, and offered burnt-offerings and
peace offerings, to make an atonement for their sins, and to obtain Gods
favor, that he would now prosper them in this their war against Benjamin.

Verse. 27. ( For the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days.] That
is, in those parts about Gibeah, to wit, in Shiloh, which was not far from
Gibeah, chap. 21.12. And they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead,
four hundred young virgins that had known no man by lying with any male, and
they brought them to the camp at Shiloh; or rather the ark was there, that is,
in the house of God, whether in the former verse it is said they went up;
though in after times the Ark was a long while out of the Tabernacle, yet in
those days it was there, in the house of God in Shiloh.

Verse. 28. And Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before
it in those days.] That is, ministered before the Lord in the priests office:
Deuteronomy. 10.8. The Lord separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the Ark of the
covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord, and to minister unto him, and
enquired of the Lord by Urim and Thummim, before the Ark in the behalf of the
people. And hereby it appears, that this story of Isreal's war with Benjamin,
did not fall out after Samsons death, according as it is here set down in order
of the History, but long before: for had Phinehas lived after Samson, he had
been well nigh four hundred years old, whereas in this time, it was a rare
thing to live till fourscore years; Psalm. 90.10. The days of our years are
threescore years and ten, and if by reason of strength they be fourscore
years; yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut off, and we
fly away.

Verse. 29. And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah, etc.] Though the
last time the Israelites enquired of the Lord what they should do, God had
assured them that they should prevail against the Benjamites: Go up, for to
morrow I will deliver them into thy hand; yet were they never a whit less
careful, to try if by policy they could get any advantage against them: and
as may be gathered by several passages in the following part of the chapter,
though the relation be somewhat intricate, the course which they took seems to
be this; they divided their army into three parts; one part was laid in ambush
in the meadows of Gibeah, verse. 33. the other part was sent against Gibeah, who
were presently to fly before the Benjamites, that they might draw them far
off from the city, verse. 30, 31. and the third was to stay in Baaltamar, and
to renew the battle, when the Benjamites came thither, pursuing the Israelites
that fled before them.

Verse. 30. And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin,
etc.] That is, that part of their army that was to make an assault upon the
Benjamites, and then presently to give back and fly. See the foregoing note.

Verse. 31. In the high ways, in which one goes up to the house of God, and
the other in Gibeah, in the field.] This surely was another Gibeah, called
Gibeah in the field, to distinguish it from that Gibeah against which the
Israelites now warred, which stood on a hill; happily it is the same which is
called Gaba, Josh. 18.24.

Verse. 33. And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put
themselves in array at Baal-tamar.] That is, the main body of the army which
stayed in that place to receive the Benjamites, when they should follow on in
the pursuit of the flying Israelites. See the note, verse. 19.

Verse. 34. And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all
Israel, etc.] These ten thousand were I conceive, the liers in wait mentioned,
verse. 33. but yet that which follows, and the battle was sore, but they knew
not that evil was near them, must be meant of the battle betwixt the
Israelites, that set themselves in array in Baal-tamar, verse. 33. and the
Benjamites that were fallen upon them, as they came pursuing the Israelites,
who did purposely fly before them; for these Benjamites they were that knew
not that evil was near them, but fought courageously till afterward they saw
the smoke of the city arise; and then they fled before the Israelites, as it
is afterward more particularly described, verse. 38, etc.

Verse. 35. And the Lord smote Benjamin before Israel.] Though they used now a
stratagem which they used not before, yet it was not thence that they
prevailed, but because the Lord was at peace with them, and gave them the
victory.

And the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and
five thousand, and an hundred men.] To wit, eighteen thousand in the fight,
verse. 44. And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; and five thousand
which they gleaned in the highways, as they found them in the pursuit,
scattered here and there, verse. 45. and two thousand which they slew at Gidom,
verse. 45. and the odd hundred, which is not expressed in the particulars, was
slain it seems, some in one place, and some in another.

Verse. 41. And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin were
amazed.] This is added to clear that which was said, verse. 40. to wit, how the
Benjamites came to look back, and see the flame of the city; the reason was,
that they were amazed to see the flying Israelites on a sudden turn head, and
renew the battle with such courage and violence, and thereupon looking behind
them, saw their city was taken, and set on fire.

Verse. 46. So that all which fell that day of Benjamin, were twenty and five
thousand, etc.] There fell that day twenty five thousand one hundred. See verse.
35. And the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day, twenty and
five thousand, and an hundred men; but here the great number is only expressed.

Verse. 48. And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin,
etc.] That is, having slain all the Benjamites that were in arms for the
defense of Gibeah, together with all the inhabitants of the city; they then
addressed themselves to take vengeance on the rest of the tribe of Benjamin,
because they also had a hand in the sending out men for the defense of Gibeah;
and herein proceeded with such fury and rage, that they utterly destroyed both
in town and city where ever they came, all that came to hand, both man and
beast; that is, they spared neither women nor children, nor any living thing
that came in their way; and this they did, either as judging that they were
bound to deal with them, as with those that were anathematized, or devoted to
destruction; according to the direction which was given by the Lord, concerning
any city that should set up idolatry amongst them; Deuteronomy. 13.15, 16. Then thou
shall enquire and make search, and ask diligently; and behold, if it be true,
and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought among you, thou shall
surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroy
it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle thereof with the edge of
the sword; or rather only out of the fury and rage wherewith they were
transported; partly, because it was such a horribe villainy which the
Benjamites had undertaken to defend; and partly, because so many thousands of
their own tribes had perished in this war against the Benjamites: concerning
which see what is further noted in the following chapter, verse. 1.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. NOw the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall not
any of us give his daughter to Benjamin to wife.] To wit, when they there first
agreed to undertake this war against the Benjamites, chap. 20.8. The most of
Expositours hold, that the drift of this oath was the utter extirpation of the
tribe of Benjamin; as indeed all the women of their own tribe being slain, this
withholding from them the daughters of Israel, must needs extinguish the tribe,
unless they would marry the daughters of the heathen about them, which was
not lawful; but yet the opinion of Expositours differs about this oath. For
some hold, that it was an unlawful, unadvised, rash oath, thus to bind
themselves to cut off a tribe from Israel; and that now they began to see their
folly, and repent themselves of it: but then others think that it was lawful
and warrantable; (yea some, that it was not without Gods appointment) because
it is not likely, that Phinehas, and others such as he, would else have
suffered them publicly to bind themselves with such an oath. Now herein I
conceive, that they are on both sides mistaken, in that they think this oath
aimed at the extinguishing of the tribe, whereas it appears not that they ever
meant wholly to root out all, men, women and children, in the tribe; but only,
that having destroyed utterly all the inhabitants of Gibeah, they would also
then send several companies of their army, to the several cities of Benjamin,
and destroy them also with a great destruction; unto which they then added this
oath, in a further manifestation of their detesting this fact of the
Benjamites, in maintaining the men of Gibeah, who were guilty of such a
horrible villainy, to wit, that they would not make any marriages with those
that should remain of the tribe, to show that they esteemed no otherwise of
them, then of heathens, and such as deserved not the name of Israelites: which
will appear the more probable, if we consider, first, that it is no where
expressed, that they vowed to destroy all the men and women in this tribe:
secondly, that if they had so vowed, there would have been no place for this
vow, of not giving their daughters in marriage to them: thirdly, that the vow
being made before the battle, they might have supposed that some of the women
might escape, as well as some of the men: and fourthly, that verse. 3. they seem
to say, that this danger of losing a tribe, was happened unto them besides
their expectation: Why is this come to pass, say they, etc? This seems to be
that which troubled them. All the men, women, and children, being in the heat
of battle, besides their expectation, every where slain (the Israelites every
where falling upon them with extreme fury) those six hundred men only
excepted, that were fled to the rock Rimmon, they now saw that the keeping
their oath of not making marriages with them, would tend to the utter
extirpation of the tribe; and this did now at last exceedingly perplex them.

Verse. 2. And the people came up to the house of God, etc.] To wit, when they
perceived that all the women of Benjamin were destroyed, and none left of that
tribe, but only those six hundred men that were fled to the rock Rimmon, chap.
20.47. for now at length they began to consider into what a strait they were
fallen; namely, that having slain all the women of Benjamin, and having withal
made a vow, that none of them would give their daughters in marriage to the men
of that tribe, either those six hundred men must take them wives from the
heathens, and so the holy seed must be polluted; or else a tribe must perish
from Israel, (and so their body politic which God had formed, must be
dismembered) or themselves must break an oath which they had solemnly taken, as
in Gods presence; and so thereupon they went with their whole army to the house
of God in Shiloh, (and therefore it is said in the twelfth verse of this
chapter, that the camp was in Shiloh) there to bewail these difficulties they
were fallen into; and to consult together; yea, happily also to enquire of God
what they should do.

Verse. 3. O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there
should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?] As if they had said, Alas Lord,
that it should so be, that one tribe should be wholly cut off from thy people:
for I conceive the words are only spoken to bewail the loss of a tribe; but
yet more may be implied, for if they destroyed all the women, not by warrant of
any command from God, which some think they did, but only through their own
immoderate rage and fury against them; it may well be, that these words were
spoken to intimate, by way of excusing themselves, that they did not intend to
have destroyed them all; and that this was happened to them besides their
expectation, through the secret all-ruling providence of God; and that
therefore they would desire the Lord that some thing might be done to prevent
this great evil.

Verse. 4. And the people rose early, and built there an altar, and offered
burnt offerings, and peace offerings.] Being at the house of God in Shiloh,
what needed they any other altar then that in the Tabernacle? I answer, that
either this altar was built as a memorial of Gods prospering them against the
Benjamites, and that their sacrifices were notwithstanding offered on the altar
in the Tabernacle; or else that they reared this altar for this present
occasion, because the ordinary altar was not sufficient for the offering up of
such a multitude of sacrifices, as were now brought in by the people, after
they had prevailed against the Benjamites; for the like we see was done, 1.
Kings 8.64. The same day did the King hallow the middle of the court that was
before the house of the Lord: for there he offered burnt offerings, and meat
offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the brazen altar that
was before the Lord, was too little to receive the burnt offerings, and meat
offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: and that the rearing of altars,
upon such extraordinary occasions was not unlawful, we may probably gather
from Exodus 20.24. An altar of earth thou shall make unto me, and shall
sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep and
thy oxen: In all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I
will bless thee.

Verse. 5. For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the
Lord to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death.] This cannot be meant
of every particular man, but it must be meant of every city, or town, that
sent none to help them against the Benjamites; and the oath they had taken
concerning these, is called a great oath, partly, because it was generally
taken by all the people in a solemn manner; and partly, because it was taken
with some severe execration against any, that should dare to break it, as is
expressed concerning the other oath, verse. 18. Howbeit, we may not give them
wives of our daughters: for the children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed
be he that gives a wife to Benjamin.

Verse. 11. Ye shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that has lien
by man.] For even against these inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead, they thought they
were bound to proceed as against men devoted, who were to be all destroyed; and
that because they came not forth to help their brethren against the Benjamites.
See the note in the former chapter, verse. 48.

Verse. 12. And they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead, four hundred
young virgins that had known no man, etc.] To wit, such as were marriageable,
and not yet married; the Israelites gave them order only to save such as
these, not doubting but of these there would have been six hundred found, for
the six hundred Benjamites that were left alive; but there were only four
hundred such found: and the rest being killed, there were not wives enough for
them: for which the Israelites afterward blamed themselves, verse. 22. Be
favorable unto them for our sakes, because we reserved not to each man his
wife in the war.

Verse. 12. And they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land
of Canaan.] Because they brought them from Jabesh-Gilead, which was without
Jordan; therefore it is said, that they brought them to Shiloh, which is in the
land of Canaan; for the land within Jordan was more peculiarly called the land
of Canaan.

Verse. 14. And they gave them wives which they had saved alive, of the women of
Jabesh-Gilead.] Wherein they conceived they brake not their oath, because they
were not their own daughters.

Verse. 19. Then they said. Behold, there is a feast of the Lord in Shiloh
yearly, etc.] Having hitherto only provided four hundred wives for four
hundred of the Benjamites that were fled to the rock Rimmon; now they pitch
upon another way whereby the other two hundred should be supplied with wives,
that so that tribe that was almost wholly destroyed, might the sooner grow up
again: namely, that at the time when there was a feast of the Lord kept yearly
in Shiloh, these two hundred Benjamites should hide themselves in the vineyards
there abouts, and so when the daughters of Shiloh came forth to dance, they
should then catch every man his wife, and so carry them away. A great question
it is, what feast it was in Shiloh when this was to be done; some conceive it
was some civil festivity, and time of rejoicing which they kept in that town,
either because of some fair or time of extraordinary concourse for traffic or
some such like occasion; but others again think that it was one of those three
solemn feasts, when all the males of Israel were to come up to the Tabernacle
of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 16.16. and indeed because the Tabernacle was now in Shiloh,
and because it is called a feast of the Lord; this seems the more probable:
only in regard the women used to come up voluntarily from all parts of the
land at these feasts to the Tabernacle, (though only the males were bound to
come up by the Law) it may be thought that they should also join in these
dances, and then it may be questioned how they should propound to the
Benjamites the taking away the daughters of Shiloh only; but for this we must
consider, that it seems it was a known custom, that only the inhabitants the
daughters of Shiloh used to go forth in dances; at least in that place where
the Benjamites were appointed to lie in wait for them, and hence was this plot
laid for the taking of the daughters of Shiloh only. As for this course which
the Israelites took to provide wives for the Benjamites, without breaking the
oath the oath they had taken, it may justly seem strange that they should
satisfy their consciences therewith: for what difference was there between
giving the Benjamites wives of any of the daughters of their tribes; and
appointing them with their consent to go and take them by force? doubtless
this was but a device to delude conscience, when they found their oath could
not be kept without suffering a tribe to perish; how much better had it been to
condemn the rashness of their oath, and so to take the liberty which was
given them of God? But when men have a desire to do what is causelessely
scrupled, they are naturally more inclinable to stop the mouth of conscience
with some groundless device or excuse, then to see their own folly, and to
judge themselves for their former error.

Verse. 21. If the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye
out of the vineyards, etc] Hereby it appears, that in those days dancing was
one of the ways whereby they expressed their joy, even when it was holy and
spiritual, as we see likewise, Exodus 15.20. And Miriam the prophetess the
sister of Aaron took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women went out after
her with timbrels and with dances; but then withal we must note, that the
virgins danced apart by themselves, for had their been men with them, the
Benjamites could not ^o easily have snatched them away: mixed dancing is very
dangerous, and was not it seems used in those times by the people of God.

Verse. 22. Be favorable unto them for our sakes, because we reserved not to
each man his wife in the war, etc.] By two arguments, the Elders of Israel do
here undertake to persuade the men of Shiloh not to be offended with the
Benjamites for taking away their daughters; to wit, first, because their was an
error committed by the Israelites, in that they reserved not to each man his
wife in the war, that is, in the war against Jabesh-Gilead: and secondly,
because it was no breach of their oath, that the Benjamites had taken them
wives of their daughters, ye did not (say they) give unto them at this time,
that you should be guilty, as if they should have said, ye have not broken the
oath ye took, because ye gave them not your daughters, but they took them by
force.

Verse. 25. In those days there was no king in Israel, etc.] See the note,
chap. 17.6.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the book of RUTH.
CHAP. I.
NOw it came to pass in the days when the Judges ruled, etc.] This History
of Ruth is an Appendix to that of Judges, in whose time it happened; yet it is
put in a book apart by it self, because the story was of such special
concernment, in that it relates some remarkable passages concerning the
genealogy of David, of whom Christ the promised Messiah descended. By whom,
and when this book was written, is no where expressed, only by the Genealogy
of David set down in the end of this book; it is manifest that it was written
after David's time, unless that were added to the book in succeeding times:
Under which of the Judges this story happened we cannot say, neither; but yet
they that refer it to the days of Deborah and Barak; or at the utmost, to
the days of Gideon, have the fairest probabilities whereon to ground their
conjectures. For Boaz, who married Ruth, was the son of Salmon by Rahab,
Matthew. 1.5. who was a woman grown, when the Israelites first entered Canaan; and
Obed the son of this Boaz, was the grandfather of David, and therefore the
marriage of Boaz with Ruth, could not be long either before or after those
days of Deborah and Barak. That it was in the days of the Judges, is noted,
that we might take notice, how by this famine God punished the sins of those
times, as he had threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.23, 24. And the heaven that is over thy
head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron. The Lord
shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust, etc. they were now fallen to
idolatry, and many other grievous sins; and now this land which flowed with
milk and honey, became barren; yea Bethlehem, that is, the house of bread, so
called it seems, from the extraordinary fruitfulness of the country where it
stood, felt this scourge of God.

Verse. 2. And the name of his two sons, Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of
Bethlehem-Judah.] So called, because this Bethlehem was formerly called
Ephrath, Genesis 35.19. Bethlehem-Judah, to distinguish it from another Bethlehem
in the tribe of Zebulun, Josh. 19.15. and Bethlehem-Ephratha, because the
country where it stood was called Ephrata, Micah 5.2. Thou Bethleem-Ephrathah,
though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he
come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel: And thus also there is a
difference made betwixt them, and those in the tribe of Ephraim who were also
so called; for Jeroboam is called an Ephrathite, 1. Kings 11.26.

Verse. 3. And Elimelech Naomies husband dyed, etc.] This is mentioned, as one
of the great afflictions that befell Naomi, who is propounded as a pattern of
patience to all succeeding times; and perhaps too (for so some Expositours
conceive) as an occasion of that which is next related, to wit, his sons
marrying with the daughters of Moab, which it may well be they would not have
done, if their father had lived.

Verse. 4. And they took them wives of the women of Moab, the name of one was
Orpah, etc.] To wit, Mahlon took Ruth to wife, and Chilion Orpah: for chap.
4.10. she is called Ruth the Moabitesse, the wife of Mahlon. If they had not
embraced the true religion before they married them, doubtless they sinned in
taking these wives: Deuteronomy. 7.2. Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor show
mercy unto them. Neither shall thou make marriages with them, etc. Neh. 13.23.
In those days also saw I Jews that had married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and
of Moab, etc. and indeed by that speech of Naomi, verse. 15. Behold, thy sister
in law is gone back unto her people, and unto her gods: it seems that Orpah had
not as yet embraced the true Religion; and hence it may seem to have been, that
they died within a while after, and that without children. For when Gods people
walk out of Gods ways, they usually meet with sore crosses and troubles.

Verse. 7. And they went on the way to return to the land of Judah.] Hereby it
appears that both Orpah and Ruth did at first intend to have gone with Naomi
into the land of Judah, though afterward Orpah went back to her own friends,
and only Ruth went along with Naomi.

Verse. 8. And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to her
mothers house.] The mothers house is mentioned, first, because daughters, when
they are in their fathers house, are wont to be most with their mothers:
secondly, because in those times, the women of each family did usually live
apart in a several dwelling by themselves: and thirdly, because herein is
implied a reason to induce them to return to wit, that it was pity they should
leave their own mothers, to go into a strange country with a mother in law:
and indeed though Naomi could not but desire much to enjoy still the society
of her daughters, whom she loved so dearly, yet because they were like to
endure much hardness, if they went with her, who was poor, and left to the
wide world; and this she could not think on without grief: it is likely enough,
that she might seriously persuade them to return; (for Ruth might have
continued in the true Religion, though she had remained still in her own
country) but yet withal she might be moved thus to speak to them, because
however she should by this means try their affections, whether they would be
content, knowing all that might be alleged against it, to go along with her.

Verse. 9. The Lord grant you, that you may find rest each of you in the house
of her husband.] That is, the Lord provide you good husbands, and such with
whom you may live comfortably, and not meet with such troubles as you have with
my sons undergone. Again single women are usually subject to many cares,
troubles and wrongs, and when they meet with husbands that are lovingly tender
over them, and careful to defend them from injuries, and to provide things
necessary for them, then are their husbands houses resting places; and hence
Naomi might use this expression to her daughters in laws.

Verse. 11. Are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your
husbands.] This she speaks with respect to that law whereby the widow was
appointed to marry the brother of her deceased husband, Deuteronomy. 25.2. Either
therefore these daughters of Moab had been made acquainted herewith by Naomi,
or their husbands; or perhaps it was a custom too in those times amongst other
nations.

Verse. 13. Nay, my daughters: for it grieveth me much for your sakes, etc.] As
if she should say, There is no hope of comfort this way from me, and therefore
return home to your own land and friends, that there you may meet with husbands
with whom you may live comfortably: for indeed, though the hand of the Lord be
heavy upon me, it grieveth me not so much for my self, as for you, that I am
able to yield you no comfort at all.

Verse. 15. Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people, and unto her
gods: return thou after thy sister in law.) Naomi was doubtless seriously
troubled that her daughters should for her sake leave their country and
friends, to go along with her a poor desolate widow, to share in her misery;
and therefore overswayed with this her grief, might in the bitterness of her
soul propound to Ruth the example of Orpah her sister (for they had married two
brethren) thereby seriously to move her to return also, that she might not be
exposed to that misery, which with her she was like to undergo: (and the
rather because she might hope that Ruth would be constant in the true Religion)
but yet because she saw that Ruth was more bent to stay with her, then her
sister Orpah was, it it most probable, that this she now said to her, was
chiefly intended to try her; and therefore she mentions Orpah her returning to
her gods, thereby as it were to put her in mind, that she must be content to
leave both her people and gods too, that she had formerly served, if she would
go along with her; and therefore ought seriously to consider of it what she
would do.

Verse. 17. The Lord do so to me and more also, if ought but death part thee and
me.] This form of swearing or imprecation, which Ruth here uses, The Lord do
so to me and more also, was it seems familiar, not amongst the Jews only, as
we may see in many several places of the books of Samuel and the Kings, as 1.
Sam. 3.17, etc. but also amongst other nations, when they swore by their false
gods, as it is evident, 1. Kin. 19.2. and 20.10. The drift of this imprecation
was, doubtless to express that they desired some notable mischief might befall
them, if they did not do what they said they would do, or what they desired
should be done by others. But why did they not express the evil they desired
should fall upon them? I answer, that it is very probable, that at first the
custom of swearing thus, without naming the mischief they wished, was taken
up, either because they were naturally afraid to mention the evil they wished
to themselves or others; not daring to use such desperate expressions as bold
wretches nowadayes use without fear, as God confound me, etc. or else, because
by this suppressing the evil they desired might light upon themselves, or
others, they did purposely intimate how grievous the mischiefs were they wished
to themselves or others in case they did not what they vowed to do, or that
others did not what they desired of them; namely, that they were such that they
were afraid to name them.

Verse. 19. All the city was moved about them, and they said, Is this Naomi?]
That is, all the inhabitants of the city were moved with much compassion and
wonder, at the sad condition wherein she was come back from the land of Moab.
It seems she was a woman of good rank and note, above others in Bethlehem when
she went thence; and therefore the report of her being returned home in such a
poor plight, being soon spread about the city, every body wondered at it; and
gazing at her as they had any occasion to see her, they cried out Is this
Naomi? as if they should have said, What an alteration is here? who would have
ever looked to see Naomi in such a condition? It seems, that not only her
poverty, but even the wonderful change of her countenance, by reason of
exceeding much sorrow, made all that saw her and had known her formerly, wonder
at her.

Verse. 20. Call me not Naomi, call me Mara; for the Almighty has dealt very
bitterly with me.] Though the complaints of the best in the hour of affliction
are many times too full of passion, yet the singular piety of Naomi makes it
most probable, that she spoke not this by way of murmuring, or with charging
God for dealing too severely with her; but only to express, that the Lord had
brought many bitter afflictions and sorrows upon her; in regard whereof Mara,
which signifies bitter, was a fitter name for her then Naomi, which signifies
pleasant, or merry.

Verse. 21. The Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted
me?] Because afflictions are ordinarily the manifestations of the Lords anger
and displeasure against his people for their sins; whence is that of Job,
chap. 10.17. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine
indignation upon me: and again, chap. 16.8. Thou have filled me with wrinckles,
which is a witness against me; therefore it is, that Naomi speaks thus of
her afflictions, The Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has
afflicted me.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ANd Naomi had a kinsman of her husbands, etc.] To intimate why Boaz
at the first knowledge of Ruth, showed her such favor as is related in the
following part of the chapter, this is here prefixed that he was a near kinsman
of Elimelechs, Naomies husband.

Verse. 2. Let me now go to the field, and glean ears of corn after him, in
whose sight I shall find grace.] These last words, in whose sight I shall find
grace, are added to imply, that she would be careful no way to be offensive to
any, and that she would not glean without leave; for which her modesty, she is
expressly commended by Boaz his bayliffe, verse. 7. She said, I pray you let me
glean and gather after the reapers amongst the sheaves: whereby we may see,
that though the gleanings of their corn, were by the Law of God appointed for
the poor, Levit. 19.9. Thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy field,
neither shall thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest; yet the poor were to
take them as a matter of favor from the owners, if not to crave leave too when
they went to gather them.

Verse. 5. Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, Whose
damsel is this?] This he might ask, either because* he perceived she was a
stranger; or because he found her sitting in the house: see the following note.

Verse. 7. So she came, and has continued even from the morning, until now
that she tarried a little in the house.] It may seem that Ruth in the heat of
the day, did withdraw her self to the house, or hovel, which was there in the
field, wherein happily the harvest men did eat their meat, that there she might
a while ease and refresh her self, and then return to her work again, (which
might also be the chief occasion that induced Boaz, seeing her sit there, to
enquire verse. 5. whose damsel she was) and therefore this servant was so
careful to inform Boaz of her diligence and industry, that from morning till
that time, she had followed her gleaning hard, only now a little while, she
had rested her self there in the house to refresh her self.

Verse. 8. But abide here fast by my maidens.] Who were doubtless employed, not
in gleaning, as some think (for the owners might not gather the gleanings of
the fields, but were to leave them for the poor and for the stranger: Levit.
23.22. When ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not make a clean
riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither shall thou
gather any gleanings of thy harvest: thou shall leave them to the poor and to
the stranger) but either in reaping, or else in gathering the corn after the
reapers, and binding the sheaves.

Verse. 12. A full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose
wings thou art come to trust.] That is, to whose providence, care, and
protection, thou have committed thy self, in that thou have joined thy self to
his Church and people. It is a figurative expression taken from chickens, or
other young birds that are sheltred and cherished under the wings of their
dammes, and it is often used in the Scripture, as Psalm. 17.8. Keep me as the
apple of the eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings: and Psalm. 91.4. He
shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust. Two
reasons are intimated in the words, why he desired the Lord thus to bless
Ruth; the one is, because she had carried her self so piously and well to her
mother in law; the other, because she had taken the Lord God of Israel to be
her God, and so had made him her hiding place, whereby indeed the Lord was the
more engaged to cherish and protect her. Nor need we stumble at it, that the
good he desires from God for Ruth, is here termed a recompense and reward; for
as a father may reward the service of a child, who yet ows his father all the
service he can do him, so God is said to reward the good works of his servants,
of his own free grace and fatherly love, not because their works can merit any
thing at Gods hand.

Verse. 13. Let me find favor in thy sight, my Lord, for that thou have
comforted me, and for that thou have spoken friendly unto thy handmaid, though
I be not like unto one of thy handmaids.] That is, though I be meaner then one
of thy handmaids, and therefore unworthy of so great favor as thou have
afforded me, even that thou should speak so comfortably unto me, and in so
courteous a manner; yet be pleased to continue thy favor unto me, for this
kind and gracious respect of me a poor desolate widow, emboldens me thus to
crave the continuance of thy favor, however unworthy I am in my self.

Verse. 14. And eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar.] This last
is added to imply, how freely and boldly he would have her make use of this
liberty which he had now given her, of eating with his servants, that he would
not have her be ashamed, or loath to make too bold (as humble spirited men and
women in this kind are) but that he would have her as freely take her share of
every thing amongst the rest, as if she were at her own table.

Verse. 14. And she sat beside the reapers.] That is, when it was meal-time, she
came as Boaz had bidden her to eat with the servants, but did not boldly thrust
in her self amongst them, but modestly sat down somewhere besides them, as one
that thought it fitting rather to receive what should be given her, then to
take what she pleased her self; and therefore it is added in the next words,
that Boaz perceiving her modesty, reached her parched corn, that is, new corn
dried over the fire, and made fit to eat, a food much in request in those
times, and therefore likely to be the best provision that was now at the table,
as we see 1. Sam. 17.17. And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy
brethren an ephah of this parched corn, etc. and 1. Sam. 25.18. and 2. Sam. 17,
28.

And she did eat, and was sufficed, and left.] Which she carried to her mother,
verse. 18. so that this is added both to show how plentifully Boaz had given
her, and how careful she was to carry somewhat of that which was given, to her
poor mother in law.

Verse. 16. And let fall some of the handfulls on purpose for her, etc.] But why
did not Boaz give Ruth some good quantity of corn, and so dispatch her back
again to her mother in law, rather then bid his reapers scatter some that she
might afterward gather it up again? I answer, two reasons may be given for
this: for first, he might judge it the best course so to relieve her wants, as
withal to keep her in a way of labor, and taking pains for what she got: and
secondly, he might do it, as not desiring there should be any notice taken of
his bounty in releiving her, but that she should gather it up, as if it had
been casually scattered.

Verse. 17. And it was about an ephah of barley.] Which was almost a bushel
after our measure, see Levit. 5.11.

Verse. 20. And Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of
our next kinsmen.] Or as it is in the margin of our Bibles, one that has right
to redeem, for the next kinsman had a right by the Law of God, to redeem any
house or land which should be sold by those of their kindred, if they were not
able to redeem it themselves, Levit. 25.25. And so also to marry the widow of
him that should die without children, that so he might raise up seed to his
brother, Deuteronomy. 25.5. and thus she gives Ruth a hint of that, which afterward
she more fully imparted to her, namely, that this Boaz was indeed by the Law of
God to marry her, that he might raise up seed to her deceased husband.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. MY daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with
thee?] As if she should have said, since by looking after it, there is little
doubt to be made, but that Boaz may be brought to marry thee, as by the Law of
God he is bound to do; shall I not do what I can to effect it? Hereby thou
may come to live at rest and plenty, whereas now thou indurest much
hardness and sorrow; and therefore I think my self bound to do what I may, to
accomplish this for thee.

Verse. 2. Behold, he winnoweth barley to night in the threshing-floore, etc.]
Naomi being to advise Ruth to go and lie down at the feet of Boaz, that night
when he was a bed, and then to challenge of him the duty of the next kinsman,
namely, that he should marry her and raise up seed to her deceased husband, she
premiseth this concerning his winnowing of barley that night, to show, that by
reason hereof, she might now take as fit an opportunity both for time and place
as could be expected, to put that in practice, which she intended now to advise
her to do, to wit, first, because as it seems, it was the custom of those
times, that either at the beginning or ending of their winnowing, the owner
made some feast for his servants, friends, or neighbors, for that Boaz did so,
we may with great probability gather from those words, verse. 7. When Boaz had
eaten and drunk and his heart was merry, he went to lie down, etc. and it may
therefore well be, that the meaning of these words, Behold, he winnoweth barley
to night, etc. is this, that he kept that night his winnowing feast; after
which Naomi might well hope, that a motion of marriage made to him by Ruth,
would be the more readily accepted: secondly, because their thresh-floors in
those times, where they winnowed their corn, and where happily also they kept
this their feast, were usually in the open fields, and therefore there she
might have the more easy and private access to him: thirdly, because the
chief time of winnowing in those hot countries was toward the evening, when the
wind usually begins to rise, called therefore, Genesis 3.8. the wind, or cool of
the day, the fittest time for this project which Ruth was now to be put upon:
and fourthly, because Boaz it seems, was wont to lodge all night in this time
of winnowing in the threshing floor; partly in regard of the late working of
his servants, to take the advantage of the evening wind, and partly to secure
his corn, whilst it lay in so open a place.

Verse. 3. Wash thy self therefore and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon
thee, etc.] That is, dress thy self handsomely in thy best attire, all which
she doubtless directed her to do, that she might be the more pleasing in his
eyes.

Verse. 4. And thou shall go in and uncover his feet, and lay thee down.]
Doubtless Naomies aim and intention in this advice she gives her daughter in
law, was lawful and honest; for her aim was only to procure that Boaz, being
as she conceived the next of kin to her deceased son, might be brought to
take Ruth to wife; that he might raise up feed unto the dead, as by the law of
God he was enjoined. And what fault was it in Ruth to challenge that from him,
to wit, marriage, which by the Law of God was due to her? yea and much might be
said, both in regard of the age, and gravitie, and piety of Boaz; and the
experience she had many years had of Ruths modesty and chastity, to justify
or excuse the way she took for effecting her aims. But yet I conceive the way
she took in regard of some circumstances was unwarrantable, and savoured much
of womanish weakness; first, because there was an appearance of evil in it
which is to be avoided, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil:
secondly, because it was not a matter of good report; and therefore was Boaz
loath to have it known, verse. 14. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman
came into the floor: thirdly, because it might have been an occasion of sin:
and fourthly, because it stood not with the modesty of a good woman, thus in
the night to cast her self down at a man's feet in his bed. And indeed besides
this, it might have been the means of alienating Boaz his affection from Ruth,
by raising some suspicion in him of her immodestie and unchaste life; had not
God that overruled all, and had a secret guiding hand in this business,
turned it to good.

And he will tell thee what thou shall do.] Hereby she intimates how confident
she was, that Boaz would not refuse the motion that was made to him, according
to the Law of God; and therefore referres Ruth to the counsel he should give
her, for any thing that was further herein to be done.

Verse. 7. And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, etc.] See
the note above, verse. 2.

Verse. 9. Spread forth thy skirt over thy handmaid, for thou art a near
kinsman.] That is, accept of me for thy wife, that thou may do the duty of a
kinsman, in raising up seed to my deceased husband. And the ground of this
phrase (as some conceive) was a custom amongst the Israelites in those times,
that in their contracts the man did throw over the woman the lap or wing of his
garment, in token that he took her into his protection: whence is that
expression also, Ezekiel. 16.8. When I passed by thee and looked upon thee, behold
the time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness: yea, I swear unto thee, and ^^tred into a covenant with thee, says
the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.

Verse. 10. For thou have showed more kindness in the latter end, then in the
beginning, etc.] That is, thou shewedst much kindness to thy husband deceased,
in leaving thine own country and people, and coming along with his mother for
his sake, though she lived in a poor estate; but now to seek to match thy self
with an old man, and that for the dead sake, to revive his name amongst the
people of God; this is a kindness surpassing that.

Verse. 16. And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou my
daughter?] By her voice her mother might know her to be a woman, but being not
yet light she could not discern her, and therefore she asked who she was.

Verse. 18. Then said she, Sit still my daughter, etc.] That is, stir thou no
further about the business, but now wait for the issue of it; or stir not
abroad, that thou may be in a readiness whenever he shall send for thee.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 1. THen went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down, etc.] Waiting there
both for his kinsmans passing by, who was like to go forth into the field, or
to return home from his business abroad; and also for such elders of the city
as might be called in to sit in that place of judgment, for the hearing,
determining, and witnessing that great and weighty business which he had in
hand: and indeed accordingly it came to pass, as is expressed in the following
words; And behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spoke came by; where this word
behold, calls the Reader to observe the providence of God herein, to wit,
that immediately, even as Boaz expected, this kinsman came by, not being yet
called or sent for; and so was presently brought to give his answer in this
business.

Unto whom he said, Ho, such a one, turn aside, sit down here.] That is,
calling him by his name, he desired him to sit down in the gate, that he might
hear what he had to say to him; but the penman of the Spirit here leaves out
his name, and supplies it with this indefinite clause (such a one,) either
because it is not material that his name should be expressed; or purposely,
because he deserved to have his name forgotten, that took no care to raise up
the name of his deceased kinsman, as God in his law had enjoined him.

Verse. 3. And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi that is come again out of the
country of Moab, sells a parcel of land, etc.] It may be, that this sale
was merely pretended by Boaz for the trial of this their kinsman, that if he
should be forward to accept of this purchase, upon the right of being the next
kinsman, he might thence the better be convinced, how just it was, that he
should perform the duty of a kinsman in one thing as well as in another. Yet
the poverty of Naomi was not such, but that she might have some small portion
of land to sell, left her by her husband by way of joynter or dowry for term
of life; and happily Ruth had acquainted Boaz with this beforehand, though it
be not expressed. However because where such lands were to be sold by any
widow, the next kinsman to whom the inheritance was to come after the widows
decease, might redeem it before any other; therefore Boaz tendered him the
redeeming this land, that if he did accept of it, he might then require of him
to marry Ruth, to which upon the same ground of being the next kinsman he was
also bound.

Verse. 5. Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field at the hand of Naomi,
thou must buy it also of Ruth, etc.] As if he should have said, If you buy this
land of Naomi Elimelechs widow, you must buy it also of Ruth, the widow of
Mahlon, the son of Elimelech, and so coming in as the next kinsman to buy her
husbands land, you are also as the next kinsman to marry her, that you may
raise up seed to her deceased husband. Because as we may probably conceive,
when Naomi had enjoyed this parcel of land as Elimelechs widow, Ruth was also
after to enjoy it for her life, as Elimelechs sons widow; and he that would
challenge from Ruth the privilege of the next kinsman, in the purchase of her
land, was also to perform the duty of the next kinsman in marrying her, that he
might raise up seed to her deceased husband, and so continue his name in his
inheritance: hence is it, that Boaz does here wind up these two thus together
in these words that he spoke to the next kinsman, thou must buy it also of Ruth
the Moabitesse, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his
inheritance.

Verse. 6. And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for my self, lest I mar
mine own inheritance.] To wit, either because his marrying with Ruth a poor
widow, would be a great hinderance to him for his estate, which otherwise might
be advanced by a rich wife; or else, because if he should happily have but one
son by her, that son of his should be called by the name of Mahlon, Ruths
former husband, and yet carry away his inheritance, and so his name should be
extinguished; or if he had more, yet his inheritance should not go to the first
born of his body begotten; or rather, because if he should have many children
by this young widow, having perhaps children already by another wife, this
would be a means to mar and consume his estate, by the great charge it would
bring upon him; and it would also cause his inheritance to be shattered into
too many several parcells, if it were to be divided amongst all his sons, as
some think it was.

Verse. 7. Now this was the manner in former time in Israel, concerning
redeeming, etc. a man plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbor, etc.]
When the widow complained to the elders, and the kinsman notwithstanding
refused to marry her, in that case the woman was to pull off his shoe and spit
in his face: Deuteronomy. 25.9. Then shall his brothers wife come unto him in the
presence of the Elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his
face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done to him that will not build
up his brothers house. But here there was no such thing, and therefore here the
man pulled off his own shoe, as was the custom in all other bargains of
alienation. The ground of which custom was this: the shoe signified the right
he had to go and come at his pleasure upon any parcel of land, as his proper
demeans (for possessio, is quasi pedum positio) and the pulling off a man's shoe
and giving it to his neighbor, signified that he willingly did forego this his
right, and resign it to his neighbor; and thence is that expression
concerning the possessing and treading down of Moab, Psalm. 60.8. Moab is my
wash pot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe.

Verse. 10. That the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren,
and from the gate of his place, etc.] That is, from amongst the inhabitants of
Bethlehem, who daily go in and out at the gates of the city, and upon all
civil occasions resort thither as to the place of judgment.

Verse. 11. The Lord make the woman that is come into thy house, like Rachel,
and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel.] Rachel is here set
before Leah because Rachel was Jacobs true and lawful wife, and Leah was by
deceit thrust upon him; and in desiring that Ruth might be to Boaz, what Rachel
and Leah were to Jacob, they desire, 1. that she may be loving and amiable to
him, as they were to Jacob: 2. that he might have a numerous progeny, as Jacob
had by them: and 3. that by this his progeny, the Israel, the Church of God,
might be built up and increased.

Verse. 12. And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, etc.] That is, as
Pharez (of whose stock thou art) was blessed in his posterity (though his
mother was a stranger, and not of the stock of Israel) so that his children,
and childrens children have been most honorable in the tribe of Judah, so
may thou be blessed in thy children begotten of this poor stranger, and may
they uphold still the honor of that house.

Verse. 17. And the women her neighbors gave it a name, saying, There is a
son born to Naomi, etc.] That is, they gave their advice that his name should
be called Obed, because this son of Ruths was to raise up the name of her
deceased husband (the son of Naomi) and to be accounted his son, rather
then the son of Boaz; therefore they do here say, there is a son born to
Naomi. Indeed every where in the genealogies Obed is reckoned the son of
Boaz; but that is because there it is fit the line should be drawn according to
the natural descents, that we might truly know the ancestors of whom Christ
came, without any respect to this Legal provision: for doubtless this child
was reckoned the son of Mahlon, Ruths deceased husband; and therefore when
they would appoint a name for this child, to wit, not as taking to themselves
the power and authority of naming the child, but only as friends giving their
advice; they called him Obed, which signifies serving, to express the hope
they had that he would, as a good child, serve and comfort Naomi in her old age.

Verse. 21. And Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed, etc.] The principal end
of setting down this genealogy here, is to show the truth of Jacobs prophecy
concerning Christ's coming of the tribe of Judah; and therefore it begins with
Pharez Judahs son, ver. 18. and so descends to David, of whose stock it was
also known the Messiah was to come. How to compute the time from the birth of
Boaz to the birth of David, is a matter of great difficulty: for from the going
of the Israelites out of Egypt, to the building of the temple, it was 480.
years, and therefore from the Israelites entering the land of Canaan, to that
time, it was 440 years, out of which deducting 24 years for the age of Solomon
when he began to build the temple, and 50. years for the age of David when
Solomon was born (which is most probable) it will then be found that it was
366. years from the Israelites entering into Canaan to the birth of David, and
it was not sure long after the Israelites took Jericho, ere Salmon married
Rahab by whom he had Boaz. But yet granting that both Boaz begat Obed when he
was a very old man, and so Obed Jesse, and Jesse David, it might well be that
in 366. years there might be no more then these generations.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the first book of SAMUEL, Otherwise called, The first book of
KINGS.
CHAP. I.
NOw there was a certain man of Ramathaim-zophim, etc.] The two books of Samuel
are so called, because they contain the story of the life and death of Samuel,
and of the Commonwealth of Israel under his government: and likewise the story
of Saul and David, who were both anointed kings by Samuel; and so show how the
prophecies of Samuel concerning them both were exactly fulfilled. Yet by the
Greek and Latin Interpreters they are usually called the two first books of
the Kings, because therein is related how the government of Israel came first
to be changed, from that of Judges to that of Kings; and because they contain
the story of Saul and David, the two first Kings of Israel. By whom these
books were written is no where expressed; but that they were written by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, whosoever the penmen were, is evident by the
testimony of the Jews, to whom were committed the Oracles of God; and who did
always acknowledge them to be a part of the sacred canon of the Scripture; and
it is likewise confirmed in the new Testament, where some passages of these
books are cited as a part of the Scripture, as we may see Matt. 12.3, 4. where
that passage concerning David's eating the shewbread, 1. Sam. 21.6. is cited by
our Savior; Have ye not read what David when he was an hungered did, and they
that were with him, how he entered into the house of God, and did eat the
shewbread? etc. and again in those two testimonies cited by S. Paul, the one
Romans 15.9. As it is written, For this cause I will confess to thee amongst the
Gentiles, and sing unto thy name; which is taken out of the 2. Sam. 22.50. and
the other, Heb. 1.5. I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son,
which is alleged from 2. Sam. 7.14. As for these first words, Now there was a
certain man of Ramathaim-zophim, etc. wherein we are told what Elkanah the
father of Samuel was; we must know first, that whereas elsewhere the town where
Elkanah dwelt is called Ramah, as in the 19. verse of this chapter; And they
rose up in the morning early, -- and came to their house to Ramah; and so
again, chap. 2.11. here it is called Ramathaim-zophim, Ramathaim (in the duall
number) because it consisted of two towns that were called Ramah, two Ramahs
joined in one, and Zophim, either because it was situate in the country or
region of Zuph, whereof we read, chap. 9.5. And when they were come to the
land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that was with him, Come and let us
return, etc. or else because of the high situation of the place, standing upon
some notable high hill, in regard whereof it may well be that there were some
watch-towers there (for that the name seems to import, because Zophim
signifies watch houses, or towers) or else (as some think) because there was
there an Universitie or school of Prophets, who are usually in the Scripture
called watchmen, as Ezekiel. 3.17. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to
the house of Israel: secondly, that whereas in setting down the genealogy of
Elkanah, it is said that he was the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the
son of Tohu, the son of Zuph; it seems in the 1. Chron. 6.26, 27. that
three of these were also called by other names; for Elihu is there called
Eliab, and verse. 34. Eliel; and Tohu, Nahath, and verse. 34. Toah; and Zuph,
Zophai: and thirdly, whereas it is said that Elkanah was an Ephrathite; thereby
is meant that he dwelt in mount Ephraim; Elimelech and his two sons are
called Ephrathites, Ruth 1.2. because they were of Bethlehem Ephratah; and
Jeroboam is called an Ephrathite, because he was of the tribe of Ephraim, 1.
Kings 11.26. but Elkanah is here called an Ephrathite, only because he dwelt
in mount Ephraim; for that he was a Levite of the family of the Kohathites;
(to whom indeed certain cities were allotted in the tribe of Ephraim Josh.
21.20.) and of the posterity of Korah, that wretch that was in so fearful a
manner destroyed in the wilderness for his rebellion against Moses, is evident
1. Chron. 6.22, 23, etc. so that it is no wonder though the sons of Korah
were spared, whilst the father was destroyed, since the Lord had determined
from this cursed stock to raise up to the Israelites such a glorious Prophet as
Samuel was.

Verse. 2. And Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.] Hannah is
reckoned in the foregoing words in the first place; and it is probable
therefore which some conceive, that Hannah was his first wife, and that
afterward he took Peninnah to wife, because Hannah was barren: For in those
times they counted it an extraordinary cross to die without issue; yea because
the temporal promise made to that nation depended much upon their carnal
generation, though the Lord allowed not their polygamie, yet he was pleased to
tolerate this infirmity in his servants till the Messiah came, when the Church
should no longer be tied to one nation, but spiritual children should be
begotten unto God from all nations: and it may be they did conceive that Gods
promise to Abraham of multiplying his seed as the stars of heaven, did implie
a dispensation granted to them for having many wives.

Verse. 3. And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship, and to
sacrifice to the Lord of hosts in Shiloh.] At Shiloh the Tabernacle had stood
ever since the seventh year of Joshua, Josh. 18.1. thither went Elkanah
yearly, that is, at those three solemn feasts, wherein all the males were
bound to appear before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 16.16. He might go at other times as a
Levite, to do service in his course at the Tabernacle; but here doubtless his
going up yearly at those great feasts is only intended, when his family went
with him (yea the women also) such was their devotion, though not bound thereto
by the Law.

And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the Priests of the Lord were
there.] This Eli was at this time Judge of Israel the next after Samson, chap.
4.18. He had judged Israel forty years; and withal, as it is generally
thought by all Expositours, he was high Priest too. Indeed, how he should come
to be high Priest we cannot say. For Aaron leaving two sons behind him,
Eleazar and Ithamar, the high Priesthood was to have descended successively to
the posterity of Eleazar, Aarons eldest son; and accordingly we read that
Eleazar was high Priest after Aaron died, Deuteronomy. 10.6. and after Eleazar died
Phinehas, Judge. 20.28. Now it is evident that Eli was of the posterity of
Ithamar, Aarons second son; because it appears that Abiathar who was deposed
from being high Priest by Solomon, was of the posterity of Eli, 1. Kings 2.27.
and of Ahimelech who was the son of Abiathar, it is expressly said, 1.
Chron. 24.3. that he was of the sons of Ithamar: and how therefore the high
Priesthood came to be transferred from the posterity of Eleazar to Eli, that
was of the house of Ithamar, cannot be cleared by any place of Scripture; only
because it is said, chap. 2.30. that God had promised Eli that his house and
the house of his father should walk before him for ever; thence some conclude
that it was not without Gods appointment, that the high Priesthood was removed
to the house of Ithamar, and that because the high Priests of Eleazars family
had some way provoked God by their evil ways, in the days of the former
Judges. As for Elies two sons Hophni and Phinenas, it is expressly inserted
here, that they were then in Shiloh, when Elkanah used yearly to go up thither
to sacrifice, to intimate thereby the wisdom and piety of Elkanah, who would
not neglect his duty in going up thither with his sacrifices, according to the
rule of Gods Law, because of the horrible wickedness of these wretches, who
were of chief sway amongst the Priests that attended the service of the
Tabernacle; no though others stumbled so at their lewdness, that chap. 2.17.
they abhorred the offering of the Lord, yet Elkanah would not do so, but went
up yearly at the appointed feasts to the house of God, though Hophni and
Phinehas were there.

Verse. 4. He gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and daughters
portions.] That is, portions of the peace offerings which he offered to the
Lord, the fat only of the peace offerings was burnt upon the altar, the right
shoulder and the breast was given to the Priest, and the remainder of the
sacrifices were for the offerer to eat, and those that belonged to him; of this
therefore Elkanah gave portions to Peninnah and her children, according to the
ancient manner of feasts of which see, Genesis 43.34.

Verse. 5. But unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion: for he loved Hannah, etc.]
Peninnah had a great share as having many children; for she and her sons and
her daughters had each of them several portions; whereas Hannah being but one,
was to have but a single portion. But her husband therefore, because he loved
her dearly, as being a gracious woman, and withal, of a meek and quiet melting
disposition, that she might not be discouraged, took care that her one portion
should be the larger and better, a double portion, (as some read it) and
happily of the choice and best of the sacrifices.

Verse. 6. And her adversary also provoked her sore, etc.] This her adversary
was Peninnah (as indeed where one man, contrary to the Ordinance of God, has
two wives, they must needs be adversaries, (as being corrivalls in his love)
and live in continual variance one with the other,) and she provoked her sore
to make her to fret, because the Lord had shut up her womb: That is, she
provoked her purposely to make her vex and disquiet her self, and that by
upbraiding her with her barrenness, as an effect of the Lords displeasure. Now
this is added here, as a second reason why Elkanah gave Hannah such a worthy
portion. It was not only because of the singular love he bare to her, but also
because he saw that Peninnah vexed her, and so he was the more careful to
comfort her and cheer her up.

Verse. 7. And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of the
Lord* so she provoked her, etc.] That is, whereas Elkanah did this yearly to
cheer Hannah, Peninnah was hereby rendered the more ready to vex her. Now this
petulancy of Peninnah in provoking Hannah by upbraiding her with her barrennes,
is hereby much aggravated, that she did not forbear at those times when they
went up to pray, and offer sacrifices to the Lord. See Mat. 5. And withal it
implies, that she upbraided her with the fruitlessenes of her seeking to God so
earnestly at those times for a child.

Verse. 9. So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had
drunk.] That is, after Elkanah and his family had eaten and drunk together,
with whom Hannah sat. It may be indeed that Hannah upon her husbands words,
verse. 8. did eat a little, yet it is most probable that she did neither eat nor
drink: for besides what she said afterward to Eli, verse. 15. I have drunk
neither wine nor strong drink; it seems to have been against the express
letter of the Law for any body to partake of these holy feasts, whilst they
were in sadness and heaviness of spirit: Deuteronomy. 12.7. And there you shall eat
before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand
unto, ye and your households: Levit. 10.19. And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold
this day have they offered their sin offerings, and their burnt offerings
before the Lord, and such things have befallen me: and if I had eaten the sin
offering to day, should it have been accepted in the sight of the Lord?

Now Eli the Priest sat upon a seat by a post of the Temple of the Lord.] That
is, of the Tabernacle, for as Solomon's Temple is sometimes called a Tabernacle,
Jer. 10.20, My Tabernacle is spoiled, and all my cords are broken; so the
Tabernacle is here called the Temple of the Lord. But yet it seems too, that
the Tabernacle was at this time within some house built for that purpose in
Shiloh, and hence there is mention here of a seat by a post, where Eli sat, and
afterward of doors, chap. 3.15. And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened
the doors of the house of the Lord, whereas the Tabernacle had neither gates
nor posts, nor seats before it, but only a vail that was hung up at the
entering into it, Exodus 26.36.

Verse. 11. And she vowed a vow, and said, etc.] To wit, as it follows
afterward, that if the Lord would give her a man-child, she would give him
unto the Lord all the days of his life, and that he should be a Nazarite,
which she expresses in the last clause of this verse, and there shall no
rasour come upon his head. Indeed being by birth a Levite, the Lords he was
without her vow, as being one of that tribe whom God had separated from the
rest of the people, for his special service; but then we must consider that
many of the Levites were dispersed abroad in several places of the land, where
their chief employment was, to teach and instruct the people, and did not (at
least continually, but only at some set times, when their course came) attend
upon the service of the Tabernacle; and again, that the Levites were not bound
to the service of the Tabernacle, till five and twenty or thirty years of age,
and were again exempted at fifty: concerning which, see the note, Numb. 4.3.
either therefore the special thing intended in her vow, was the consecrating
him wholly to the service of the Tabernacle; or else, the time when he should
begin to attend there, that he should not stay till the usual years of other
Levites, but should be brought thither and trained up there, even from his
childhood, and all that while continue under the strict vow of a Nazarite,
which ordinarily the Levites were not bound unto. As for her power to vow this;
we must understand, that she only vowed to do what in her lay, that it might
be thus, to wit, the child being by no defect of body or mind unfit for Gods
service, and willing when he came to years of discretion to take upon him the
vow; and again, her husband consenting thereto, without which the woman's vow
was of no force, Deuteronomy. 30.8. But if her husband disallow her on the day that he
heard it, then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she
uttered with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect, and the
Lord shall forgive her. Indeed it is evident in the sequel of Samuels story,
that he did not always continue in the Tabernacle, chap. 7.16. And he went
from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged
Israel in all those places: and hence it seems probable, that after Samuel
became Judge in Israel, he was by special dispensation from God, freed from
this vow of his mother.

Verse. 14. And Eli said unto her, How long will thou be drunken? put away thy
wine from thee.] That is, How long will thou carry thy self as a drunken woman?
How long will thou continue here in thy drunkenness, and profane this holy
place thou art come into? go home and sleep and rid thee of this distemper, and
then come with a penitent heart and make thy peace with God: because he saw her
stand so long together mumblimg with her lips, after an unusual manner, and
yet could not perceive that she was praying, he persuaded himself she was
drunk, and thereupon did thus sharply chide her, the rather happily inclining
to this rash judgment, because of some incomposednesse in the gesture of her
body, arising from the vehemence of a transported mind, which at the same time
he might also discern in her; but especially because it was immediately after
they were risen from eating and drinking before the Lord, verse. 9.

Verse. 15. And Hannah answered and said, No, my Lord, I am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit, etc.] Though Eli had most unjustly charged Hannah with
drunkenness, yet we see with what meekness she seeks to clear her self of
that fault, by giving him to understand, first, that she was a woman of a
sorrowful spirit, and therefore in a condition altogether unlikely to give her
self to such excess: secondly, that she had at present, drunk neither wine nor
strong drink: and thirdly, that she had been employed in a duty, for which she
had been very unfit had she been drunk, namely, in prayng to the Lord I have,
says she, powered out my soul before the Lord: for it is usual in the
Scripture to call prayer the pouring forth of the soul to God, as Psalm. 62.8.
Trust in him at all times; ye people pour out your heart before him: and Lam.
2.19. Arise, cry out in the night; in the beginning of the watches, pour out
thine heart like water before the face of the Lord: and that I conceive for
these two reasons, first, because Gods servants are wont in prayer, as his
friends and favorites, to discover all their sins, and make known all their
wants and griefs, and cares and troubles, and all the complaints and desires of
their souls, not hiding any thing from him: and secondly, because they do this
too, with much vehemence, and earnestness; their prayers come not from them
sleepingly, and dreamingly, but are poured forth with strong affections and
fervency of spirit.

Verse. 16. Count not thy handmaid a daughter of Belial, etc.] See the note,
Deuteronomy. 13.13.

Verse. 17. Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace.] That is, be not troubled
with that which I said (for I see now that I was deceived) neither let this
affliction thou art in disquiet thy mind, but repose thy self on the providence
of God, who no doubt will provide for thee, as may be most for thy good.

Verse. 18. And she said, let thy handmaid find grace in thy sight.] That is, I
desire that thou would still continue this good opinion of me, and still
pray to the Lord in my behalf.

So the woman went away, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.]
Which was an effect of faith, wrought in her by the spirit of God, upon the
prayer she had poured forth unto the Lord, and the gracious encouragement she
had received from the high priest, whose words she entertained, as if a promise
had been made to her from heaven.

Verse. 20. She bare a son, and called his name Samuel.] That is, asked of
God; whereof she gives the reason in the following words, because, says she, I
have asked him of the Lord: so that hereby it is clear, that she gave him that
name, first, to testify the comfort she took, in that she had obtained this
son by prayer from the Lord; though the having of a child, a son, after so
long a time of barrenness, the taking away of her reproach, and the stopping of
her adversaries mouth were all blessings, wherein she could not but much
rejoice; yet that this son was given her as a return of her prayer, was in
her esteem above all these: and secondly, that this name of her son might put
them continually in mind, in what a singular extraordinary way he was given
them of God, that so she might be rendered thereby the more careful to perform
the vow she had made, and her husband too having consented to it, and that the
child might be the readier to submit himself to the service of God in that
strict way of a Nazarite, according to that which his mother had vowed.

Verse. 21. And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the
Lord the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.] That is, some sacrifice which he had
vowed to the Lord; and what can we rather think this to have been, then a vow
of peace offerings, which he had vowed to give unto the Lord, by way of
thankfulness, for this son which by his beloved Hannah the Lord had now
given him?

Verse. 22. She said unto her husband, I will not go up until the child be
weaned, etc.] Hereby it appears that Hannah had acquainted her husband with her
vow, and that he had consented to it. Some Expositours question whether Hannahs
keeping the child at home till he was weaned, was not a transgression of the
law; but causelessely, for first, for that Law concerning the presenting the
first born before the Lord, which the Virgin Mary observed, Luke 2.22. And when
the days of her purification were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem
to present him before the Lord: this concerned not the Levites, but only those
first born that were to be redeemed: and secondly, for that Law concerning the
appearing of all the males thrice a year before the Lord, Exodus 23.17. three
times in a year all thy males shall appear before the Lord God: it was meant
only of those that were capable in some measure of joining in the worship and
service of God. Hannah therefore was not bound to go up with her young child
immediately, and being not bound she chooses rather to stay till he was
weaned; because it went against her, to think of bringing away a child vowed to
God, after she had once brought him to the Tabernacle of the Lord; resolving
that after he was weaned, she would then carry him and leave him there, that he
might continue in the service of the Lord for ever. Concerning which see the
foregoing note upon verse 11.

Verse. 23. Tarry until thou have weaned him, only the Lord establish his
word.] This word of the Lord which Elkanah speaks of, must either be the
gracious answer which Eli returned to Hannah, verse. 17. Then Eli answered, and
said, Go in peace, and the God of Israel grant thee thy petition which thou
have asked of him: which she took as a kind of promise sent her from heaven, or
rather the answer which God returned to her prayers, by giving her a son,
which was all one at if a voice had come from heaven, Hannah thy desire is
granted; and this word it is, which he desires the Lord would establish; she
had not only craved a son, but also with this condition by way of vow
annexed, that he might live a perpetual Nazarite consecrated to the service of
God, and in this he prays that the Lord would perfect what he had begun: or
else it must be understood generally that God would perform what he had
determined concerning this his son, as taking it for granted, that surely a
child so miraculously given, was determined for some great service.

Verse. 24. She took him up with her, with three bullocks, and one ephah of
flower.] There is mention afterward of the sacrificing of one of these
bullocks only, verse. 25: And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to
Eli: but it cannot be thence gathered, that one only was intended for
sacrifices, the other for other uses; that one might be offered when they
presented the child, and delivered him up to the service of God, (which is
therefore only mentioned) the other afterward in other oblations; or the one
might be offered as a burnt offering, the other for a peace offering. As for
the Ephah of flower which he carried also; an ephah contained ten omers or
tenth deals; now the Law perscribing three tenth deals to be offered with a
bullock, Number. 15.9. Then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three
tenth-deales of flower, mingled with half an hin of oil, nine tenth-deales of
this ephah were for the three bullocks, and the other tenth deal which was
overplus, might be intended for a voluntary meat offering.

Verse. 28. And he worshipped the Lord there.] This may be me^^t of Eli, that he
blessed God for hearing both his and her prayer, and for Hannah her voluntary
consecrating her child to be a perpetual Nazarite unto God; but I rather
conceive that it is meant of Elkanah; he with Hannah brought the child to Eli,
verse. 25. And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli. Hannah made
known their errand to him; and now it is added, that he, that is, Elkanah
worshipped the Lord, implying thereby his assenting to that which Hannah had
said, and that he besought the Lord to accept the child and bless him, etc.

And Hannah prayed, and said, etc.] It is not improbable that Hannah joined
petitions at this time with her thanksgiving, though the gratulatory part be
expressed only; but however it is not improper to say she prayed, when she
praised God, for this is a part of prayer. Prayer being (if generally defined)
a holy expression of our minds to God, either by way of desiring any thing from
him or by returning him thanks, and giving him the glory of what he has done:
1. Tim. 2.1. I exhort therefore, that first of all supplication, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: Col. 4.2. Continue in
prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. MY heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord,
etc.] In this song of Hannahs, her drift is to set forth the praises of God, by
way of testifying her thankfulness for the great mercy he had shown to her in
her son Samuel; yet she does not only insist upon this particular, but takes
occasion from thence to set forth his infinite holiness, and wisdom, and
power, and speaks of the mavelous works of his providence which he daily does
in the world; and of the manifold benefits both temporal, and spiritual, and
eternal, which he is always ready to impart to his Church and people. Indeed
in the first words of the song, she begins with that which God at present had
done for her; wherein we must note, first, that though she did doubtless
rejoice much in the child that God had given her; yet the chief thing that
cheared her heart was, that the Lord by granting her request in giving her a
son, had discovered his love to her, and the precious account that he made of
her, and therefore when she comes to set forth the ground of her joy, she
insists altogether upon her interest in God, and his favor to her: My heart
rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord: secondly, that by
exalting her horn, is meant the advancing of her power and glory, and the
cheerfulness and joy of her spirit; the metaphor is taken either from horn
beasts whose power and beauty is chiefly in their horns, and who being lusty
and full of spirit, do the more advance and lift up their horns as they go up
and down; or else from captains and soldiers, who were wont in those times (as
some say) to wear a kind of horn made of brass upon their helmets, and when
they were conquerers and triumphed over their enemies, then they wore it up,
but when they were conquered and foiled, they drew it down. However, Hannah
intends hereby to intimate, that through the Lords goodness to her in giving
her a son, she was become stronger and more renowned then before (for
children are the strength and glory of their parents) and that she was cheared
and encouraged to triumph over all her enemies: thirdly, that whereas she
adds, my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; thereby is meant, both that she
had now more abundant matter for the praising of God then her enemies, and
likewise that she had now enough to say wherewith to stop the mouth of her
insulting adversary; before, when she was barren, she had nothing to reply
against Peninnah, but was fain to bear her reproaches in silence; but now
Peninnah could not insult over her as before; and if she did, she had enough to
answer her: and fourthly, that the reason of this is rendered in the last words,
because I rejoice in thy salvation, that is, because thou have saved me, to
wit, from the affliction and reproach of my barrenness, and the insulting of
mine enemies.

Verse. 2. There is none holy as the Lord, etc.] To wit, because there is no
creature that is perfectly holy without spot or blemish, essentially and
independently holy, and the fountain of all holiness that is in others, as the
Lord is; and therefore it follows, for there is none besides thee, that is,
there is no God beside thee, neither is there any rock like our God: but
concerning this last clause, see the note, Deuteronomy. 32.4.

Verse. 4. For the Lord is a God of knowledge, etc.] By two reasons Hannah shows
the folly of those that proudly insult over Gods people: first, the Lord,
says she, is a God of knowledge, that is, a God that knows all that in your
pride and arrogancy you think or speak, or attempt against his poor servants;
and from whom you have even that knowledge, wisdom and understanding, in the
confidence whereof you are so ready to exalt your selves; wherein there are
many strong arguments included to dissuade all men and women from such proud
and arrogant boasting as Peninnah had used: first, because he that is the just
avenger of all wickedness, must needs know it: secondly, because he discerning
all their thoughts and projects, could easily infatuate them, and cross them
many ways in their purposes: and thirdly, because they may be sure, that he
orders all with great wisdom for the good of those that fear his name.
Again, a second reason is, that by him actions are weighed: whereby is meant
that he exactly ponders all the actions of men, and will therefore as a just
Judge repay them as he finds them good or evil; yea, according to the degree of
good and evil which he finds in them; or rather it is meant of all the actions
of men, as they are disposed by the providence of God; that he weighs them,
that is, he orders them in great wisdom; even as the Apothecarie weighs the
drugs he puts into his medicines, so the Lord moderates or enlarges the rage
of wicked men against his children, as may be most for their good; and
therefore though they be insatiably desirous to lay load upon his children, yet
they are restrained many times, and can proceed no further then God sees shall
be for their good.

Verse. 4. The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are
girt with strength.] In these words is implied that God does many times abate
the strength of the mighty, or at least blasts their attempts, and makes them
successelesse; and so (as when the bow of a mighty man breaks) all their
endeavors come to nothing; and on the other side he many times so strengthens
the feeble that of themselves are ready to stumble, or at least so prospers
their weak endeavors, that unexpectedly they bring mighty things to pass.
Those that are strong of body, strong in military forces, in power and
authority in the Commonwealth, in wisdom, wit, judgment and memory,
become many times as Samson when his hair was cut off, like other men, yea
though their strength remains, their bow is often broken, their attempts are
vain, and end in shame and reproach; whereas those that are weak in these
regards, become mighty and strong, at least they prevail successefully in all
their affairs.

Verse. 5. They that were full have hired out themselves for bread, and they
that were hungry ceased.] That is, they that were hungry became rich, or at
least were well provided for, so that there was not a poor man any longer left
amongst them.

So that the barren has born seven, and she that has many children is waxed
feeble]. That is, those that were barren have born many children; (for seven is
usually in the Scripture put for many, as Deuteronomy. 28.7. they shall come out
against thee one way, and fly before thee seven ways: and so in diverse other
places) and on the other side, they that have had many children have either
grown weak, and so through feebleness have left bearing, or else have buried
the children they have had, and so became feeble, children being still esteemed
the strength of their parents. Now this particular passage of Gods providence,
it is likely that Hannah did the rather mention amongst the rest, as having
respect to the Lords mercy, in opening her barren womb, and perhaps to the
hope she had also, if not the assurance she had by the spirit of prophecy, that
the Lord would give her many children more, as indeed we find verse. 21. of this
chapter, that she had after this, three sons and two daughters.

Verse. 6. The Lord kills and makes alive, etc.] These following passages in
this and the next verse may either be meant of several men, to wit, that the
Lord kills one, and makes alive another, that he makes one man poor, and
another man rich, etc. or else of the same persons; that the Lord kills men,
and then makes them alive again; that he makes a man poor, and then
afterward rich again, that he brings a man low, and then afterward lifts
him up again. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich; he brings low, and
lifts up: as for these expressions of killing and making alive, of bringing
down to the grave, and bringing up, though they may be meant first, literally,
that the Lord sometimes kills men, and yet restores them to life again, as
he did the good Shunamites son, 2. Kings 4.35. and secondly, spiritually,
that the Lord with the terrors of the Law, and the lashes and sting of
conscience for sin has humbled men, and laid them as it were for dead
according to that of the Apostle, sin revived, and I died, Romans 7.9. whence
the Law is called the ministration of death, 2. Cor. 3.7. and yet afterward he
revives them, and cheers them up again by the promises of mercy and the sweet
comforts of his spirit; yet thirdly, I conceive they may be best understood of
the desperate dangers, the grievous and heavy afflictions, whereinto the Lord
many times brings men, and yet afterward raises them up again; when men by
sickness or any other dismal calamity, are brought to desperate extremities
of danger, heartbreaking sorrows and miseries, out of which there seems to be
no hope of recovery, they are said in the Scripture to be as dead men, and to
be brought to the brink of the grave; there is but a step between me and death,
says David, chap. 20.3. For thy sake are we killed all the day long, says the
Apostle, Romans 8.36. and so also when the Lord delivers them from these
dangers and miseries, they are said to be revived and raised up from the grave,
Hos. 6.2. After two days will he revive us, in the third day will he raise us
up, and we shall live in his sight: Esa. 26.19. Thy dead men shall live,
together with my dead body shall they arise; awake and sing ye that dwell in
the dust, etc. And thus Hannah here speaks of the strange changes and
alterations which God makes amongst men. The Lord kills and makes alive, he
brings down to the grave and brings up: because, first, men will not be
humbled many times, till they be brought to such depths of misery: and
secondly, men are most affected with Gods goodness when they have given
themselves for lost, and are then raised up again: and thirdly, the Lords power
is most magnified, when men are restored from such inextricable miseries;
therefore usually the Lord does thus kill men, when he means nothing less then
that they should be lost, but within a while revives them again, and puts them
into a better estate and condition then they were in before.

Verse. 8. For the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world
upon them.] That is, the whole earth is the Lords, even to the center and
foundation thereof, upon which the Lord has settled and built up the whole
frame of the world, as it were upon pillars. The earth hangs we know in the
midst of the air, having nothing to support it but the mighty power and
command of God; but because it stands firm and fast as if it were supported
with pillars, hence is this expression, The pillars of the earth are the Lords,
etc. and this clause is added, to show that it is no wonder, that God should
thus turn things upside down in the government of the world, as is expressed in
the foregoing verse; since he that thus made the world at the first, must needs
be of power to do what he will, and may well also take liberty to do what
seems good in his own eyes; for with his own why should he not do what himself
pleases?

Verse. 9. He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent
in darkness.] By keeping the feet of his saints, is meant the Lords preserving
them from all dangers bodyly and spiritual; and that especially by the inward
guidance of his spirit; and as for the second clause, the wicked shall be
silent in darkness; this may be understood either of the great calamities that
shall fall upon them; Eccles. 5.17. All his days also he eats in darkness,
and he has much sorrow and wrath with his sickness: Zeph. 1.15. That day is a
day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wastnesse and
desolation, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick
darkness: wherein Hannah foretells here that they should be silent, that is,
even overwhelmed with confusion and astonishment, not having any thing to say
for themselves, according to those expressions, Matthew. 22.12. And he said unto
him, friend how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment: and he was
speechless: Job 5.16. So the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her
mouth: and Jer. 8.14. Why do ye sit still? assemble your selves, and let us
enter into the defenced cities, and let us be silent there: for the Lord our
God has put us to silence, and given us waters of gall to drink, because we
have sinned against the Lord: or else of their being cut off from the land of
the living, for such are said to dwell in silence, Psalm. 94.17. Unless the
Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence, and in darkness:
Job 10.21, 22. Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of
darkness, and the shadow of death: and especially the wicked, whose souls are
cast into outer darkness, Matthew. 8.12. But the children of the kingdom shall
be cast into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

For by strength shall no man prevail.] That is, by their own strength. This is
added as a reason of both the foregoing clauses, the Lord will keep the feet of
his saints; for should not the Lord keep them, they could never preserve
themselves by their own strength; and the wicked shall be silent in darkness:
for if the Lord undertakes to punish them, they cannot by their strength secure
themselves; the weak and strong are both alike to him; he can pull down the
mightiest as well as the meanest.

Verse. 10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken in pieces, out of heaven
shall he thunder upon them.] This last clause being a branch of the
prophetical part of Hannahs song, may have reference to that particular
judgment upon the enemies of Gods people, in the time of her son Samuels
government, 1. Sam. 7.10. The Lord thundered with a great thunder on that day
upon the Philistines, and discomfited them, and they were smitten before
Israel; or that 1. Sam. 12.18. So Samuel called unto the Lord, and the Lord
sent thunder and rain that day; and all the people greatly feared the Lord and
Samuel. Yet withal it may be meant generally of the Lords pouring down
vengeance from heaven upon his adversaries; for we see, 2. Sam. 22.14, 15.
David says, The Lord thundered from heaven, and the most high uttered his
voice; and he sent out arrows and scattered them, lightning and discomfited
them, etc. And yet we read not of any such storm of thunder and lightning that
ever fell upon the enemies of David; because God had many times destroyed his
enemies by thunder from heaven, it grew to be, as it seems, a proverbiall
speech, to say that the Lord would thunder upon them, when they meant that the
Lord would terribly destroy them.

The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, etc.] This is a prophecy
concerning the exaltation and kingdom of Christ the Messiah; and indeed it is
the first place in the old Testament, where Christ is mentioned under the name
of the Messiah, the anointed. The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and
he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed; that
is, the Lord shall rule the whole world, and at the last day he shall judge all
the inhabitants of the earth, yea and that by the Messiah, the Lord Christ his
anointed King, who though at first he shall live in a low and mean estate and
condition, yet when he has finished the work of man's redemption, he shall then
be exalted above all principalities and powers, and shall sit down at the right
hand of his father: all power shall be given him both in heaven and in earth,
he shall gather in his elect people among all nations, govern them by his word
and spirit, and destroy all his and their enemies. Thus, I say, it is generally
thought by Interpreters, that these words are a prophecy concerning Christ the
Lords anointed; yet in regard the kingdom afterward established amongst the
Jews was a figure of the kingdom of Christ, it may also be well understood of
that.

Verse. 11. And the child did minister unto the Lord before Eli the Priest.]
This is repeated again, verse. 18. where it is also added that in his ministering
before the Lord he was girded with a linen Ephod. It is expressly said in the
former chapter, verse. 24. that Samuel was carried by his parents to the
Tabernacle, and left there so soon as even he was weaned. But we cannot
possibly think that there was any service of the Tabernacle, that at those
years Samuel was able to do; and therefore the meaning of this clause is only,
that afterward, even whilst he was yet but a child, de did such service in
the Tabernacle, as according to his years and strength he was capable of doing.
The Levites indeed did not enter upon the service of the Tabernacle till they
were twenty five years old, Levit. 8.24. But now Samuels case was
extraordinary, because by the special vow of a Nazarite, he was even from his
tender years consecrated to the service of the Lord; and therefore we see even
in his childhood he did wait upon the service of the Tabernacle, to wit, in
such services as still by degrees he grew able to do; as happily in locking and
unlocking the doors of the Tabernacle; in laying up and fetching out the
vestments of the Priests, and such like; for that it was some ministry in the
Tabernacle that he was employed in is evident, because verse. 18. it is said,
that he wore a linen Ephod, which was an holy garment, in the doing of it. We
find not indeed in the law of Moses that there was any such linen Ephods
appointed for the Levites, but for the inferior Priests only, the sons of
Aaron, Exodus 39.27. And they made coats of fine linen of woven work, for Aaron
and for his sons: either therefore afterward when the Tabernacle came to be
settled in the land of Canaan, it was ordered, and that by divine authority,
that the Levites also should wear such linen Ephods when they attended upon the
service of the Tabernacle; or else Samuel was by special dispensation, because
of the Nazarites vow, or some other reason, appointed to wear this holy
vestment; which yet seems not so probable, because it appears that this linen
Ephod was so commonly worn by all that were employed in holy services, that
even David also when he danced before the Ark, 2. Sam. 6.14. was girded with a
linen Ephod. However, hereby I say it is clear, that Samutl in his childhood
and youth did attend upon the service of the Tabernacle, in such services as he
could then discharge, and that before Eli the Priest, that is, according as he
was ordered and directed by Eli, who undertook the training of him up, and upon
whom he chiefly attended in the service he did.

Verse. 12. Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial, they knew not the
Lord.] This is meant of the effectual knowledge of faith; so they knew not the
Lord, they had no lively knowledge nor apprehension of God. They that have a
floating knowledge in their brains of those things which they believe not in
their hearts, may be well said not to know that which by a speculative
knowledge they understand well enough; and so they that understand well enough
those things which God has revealed concerning himself, either by his word or
works, if this their knowledge be not accompanied with faith and the fear of
God; (and so though they know God, yet they do not glorify him as God, Romans
1.21.) these men do not indeed know God; they may say they know him, but their
own works may confute them; for if they did indeed know him, they would fear
him and honor him as God: They profess that they know God, says the Apostle
concerning such men as these, Tit. 1.16. but in their works they deny him,
being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. He that
says, I know him (says S. John, 1. John 2.4.) and keeps not his
commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him: and thus it is said here
of the sons of Eli, that they knew not the Lord: Though they were Priests,
whose office it was to teach and instruct the people in the knowledge of God,
yet because they were wicked ungodly wretches, sons of Belial (concerning
which expression see the note, Deuteronomy 13.13.) therefore they are said not to have
known the Lord; as upon the same ground the Prophet Hosea complained of the
people of God in his time, that there was no knowledge of God in the land. Hos.
4.1. And this is here inserted concerning the sons of Eli, to intimate both
the faith of Samuels parents in leaving him, and also the singular grace of God
in preserving him pure and incorrupt, where there was such danger of infection
by reason of these sons of Belial with whom he was to live.

Verse. 13. The Priests servant came, whilst the flesh was in seething, with a
flesh-hook of three teeth in his hand, etc.] Concerning this flesh-hook see
Exodus 27.3. The sin of these sons of Eli here set forth was this, first,
that not content with the breast and shoulder which only were the Priests
portion of the peace offerings, Levit. 7.31, 32, 33, 34. they used to take out
of that which was seething for the sacrifices, as their customarie fees, not
having any Law of God for it, all that their flesh-hook could take out; and it
is said that this they did not now and then, but always, verse. 14. So they did
in Shiloh, unto all the Israelites that came thither: Again, sometimes they
would have this their overplus customarie portion before the flesh was
seething, that they might roast it, yea before the fat was burnt, directly
against that Law, Levit. 7.31. And the Priest shall burn the fat upon the
altar, but the breast shall be Aarons and his sons; yea, and perhaps before
the fat was taken off, which may be the reason why verse. 29. they are said to
have made themselves fat with the chiefest of the offerings.

Verse. 18. But Samuel ministered before the Lord being a child girded with a
linen Ephod.] See the note above, verse. 11.

Verse. 19. Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him
from year to year, etc.] During his childhood, when as yet he could do but
little service in the Tabernacle, his mother thought it requisite to supply
him with clothes, the rather that she might yearly bring him some small pledge
of a mothers love.

Verse. 21. And the Lord visited Hannah, so that she conceived and bare three
sons and two daughters.] Thus for that one son which she had given to the
Lord, the Lord gave her three sons and two daughters more, and that too
immediately upon Elies blessing them, to show how powerful the prayers are of
such as Eli was, verse. 20. it is said Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and
said, The Lord give thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the
Lord; and then immediately after follows, And the Lord visited Hannah, so that
she conceived, etc.]

Verse. 22. Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
Israel, and how they lay with the women, etc.] That is, he heard both of the
wrong they did unto all Israel, in the matter of their sacrifices, and likewise
of that particular villainy of theirs, in lying with the women that assembled
at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation: It is very hard to say what
these women were, with whom the sons of Eli committed this lewdness; first,
some hold that they were certain devout women that withdrawing themselves from
all worldly employments and secular affairs, did give up themselves wholly to
the service of God in the Tabernacle; there to spend their time in fasting and
prayer, and other holy duties both day and night; of which sort they say that
prophetess Anna was one, of whom it is said, Luke 2.37. She was a widow of
about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the Temple, but
served God with fastings and prayers night and day: secondly, others hold that
they were certain women that did assemble together in their turns, some in one
course, and some in another, for some services in the Tabernacle that were
proper for them to do, as washing and spinning; and so had their abode for that
purpose in some places adjoining to the Tabernacle; and did attend at the door
of the Tabernacle to receive directions from the Priests as there was occasion:
thirdly, others say that they were the women that after childbearing came to
be purified according to the Law, who being accompanied, when they came with a
great many of their neighbors and friends that went along with them, it is
therefore said that they assembled by troops (as the word in the Original
signifies) at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation: and lastly,
others think that it is meant generally of all those women, that in the
forwardness of their zeal and devotion did flock together daily at the door
of the Tabernacle, to offer sacrifices, and to perform other duties of Gods
worship and service; and indeed considering that the same phrase is used
concerning those women that came flocking in to bring their looking-glasses for
the service of the Tabernacle (at which time there could not be any such
companies of women, that had either consecrated themselves to the perpetual
service of God in the Tabernacle, or that came up in their courses to be
helpful in their way to the ministers of the Tabernacle; and that because the
Tabernacle was not then built) Exodus 38.8. And he made the lave^, of brass, of
the looking-glasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the door of
the Tabernacle of the congregation, I do the rather think it is meant of all
such women generally, as came in freely and frequently to serve God in the
Tabernacle, and that many of these were seduced by these varlets, as they got
opportunity of any privacy with them, and drawn to lie with them, and that in
Gods house; a wickedness the more abominable too, because they had wives of
their own, chap. 4.19. As for the mention that is here made of Elies age, Now
Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did, etc. I conceive there are
two reasons why this is expressed; first, to intimate why he himself never took
notice of these vilde pranks that his sons played; being very aged and so not
being able, frequently to attend himself upon the service of the Tabernacle, he
never knew of these things till others told him of it: and secondly, as an
aggravation of his affliction in the wickedness of his sons, that it fell
upon him in his old age; to hear such tidings of his sons, would have been a
burden heavy enough to have been born when he was in his full strength, but in
his old age, when the grassehopper is a burden, as Solomon says, Eccles. 12.5.
to have such milstones fall upon him, must needs crush him.

Verse. 23. And he said unto them, Why do you such things? etc.] Thus he
reproves his sons for their sins; but herein lay the sin of Eli, that
knowing them guilty of such horrid abominations he thought it enough to reprove
them, and that so gently too, Nay my sons, for it is no good report that I
hear, etc. For such villainies as these of his sons, that were now discovered
to him, he could have done no less in justice then to have turned them out of
the priesthood, yea to have cut them off from the people of God; and therefore
instead of that just severity thus mildly to admonish them only, was certainly
a grievous sin; and indeed it discovered plainly he had always marred them
with too much indulgence; so that it is no wonder though the Lord were highly
offended with him.

Verse. 24. Ye make the Lords people to transgress.] If we read this clause as
it is in the margin of our bibles, Ye make the Lords people to cry out, it is
do^btlesse then meant of the complaints and outcries of the people against them
for their abominable ways; but if we read the words as they are in our text,
Ye make the Lords people to transgress, the meaning is, that they did not
only sin themselves, but also caused the people to transgress, and so were
guilty as much as in them lay of helping to destroy their souls also; to wit,
partly in that they imitated their evil example; and partly, in that they
forbore to bring their sacrifices to the Lord, being offended at their ill
managing those sacred services, as is before noted, verse 17.

Verse. 25. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if
a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?] That is, though all
the friends he has should join together and entreat, they shall not be able to
make his peace. This speech of Eli to his sons, is somewhat difficult, and is
diversely expounded; some understand it thus, that whereas when one man wrongs
another, the Judge or umpire chosen between, may compose the difference and
reconcile them together, it is otherwise when a man wittingly, maliciously, and
presumptuously sins against God; for there all hope of pardon is denied,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, that is, for such a man's sin, Heb.
10.26. neither should such an one be prayed for: 1. John 5.16. If any man see
his brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall
give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death:
I do not say, he shall pray for it. But this Exposition agrees not with Eli
his aim, which was doubtless to win his sons to true repentance; and
besides, why should sinning against the Lord, be here restrained to sinning
against him maliciciously, and with a high hand? I rather therefore think, that
the drift of these words is only to show them what a grievous and dangerous
thing sin is, especially such sins whereby God is immediately wronged and
provoked, that so he might scarre them from their evil courses; to wit, either
because if God by his Judges punish offenses against man, he must needs be more
severe when men rise against him; or else because no mediation nor satisfaction
by man can here take up the quarrel; as may be done when the difference is
between one man and another: If one man (says he) sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him; that is, an Umpire may come and take up the
controversy; the party may be adjudged to make satisfaction, and there will
be an end of the quarrel; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall
entreat for him? that is, no mediation nor satisfaction of man can here make a
man's peace; no reconciliation can be here hoped for, unless the sinner
repenting of his sins, do by faith in Christ turn to God. So that herein also
is implied the desperate danger of their condition, who by kicking against the
sacrifices, did in a manner despise this only means of their reconciliation
with God.

Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the
Lord would slay them.] That is, because the Lord had determined to destroy
them; and so consequently not to give them grace to repent, but to leave them
to the stubbornness of their own wicked hearts; for though it be true, that God
wills not the death of a sinner, (Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way, and live; that is, he desires not that sinners should perish, but would
rather that they should repent, etc.) yet it does not hence follow, but that
God may determine in a way of justice, not to give any effectual grace to such
and such men, as have grievously provoked him by their sins, but rather to
deliver them up to hardness of heart, and so it was here; for their sins God
determined to destroy them, and consequently to leave them to themselves; and
therefore it was no wonder though they minded not the reproofs and counsel of
their father.

Verse. 26. And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favor both with the Lord,
and also with men.] This is here inserted, first, for the greater praise of
Samuel, who grew in grace even in these declining times: and secondly,
especially to show how God remembered mercy in the midst of judgment, by
raising up such a glorious instrument to be a stay to his poor people, in
those dismal times that were now coming upon them.

Verse. 27. Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they were in
Egypt in Pharaohs house?] to wit, by choosing Aaron of whom Eli was descended,
to join himself with Moses, for the deliverance of the Israelites when they
were in bondage to Pharaoh in Egypt.

Verse. 29. Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice, and at mine offering, which I
have commanded in my habitation, and honor thy sons above me? etc.] In
this clause, first, Eli and his sons are reproved for kicking against Gods
sacrifices and offerings; and they are said to kick at his sacrifices, etc. 1.
because they seemed not pleased that God had so much, and they so little of the
sacrifices and offerings; and therefore in a proud and scornful manner, took
from the sacrifices for their own use what they pleased themselves; and 2.
because by their doing what they listed about Gods sacrifices, and by carrying
themselves as if they thought any thing that they were pleased to leave, after
they had served themselves, good enough for Gods altar; and generally by their
profane and careless carriage of themselves in the sacred service, whereto
they could not have addressed themselves with too much reverence and fear; they
discovered what a slight and base esteem they had of Gods sacrifices, which
was all one in effect, as if they had trampled them under their feet; and 3.
because by their insolent and wilful disobeying the law of the sacrifices
which God had given them in charge; they did as it were kick and spurn against
God in his Ordinances: And though Eli did not this but his sons only, yet
because he did not restrain them from these evil practices, and punish them for
their wickedness herein; it is charged upon him as well as upon them:
Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice? etc. and secondly, Eli is reproved for
honoring his sons above God; and that because he was more careful to please
his children, then to please God; to keep them in their places, then to
vindicate Gods sacrifices from being polluted.

Verse. 30. I said indeed, that thy house, and the house of thy father should
walk before me for ever, etc.] Because the taking away the high Priests place
from Eli and his family, is not the only punishment here threatened, though
the chief; (for the cutting off many of his posterity from the inferior
priesthood, is also included in the evil denounced against him in this place,
verse. 31. Behold, the days come that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of
thy fathers house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house:)
therefore this which is here said of a conditional promise formerly made,
which should now be reversed, because the condition was not performed, cannot
be referred to any particular promise made to Eli, or any decree of Gods
concerning Eli, that the high Priesthood should be continued in his line; but
to that promise made to Aaron and his seed in general, Exodus 29.9. Thou shall
qird them with girdles (Aaron and his sons) and put the bonnets on them: and
the Priests office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: which is now
reversed as concerning Eli his family, whom the Lord threatens to cut off in a
great part from the priesthood* given at first to Aaron and his seed.

Verse. 31. Behold, the days come that I will cut off thine arm, etc.] That is,
I will make both thee and thy family weak and ignoble: (for the cutting off
the arm, signifies the taking away from them the strength and dignity of
their family, Zech. 11.17. Woe to the idol-shepherd that leaves the flock, the
sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean
dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened: and this was done, first,
by cutting off him and his two sons, chap. 4. secondly, by cutting off his
posterity in the flower of their age, which was no doubt partly accomplished
by that bloody execution that was done upon Abimelech and eighty five of the
Priests of his family, chap. 22.16. -- 18, 19. And the King said, Thou shall
surely die, Ahimelech, thou and all thy fathers house. -- And the King said to
Doeg, Turn thou and fall upon the Priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he
fell upon the Priests, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that
did wear a linen Ephod. And Nob the city of the Priests smote he with the edge
of the sword, both men, and women, children and sucklings, etc. and thirdly, by
removing the dignity of the high Priesthood from Elies family, which was
descended from Ithamar unto Zadok, the faithful Priest spoken of verse. 35. of
the stock of Eleazar, which was done at least eighty years after this in the
days of Solomon: 1. Kings, 2.27. So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being
Priest unto the Lord: that he might fulfill the word of the Lord, which he
spoke concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.

Verse. 32. And thou shall see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth
which God shall give Israel.] This may be meant of Eli his seeing the time when
the Philistines should enter the land of Israel, the place which God had chosen
to dwell in amongst his people, and spoil them of their wealth; and take away
the Ark of God, etc. especially if we read this clause as it is in the margin;
And thou shall see the affliction of the Tabernacle, for all the wealth which
God would have given Israel. But rather I conceive that the meaning is, that
Eli should see these things, to wit, in his posterity (for it is usual in the
Scripture to speak that of the father, which shall be accomplished in his
posterity long after: as Genesis 27.29. Let people serve thee; and nations bow
down to thee: be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mothers sons bow down to
thee; cursed be every one that curses thee, and blessed be he that blesses
thee. 2. Sam. 7.16. And thine house, and thy Kingdom shall be established for
ever before thee; thy throne shall be established for ever.) Thou shall see
says the Lord, an enemy, to wit, Zadok and his posterity (whom Elies
children should envy and malign as an enemy, because the high priesthood was
taken from their family, and conferred upon them) in my habitation; that is,
in the temple executing the high Priests place, and that in all the wealth
which God shall give Israel; that is, in those days when Israel shall flourish
most in wealth and glory; and when consequently the high priesthood shall be
most desirable, to wit, in the days of Solomon; for this last clause is added
to implie the time when this should come to pass which is here threatened.

Verse. 33. And the man of thine whom I shall not cut off from mine altar, shall
be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart.] That is, those of thy
posterity that shall not be cut off, shall live miserably, pining away with
grief and vexation of heart, because they shall see the adversary family
enjoy their honor: for still that which is said of Elies eyes and heart, is
meant of the eyes and heart of his posterity.

Verse. 34. And this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two
sons, etc.] That is, though many of these things which I have threatened
against thy family, shall not come to pass in thy time; yet by this sign
which I now foretell thee, to wit, the slaying of thy two sons, Hophni and
Phinehas on one day thou may be assured concerning those things; and that
because as truly as thou shall see this accomplished, so truly shall all the
rest come to pass too in their several seasons.

Verse. 35. And I will raise me up a faithful Priest, that shall do according
to that which is in mine heart, etc.] To wit, Zadok of the family of Eleazar,
who did faithfully cleave to Solomon, whom the Lord had appointed to succeed
David in the throne, when Abiathar who was of the posterity of Eli, conspired
with Adonijah against David, and against Solomon, 1. Kings 1.7, 8. whereupon it
was, that he was afterward deposed by Solomon from being high Priest, and
Zadok, was made high Priest in his stead, 1. Kings 2.27. Now concerning this
Zadok there is a promise here made, I will build him a sure house, and he shall
walk before mine anointed for ever: Where first, by building him a sure house,
is meant the multiplying of his family, together with the prosperity they
should enjoy in every respect; and more particularly the establishing of his
offspring in the priesthood, and settling of the high Priests place upon them:
for thus we find this phrase of building men a house used elsewhere, as Deuteronomy.
25.9. So shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his brothers
house: and Exodus 1.21. And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God,
that he made them houses: and 2. Sam. 7. where that which the Lord said to
David concerning Solomon, verse. 13. I will establish the throne of his kingdom
for ever, is thus afterward repeated by David, verse. 27. For thou, O Lord of
hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee
an house. And indeed we find accordingly, that the high priesthood was
continued in the line and posterity of Zadok, unto the time of the Babylonian
captivity; Ezekiel. 44.15. But the Priests, the Levites, the sons of Zadok,
that kept the charge of my Sanctuary, when the children of Israel went astray
from me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, etc. and so Zadok
being of the posterity of Phinehas the son of Eleazar, that promise was made
good which the Lord made to Phinehas, Number. 25.13. He shall have it, and his
seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood: and secondly,
by his walking before the Lords anointed for ever, is meant that Zadok and his
posterity should perform such services as belonged to the high Priest, for
Solomon and his successors, by enquiring of the Lord for them, by offering
sacrifices for them; yea and by giving them counsel and advice upon every
occasion, etc. yet some conceive too, that this last clause must also be
referred to Christ the Lords anointed, of whom both Solomon and his successors
were types; and who was at his coming to abolish the Leviticall priesthood.

Verse. 36. Every one that is left in thy house, shall come and crouch to him
for a piece of silver, etc.] That is, those of thy posterity that shall not be
cut off, shall come and bow and crouch before the posterity of Zadok to beg
some relief, and to sue that they may be employed, though it were but in some
of the meanest services of the Temple; only that they may have bread wherewith
to sustain themselves and indeed if we yield what is most probable, to wit,
that the Priests were many times degraded for their evil deeds, and turned out
of their office; it needs not seem strange, that many of Elies posterity
should fall into such extreme poverty and misery. Some conceive that we have
some footsteps of this curse in that which is said of the Priests that were not
of Zadoks posterity, Ezekiel. 44.13, 14. And they shall not come near unto me to
do the office of a Priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things,
in the most holy place: but they shall bear their shame and their abominations
which they have committed: But I will make them keepers of the charge of the
house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. ANd the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli:] See the
note, chap. 2.11.

Verse. 3. And the word of the Lord was precious in those days, etc.] That is,
rare; for so this word is used elsewhere, Esa. 13.12. I will make a man more
precious then fine gold: and so it is explained here in the following clause,
The word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no open vision:
That is, there was not a known Prophet in those days, there was not a man
openly known, to whom the Lord appeared in visions, as afterward he did to his
Prophets, or whom the Lord did send forth among the people with a word of
prophecy in his mouth. Now this is thus expressed, partly to show how the Lord
hereby punished the profaneness of these times: many of the Priests were grown
in these days desperately wicked, and by their means the worship of God grew
into contempt; (for men abhorred the offerings of the Lord, chap. 2.17.) and so
by degrees, idolatry and all other sins grew rife amongst them; as is
evident by the reformation following immediately after this, when Samuel came
to be their Judge, chap. 7.3, 4. Now hereupon, as these words implie, the Lord
hid himself in a great measure from his people, and did not reveal his will by
his Prophets to them as at other times, according to that which is threatened,
Amos 8.11. I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a
thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord: and that complaint of
the Church, Psalm. 74.9. We see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet,
etc. and then again it is expressed partly for the honor of Samuel, by and in
whom the Lord was pleased to reestablish in his Church this prophetical
office; whence it is, that often in the Scripture Samuel is mentioned as the
first of the Prophets, as 2. Chron. 35.18. And there was no Passover like to
that, kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the Prophet: and Acts 3.24. Yea
and all the Prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have
spoken, have likewise foretold of these days; and so also Heb. 11.32.

Verse. 2. And it came to pass at that time when Eli was laid down in his
place, etc.] Here the time is set down when the Lord appeared first to Samuel:
first, more generally, that it was in those days when the word of the Lord was
so precious, so rare; for to this in the words immediately foregoing, I
conceive this clause may best be referred, And it came to pass at that time;
though indeed others refer it to that which is related in the foregoing
chapter, verse. 27. concerning a message that was brought unto Eli by a man of
God that was sent unto him, to wit, that at that time, when the aforesaid
Prophet had spoke unto Eli, then also the Lord appeared to Samuel, and told him
of the judgments that should fall upon Eli and his house: and then, secondly,
more particularly; as first, that it was in the night, when Eli was laid down
in his place, that is, when he was gone to bed, and laid down to his rest, to
wit, in some lodging of the house, wherein the Tabernacle was kept; of which
see the note before, chap. 19. and secondly, that it was toward morning, verse.
3. ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the Lord, where the Ark of God
was; that is, before the lamps that were in the golden candlestick in the
Tabernacle were gone out, the oil being wasted: (for in the evening the lamps
were lighted, and so burnt all night till they went out in the morning:
concerning which see the note Exodus 30.7. whence it is said, 2. Chron. 13.11.
that the lamps of the golden candlestick were to burn every evening) as for
that clause verse. 2. concerning the dimnesse of Elies eyes, when Eli was laid
down in his place, and his eyes began to wax dim that he could not see; that is
inserted either to implie also the time when the Lord appeared to Samuel;
namely, that it was when Eli was now grown very old, insomuch that he began to
be blind with age; or else rather to implie beforehand the reason why Samuel,
supposing that Eli had called him, when the Lord spoke to him, was so ready
even in the night time to run to him; namely, because Eli could not see, and
therefore often wanted help, in regard whereof Samuel, who now in his young
years attended upon Eli, was wont to rise and go to him if he heard him call,
though it were at midnight.

Verse. 7. Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord, etc.] That is, he was not yet
acquainted with Gods manner of revealing himself to his Prophets by visions.

Verse. 8. And Eli perceived that the Lord had called the child.] By this we may
perceive the reason why the Lord suffered Samuel so often to mistake the voice
that he heard, and run to Eli, to wit, that Eli might certainly be assured when
he heard Gods message from him, that indeed the Lord had appeared to him.

Verse. 10. And the Lord came, and stood, and called, etc.] This proves not that
God appeared in a visible shape; rather it is a speech of God after the manner
of men, yet happily withal to implie, either that whereas before the voice he
heard was as of one afar off, now it was as of one that stood near by him; or
else that whereas before the Lord only called him, now he did not only call
him, but also proceeded to make known what he had to say to him.

Verse. 11. Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of
every one that hears it shall tingle.] That is, at the hearing whereof they
shall be stricken with horror and astonishment. The same expression is used 2.
Kings 21.12. in threatening the evil that was to come upon Jerusalem and Judah,
because of the sins of Manasseh; and it is a figurative expression taken from
the singing and dizzinesse which some sudden terrible noise, as a clap of
thunder, or the roaring of a cannon, will make in the head of a man that is near
to it. How this was accomplished in Eli, and the wife of Phinehas, we may read
in the following chapter, verse. 18, 19, etc. where we shall find, that upon the
report of the judgment now threatened, Eli fell down and brake his neck, and
his daughter in law the wife of Phinehas fell presenty into the pains of
travel and died.

Verse. 12. When I begin I will also make an end.] That is, as sure as I begin,
so sure will I make an end; though it may be some time ere I begin, yet
assuredly all shall come upon them which I have threatened.

Verse. 13. For I have told him, that I will judge his house for ever, for the
iniquity which he knows.] This is added by way of aggravating Elies sin,
that it was not ignorantly done, but wittingly: he knew what his sons did,
and that the Lord was displeased at it (for he had by his messenger, chap.
2.27. threatened him for it) and yet he would not restrain them.

Because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.] The word
here translated vile, may be also rendered accursed, as it is in the margin of
our bibles; and indeed let the word be taken either way, the sons of Eli had
deserved this censure; vile, they were in regard of their base sins, which
made them even to stink, and to be abhorred amongst the people; every one
loathed them for their abominable lives: and accursed they were in regard of
the curse of God, that is in a special manner denounced against those, that
presumptuously walk in such gross and detestable sins; and it might well be
said, that they made themselves vile, or accursed, because it was merely by
their own wilful choosing to walk in such lewd ways, that they had brought
such shame upon themselves, and exposed themselves to the curse of God
according to that of the Prophet, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, Hos.
13.9.

Verse. 14. I have sworn unto the house of Eli* that the iniquity of Elies
house shall not be purged with sacrifice, nor offering for ever.] Two things
are included in this decree of the Lord, concerning Elies house: first,
concerning his wicked sons, that the Lord delivering them up to a reprobate
sense, they should continue in their infidelity, impenitency, and hardness of
heart, unto their dying day, and so then it was not their sacrifices and
offerings that should do them any good: secondly, concerning their posterity,
that the temporal punishment which God had threatened to bring upon them,
should not by any means be kept off, to wit, that the dignity of the high
priests office, should be taken from them, etc.

Verse. 15. And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the
house of the Lord.] By this and some other places it seems probable, that
though the Tabernacle whilst it was in the desert, for the better transporting
and carrying it from place to place, had no other covering nor fence, then the
curtains and hangings appointed by Moses, yet afterward it was some other way
shut in; yea as it is most probable housed; whence there is mention here of the
doors of the house of the Lord, see the notes chap. 1.9. The office of opening
the doors belonged to the Levites, as afterward in the Temple, 1. Chron. 23.5.
and so Samuel now did it. And observable indeed it is, that Samuel was not
puffed up so by the Lords appearing to him, as to despise that which might seem
for a Prophet a mean employment.

And Samuel feared to show Eli the vision.] Though the Lord had not commanded
Samuel to acquaint Eli with that he had revealed to him, concerning the heavy
judgment that should befall his house, yet his own reason suggested, that it
was not fit that a secret that so nearly concerned him, should be kept from
him; only says the text, Samuel feared to show Eli the vision, to wit, either
because, first, such sad tidings he knew would wound his heart, and therefore
being loath to grieve him, he was afraid to let him know it; or secondly,
because he doubted it might seem arrogance in him, as a messenger sent from
God, to denounce such terrible things against his aged Tutour and governor; or
thirdly, because he feared Elies displeasure, as knowing well that ancient men,
and men in authority, cannot easily brook, to have the judgment of God
denounced against them, especially by those that are for years, or otherwise,
inferior to them.

Verse. 17. God do so to thee and more also, if thou hide any thing from me,
etc.] By this importunity of Eli in conjuring Samuel so earnestly to tell him
all that God had said unto him, it is evident that so soon as Eli conceived
that the Lord had appeared to Samuel, he presently feared that something was
revealed to him concerning him and his sons. Guilty consciences will still be
suggesting terrors and fears upon every occasion; and so it was here with Eli;
being conscious to himself of his sons lewdness, and his own indulgence
toward them, no sooner was he persuaded in his mind, that the Lord had
appeared in a vision to Samuel, but presently he apprehended some heavy
sentence pronounced against him; and this made him now so eager to know what it
was; as for this manner of adjuration, God do so to thee and more also, see the
note, Ruth. 1.17.

Verse. 18: And he said, It is the Lord: let him do what seems him good.] God
has absolute power over all his creatures, to do with them what seems good
in his own eyes, neither is he to render an account of his actions: and
besides, he is most wise, and faithful, and just, so that though men cannot
comprehend the reason of his judgments, yet they may be sure there can be
nothing faulty in them: and to his children withal his goodness and love is
so great, that unless it were needful he would not, and beyond what is
needful he will not afflict them. In all which regards it might well be, that
Eli alleged this as a reason why he could not but submit to what was
threatened; namely, because it was the Lord that had said it. It is the Lord:
let him do what seems him good.

Verse. 20. And all Israel, even from Dan to Beersheba, knew that Samuel was
established to be a Prophet of the Lord.] To wit, by the accomplishment, not
only of that which he had now said unto Eli, but also of other things revealed
to him by the Lord at other times; in regard whereof that is added which
follows in the next verse, the Lord appeared again in Shiloh,, to wit, to
Samuel.

Verse. 21. For the Lord revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh, by the word of
the Lord.] That is, by Christ, the word of his Father, or by revealing his will
and word unto him, which afterward was to be delivered by him to others, to
wit, by prophetical revelation, and not by any corporal or visible apparition.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. ANd the word of Samuel came to all Israel.] Or, came to pass; the
meaning is, that Samuel as a Prophet made known the word of the Lord, as to Eli
before, so afterward to all Israel, reproving them for their sins, and
telling them beforehand the judgments that would fall upon them, if they did
not repent. All which did accordingly come upon them.

Now Israel went against the Philistines to battle, etc.] Who began now again
to invade the land of Israel. It may seem that all the forty years of Elies
judging Israel they had been quiet; happily because they had been so
exceedingly weakened by the slaughter which Samson made so often among them,
especially at his death; where no doubt most of their princes and lords were
slain, Judge. 16.30. And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines; and he
bowed himself with all his might: and the house fell upon the lords, and upon
all the people that were therein: so the dead which he slew at his death, were
mo then they which he slew in his life. But now they began again to quarrel
with the Israelites, and that no doubt not without the secret counsel of God,
who intended to punish hereby both the Priests and people of Israel; and
hereupon it was, that the Philistines being entered upon the land of Israel, the
Israelites were gathered together to fight with them; now the camp of the
Israelites was besides Eben-ezer, that is, a place where afterward a stone was
erected that was called Eben-ezer, the occasion whereof we may see chap. 7.11,
12. and the camp of the Philistines was in Aphek, a city in the tribe of
Judah, which bordered upon the land of the Philistines: see Josh. 15.53.

Verse. 3. Wherefore has the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistines? Let
us fetch the Ark, etc.] Though idolatry and many other gross sins were at
this time rife amongst the Israelites; They provoked him to anger with their
high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images, says the
Psalmist concerning these very times, Psalm. 78.58. yet so blind and stupid they
were, that because they were the seed of Abraham, and the people of God, they
wondered why God should take the uncircumcised Philistines part against them,
never minding or mentioning their own wickedness, which had provoked the Lord
to bring these miseries upon them; Wherefore, say they, has the Lord smitten
us to day before the Philistines? and vainly they thought to mend all for the
future, by fetching the Ark of God to be amongst them: Let us, say they, fetch
the Ark of the covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that when it comes
among us, it may save us out of the hand of our enemies. Now however they were
moved no doubt to take this course: first, because the Ark was the sign of
Gods presence amongst them; whence it is said verse. 4. that the people sent to
Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the Ark of the covenant of the Lord
of hosts, which dwells between the Cherubims: and secondly, because the
Israelites in former times had prevailed mightily against their enemies, when
the Ark was amongst them, as when they vanquished the Midianites, Number. 31.6.
and at the sacking of Jericho, when the walls of the city fell down before
them, Josh. 6.4, 5. and on the other side, when the Ark was not with them, they
had gone by the worst, as when they went out to fight against the Canaanites,
Number. 14.44, 45. They presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheles the Ark
of the covenant of the Lord and Moses departed not out of the camp. Then the
Amalekites came down and the Canaanites which dwelt in that hill, and smote
them, and discomfited them even to Hormah: and therefore it seems afterward to
have been an usual custom to carry forth the Ark into the field with them;
for Saul had it with him when he was in arms against the Philistines, chap.
14.18. Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the Ark of God (for the Ark of God
was at that time with the children of Israel): and Joab (as some think) had it
with him when he went out against the Ammonites, the Ark, and Israel, and Judah
abide in tents, said Uriab, 2. Sam. 11.11. yet because at present they did
merely rest upon the outward sign, and did not repent them of their sins,
whereby they had forfeited their interest in God, nor seek to make their peace
with God, as they ought to have done; therefore their confidence in the Ark was
groundless and vain, and the sign of Gods presence became ineffectuall
amongst them. And doubtless there was a secret overruling hand of God in this
their sudden resolution to fetch the Ark into the camp, whereby he made way to
the delivering up the Ark into the power of the enemy, and to the death of the
two sons of Eli, who coming along with the Ark, were slain by the Philistines.

Verse. 4. And the two sons of Eli Hophni and Phinehas were there with the Ark
of the covenant of God.] To wit, either to carry it, as Number. 4.15. or at least
to attend it.

Verse. 7. And the Philistines were afraid; for they said, God is come into the
camp.] This happily the Philistines spoke, as thinking the Ark to be some
representation of the God of the Israelites* and having the same opinion of it
as they had of their own idols; at least they conceived that there was some
divine power that went along with the Ark where it went, which was the reason
why they were stricken with such astonishment and fear.

And they said, Woe unto us; for there has not been such a thing heretofore.]
That is, in former conflicts we have had with them, they used not to bring
their Ark into the camp; even by this unwonted shout of the Israelites we may
see how much greater their hope and confidence is now, then it has been
formerly.

Verse. 8. These are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in
the wilderness.] In the former part of this clause it is manifest, that the
Philistines speak of those diverse great plagues wherewith the Lord smote both
Pharaoh and his people in Egypt, thereby forcing them to let his people go; but
these words (in the wilderness) are added in the close, because in the
overthrow of the Egyptians in the red sea (which joined to the desert of Etham,
Exodus 13.20.) there was a consummation of all the former plagues.

Verse. 13. For his heart trembled for the Ark of God.] Which proceeded partly
from the guiltiness of his conscience, and the remembrance of those heavy
things which had been spoken to him; first by the man of God, chap. 2.27. and
then by Samuel, chap. 3.18. and partly from the great care be took above all
for the Ark, lest that should fall into the hands of the uncircumcised
Philistines.

Verse. 15. Now Eli was ninety and eight years old, and his eyes were dim that
he could not see.] His age is mentioned as the cause of his blindness; his
blindness as the cause why he took no notice of this doleful messenger till
he perceived somewhat was amiss by the cry of the people.

Verse. 18. And it came to pass when he made mention of the Ark of God, that he
fell from off the seat.] This implies, first, the suddenness of his death; no
sooner did the messenger make mention of the Ark, but presently his heart died
within him, and so falling down backward he brake his neck: and secondly, how
grievous it was to him to hear the Ark was taken; though he was able to endure
the relation of the flight and slaughter of the people, yea, of the death of
his two sons, yet as soon as he began the relation of the arks being taken,
that presently struck him into a deadly swo^n. As for the gate from the seat
whereof he fell, either it was the gate of the city, or of the Tabernacle; and
if the last be meant, very observable it is, that in the place where his sons
had so grievously sinned, chap. 2.22. this heavy hand of God should fall upon
him.

For he was an old man, and heavy.] Both his weakness through age, and the
corpulency and unwieldnesse of his body were the cause, that falling he brake
his neck; and therefore are they here expressed.

Verse. 19. When she heard the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that
her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed her self, etc.] As women
are wont to do when the pains of travel come upon them.

Verse. 20. But she answered not, neither did she regard it.] That is, she made
no answer to that wherewith they sought to comfort her, as indeed not regarding
it, but rather proceeded on in expressing her sorrow by giving that name
Ichabod, that is, Where is the glory, or there is no glory, to her son that
was born.

Verse. 21. The glory is departed from Israel, etc,] God was the glory of his
people because rejecting other nations, he had chosen them to be his peculiar
treasure* Psalm. 106.20. Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of
an ox that eats grass: Jer. 2.11. Has a nation changed their gods, which
are yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory, for that which does
not profit: and therefore she says, that the glory was departed from Israel,
because they had lost the ark which was the sign of Gods presence amongst
them, and consequently their glory; Psalm. 26.8. Lord, I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwells: and Psalm.
78.60, 61. So that he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh: the tent which he
placed among men, and delivered his strength into captivity: and his glory
into the enemies hands.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. WHen the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the
house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.] This they did either in contempt of the
ark, presenting it as a captive before their Dagon, by whose help they
persuaded themselves it was, that they had overcome both the Hebrews and their
God; or else out of a kind of reverence they bare to this God of the Hebrews,
whom therefore they thought good to place with Dagon in his Temple. Whence also
perhaps it was, that they feared to offer any violence to it, by opening it and
taking forth those holy things that were in it.

Verse. 3. Behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of
the Lord.] And hereby did the Lord discover to the Philistines what a vain idol
their Dagon was, and that the God of Israel was the only true almighty God;
yea the more the Lord was magnified herein, because he cast down this idol-god
in his own temple, enemies being never foiled with more glory to the
conqueror then when they are overcome in their own dominions. Besides, the ark
being a type of Christ, by whom God reveals his will unto men in the
ministry of the Gospel, the fall of Dagon before the ark, did notably shadow
forth the ruin of idolatry, by the preaching of the Gospel; God will not
suffer any rivall-gods to stand cheek by jowl with him, but when the Gospel
comes in, idolatry shall down.

And they took Dagon and set him in his place again.] Had Dagon fallen but
once, being at first dashed in pieces, they might have pretended that it came
by some casualtie; but now when upon the first fall they set it up again, and
no doubt used all the skill they could to fasten it; this made it beyond all
excuse manifest, that by the mighty power of God only it was beaten down.

Verse. 4. And the head of Dagon, and both the palms of his hands were cut off
upon the threshold, etc.] The head, the seat of wisdom, and the hands,
wherewith the strength of man is put forth were cut off, to show that there was
neither knowledge nor power in this their idol-god. Besides, now the priests
could not set up their idol again, and conceal his overthrow from the people,
as before perhaps they did. By casting the head and hands upon the threshold,
that those that entered might presently trample upon them, the Lord showed the
baseness of this their idol-god; or that he would have this spectacle scarre
them from coming any more into that Temple for that gross idolatry, whereto
they had formerly given themselves. As for that last clause, only the stump of
Dagon was left to him, in the Original it is only Dagon remained, the ground
whereof may be, because the most of the idol that remained, was the fishie
part. For Dag signifies a fish; now because this idol was so called, in regard
that in the nether parts it resembled a fish, the hands and head being cut off,
it is said that only Dagon remained: see the note. Judges 16.23.

Verse. 5. Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagons
house, tread on the threshold, etc.] This they did either by way of veneration,
as accounting the threshold sanctified by the touch of the head and hands of
their idol; or rather by way of detestation, as thinking that it was the
falling of their idol upon the threshold, that had dashed it in pieces (for why
else should they not as well have forborne to tread upon the pavement, where the
body of their idol lay?) however thus by the alruling Providence of God, even
their superstition, became a means to perpetuate the memory of this wonderful
work of God in the confusion of their idol, which otherwise within some short
time, might have been forgotten.

Verse. 6. But the hand of the Lord was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he
destroyed them, and smote them with emerods.] Because that the Lord had so
clearly discovered to the men of Ashdod, that their Dagon was a vain idol, and
that the God of Israel, whose ark they had boldly surprised, was the only true
almighty God, to wit, by casting down their idol before the Ark, and at last
breaking it in pieces; and yet notwithstanding they continued still as
superstitiously devoted to their idol, as they were before, and were not afraid
still to detain the ark of God in captivity, as at the first: therefore now the
Lord began to take vengeance on the men of Ashdod, the hand of the Lord was
heavy upon the men of Ashdod. etc. Many Expositours understand the next words,
and he destroyed them, of the plague of mice, wherewith also that this time he
destroyed and wasted their land, chap. 6.5. and others of some other mortal
disease, which God sent amongst them, besides the emerods: but I rather
conceive, that all the following words are meant of the plague of the emerods,
wherewith God smote them, and he destroyed them, and smote them with emerods;
only these words, and he destroyed them, are prefixed to make known, that this
disease of the emerods was amongst them not only painful and disgraceful,
Psalm. 78.66. And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a
perpetual shame; but mortal also, so that many died of them, and therefore
the Ekronites cried out, verse. 10. They have brought about the Ark of the God
of Israel to us, to slay us and our people.

Verse. 8. And they answered, Let the Ark of the God of Israel, be carried about
unto Gath.] This the Lords of the Philistines resolved upon, to try hereby
whether it were the presence of the ark that had caused those plagues; or
whether they came by chance; with which conceit as yet they chuckered
themselves; else the Princes of Gath, who were in this counsel amongst the
other Lords of the Philistines, would never have consented to the removing of
the Ark to their city.

Verse. 11. Send away the Ark of the God of Israel, etc.] The men of Ekron being
fully now convinced, that it was because of the Ark, that so much misery was
fallen on them; desire plainly, that it might be sent back to the land of
Israel: but it seems their Princes, loath yet to part with such a glorious
trophee of their victory; desired to try yet a little further; for that after
this it was sent both to Gaza and Ashkelon, is evident: chap. 6. verse. 4. Then
said they, What shall be the trespasse-offering which we shall return to him?
They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, according to the
number of the lords of the Philistines: for one plague was on you all, and on
your Lords: and again verse. 17. And these are the golden emerods which the
Philistines returned for a trespasse-offering unto the Lord; for Ashdod one,
for Gaza one, for Ashkelon one, etc.

Verse. 12. And the men that died not, were smitten with the emerods.] The
meaning of this may be, that there were many smitten with the emerods, besides
those that died of them; or else we must hold that there was some other deadly
disease which God sent amongst them besides the emerods, which is called in the
foregoing verse, a deadly destruction.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 2. ANd the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying,
What shall we do to the Ark of the Lord, etc.] Thus was God the more glorified,
when their very priests, the most zealous maintainers of their idol-gods, were
brought to give this following advice, which tended so much to the honor of
the Lord, and the shame of their idols. The question they propounded to their
priests was not, What shall we do with the Ark? but What shall we do to the Ark
of the Lord? Tell us wherewith we shall send it to his place, that is, in what
manner, and with what gifts shall we send back the Ark? Being convinced by the
heavy hand of God that lay upon them, that they had trespassed some way against
the Ark; it seems their reason led them to think, that some satisfaction or
other was to be made; and thereupon, being resolved to send it away, they
consulted wherewith they should send back the Ark,

Verse. 3. Then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you, why his hand
is not removed from you.] That is, if they were healed, as they confidently
assured themselves it would prove, then hereby they should know why hitherto
his hand had not been removed from them.

Verse. 4. They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, according
to the number of the lords of the Philistines.] These were the
trespasse-offerings which their priests and diviners advised them to send back
with the Ark, to wit, as by way of acknowledgement, that the God of Israel had
brought upon them those plagues of the emerods, and mice, for their holding of
the Ark of God captive amongst them; and therefore the reason given in the
following verse, why they would have these presents sent back with the Ark, is
that they might hereby give glory to the God of Israel, namely, by an
acknowledgement and confession of their sin, and the just hand of God that
had been upon them for their sin: verse. 5. Ye shall make images of your
emerods, and images of your mice, that mar the land, and ye shall give glory
unto the God of Israel; the very same expression which Joshua used when he
advised Achan to confess his fault, Josh. 7.19. My son, says he, give, I
pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel. It may well be indeed which some
conceive, that the sending of such absurd and ridiculous gifts with the Ark, as
emerods and mice, was suggested by Satan to their diviners in contempt of God:
but if it were so, whilst Satan intended hereby to dishonor God, the Lord by
his alruling providence, intended hereby to cast the shame upon them, and to
bring great glory to his own name; whilst the Philistines themselves, were made
to send into the land of Israel such things, as might there remain perpetual
monuments and memorialls of those shameful punishments, wherewith God had
humbled them. It cannot well be conceived how they could make images of their
emerods, without making images of their secret parts, where they were smitten
with those ulcers, which we call piles or emerods. Now what a shame must it
needs be to the Philistines to send to the Israelites the images of their
secret parts, thus tortured with an ignominious disease? Doubtless they must
needs judge it a great reproach to their nation; but when men are under the
wrath of the Almighty, what will they not do to be rid of the judgments that
lie upon them.

Verse. 5. Peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your
gods.] From this passage some Expositours gather that not Dagon only, but many
other of their idol-gods were thrown down and broken to pieces, by a secret
hand of God, in all the cities whither the Ark was brought, as indeed it is
probable the like was done in Egypt, when the Lord punished Pharaoh and his
people because they would not let the Israelites go. Against all the gods of
Egypt, I will execute judgment, says the Lord, Exodus 12.12. and Number. 33.4. it
is said, The Egyptians buried all their firstborn --; upon their gods also the
Lord executed judgments. But yet because this is not expressed in the story,
others understand this which is said here, of the hand of the Lord which was
upon their gods, only of the reproach and dishonor, that was brought upon
their idols, partly by the Lords casting down Dagon, and partly by the heavy
judgments he had infflicted upon the people that served them; and that this
hand of God it was, which the Philistine-priests hoped would be lightened from
off their gods, if the Ark were sent back with those trespasse-offerings they
had now prescribed.

Verse. 6. Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh
hardened their hearts, etc.] By this it may seem. that though the greatest
number inclined to the sending of the Ark back, verse, 2. What shall we do, say
they, to the Ark of the Lord, Tell us wherewith we shall send it to his place;
yet some were of a contrary judgment, and opposed it, and therefore are here
blamed for hardening their hearts against the means which God had used to
convince them of their sin.

Verse. 7. Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch-kine, on which then
has come no yoke, etc.] It may well be, that these idolatrous priests and
diviners of the Philistines, did not merely of their own invention prescribe
this strange way of sending home the Ark, to make trial whether the God of
Israel, would by a supernatural power, cause these milch-kine to go the right
way with it; but were herein directed to do what they did by their practices of
sorcerie and divination: but if it were so, even herein too there was an
overruling hand of providence, that disposed of all as might be most for Gods
glory. A new cart was doubtless appointed as a sign of their reverencing the
Ark: their choosing young heifers that had never been employed in any profane
service, might also be done for the same cause out of reverence to the Ark; but
the main end was to make the hand of God the more manifest, if they should go
along the right way to the land of Israel. Custom might make cattle used to
the yoke to go on right forward, when they are once entered into a beaten way;
but young things not used to the yoke, especially when their calves were shut
up from them, were not like to do so; it was a wonder that they should endure
the yoke at all.

Verse. 8. And put the jewels of gold which ye return him for a
trespasse-offering in a coffer, etc.] These jewels of gold were the golden
images of the emerods and mice; which they put in a coffer, as not daring to
venture it seems, to put them into the Ark.

Verse. 9. And see, if it goes up by the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh.]
A city of Judah, Josh. 15.10. close by the confines of Judea and Philistea,
and in the way to Shiloh; and therefore propounded here by the Philistines
Priests, as the city whither the kine would go if Gods hand were in the
business.

Verse. 12. And the kine took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, etc.]
And thus did the Lord by his all-ruling power and providence, prosper the
device which they had contrived to discover whether it was by him, and for
their detaining the Ark, that they had been of late so severely punished, that
he might confound them by their own inventions. Bethshemesh was one of the
Priests cities, Josh. 21.16. so that the kines carrying the Ark thither, was as
if they had intended to deliver it up into their hands to whom the custody of
it did of right appertain.

And the lords of the Philistines went after them unto the border of
Bethshemesh.] Thus by the providence of God it was brought about, that they who
ere-while as victours did carry away the Ark as their captive, do now as
servants and pages attend upon it, when it returned home into the land of
Israel.

Verse. 13. And they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat-harvest.]
Wheat-harvest in that country used to be in our May, at the feast of
Pentecost, Lev. 23.16. Whence we may gather, that the Ark was taken about
November, since it was verse. 1. seven months in the country of the
Philistines.

Verse. 14. And they clave the wood of the cart, and offered the kine a
burnt-offering unto the Lord.] That this is spoken of the men of Bethshemesh,
and not as some would have it, of the Lords of the Philistines, that came after
the Ark to see what would become of it, is evident by the very connection of the
words: In the foregoing verse it is said, that they of Bethshemesh were
reaping, etc. and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the Ark, and rejoiced to
see it; and in this verse now it follows; And they clave the wood of the cart,
and offered the kine, a burnt-offering to the Lord. Besides, when the men of
Bethshemesh came flocking about the Ark, and the Levites had taken down the Ark
out of the cart, as it follows in the next verse; is there any likelihood
that they would suffer the uncircumcised Philistines to come amongst them to
offer up a sacrifice to the God of Israel, they standing by, and as it were
communicating with them in their sacrifice? Surely no; rather we may well think
that the lords of the Philistines followed the Ark aloof off, only desiring to
see what would become of it, and came not near the Israelites; and therefore it
is said verse. 16. that when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it; that
is, when they had seen what was done, they returned to Ekron the same day. The
greatest difficulty is concerning the offering up of kine, which we know was
not according to Gods Law, and therefore liker to be the act of the
Philistines, then of the Priests of Israel; for the Law did expressly command
that none but males should be offered in burnt-offerings: Levit. 1.3. If his
offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a male without
blemish. But to this it may be answered, that either the men of Bethshemesh did
sin herein, being transported by the excess of their joy: and that this
might be one thing wherewith they displeased God, and provoked him to bring the
following judgment upon them: or rather that this was an extraordinary act of
devotion whereto the Priests were led, by reasons grounded upon this strange
and extraordinary work which God had wrought, and perhaps also by a special
instinct of Gods Spirit; and is not therefore to be judged of according to the
rules of other ordinary burnt offerings: They considered that these kine had
been given up by the Philistines to the service of the Lord in bringing home
the Ark; and that having been employed in so sacred of service, it was not fit
they should be employed to any other use; or much less that they should be
sent back to the Philistines again; and therefore they resolved by this way of
an extraordinary burnt-offering to yield them up to the Lord, by whose
all-ruling providence they were so miraculously swayed to bring back the Ark
unto that place. And indeed had they sinned in offering these kine for a
burnt-offering, why should not this be mentioned verse. 19. as the cause of Gods
displeasure against them, as well as their looking into the Ark.

Verse. 15. And the Levites took down the Ark of the Lord, etc.] That is, the
Priests who were of the tribe of Levi: for Bethshemesh as is before noted, was
one of the Priests cities, Josh. 21.16. nor was it lawful for the Levites to
touch the Ark: Number. 4.15. And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of
covering the Sanctuary, and all the vessels of the Sanctuary, as the camp is
to set forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it; but
they shall not touch any holy thing lest they die.

Verse. 18. And the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of
the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of
country villages, etc.] That is, according as all the cities and villages of
the Philistines were divided into five parts, and were under the command of
their five great lords, each of those cities before mentioned being the mother
city in each division; so accordingly there were five golden mice given (as
was said before, verse. 4.) and that in the name (and happily at the charge) not
of the mother-cities only, but of all the several circuits or provinces that
belonged to them, because all had been punished with that plague of mice which
were sent amongst them; even all the land of the Philistines unto the great
stone of Abel; that is, mourning; so called doubtless, because of the peoples
lamentation (verse. 19.) as upon a like occasion the floor of Atad where the
sons of Jacob with the Egyptians mourned for the death of Jacob, was called
Abel-mizraim, Genesis 50.11. that is, the mourning of the Egyptians.

Verse. 19. And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into
the Ark of the Lord.] It was not lawful for any but the Priests, no not the
Levites who carried it, to look upon the Ark bare and uncovered: Number. 4.20. But
they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they die. It
was therefore sufficient to render the people obnoxious to the judgment that
fell upon them, if we suppose that it came covered from the Philistines, and
they uncovered it to look upon it; or that it came uncovered, and they took
liberty without any fear or reverence to stare and gaze upon it: But yet the
words seem to import that they proceeded further, even to look into the Ark;
either merely out of curiosity, or perhaps to see whether the Philistines had
not put any thing into it, or taken any thing out of it; only I see not how so
many could offend in this kind.

Even he smote of the people fifty thousand, and threescore and ten men.] That
is, of them, and of the people together that came flocking from all parts to
see the Ark, there were slain fifty thousand, and threescore and ten men. It
were much that there should be so many found in so little a city as
Bethshemesh was; but amongst those multitudes that might come from all parts to
see the Ark, there might well be fifty thousand, and threescore and ten slain.

Verse. 21. And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjath-jearim, etc.]
Pretending happily that their city of Bethshemesh was not a place of such
safety for the Ark to be in, as Kirjath-jearim was; they sent to the
inhabitants of Kirjath-jearim to desire them to fetch the Ark thither: The
Philistines, say they, have brought again the Ark of the Lord, come ye down,
and fetch it up to you.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. ANd the men of Kirjath-jearim came and fetched up the Ark of the Lord,
etc.] Three particulars are here related concerning this removal of the Ark.
The first is, that it was fetched up from Bethshemesh by the men of
Kirjath-jearim, a city in the tribe of Judah, not far from Bethshemesh,
called formerly Baalah, and Kirjath-Baal, Josh. 15.9, 60. and 18.14. Now this
being none of the cities of the Priests who only might touch the Ark; though
it be said, that the men of Kirjath-jearim fetched up the Ark, yet thereby is
meant only, that they came up to have it carried to their city, and attended
it when it was removed (for they were doubtless priests either of Bethshemesh,
or of some other place that carried the Ark.) Notwithstanding the men of
Bethshemesh were smitten for looking into the Ark, chap. 6.19. yet the men of
Kirjath-jearim did not oppose the removing of it to their city, but themselves
fetched it thither, no doubt with much joy, and that because they knew that it
was not the presence of the Ark amongst the men of Bethshemesh, but their
unreverend carriage of themselves in gazing upon the Ark, or looking into it,
that was the cause of their misery. The second thing related is, that they
brought the Ark into the house of Abinadab in the hill. It is likely that
Abinadab was a man of singular holiness; and perhaps, as some hold, a Levite
too; but yet the reason which the text implies, why his house was chosen for
the keeping of this sacred treasure, is this; that it was in the hill, to wit,
first, because high places were in these times in great request, and judged
fittest for holy employments: and secondly, because it might be a place of
strength, and so of safety for the Ark to be kept in: whence it was, that the
Ark was kept there till David's time, when it was fetched away from thence: 1.
Chron. 13.6, 7. And David went up and all Israel to Baalah, that is, to
Kirjath-jearim which belonged to Judah, to bring up thence the Ark of God the
Lord. -- And they carried the Ark of God in a new cart out of the house of
Abinadab. Indeed in 2. Sam. 6.3. it is said that the Ark was brought out of the
house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: but by Gibeah there is meant the hill,
(as it is translated there in the margin of our Bibles) for it is expressly
said in that very place, verse. 2. that the city out of which the Ark was then
fetched was Baal of Judah, which was Kirjath-jearim, as is before noted, Josh.
15.9. and the city Gibeah was in the tribe of Benjamin, Josh. 18.28. Judge.
19.14. The third particular here related is, that having carried the Ark into
the ^o^se of Abinadab in the hill, they sanctified Eleazar his son to keep
the Ark of the Lord, that is, they chose him to be set apart to this holy
employment, even to give continual attendance upon the Ark, that he might keep
others from coming near to pollute or defile it; and to that end they caused
him to fit and prepare himself in all holy manner for this sacred charge; under
which the washing of his garments with water, and such other ceremonies of
legal purifying, may be comprehended, as we see Exodus 19.10. And the Lord said
unto Moses, Go unto the people and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let
them wash their clothes. But may some say, when the Israelites had gotten the
Ark again out of the land of the Philistines, why did they not carry it back to
the Tabernacle in Shiloh? I answer, at first the terror of the men of
Bethshemesh, might be the cause that it was presently removed to
Kirjath-jearim, a city near unto Bethshemesh; yet because the Ark stayed there
so long, it is most probable, that either it was at first removed thither, or
at least afterward continued there, not without the consent of Samuel their
Judge, and the other Elders of Israel; yea happily not without express
direction from the Lord, and that because Shiloh was destroyed when the Ark was
taken by the Philistines; or else, rather because the Lord would still show his
indignation against the former wickedness of that place, by not suffering the
Ark to be carried thither again.

Verse. 2. And it came to pass while the Ark abode in Kirjath-jearim; that the
time was long; for it was twenty years, etc.] This is not meant of the whole
term of the Arks remaining in Kirjath-jearim; for between the death of Eli
(presently after which the Ark was brought to this place) and the beginning of
David's reign when it was first removed thence, 2. Sam. 6.2, 3. there must
needs be forty years allowed for the government of Saul and Samuel, Act.
13.21. all which time the Ark continued in Kirjath-jearim, unless when it was
for a while only carried forth into the camp in the war against the
Philistines, chap. 14.18. And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the Ark of
God: for the Ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel. The
meaning therefore of this clause, is only thus, that twenty years were expired
ere the people by the exhortations of Samuel* or by the troubles that God
brought upon them, could be won to that solemn conversion related in the
following verses, concerning which it is said here in the last clause of this
verse, that all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord, that is, they were
brought to bethink themselves of their sins, and began with all humiliation
and sorrow to seek the recovery of Gods love and favor, and that no doubt
because of the heavy oppression of the Philistines: for it seems that ever
since the taking of the Ark, they had kept many of Isreal's cities in their
hands, and many ways tyrannized over them, as is evident verse. 7. The Lords of
the Philistines went up against Israel: and when the children of Israel heard
it, they were afraid of the Philistines. And verse. 14. The cities which the
Philistines had taken from Israel, were restored to Israel, etc.

Verse. 3, And Samuel spoke unto all the house of Israel, etc.] That is, to the
Elders of Israel resorting to him from all places; or to the people, as he went
about in his circuit.

Put away the strange gods, and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your
hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only.] That is, Content not your selves
with the outward act of removing your strange gods, but labor to bring your
hearts into a fit temper for God, purified by faith, humbled with the sight and
detestation of your sins, and settled in a full purpose of amendment of life.
Concerning Ashtaroth, see the Note, Judges 2.13.

Verse. 5. And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh and I will pray for you
unto the Lord.] Of Mizpeh, see Judges 20.1. Thither the people are at present
appointed to gather themselves. 1. That they might there in a public and
solemn manner renew their Covenant with God, and pray unto him for pardon and
favor: and 2. That they might there consult about means, both for reforming of
public abuses, and for making war against the Philistines.

Verse. 6. And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it
out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, etc.] What this pouring forth of
water before the Lord was, and to what end it was done, it is hard to say. Many
Expositours understand it merely of drawing and pouring forth water, to wit, as
a kind of sacrifice; or rather, as a sacred Ceremony, whereby they desired to
signify either, First, That they wished that those that should return to their
idolatry again, might utterly perish without hope of recovery, as that water
that was poured forth, that could not be gathered up again, according to that
of the widow of Tekoah, 2. Sam. 14.14. We must needs die, and are as water
spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again: or Secondly, That
they did utterly renounce and cast away their idolatry, even as that water was
wholly poured forth out of their vessels, not the least drop remaining behind,
and were resolved never more to take up their superstitious practices again, no
more then they would think of taking up that water again which they had so
poured forth: or Thirdly, That they hoped that as the water being poured forth
was straight gone out of sight, and was not to be seen, so the very remembrance
of their sins should be blotted out before the Lord, and should be as it were
perfectly washed away: or Fourthly, That in their confessions and prayers that
day, they did sincerely pour out their hearts to God; even as that water was
poured forth. Thus I say many Expositours understand this to have been done
according to the letter of the words, and that it is said to be done before the
Lord, because it was done where they were met together in a way of religion, to
fast and pray before the Lord, and where happily they had for the time the Ark
of God amongst them. But yet because we find no such ceremony any where
enjoined by Gods Law, nor at any other time practiced by Gods people: others
do, I think upon better grounds conceive otherwise of these words. For some
hold, that it is a figurative and hyperbolicall expression of their great
lamentation and weeping, to wit, that they poured forth whole streams of tears
before the Lord, drawn from the inward fountain of a broken heart and so
parallel it with those expressions of Jeremy, Jer. 9.1. Oh that my head were
waters and mine eyes a fountain of tears! that I might weep day and night, etc.
of Job, Job 16.20. Mine eye pours out tears unto God; and so also of David,
Psalm. 6.6. All the night make I my bed swim; I water my couch with tears: and
Psalm. 42.3. My tears have been my meat day and night. And again, others
conceive that it is meant of their drawing and pouring forth water for the use
of their legal purifying, which was frequently used in those times as a sign
that they acknowledged their own filthiness, and expected to be cleansed by
the blood and spirit of Christ. And indeed this last, best agrees with the
letter of the Text.

Verse. 9. And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt-offering,
etc.] If Samuel offered this himself, and not by the hands of the priests, it
was by extraordinary dispensation in regard he was a prophet; for so we see
also Elijah did, 1. Kings 18.31, etc. The like we must judge also concerning
the place wherein this sacrifice was offered, at least if the Ark were not at
present in Mizpeh.

Verse. 10. But the Lord thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the
Philistines.] This was according to Hannahs prophecy, chap. 2.10. But yet the
Israelites were fighting, not idly looking on, when the Lord thundered upon
them, as is evident in the next clause, and they were smitten before Israel. No
doubt in the best manner they were able, they set themselves in battle array
against the Philistines, yea and when the Philistines were discomfited, it
seems the rest that staid in Mizpeh came out too, as seems to be expressed in
the following verse.

Verse. 12. Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and
called the name of it Eben-ezer, etc.] This shows that this glorious victory
was gotten in the very same place, where before the ark was taken and the
Israelites vanquished, chap. 4. verse 1. Now Israel went out against the
Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Eben-ezer.

Verse. 13. So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the
coast of Israel, etc.] It may be questioned how these words must be understood
that the Philistines came no more into the coast of Israel, and that first,
Because it is evident that the Philistines did often after this invade the land
of Israel; as is clear, chap. 17.1. and 31.1. and many other places. Yea, and
secondly, It was not long after this ere they did enter the land and that with
a mighty army. For in the beginning of Saul's reign, chap. 13.1, 5. which was
not long after this, the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
Israel, thirty thousand charets, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the
sand which is on the seashore in multitude, and they came and pitched in
Michmash, etc. and thirdly, The very following words here, and the hand of the
Lord was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel, seem clearly to
imply, that after this even in Samuels days, there were many conflicts between
the Philistines and the Israelites, wherein the Israelites still prevailed
against them. But for the resolving of this doubt we must know, that the
meaning of these words, And they came no more into the coast of Israel, is,
that they did no more at that time rally their scattered troops together, and
come back again into the land of Israel, to revenge their former defeat; or
else, that they came no more into the land whilst Samuel governed Israel alone;
and indeed this is the utmost extent that can be given to these words: for
after Saul was chosen to be their King, it is evident that the Philistines did
often with their armies enter the land.

Verse. 14. And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel, were
restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath, etc.] It is plain by many
places, that in the beginning of Saul's reign, the Philistines had garrisons in
several places of the land of Israel; for so we read, chap. 10.5. Thou shall
come to the hill of God, says Samuel to Saul when he had newly anointed him
King, where is the garrison of the Philistines: and again chap. 13.3. Jonathan
smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the like in other
places: either therefore the Philistines did again after this surprise some
strong forts, which they had now delivered up, and did again place garrisons
there; or else, though they now restored to Israel the cities they had formerly
taken from them, yet they still reserved some places of strength wherein they
kept garrisons, for the better awing of the Israelites, that they might not
break out against the Philistines.

And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.] That is, there was no
war between them. By the Amorites here some conceive the Philistines are
meant: but it may also be meant of the remainder of the Canaanites, who being
terrified with this victory which the Israelites had gotten over the
Philistines, did hereupon also desist from troubling the Israelites: for this
is here set down as an effect of that victory.

Verse. 15. And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.] For though Saul
were anointed King in Samuels time, and had the supreme power in his hand, yet
Samuel gave not over the government altogether, but exercised the jurisdiction
of a Judge, or a kind of extraordinary power derived unto him from God, as
appears by many things he did after Saul was King, as his killing of Agag,
chap. 15.32, 33. Then said Samuel, Bring you hither to me Agag the King of the
Amalekites: and Agag came unto him delicately: And Agag said, Surely the
bitterness of death is past. And Samuel said, As thy sword has made women
childlesse, so shall thy mother be childles among women. And Samuel hewed Agag
in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal. And his anointing of David, chap. 16.13.
Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his
brethren: and therefore are Saul and Samuel joined together, chap. 11.7. And he
took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent throughout all the
coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers, saying, Whosoever comes not forth
after Saul, and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. And the years
of both their government are joined together, Act. 13.20, 21. And after that he
gave unto them Judges, about the space of four hundred and fifty years, until
Samuel the prophet. And afterward they desired a king, and God gave unto them
Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty
years.

Verse. 17. And there he built an altar unto the Lord.] This he might do by an
extraordinary Prophetical instinct, especially in these times when it is very
questionable whether they were bound to that Law, Deuteronomy. 12.15. to wit, because
the Tabernacle and the Ark were now in several places, and so a long time
continued.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass when Samuel was old, that he made his sons
judges over Israel.] To wit, as his deputies and substitutes, being through age
unable to go through the land to judge the people, as formerly he had done, he
appointed his sons to judge the people in some part of the land in his stead,
and that happily not without Gods permission and consent.

Verse. 2. Now the name of his firstborn was Joel.] Who was also called Vashni,
1 Chronicles. 6.28.

They were judges in Beersheba.] Though they exercised authority, and power of
Judges over all the people, at least in those parts, and went happily in their
circuits as their father had done; yet there they dwelt, as their father did in
Ramah, and there most an end they judged the people: and that it may be
purposely, either because that town was in the utmost southpart of the land,
the furthest off from Ramah, from whence it was most trouble for the people to
come to Samuel in Ramah; or because it bordered close upon the land of the
Philistines, over whom they might the better keep a vigilant eye.

Verse. 3. And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after
lucre.] Not only the singular piety of Samuel, but also the experience he had
of Gods severity against Eli for his indulgence to his children, may well
induce us to think that he did what he could to train up his sons in the
ways of righteousness, nor can we indeed think that he would have entrusted
them with the subordinate power of governing the people under him, had they not
to that time behaved themselves well, and given hope of managing the trust well
that was committed to them; but being advanced to these places of dignity and
power, it seems they soon degenerated, and proved the occasion of much mischief
to the commonwealth.

Verse. 5. Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make
us a King, etc.] They expressly pretend only Samuels age, and his sons
wickedness, as the reasons why they desired a King; but there were other
things that did chiefly move them in this attempt; to wit, first, their fear of
the great preparations which they perceived Nahash the king of the children of
Ammon made against them; whereupon as men not having any confidence in Gods
protection, they fly to other devices, and pi^ch upon this of making them a
king chap. 12.12. And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon
came against you, ye said unto me, Nay* but a king shall reign over us; and
secondly, an ambitious affectation of being like other nations; by turning
their government into an absolute Monarchy, which is employed in their last
words, Now make us a king to judge us like all the nations. But though they
were resolved to have a king, yet they refer the choice of him that should
reign over them to the Lord (for they came to Samuel as a Prophet that might
enquire in this business of God) and that no doubt as pretending respect to
that which was written in their Law; Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. When th^^ art come unto
the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall
dwell therein, and shall say, I will set a king over me, like as all the
nations that are about me: Thou shall in any wise set him king over thee whom
the Lord thy God shall choose.

Verse. 6. But the thing displeased Samuel, etc.] It could not but greive him,
that the people, of whom he had deserved so well, should thus unthankfully
shake off his government; but the chief thing that troubled him, was because he
knew their desire was sinful, and would be displeasing to God: and therefore
that clause is added, that Samuel prayed unto the Lord, that is, he prayed him
to forgive this their sin, to help in this danger, and to direct him what
course he should take with them.

Verse. 7. And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people
in all that they say unto thee.] Thus God yields to their desire, but in his
anger, Hosea 13.11.

For they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not
reign over them.] That is, For they have rejected me rather then thee: we have
the like phrase in many places of Scripture, as Matthew. 10.20. For it is not ye
that speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks in you: It is the
spirit of your father rather then you that speaks: Hos. 6.6. For I desired
mercy and not sacrifice; that is, mercy rather then sacrifice: Acts 5.4. Thou
have not lied unto men, but unto God; that is, unto God rather then men. And
this God says, first, because they cast off that government which God had
established amongst them: for though God had a purpose to erect a regal throne
amongst them, and to give them Kings out of whose seed the Messiah should come;
and now made use of their inordinate desire to accomplish his own purpose: (as
usually he does turn the evil actions of men to a good end) yea though he had
partly made known this to his people; Genesis 17.6. And I will make thee exceeding
fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee;
and 49.10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
between his feet, until Shiloh come: Deuteronomy. 17.18. And it shall be, when he
sits upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of
this law in a book: yet they should have waited Gods leisure; neither was it
therefore lawful to make an innovation in the government, without any
direction from the Lord; especially in such a sinful manner, out of a
distrustful fear, and proud affectation to be therein like all other nations;
as is noted before upon Deuteronomy. 17.14. secondly, because though God do govern by
kings also, Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, By
me Princes rule, and Nobles; even all the Judges of the earth: yet his
government was more immediate which he now exercised over them by Judges; both
because they were extraordinarily raised up of God, and because they had not
that absolute power which kings usually have, but judge them chiefly by making
known to them the will of God; and to that end did often enquire of the Lord in
difficult cases: see Judge. 8.23. And thus the Lord shows Samuel, first, the
grievousnesse of their sin, and that this moved him in his displeasure to
yield them their desire: and secondly, he sought to prevent the wonder and
indignation of Samuel; for why? they dealt no otherwise with him, then with the
Lord himself; as Christ says to his disciples, Matt. 10.24, ^5. The disciple
is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough for the
disciple that he be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord: If they have
called the Master of the house Beel-zebub, how much more shall they call them
of his household?

Verse. 9. Howbeit, yet protest solemnly unto them, and show them the manner of
the king that shall reign over them.] Samuel is not here enjoined to show them
what power, right and authority their king must have over them; but what would
be the manner of their kings dealing with them; and this he is appointed to
tell them beforehand* that either they might be persuaded to desist from their
enterprise; or that they might be left inexcusable, and only condemn
themselves when these miseries befell them.

Verse. 11. He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
chariots, etc.] That princes may make use of the subjects that live under their
command both in the services of war and peace, cannot be questioned; nor yet
that the subjects may be legally compelled to yield obedience in this kind if
they should refuse; but the oppression which is here threatened is, that he
should deal with them herein, as tyrants with slaves, not freeborn subjects,
forcing children from their parents many times, without affording them any
equal recompense; and that to employ them causelessely, only to satisfy his
pleasure in the basest drudgerie and most perilous employments. And how soon
the Israelites began to feel these grievances under their kings, we may see by
that which is said of Solomon, 1. Kings 12.4. Thy father made our yoke
grievous: now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his
heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.

Verse. 12. And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over
fifties, and will set them to ear his ground, etc.] These were honorable
offices to them that enjoyed them, but they were burdensome to the people, who
must be heavily taxed to maintain them; and threatened all severe rigor to
those drudges and laborers, over whom happily they were set as overseers.

Verse. 22. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man unto his
city.] That is, he undertook to satisfy their desire, and so brake up the
assembly, till the Lord had revealed his will; and so it might be known what
course they should take to provide them a king.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. NOw there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of
Abiel.] Who is also called Ner, 1. Chron. 8.33. and 9.39. Out of what tribe the
Lord chose their first king, is a circumstance very observable, and therefore
here expressed; to wit, first, because the tribe of Benjamin, through the
desolation they brought upon themselves, Judges 20.46. was become the least and
most obscure tribe, and yet yields Israel her first king: secondly, because in
the victories of this king of Benjamins tribe, Jacobs prophecy was in part
accomplished, Genesis 49.27. Benjamin shall ravine as a woolf: in the morning he
shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil: and thirdly,
because this shows that the kingdom was not to be settled upon the posterity
of this their first king: for it was to be settled in the tribe of Judah, Genesis
49.10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between
his feet, until Shiloh come: and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.

Verse. 2. And there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person the^
he, etc.] Because goodlinesse and comeliness of person in princes, breeds a
kind of reverence in the hearts of the people, and makes men judge them the
fitter for high places and great employments, therefore is this so expressly
noted of Saul, whom God had designed to be the King of Israel; that there was
scarce so proper and goodly a person in all the land as he was.

Verse. 3. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with
thee, and arise, go seek the asses.] It seems that in those times asses were
highly esteemed in the land of Israel; as appears also by this, that their
princes and great men used to ride upon asses, Judge. 10.4. and 12.14. and hence
it was perhaps, that Kish though a great and rich man, was yet so desirous to
recover the asses that he had lost, that he sent his son Saul together with
one of his servants to seek them out: but withal, there was a secret hand of
Gods all-ruling providence in this, that by this means led Saul to Samuel, that
by him he might be anointed King of Israel.

Verse. 4. And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land of
Shalisha.] This Shalisha is taken to be a plain country in the tribe of
Benjamin, called Baal-shalisha, 2. Kings 4.42. and so also the land of Shalim
afterward mentioned, is thought to be the same that is called Salim, Joh. 3.23.

Verse. 5. And when they were come to the land of Zuph, etc.] To wit, the
country where Ramah Samuels city was situate, which thereupon was called
Ramathaim-zophim, chap. 1.1.

Verse. 6. Behold now, there is in this city a man of God, and he is an
honorable man.] That is, highly esteemed for his supernatural knowledge of
things secret.

Now let us go thither; peradventure he can show us our way that we should go.]
God gave the gift of prophecy to his servants, to be employed in directing the
people in weightier matters then such as this, concerning the finding of asses
that were lost; which makes the best interpreters blame this course, as a
dishonorable abasing of the gift of prophecy: yet it seems to have been the
usual practice of those times, as we see by Jeroboams sending his wife to the
Prophet, to know whether his sick child should recover or no, 1. Kings 14.2.
and perhaps the Lord did herein satisfy them oftentimes, that he might keep
them from seeking to witches, or to the oracles of the heathens: 2. Kings 1.3.
But the angel of the Lord said to Elijah theTishbite, Arise, go up to meet the
messengers of the King of Samaria, and say unto them, Is it not because there
is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron?

Verse: 7. Then said Saul to his servant, But behold, if we go, what shall we
bring the man?] This question proceeded either from an opinion, that it was not
fit they should go to the Prophet without some present, as a testimony of the
reverend esteem they had of his person, (and then this care was commendable);
or else, out of a base conceit of hiring Gods Prophet, as they would have done
a soothsayer, to tell them tidings of their asses, which had been inexcusable.
But this last agrees not with the servants speaking before so honorably of
him, though otherwise his following words might seem to implie so much, verse.
8. And the servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at hand
the fourth part of a shekel of silver; that will I give to the man of God, to
tell us our way: and besides, we see that it was a constant custom in those
days, to go with a present to the Prophets, 1. Kings. 14.2, 3. And Jeroboam
said unto his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thy self, that thou be not
known to be the wife of Jeroboam, and get thee to Shiloh: Behold, there is
Ahijah the Prophet, which told me that I should be king over this people: And
take with thee ten loves, and cracknels, and a cruse of honey, and go to him;
he shall tell thee what shall become of the child: 2. Kings, 4.42. And there
came a man from Baal-shalisha, and brought the man of God bread of the
first fruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears of corn in the husk
thereof, etc.

Verse. 12. Behold, he is before you; make haste now, for he came to day to the
city.] The city they speak of was Ramah, where Samuel dwelt, as is evident by
the servants words, verse. 6. And he said unto him, Behold now there is in this
city a man of God, and he is an honorable man, etc. how then do these young
maidens say, He came to day to the city? I answer: either they intend only
his going forth out of his house into the city; or else, that he was come out
of that Ramah, where his dwelling was, into this where the feast was to be kept
(for here were two towns joined in one; whence it is called in the duall number
Ramathaim, chap. 1.1.) or else, that having been abroad about some employments,
he was this day returned to Ramah.

For there is a sacrifice of the people to day in the high place.] To wit, a
sacrifice of peace offerings, wherewith the offerers were wont to feast
together with their friends: and it may be Samuel had purposely appointed this
sacrifice for the entertainment of the man that was to be anointed king; and
for the procuring of Gods favor in that great and weighty business: for it
is evident, verse. 15, 16. that God had the day before told Samuel, that he
would this day send him a man out of the land of Benjamin, whom he should
anoint Captain over his people Israel. But what was this high place where they
offered their sacrifices? were not the Israelites bound by the law only to
offer up sacrifices on the altar that was in the Tabernacle? Deuteronomy. 12.4, 5.
Unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to
put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou
shall come; And thither ye shall bring your burnt-offerings and your
sacrifices, etc. I answer, Many Expositours hold, that this was meant only of
the Temple; and that till the Temple was built, the people might lawfully offer
their sacrifices in any other places: but yet, first, because Jer. 7.12. Shiloh
is called the place where God set his name at the first: and secondly, because
it was to no end to have an altar in the Tabernacle, if the people might set up
altars and offer sacrifices where they listed themselves: and thirdly, because
in the beginning of Solomon's reign before the Temple was built, it is
mentioned as the only blemish of the Israelites in those flourishing times, 1.
Kings, 3.2. Only the people sacrificed in high places; therefore many other
Expositours hold, that even before the Temple was built, the people used to
bring their sacrifices to the Tabernacle, as afterward to the Temple till the
Ark was taken by the Philistines in the days of Eli; but that afterward the
Tabernacle and Ark being still kept in several places, the people began to
question whether they were then tied to bring their sacrifices to any of those
places; and so by degrees did at length offer their sacrifices in such places
as they judged meetest for such services, to wit, upon hills and clifts, which
were therefore called high places.

Verse. 15. Now the Lord had told Samuel in his ear, a day before Saul came,
etc.] Before the story relates the meeting of Samuel and Saul, this is here
inserted, that the day before Saul came, the Lord had told Samuel in his ear,
that is, by the secret instinct of his spirit, that the next day he would send
him a man out of the land of Benjamin, whom he should anoint to be king of
Israel; first, to intimate that this was the occasion of the sacrifice and
feast which Samuel had appointed, knowing that the man chosen of God to be
their king was to come thither this day, he had appointed this feast for his
entertainment; and secondly, to show that it was no wonder that Samuel should
presently entertain Saul as the elect king of Israel, because the Lord having
told Samuel the day before, that he would send him a man out of Benjamin the
next day, when this came to pass as God had told him, this must needs be a
notable means to strengthen Samuels faith.

Verse. 16. And thou shall anoint him to be captain over my people Israel, that
he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines.] It seems the
Philistines, who had been quiet all Samuels time, chap. 7.13. So the
Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the coast of Israel: and
the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel; began
now again to raise war against the Israelites, having happily made an
agreement to that purpose with the king of Ammon, that the one should invade
the land on one hand, and the other on the other side: for that the Ammonites
did also invade the land at this time, is evident chap. 12.12. And when ye saw
that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto
me, Nay, but a king shall reign over us; when the Lord your God was your king.
This made the people cry, and their cry the Lord heard, and taking pity on
them, promised now to save them from the Philistines, (of whom it seems they
were most afraid) and that by the hand of Saul. And indeed, though the war
betwixt Saul and the Philistines continued all his days, and at his death they
prevailed much, yet oftentimes he prevailed against them, and so saved them
from much of that oppression which otherwise the Philistines would have laid
upon them: wherein also observable it is, that God intended mercy to them in
that, which they notwithstanding had sinned in desiring, to wit, the raising up
of a king amongst them.

Verse. 19. Go up before me unto the high place, for ye shall eat with me to
day; and to morrow I will let thee go, and tell thee all that is in thine
heart.] Though Samuel knew that Saul's sovereignty would deprive him of that
supreme dignity he had formerly enjoyed, yet knowing it was Gods will that Saul
should be king, we see that instead of looking with an envious and malignant
eye upon him, he entertained him with all possible courtesy, and did what he
could to honor him amongst the people. As for that clause, And will tell thee
all that is in thine heart, thereby is meant, either that he would tell him all
that he had a purpose to enquire of him, or else he would tell him many secret
things which no body knew but himself only; and indeed, though for the present
he told him of the asses only, as it follows in the next verse, And as for
thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them, for they
are found, (which doubtless he did, to free him from that care, and that he
might be the more willing to stay with him) yet it may well be that afterward
when they were together alone, he told him many other secret things, for the
greater confirmation of his faith, concerning the promise of the kingdom, as
Christ did to the woman of Samaria, to make her know he was the Messiah. Joh.
4.29. where we have an expression much like this of Samuel, Come see a man,
says she, that has told me all that ever I did.

Verse. 20. And on whom is all the desire of Israel? is it not on thee, and on
all thy fathers house?] That is, on whom must the kingdom and royal dignity,
which all Israel desire may be reared up amongst them, be conferred but on thee
and on thy fathers house?

Verse. 21. And Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of
the tribes of Israel, etc.] Though Samuel had in the foregoing words spoken
very covertly, concerning Saul's being king, And on whom is all the desire of
Israel, etc. yet the peoples eagerness at this time to have a king being so
famously known, Saul might well hereby guess at Samuels meaning, and the
strangeness of such tidings makes him therefore as one astonished, so debase
himself, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel, etc.
Nor need we wonder that he calls the tribe of Benjamin, the smallest of the
tribes, if we remember that this tribe was almost wholly destroyed not many
years before, in that war that was between this tribe and their brethren of
the other tribes, Judge. 20. Long it was, it seems, ere this tribe recovered the
desolation that was then made amongst them, if ever they recovered it; for even
in regard that there were so few of this tribe, it may well be, that when this
tribe kept faithful to the house of David in the days of Jeroboam, as well as
the tribe of Judah, yet still the Scripture speaks but of one tribe that did
cleave to the house of David, to wit, the tribe of Judah, as we may see, 1.
kings 11.32. and so in many other places; Benjamin not being mentioned because
of their paucity, but comprehended under the men of Judah.

Verse. 22. And Samuel took Saul, and his servant, and brought them into the
parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden.]
Doubtless those invited were of the Elders and chief of the city: by placing
Saul therefore above them, he began to give a sign of the dignity he should be
raised too; and withal, showed how far he was from envying him, because he
should be obscured by his advancement.

Verse. 23. And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee,
of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.] Samuel it seems had given order to
the cook, for one special extraordinary mess that should be set by and
reserved, as for some extraordinary guest, and not sent up till Samuel sent for
it: and hereupon therefore he now called upon him to bring him that mess, that
it might be set before Saul. As for the custom of those times in allotting a
several mess to every guest, see the note upon Genesis 43.34.

Verse. 24. And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it, and
set it before Saul.] To wit, the left shoulder; for the right shoulder of all
peace offerings was the priests portion, Levit. 7.32, 33. The shoulder was it
seems in these times accounted the chief piece, and therefore doubtless was it
alloted for the priests portion, and here at this time appointed for Saul's
mess. It is hard to say what is meant by those words, and that which was upon
it, to wit, whether it be meant of any thing that was poured or laid upon it as
sauce, or only for garnishing the meat, or of any other joint that was here
brought in, together with the shoulder, as the neck or breast which before they
are severed are upon the shoulder; but because the shoulder is the only joint
mentioned, the first I conceive is most probable.

Behold, that which is left, set it before thee, and eat; for unto this time
has it been kept for thee, since I said, I have invited the people.] That is,
since I first gave order to the cook that he should prepare this provision for
those that were invited. Now this is expressed, that hereby Saul might see that
God had beforehand revealed his coming thither to Samuel; for how else could
Samuel have purposely set apart this portion for him?

Verse. 25. Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house.] Where they
might be most private; for thence also is that, Acts 10.9. Peter went up upon
the house to pray, about the sixth hour. Both this, and his choosing the
spring of the day to anoint Saul in, verse. 26. before any body was stirring;
and his going forth to the end of the city, and sending his servant away,
verse. 27. they all show how careful Samuel was, that it should not yet be
known that Saul was anointed king, to wit, that when he was afterward chosen by
lot, no body as yet thinking of any such thing, it might be the more manifest
that he was chosen of God, and that no body else had any hand in it: and
secondly, that Saul might hereby be taught to wait upon God, to content himself
with the promise for a time, and to stay Gods leisure for the performance of
what was promised.

Verse. 26. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel,
abroad.] The calling up Saul therefore to the top of the house mentioned in the
foregoing words, Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, etc. was only
that Samuel might will him to make ready presently to be gone; which Saul
accordingly did; and so then Samuel went along with him out of the city,
intending at their parting to anoint him king.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. THen Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and
kissed him, etc.] Two ceremonies are here mentioned which Samuel used, when he
conferred upon Saul the supreme power of being king of Israel. The first is,
that he took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head; which he did by Gods
command; as we find it expressed chap. 15.1. Samuel also said unto Saul, The
Lord sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel: and this
was doubtless to signify, first, that the Lord had chosen him and set him
apart to that sacred and supreme office of being Gods Vicegerent, in ruling and
governing his people; for oil being ordinarily used in the consecrations of the
Old Testament; by the anointing of the kings of Israel, the Lord was pleased to
show forth, that he had called them and separated them to this place of
singular and highest authority over the people; and the rather say some
Expositours, beause oil being mingled with other liquours will be still
uppermost; and so was the fitter to shadow forth that eminency of dignity and
power whereto God had advanced them; and secondly, that the Lord would pour
forth upon him an extraordinary measure of the gifts of his Spirit, figured by
the oil, thereby to enable him for that great service whereto he was called:
whence it is noted in the ninth verse of this chapter; to show as it were, the
accomplishment of that which was signified by this outward ceremony, that God
gave him another heart, and verse. 6. that he was turned into another man, he
was not the same man that he was before. Besides, because by that speech of
Jothams, Judge. 9.8. The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them,
it is evident that it had been many years before this, a constant custom
amongst other nations to anoint their kings, and so was always continued:
whence it is that Cyrus the king of Persia is called the Lords anointed, Esa.
45.1. it may well be that the people desiring a king like other nations, the
Lord might in this regard appoint this their new chosen king to be designed to
his sovereignty by the same ceremony that was used amongst other nations. It is
a great question amongst Expositours whether the kings of Israel were anointed
with that holy anointing oil of the Tabernacle, wherewith the Priests were
anointed, or with any other ordinary oil; but because there is nothing can be
alleged that gives the least intimation, that Saul was anointed with the oil
of the Sanctuary, but only that David and his successors were, I shall
refer the resolving of this doubt to the note upon chap. 16.1. The second
ceremony used here by Samuel at the anointing of Saul was, that he kissed him:
which he did either by way of congratulation for that dignity whereto God had
now advanced him, as making this a token of Gods favor, and his own voluntary
and peaceable resigning the government over to him; or rather by way of homage;
for in those times, it seems, subjects used to acknowledge the sovereignty of
their kings by kissing them, whence is that expression concerning Christ, of
whom it is said there, that God had set him to be king upon his holy hill of
Sion, Psalm. 2.11, 12. Serve the Lord with fear -- Kiss the son lest he be
angry: and the ground of this civil ceremony was* to signify the willingness
of their subjection, that they loved their kings, and not so much out of fear
as love would be ready to serve them. And thence it well may be too that in
times of idolatry they used to kiss their idols, as is evident, 1. King.
19.18. Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel* all the knees which have
not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him: and again, Hos.
13.2. And now they sin more and more, and have made them molte^ images of
their silver, and idols according to their own understanding, all of it the
work of the craftsmen: they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice, kiss the
calves.

And said, Is it not because the Lord has anointed thee to be captain over his
inheritance?] In rendering this reason why he had used those outward ceremonies,
the Prophet chiefly presses him to remember, first, that it was not he but the
Lord that had chosen him to be king: and secondly, that it was Gods own
inheritance over whom he was to reign; a strong argument to render him the
more careful how he ruled over them: 1. Kings 3.9. Give therefore thy servant
an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and
bad; for who is able to judge this thy so great people? Why the Israelites were
called the Lords inheritance, see the note Deuteronomy. 32.9.

Verse. 2. Thou shall find two men by Rachels sepulcher in the border of
Benjamin.] Though Bethlehem was in the portion of Judah, Mich 5.2. But thou
Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out
of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be a ruler in Israel: and
Rachels sepulcher in the way to Bethlehem; Genesis 35.19, 20. And Rachel dyed, and
was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem. And Jacob set a pillar
upon her grave: that is the pillar of Rachels grave unto this day. yet might
her sepulcher be in the border of Benjamin, or near to it: for the portion of
these two tribes lay together.

Verse. 3. And there shall meet thee three men going up to God to Bethel, one
carrying three kids, etc.] To wit, because they were going thither to
sacrifice: whereby it appears that as in many other places, so in Bethel also
there was an high place at this time, wherein they used to sacrifice: to which
they might partly be induced out of an opinion of the holiness of the place,
because there God appeared to Jacob, Genesis 28.19. Now the more punctually these
particulars are here expressed which these men carried with them, the more it
must needs strengthen Saul's faith, when the least thing failed not of that
which was now foretold him.

Verse. 4. And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread, which
thou shall receive of their hands.] It is most probable that these men did
never formerly know Saul, nor were at all acquainted with him, because Samuel
gives him order to take the loaves which they should proffer him, which there
would have been no need to have done, had they been his known and familiar
friends; now the less reason could be conceived why mere strangers should
carry themselves thus toward him, the more admirable it was that God should
secretly move their hearts thus to honor him, as it were with a present, as if
they had known of the advancement which the Lord had conferred upon him; and
the more admirable and strange this was which Samuel foretold, the more it must
needs confirm Saul's faith when it came to pass.

Verse. 5. After that thou shall come to the hill of God, where is the garrison
of the Philistines.] Concerning the garrisons which the Philistines kept now in
the land of Israel see the note chap. 7.14. It is probable that this was in
Gibeah of Benjamin where Saul's father dwelt, or near to it: first, because this
happened toward the end of his journey, where his uncle dwelt, and where
himself was well known, as is evident verse. 11. And it came to pass when all
that knew him before time, saw that behold he prophesied among the Prophets,
then the people said one to another, What is this that is come unto the son
of Kish? Is Saul also among the Prophets? and again verse. 13.14. And when he
had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place. And Saul's uncle said
unto him, and to his servant, Whither went ye? and secondly, because we read,
chap. 13.3. of a garrison of the Philistines which was kept in Gibeah. However
it was doubtless called the hill of God, both because there was in that place
a College of the prophets consecrate to the service of God, and also because
of the high place there, wherein the people used to offer sacrifices to God.

Thou shall meet a company of Prophets coming down from the high place with a
psalterie, etc.] Not only those that had the extraordinary gift of foretelling
things to come, are in the Scripture called Prophets, but also, first, those
who did interpret the holy Scriptures; and as the messengers of God did teach
and instruct the people concerning the will of God revealed in holy writ: see
Romans 12.6. Having then gifts, differing according to the grace that is given to
us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith:
Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets: 1. The^s. 5.20.
Despise not prophesying: 1. Cor. 14.31, 32. For ye may all prophecy one by
one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. And the spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets: Prove. 29.18. Where there is no vision,
the people perish; but he that keeps the law happy is he: and secondly,
those also that were set apart to compose and sing songs, and Psalms of
praise; and that happily because these were intended for instruction, and often
contained predictions of future things: 1. Chron. 25.1, 2, 3. Moreover, David
and the captains of the host separated to the service of the sons of Asaph,
and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophecy with harps, with
psalteries, and with cymbals: and the number of the workmen, according to their
service, was: Of the sons of Asaph, Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and
Azarelah: the sons of Asaph, under the hands of Asaph, which prophesied
according to the order of the king. Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun,
Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah; six, under the
hands of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and
to praise the Lord: and to this some apply that place also, 1. Cor. 11.4.
Every man praying, or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonors his
head. And such doubtless were these prophets. It appears by this and other
places, that there were in these times certain Colleges erected, wherein many
holy men lived consecrated to God; whose continual employment it was to study
the Law, and other holy writings, to teach and instruct others therein; to sing
in a solemn manner Psalms of praise unto the Lord; and to train up other
young students who studied this way of prophesying under them. One of these
there was at Bethel, another at Jericho: 2. Kings 2.3.5. Yea, so did the Lord
bless this course, that upon many of them he bestowed that extraordinary gift
of foretelling future things, as is evident by that place before-cited, 2.
Kings 2.3. And the sons of the Prophets that were at Bethel, came forth to
Elisha, and said unto him, Know thou that the Lord will take away thy Master
from thy head to day? And he said, yea, I know it, hold you your peace. And so
verse. 5. where the same is said of the sons of the Prophets that were at
Jericho. Such a College there was here; and of these were the Prophets that
met Saul; whence it is said, that they had a psalterie, and a tabret, and a
pipe, and a harp before them: for these they made use of in their singing and
praising God; and if that were not all that was intended, when they are said to
have prophesied, we may conceive that this music was used to stir up their
own hearts, and the hearts of the people before they prophesied; as Elisha did,
2. Kings 3.15. But now bring me a minstrell. And it came to pass when the
minstrell played, that the hand of the Lord came upon him. Concerning this
their prophesying, see the note upon Numb. 11.25.

Verse. 6. Thou shall prophecy with them, and shall be turned into another
man.] That is, he should become a man of a more princely and heroical spirit
then now he was, and filled with new and divine gifts and qualities; and so
those whom God advances to be spiritually Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6. And
has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: to whom be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen. he makes them new men, 2. Cor. 5.17.
Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are past
away, behold, all things are become new.

Verse. 7. Do as occasion shall serve thee, for God is with thee.] That is, as
any occasion or opportunity shall be given of doing any thing that belongs to
this regal dignity whereunto God has now advanced thee, fear not to undertake
it, for God who has called thee to this honor, is with thee to prosper thee
in it.

Verse. 8. And thou shall go down before me to Gilgal, and behold I will come
down unto thee to offer burnt-offerings, etc.] In these words Samuel appoints
Saul, 1. to go down to Gilgal, promising that he would come thither to him, to
offer up sacrifices for him, and to direct him what he should do: and 2. to
stay there for him seven days, as it is in the last words of this verse, seven
days shall thou tarry till I come to thee, and show thee what thou shall do:
and the joining of this to that which went before, may seem to import that he
enjoined Saul to do this immediately upon the accomplishment of the signs
before mentioned; whereas indeed it is evident in the 13. chapter, that it was
two years after Saul's being anointed by Samuel, ere Saul waited for Samuel at
Gilgal, and was sharply reproved because he did not wait fully to the end of
the seventh day, as Samuel had enjoined him; for so we read 1. Sam. 13.1, 2.
Saul reigned one year, and when he had reigned two years over Israel, Saul
chose him three thousand men* etc. and then it follows v. 8. And he tarried
seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed, etc. Either
therefore we must conceive that this charge which Samuel now gave to Saul,
concerning his staying for him at Gilgal, was so delivered by him, that Saul
might know that it was meant of that particular time when he was to raise an
army at Gilgal, that he might fight with the Philistines, which was at least
two years after this, c. 13.1.4. (which may well be; for happily Samuel
expressed this charge more fully and particularly then it is here related) or
else that it was mean: by Samuel indefinitely, of the first difficulties he
should meet with after the kingdom was settled upon him, to wit, that if he
were in any strait, and Samuel were not with him, he should then resort to
Gilgal, and stay there for Samuel seven days, within which time he would not
fail to come unto him, both to offer up sacrifices for him, and to direct him
what he should do. And this indeed seems to be most probable: for though Saul
went not to Gilgal in his first enterprise against the king of Ammon, the
reason of that was because Samuel was then with him, c. 11.7. and therefore that
cannot be justly objected: so that this clause I conceive is added here by way
of encouragement; viz. that as occasion was offered of any difficult and
perilous enterprise to be undertaken by Saul, Samuel would be ready to assist
him, both by offering up sacrifices in his behalf, and by advising him in all
doubtful cases; only withal he gives him charge to wait for him in Gilgal
for that purpose seven days; which was doubtless of God for the trial of Saul.

Verse. 11. What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? is Saul also amongst
the prophets?] Because Saul had not been trained up amongst the sons of the
Prophets, but in his fathers countrey-affairs, as when he was sent to look the
asses that were lost, therefore they admired to hear him prophecy amongst the
prophets; insomuch that in aftertimes this became a proverb among the
Israelites, as it is in the next verse, Is Saul also among the prophets? when
they beheld any thing in any man that was strange and ^nexpected, they would
say, what have we here, Is Saul also among the prophets? And indeed all sudden
and supernatural changes wrought in men must needs make them a matter of
wonder in the world: for thus we see they wondered in the days of the Gospel at
that Saul, who was also of the tribe of Benjamin, and was afterward called
Paul, Romans 11.1. Is Saul also among the Apostles? Acts 9.21. All that heard him
were amazed, and said, Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this
name in Jerusalem? etc. Yea, and so it was also with Christ and the other
Apostles. Because they were not trained up in a way of learning, they wondered
to find them endued with those excellent gifts which God had bestowed upon
them. Matt. 13.55, 56. Is not this the Carpenters son? (say the Jews of
Christ) whence then has this man all these things? and John 7.15. The Jews
marvelled, saying, How knows this man letters having never learned? and when
the Apostles spoke diverse languages at the feast of Pentecost, Acts 2.7, 8.
They were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another; Behold are not all
these which speak Galileans? And how hear we every man in our tongue wherein
we were born?

Verse. 12. And one of the same place answered and said, But who is their
father?] Three several expositions are given of these words; for first, some
understand it to have been spoken concerning Saul and his servant, (as
inferring from these words, that he also prophesied among the Prophets together
with Saul) and that to express the reason why it seemed so strange to them,
that Saul and his servant should prophecy among the Prophets; namely, because
their fathers being contrymen, men unskilful in music and prophesying,
could never instruct them in such high things. Secondly, others conceive it was
by way of amplifying the wonder of Saul's prophesying among the Prophets; to
wit, that some breaking out into those words of admiration, What? is Saul also
among the Prophets? another neighbor that stood by, added, But who is their
father? thereby willing them, as it were, to take notice that he did not only
prophecy among the Prophets, but was as their father, in the chief place among
them, that he led them as their head, as Samuel the father of the Prophets was
wont to do, being endued with a kind of majesty and eminency of gifts above
the rest that prophesied with him; which did much increase the wonder. And
thirdly, others conceive that this was spoken by way of correcting those that
made such a matter of wonder of it, that Saul should prophecy among the
Prophets; But who is their father? said one that stood by and heard them; that
is, the father of those Prophets among whom Saul prophesied? as if he should
have said, Is not God their father? did not he teach and instruct them? and is
not he able to give the same gift of prophecy to Saul that he has given to
them? those that were trained up in the Colleges of the Prophets, were called
the sons of the Prophets, 2. Kings 2.3. Now because that which these men
wondered at was, that one not trained up under the father or fathers of these
Prophets should be able to prophecy: To this it is answered, that it was God
indeed that was their father, it was God that instructed them, and not the
Prophets under whom they were trained up, and the same God that by his spirit
enabled them to prophecy could likewise confer the same gift upon Saul too:
and this I conceive is the most probable exposition of these words; and that
because the words seem plainly to imply, that they were spoken by way of
answering those that were so amazed, that Saul should prophecy among the
Prophets.

Verse. 13. And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high
place.] To wit, to praise God for his singular favor, and to pray to him for
the assistance and guidance of his holy spirit: for in this high place no doubt
they used to sacrifice, and had perhaps a synagogue and house of prayer.

Verse. 14. And Saul's uncle said unto him, and to his servant, Whither went ye?]
It is likely that this uncle of Saul's, was Ner the father of Abner, chap.
14.50. and that seeing Saul prophecy among the Prophets, or at least hearing
of it, he enquired thus where they had been, as thinking thereby to find it out
how he should come to this extraordinary gift: for by this change that was seen
in him, he concluded that some strange thing had happened to him in his journey.

Verse. 16. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spoke, he told him
not.] This is noted, doubtless by way of commending Saul; and three reasons
may be probably given why Saul forbear to tell his uncle what Samuel had said
to him concerning the kingdom, notwithstanding that by the late accomplishment
of those several signs that Samuel had given him, he might be assured that
Samuel was indeed sent of God to anoint him king, to wit, First, because he was
not at first puffed up with this dignity that God had conferred upon him, but
of a modest and humble spirit, and therefore not prone to boast and brag of it,
as others would have been. Secondly, because he feared to provoke his uncle and
others of his family and kindred to envy him for this honor, to which God had
designed him. And thirdly, because he remembered how careful Samuel had been to
anoint him in secret where no body should be present, chap. 9.25, 26, 27. which
was intimation enough to Saul, not to discover this secret till God should
himself openly make known his will herein. Notwithstanding this prudence of
Saul in concealing what had passed betwixt Samuel and him, yet when he was
publicly chosen, certain sons of Belial did openly despise him, verse. 27.
and what then would they have done had it been known that Samuel had beforehand
anointed him? would not this have been a fair pretense for them to have said,
that this had been plotted beforehand betwixt Samuel and him?

Verse. 17. And Samuel called the people together unto the Lord to Mizpeh.] See
the note upon Judges 20.1.

Verse. 18. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt,
etc.] This recital of the mercies which God had afforded the Israelites is
premised, for the aggravation of their present sin in rejecting the
government which God had established amongst them.

Verse. 19. And ye have this day rejected your God, etc.] That is, by your
desiring a king, the business which this day you are come about. And herein
does Samuel covertly strike at their wilful persisting in this their
requiring a king. Samuel had done what he could to beat them from it; but they
continued resolved that so they would have it: whereupon it was, that he had
now called them together to discover by lots who it was that God had chosen:
and therefore Samuel uses these words, Ye have this day rejected your God,
etc. See the notes, chap. 8.7.

Now therefore present your selves before the Lord by your tribes, and by your
thousands.] That is, your families, Mich. 5.2. But thou Beth-leem Ephratah,
though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he
come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel: and this was done, that by
casting lots it might be discovered whom God had chosen to be their king.

Verse. 22. Therefore they enquired of the Lord further, if the man should yet
come thither.] To wit, either by Urim and Thummim in the high Priest, or by
desiring Samuel as a Prophet to enquire of the Lord for them.

And the Lord answered, Behold, he has hid himself among the stuff.] That is,
among the public carriages of the camp, or among the baggage and implements of
his own tent, and this he did out of modesty, as not deeming himself fit for so
high an advancement, or able to bear so great a burden, especially the
commonwealth of Israel being in such an unsettled and perilous condition as
now it was.

Verse. 25. Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, etc.] That
is, both the duty of the king toward his subjects, and the subjects toward
their king; and these were the fundamental laws of the kingdom: all, which he
wrote in a book, as it follows in the next words, and laid it up before the
Lord, that is, before the Ark, or in the Tabernacle; and the reasons why this
book was thus carefully laid up before the Lord, we may well conceive were
these: First, for the sure preservation of it: Secondly, to signify that even
these civil laws were the ordinance of God, which men were bound to obey, not
only for wrath, but for conscience sake, Romans 13.2, 5. And thirdly, to
intimate, that God would take care of those laws to uphold and maintain them,
and to punish those that should vilify and break them.

Verse. 26. And there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had
touched.] Though he was but a mean man to speak of, and only yet chosen and
designed to the kingdom, not inthroned, (for afterward he was solemnly
confirmed and settled in the kingdom) yet some were moved of God to think that
it was fit they should attend upon him in his return home, and accordingly
there was a band of men who did voluntarily yield him this service, going along
with him as a royal guard, to attend and conduct him on the way.

Verse. 27. But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? and
they despised him and brought him no presents.] Because Saul was but a mean man
to speak of, therefore there was a company of proud, dissolute, lawless
wretches that despised him, as one altogether unfit to be king, and unlikely to
govern them and defend them from their enemies as a king should do; and hence
it was, that they brought him no presents, as it seems the rest of the people
did, to wit, as a sign of their subjection and their acknowledging him to be
their king: for that was the custom of those times, as is noted concerning
Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 17.5. The Lord established the kingdom in his hand, and
all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; whence it was also, that when the
wise men had found out Christ, to whom they were directed by a star as the
king of the Jews, they fell down and worshipped him, Matt. 2.11. And when they
had opened their treasures they presented unto him gifts, gold and frankincense
and myrrh. And indeed observable it is, that though the Lord was highly
displeased with the Israelites for desiring a king, yet when he had once chosen
Saul to be their king, and conferred the royal dignity upon him, those that
despised him, and would not submit to his government, are for that branded to
be children of Belial, concerning which expression, see the note Deuteronomy. 13.13.

But he held his peace.] To avoid sedition and to win them by lenity, as
considering that it was no wisdom to use severity, being not yet settled in
the kingdom.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. THen Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against
Jabesh-Gilead.] A city without Jordan nigh unto the Ammonites. This invasion
was brewing against the Israelites before they desired a king, and was in part
the occasion of that their desire, chap. 12.12. And when ye saw that Nahash the
king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay, but a
king shall reign over us, when the Lord your God was your king. But now
happily it was the more hastened by Nahash the Ammonite, because of the report
which might be brought to him of the Israelites shaking off the government of
Samuel, and desiring a king to reign over them, and the division newly begun
amongst them by reason of the discontent of some, who would not acknowledge
their new chosen king. What they made the ground of their quarrel it is not
expressed: Like enough it was that old pretense which they stood upon, Judge.
11.13. when Jephtha foiled them, to wit, a claim which they laid to the land of
Gilead, where Jabesh stood; which now to recover, and withal to revenge that
shameful overthrow which Jephtha had given them, they might be the rather
emboldened, because the Philistines on the other side of the country, had
exceedingly weakened and oppressed the Israelites.

Verse. 2. On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust
out all your right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.] To wit, to
disable them for the war (for with their shields they covered their left
eyes, and therefore having lost their right eyes, what service of war could
they be fit for?) and consequently that the accepting of such dishonorable
conditions, might be a perpetual reproach to all the people, because it would
be said hereupon, what a base people the Israelites were, that would buy off
death upon any terms; yea to the God of Israel, on whom his people durst not
rely for help: and thus Satan labors to put out the right eye of faith, and
to leave us only the left eye of reason.

Verse. 4. Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, etc.] That is, as to
other towns so also to this: or rather, knowing that Saul their Prince elect
was at Gibeah, and Samuel with him, these messengers of Jabesh-gilead went
directly thither, that they might acquaint them with the extremity of streights
they were in, that so they might speedily send into all the coasts of Israel
for help. Had Nahash the king of the Ammonites yielded to the submission of the
inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead, he might not only have had that town delivered up
to him, but in all probability many more would have yielded themselves to him
after their example. Yea, and when they desired seven days respite, that they
might send messengers into all the coasts of Israel, promising that if in that
time they had not help, they would yield up the town, had not he yielded to
this, he might happily in that time have taken the town by force. But first he
proudly and scornfully refused the tender of their service, and sent them word
that nothing should satisfy him, unless he might thrust out all their right
eyes; and when they desired a truce of seven days, to try if they could call
in their brethren to their aid, ere they yielded to so hard a condition, he
granted them their request, and (as we see here) suffered them to send their
messengers, as being puffed up with such an opinion of his own strength, that he
thought it impossible that in that time their brethren either could or durst
come to relieve them; and so by this means, through his arrogance and cruelty
he was carried headlong to his own destruction, whereas by granting them fair
quarter, he might have brought them under his yoke, and have spread his
victories much further.

Verse. 5. And behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field.] Being only
yet elected king. and finding many to repine against it, returning home he
betook himself, as most Interpreters hold, to his wonted country employments.
But this agreeing not with the state of his being conducted home, chap. 10.26
may rather be understood of casual coming after the herd, and that it is here
expressed only because of that which follows his taking a yoke of the oxen,
and hewing them, etc.

Verse. 6. And the spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and
his anger was kindled greatly.] Herein we see how fairly Saul carried himself
as long as those gifts of Gods spirit were continued to him, wherewith the Lord
had fitted him for the government of his people. He that was so patient in his
own cause, that when certain children of Belial scorned and despised him, he
passed it by as if he had taken no notice of it, chap. 10.27. was now impatient
of the wrong that was done to the Lord and his people by the Ammonites, that
had propounded such intolerable conditions to the men of Jabesh-gilead; now
his anger was kindled greatly, and it never abated till he had rescued his
poor oppressed brethren out of the danger they were in. As for that
expression, And the spirit of God came upon Saul, see the note Judge. 3.10.

Verse. 7. Whosoever comes not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it
be done unto his oxen.] It may well be that Saul took this course of hewing a
yoke of oxen in pieces, and sending the pieces to the several tribes of
Israel, in imitation of the Levite Judge. 19.29. who did thus cut his concubine
in pieces, and sent them to the several tribes, the better to stir up their
indignation. And in the message he sent to the tribes, because he was not yet
generally approved and received as king of all the people, he uses not his own
name only, but Samuels also (who it seems accompanied him home from Mizpeh as
others did, chap. 10.26. and so was now with him) that by this means he might
make sure that all should come; if not for respect of him their king, yet out
of regard had to Samuel, Gods Prophet, and formerly their Judge.

And the fear of the Lord fell on the people, and they came out with one
consent.] That is, though Saul did what he could to make the people afraid to
disobey his command, yet it was of God that they were so generally stricken
with fear, and thereupon ready to come forth at the command of their new chosen
king: as it is said of the Canaanites that were restrained from pursuing Jacob
and his family, when his sons had made that massacre in Schechem; Genesis 35.5.
And they journeyed; and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round
about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.

Verse. 8. The children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of
Judah thirty thousand.] The men of Judah are reckoned apart from the children
of Israel; and these reasons may be given for it: 1. Because they usually had
the privilege of going first against the enemy, in any common danger: 2. To
let us see that the tribe of Judah, though the chief, and the tribe wherein God
had said the throne should be established, Genesis 49.10. yielded to obey Saul
chosen out of the least of the tribes: or thirdly, because this would intimate
how willingly the people flocked together, when out of Judah alone there came
thirty thousand, though by the continual incursions of the Philistines, they
were forced to look to the defense of their own coasts against these their
neighbors.

Verse. 9. And they said unto the messengers that came, etc.] That is, Saul and
Samuel.

Verse. 10. Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out unto
you, etc.] They repeat the main head of the covenant they had made with the
king of Ammon, to wit, that they would come forth and yield themselves,
concealing the condition, that is, if help came not in the mean time; by
concealing whereof they both provide for their own safety, that nothing might
be presently attempted against them, and make their enemies the more secure,
that Saul might come upon them unawares.

Verse. 11. Saul put the people in three companies, and they came into the midst
of the host in the morning watch, etc.] It seems Saul marched all night, that
by the morning watch he might come upon them, and surprise them unawares. And
thus he raised the siege of Jabesh-gilead, and freed them from that horrid
cruelty which the enemy intended against them; and how thankful the
inhabitants of this city were to Saul for this great benefit they enjoyed by
his means, we may see chap. 31.11, 12, 13. And when the inhabitants of
Jabesh-gilead heard of that which the Philistines had done to Saul; All the
valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul, and the
bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt
them there. And they took their bones and buried them under a tree, and fasted
seven days.

Verse. 13. And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day; for
to day the Lord has wrought salvation for Israel.] In this reason that Saul
gave why he would not suffer any man to be put to death that day, for to day
the Lord has wrought salvation in Israel, two things may be employed: first,
that he would not have a day of so much joy and triumph, stained with the least
sorrow and mourning amongst any of the people: and secondly, that when God had
shown himself so good and gracious to his people, he could not think it fit to
be so rigid and severe against those that had at first slighted him in his
sovereignty. However here again we see what a difference there was betwixt that
which Saul was in his first government, and that he was afterward when the
Spirit of the Lord was departed from him. Now none more humble and gentle then
he, not a man should be put to death for him; but afterward in his dealing
with David, and the Priests of the Lord, he was another man, even
bloodthirsty, cruel, and implacable beyond measure.

Verse. 14. Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and
renew the kingdom there.] A city this was near hand, adjoining upon Jordan;
there Joshua renewed the covenant betwixt the Lord and his people, Josh. 5.9.
and there Samuel now renewed the covenant concerning the kingdom betwixt Saul
and the people. Before he was chosen, but this was as it were the solemnity of
his inauguration and coronation: and now it seems he was anointed in public as
before in private; and therefore in the next chapter, Samuel speaking to the
people, calls Saul several times, the Lords Anointed.

Verse. 15. And there they made Saul king before the Lord in Gilgal; and there
they sacrificed, etc.] It is evident therefore, that here now Saul and Samuel
sacrificed together in Gilgal; whence we may certainly conclude, that the
charge which Samuel gave to Saul, chap. 10.8. that he should stay for Samuel at
Gilgal seven days* till he came to offer sacrifice for him, was not meant of
Saul's immediate going to Gilgal, but of his going thither when he should be in
a strait, and had not Samuel with him, as is before noted in the exposition of
that place.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto your
voice in all that ye said unto me, etc.] Samuel presses them now more closely
and sharply then ever, with their sin in rejecting the government which God
had established among them: first, because in this their jollity, for that
glorious victory which their new king had obtained against the Ammonites, they
were in danger to be puffed up with an opinion, that God approved that which
they had done, and that they had not sinned in desiring a king: secondly,
because having established Saul in the throne, and actually resigned the
government into his hands, he might now speak the more freely, without giving
the least ground of suspicion that he was loath to give over the government, and
therefore condemned them for choosing a king.

Verse. 2. And now behold, the king walks before you.] This is meant of Saul's
being now settled in the supreme magistracy, as a shepherd or captain to lead
and govern the people, and to be as a shield unto them, to stand betwixt them
and harms way: the like phrase there is Numb. 27.17. concerning which see the
note there.

And I am old, and gray headed, and behold, my sons are with you.] To imply
how good cause he had to be very well content in regard of himself, that the
burden of the government should be taken from his shoulders, he wishes them to
remember that he was now grown aged, I am, says he, old and gray headed, and
then he adds, and behold my sons are with you, that is, they are amongst
you, as one of you, they shall lay no claim to the government no more then I
do; so that this he says: either first, the more to clear his integrity who
was willing his sons should lay down the power of government as well as
himself: or secondly, to intimate that if they could charge him for any wrong
done, his sons should make satisfaction: or else to imply, that of them they
might be satisfied concerning his course of life; and particularly, whether he
did any way encourage them in those wicked courses they ran into, chap. 8.3.

Verse. 3. Behold, here I am, witness against me before the Lord, and before
his anointed, etc.] As if he should have said, being now the power of
government is transferred to another, ye need not fear to speak your minds of
me, and therefore if ye can accuse me of any evil, speak it freely. And this
protestation of his innocence he makes: First, that he might the more freely
reprove them. Secondly, to manifest the greivousnesse of their sin, who had
without any just cause rejected the government which God had erected among
them. And thirdly, to propound this covertly, as a pattern for their new chosen
king to follow, before whom all this was spoken, witness against me before the
Lord, and before his Anointed.

Verse. 7. Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the
Lord, of all the righteous acts of the Lord, etc.] That is, both mercies and
punishmen^^; but chiefly I conceive this is meant of his mercies, wherein the
Lord approved his faithfulness, in performing the covenant which he had made
with them; for these he presses upon them, to discover the heinousness of
their sin in rejecting his government, who had so carefully protected them
against all their enemies, and so abundantly blessed them in every regard.

Verse. 8. The Lord sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers out
of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.] This making them to dwell in the
land of Canaan, is ascribed to Moses and Aaron: First, because they led the
people from Egypt through the wilderness, and brought them unto the land which
God had promised them: and secondly, because Moses put them in possession of
that part of the land which was without Jordan, and substituted Joshua in his
place, who afterward gave them the possession of the rest of the land. But the
chief thing intended, is to put them in mind of Gods mercy in giving them that
land, without whom, neither Moses, nor Aaron, nor Joshua could have done it.

Verse. 9. And when they forgot the Lord their God, he sold them into the hand
of Sisera, etc.] Samuel here calls the rebellion of the Israelites against God,
a forgetting of the Lord; because if men did indeed think upon God as they
ought to do they would not dare so to transgress his commandments: and thence
it is also, that David says of wicked men, that God is not in all their
thoughts, Psalm. 10.4.

Verse. 11. And the Lord sent Jerubbaal* and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel,
etc.] Some conceive that Jair is here called Bedan, and that to distinguish him
from that former Jair of whom Moses speaks, Numb. 32.41. and indeed there is
one Bedan a Manassite mentioned, 1. Chron. 7.17. Others again think that this
Bedan was some Judge of Israel, that is not mentioned in the book of Judges.
But the more common, and I think the more probable exposition is, that Samson
is here meant, and that he is called Bedan, because he was of the tribe of Dan;
for Bedan signifies in Dan, or, of Dan, and Bendan signifies the son of
Dan. As for Samuels speaking of himself as of a third person, it is usual in
the Scripture, as we see Genesis 4.23. And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and
Zillah, Hear my voice ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have
slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt. He particularly puts
them in mind of Gods delivering them by him, because the deliverance which God
had given them by him, was best known to them, and best served to condemn them
for rejecting in his days that government which God had settled among them,
and that in part for fear of their enemies.

Verse. 14. Then shall both ye, and also the king that reigns over you,
continue following the Lord your God.] That is, God will not destroy you, but
you shall still continue a peculiar people to the Lord, shrouded under his
conduct and protection.

Verse. 17. Is it not wheat-harvest today? I will call unto the Lord, and he
shall send thunder and rain.] In Palestina thunder and rain in wheat-harvest
was most unusual, whence is that of Solomon. Prove. 26.1. As snow in summer,
and as rain in harvest: so honor is not seemly for a fool: and that Amos 4.7.
And also I have withheld the rain from you, when there were yet three
months to the harvest; and I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it
not to rain upon another city. Now the rather did the Lord convince them of
their sin by this miracle, because hereby they might see their folly, both in
rejecting the Lord, such a mighty protector, who was able by thunder to
destroy their enemies, as they had seen formerly chap. 7.10. and likewise in
rejecting Samuel, who could by his prayers fetch down thunder and rain from
heaven.

Verse. 18. And the Lord sent thunder and rain that day.] To wit, in some very
extraordinary manner, in so much that the people were not only fully convinced
hereby, that they had sinned in desiring a king, but were also afraid that by
this terrible tempest they should have been destroyed; whence is that in the
following verse, Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not.

Verse. 20. And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not.] That is, despair not of
Gods goodness and mercy.

Verse. 21. And turn ye not aside: for then should ye go after vain things,
which cannot profit nor deliver.] Idols may be the vain things here principally
meant, as Deuteronomy. 32.21. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not
God, they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and Jer. 2.5. Thus
says the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone
far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? but withal
we may well understand it of every thing else, wherein they should seek for
help and happiness, having turned aside from following the Lord.

Verse. 22. For the Lord will not forsake his people, for his great names sake.]
That is, because Gods name is called upon you, and so it would not be for his
glory to forsake you; and indeed all the good which God does for his Church and
people, is more for his own glory, then for any good he sees in them.

Verse. 23. Moreover, as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the
Lord, in ceasing to pray for you.] They had desired him to pray for them, verse.
19. but the injury they had done him might make them fear he would not regard
them; the rather, because the thunder he had prayed for, might argue some
displeasure conceived in him against them, and therefore he assures them that
he would not cease neither to pray for them, nor to instruct them, but (says
he) I will teach you the good and the right way.

Verse. 24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, etc.] As though he
should say, else my praying for you will do you no good.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. SAul reigned one year, and when he had reigned two years over
Israel.] The first clause, Saul reigned one year has reference to the time
when those things were done, mentioned in the two former chapters; when Saul by
occasion of his victory over the Ammonites, and his raising the siege of
Jabesh-gilead, was at Gilgal confirmed and solemnly inaugurated king of Israel,
then he had reigned one year, to wit, from the time that he was chosen and
publicly declared king at Mizpeh, chap. 10.24. and then the second clause, And
when he had reigned two years over Israel, has relation to that which is here
related in this chapter, to wit, that a full year after his solemn
inauguration at Gilgal, when he had in all reigned two years, then he began to
raise an army of three thousand men, as intending now to drive the Philistines
out of those forts which they held in the land of Israel, and to save the
people from the cruel oppression of those their insulting enemies.

Verse. 2. And the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.] Having
appointed the people to assemble themselves as at other times, out of them he
chose three thousand to be in arms with him and his son Jonathan, and the
rest he dismissed.

Verse. 3. And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba.]
That is, in Gibeah of Benjamin: One main reason why Saul had raised an army of
three thousand Israelites, was doubtless that they might surprise all those
garrisons which the Philistines kept in the land of Israel, wherewith they did
mightily oppress the Israelites, and kept them in such miserable bondage, that
they would not suffer them to have any weapons of war, (but what they got by
stealth, or kept hid in some secret place) nor would let a smith live among
them, least by that means they should get them swords or spears, as is
afterward expressed, verse. 19. Jonathan therefore having a thousand of these
new mustered forces to be under his command, did presently address himself to
this work, and went and smote a garrison of the Philistines in Gibeah; making
this no doubt his first enterprise, because Gibeah was his own country, the
place where his father and ancestors had lived before him, chap. 10.26.

And Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews
hear.] That is, he gave order to the messengers he sent abroad, to proclaim
and to make known in all parts by the sound of a trumpet, both the victory
which Jonathan had gotten for their encouragement, and how the Philistines were
hereupon enraged, and made great preparations against them, that having this
warning, they might in every place take heed to themselves, and that they might
send further forces from all parts to be with him at Gilgal.

Verse. 4. And all Israel heard say, that Saul had smitten a garrison of the
Philistines.] Though it was Jonathan that smote the garrison, yet it is here
ascribed to Saul, because usually that which a kings Generals do, that the
king himself is said to do; and besides it is probable, that it was expressly
made known to the people, that Jonathan had not done this without Saul's
approbation.

And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal.] Because Samuel,
chap. 10.8. had appointed Saul that he should go down to Gilgal (to wit, if he
came to be in any danger, or took occasion to attempt any thing against the
Philistines) and should there wait for him seven days, till he came and
advised him what he should do, and offered sacrifice both for him and for the
people, therefore was Gilgal appointed to be the rendevouz for the people.

Verse. 6. When the men of Israel saw that they were in a straight (for the
people were distressed, etc.] That is, their apprehension of the danger they
were in was not without cause: for they were indeed in great distress, the
enemies being innumerable, and withal strong and well armed with horses and
chariots, and the Israelites on the other side but few in number, and those
either unarmed, or very poorly provided to join in battle with that mighty
army of the Philistines. And thus they that erewhile reposed all their hope of
safety in having a king, did now follow their king trembling as it follows
verse. 7. and were taught, that without Gods assistance all humane devices and
counsel are nothing worth.

Verse. 8. And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had
appointed.] That is, he tarried until the seventh day, and part of that; for
that he tarried not till the seven days were out, as Samuel had appointed,
chap. 10.8. is evident in the thirteenth verse of this chapter, where Samuel
reproves him, because he had not herein kept the commandment of the Lord.

Verse. 9. And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt-offering to me, and
peace offerings. And he offered the burnt-offering.] That is, the Priests for
him. As Elkanah did, chap. 1.3. And this man went up out of his city yearly, to
worship and to sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh: and Solomon, 1.
Kings 3.4. And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, for that was the
great high place: a thousand burnt-offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar.
Some conceive that he did it himself, and that this was the sin for which
Samuel afterward reproved him, to wit, that he intruded himself into the
Priests office. But this is not probable: first, because Samuel being a Levite
not a Priest, might not offer sacrifice by the ordinary rule of the Law, no
more then Saul: and therefore Saul's staying for Samuel seven days, was not
enjoined upon this ground, because it was lawful for him to sacrifice, not for
Saul. And secondly, because Saul afterward excuses himself, that what he had
done contrary to the commandment of the Lord, he was constrained by necessity
to do it: but for this sacrificing himself without a Priest, he could pretend
no necessity, Ahiah the high Priest the son of Phinehas being then with him
in the camp, chap. 14.3. Doubtless therefore the sin of Saul was this, that
having received a charge from the Lord by Samuel, chap. 10.8. that he should
stay for Samuel at Gilgal seven days, and not resolve upon any thing till he
came, when they were to offer up sacrifices unto the Lord, and Samuel was to
advise Saul what he should do; Saul having stayed till the seventh day was
almost expired, began to conclude that Samuel would not come, and fearing least
if he staid any longer, his soldiers might all slink away, or that the
Philistines might fall upon them on a sudden, before they had by sacrifices
sought the Lords favor and help, he resolved not to stay any longer for
Samuel, for fear of the worst, (which argued his diffidence and distrust in
God) and thereupon commanded sacrifices to be offered, intending after that was
done, to pitch upon some course or other for the defense of themselves and
their country against the Philistines. This I say was Saul's sin, not that he
himself offered sacrifices; for this Samuel never charged him with.

Verse. 10. As soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt-offering, behold
Samuel came.] And thus for want of staying an hour or two longer then he did,
perhaps less, he brake the commandment of God and forfeited his kingdom.

And went out to meet him that he might salute him.] The rather happily,
because out of a guilty conscience he feared Samuels displeasure, and by this
external reverence, therefore sought to prevent it, and to let him see, that
what he had done was not done out of any contempt of the directions which he
had given him.

Verse. 11. And Samuel said, What have thou done?] He saw well enough what he
had done: But by these words of discontent, What have thou done? he expresses
his displeasure against him, and withal the danger that Saul was in, because
of this his disobedience.

And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that
thou came not within the days appointed, etc.] In these words Saul
intimates, that because a great part of the seventh day was past, he conceived
that Samuel would not have come within the appointed time; and so he seeks to
cast the blame upon Samuel, rather then he would acknowledge himself in a fault.

Verse. 12. I forced my self therefore, and offered a burnt offering.] As if he
should have said, It went against me to sacrifice before thou were come, but I
was constrained by necessity, I could stay no longer unless I would have
suffered the enemy to come upon this weak unarmed company, before we had made
supplication to the Lord; and what a disadvantage would that have been?

Verse. 13. And Samuel said to Saul, Thou have done foolishly; thou have not
kept the commandment of the Lord, etc.] To wit, because he waited not for
Samuel all the seven days, as Samuel had appointed him, chap. 10.8. See the
note above, verse. 9.

For now would the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.]
This may seem to contradict that prophecy of the establishing the kingdom in
Judahs tribe, Genesis 49.10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come: and unto him shall the
gathering of the people be. But we must know that God speaks here to the
capacity and according to the sight and judgment of man, and therefore without
respect to Gods decree which is secret to man, teaches us to judge of Saul's
rejection as a fruit of sin, and his supposed obedience as that which might
have been a means to confirm the kingdom to him and his. For whereas some
understand these words thus, The Lord would have established thy kingdom upon
Israel for ever, that is, all thy days; that cannot I conceive be the meaning,
because Saul did enjoy the kingdom all his life; whereas Samuel speaks here of
something God would have done for him, if he had obeyed the commandment of the
Lord which now by his sin he had forfeited and lost.

Verse. 14. But now thy kingdom shall not continue; the Lord has sought him a
man after his own heart, etc.] That is, the kingdom shall not now be settled
upon thee and thy posterity, as it should have been, but God has provided
himself of another man to succeed thee in the throne; and this was David, a man
after Gods own heart, whose heart was sincerely bent to do all the will of God,
even according to Gods own heart, which could not be said of Saul that always
had an hypocritical heart; and the Lord, says Samuel, has commanded him to
be captain over his people, etc. that is, he has decreed to give him the
charge of governing his people. It was some time after this ere Samuel was sent
to anoint David; only because God had firmly decreed that it should so be,
therefore Samuel speaks of it, as if it were done already; The Lord has
commanded him to be captain over his people; and so we see elsewhere, the Lord
expresses his decree concerning the ravens feeding Elijah, I have commanded
the Ravens to feed thee there, 1. Kings 17.4. It may seem strange indeed that
the kingdom should be removed from Saul's family for so small an offense as one
would judge this of Saul's to have been; for what great matter was there in it,
that Saul should offer a sacrifice perhaps an hour or two before it should
have been done? for, first, there was no hurt in the thing it self, it was a
part of Gods worship in the Law enjoined: and secondly, it was done but a very
little while before it should have been done; Samuel had appointed Saul to wait
for him seven days and he had waited till the seventh day was almost ended:
thirdly, considering what a mighty army the Philistines had, not far from
him, and how many of his own people were run away from him, and how full of
fears the rest were that remained with him, it might argue a great deal of
courage and confidence in God, that he durst stay there so long as he did: and
fourthly, it was out of a good intention that he did not stay any longer, but
offered a sacrifice before Samuel came; namely, that he might not be set upon
by the Philistines before he had made supplication to the Lord, and that he
might by this means encourage his fainthearted soldiers, and prevent their
running away after their fellows; and therefore I say it may perhaps seem
strange, that by this offense he should loose the kingdom. But for this we
must consider: first, that there may be much wickedness of heart in doing that
which may seem outwardly a small offense: secondly, it cannot be a small matter
to disobey any commandment of God; the excellency of the person makes the
disobedience great, in whatever the offense is committed: and thirdly, Saul
being the first king of Israel, God was pleased by this severity against Saul
for his first rebellion against Gods command to make him an example to all that
should afterward succeed in that throne, that they might fear to transgress
the commandment of the Lord as he had done. As the Lord did with great severity
punish the first sin of the Priests, to wit, that of Nadab and Abihu, Levit.
10.1. that all the succeeding posterity of Aaron, might be rendered thereby the
more wary how they carried themselves in their preistly office; so likewise he
did here sharply punish the first sin of the first king of Israel, that all
that should afterward sit in that throne, might learn to be very strict in
observing whatever God should give them in charge.

Verse. 15. And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal, unto Gibeah of
Benjamin.] And Saul with him, or immediately after him, as is evident in the
16. verse, And Saul and Jonathan his son -- abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: and
indeed it is not likely that he would have gone nearer to the enemy (for Gibeah
was far nearer to Michmash where the Philistines were, then Gilgal) if he had
not been encouraged by Samuel, especially considering, that of his three
thousand soldiers mentioned verse. 2. and the people that were afterward called
to Gilgal, verse. 4. there were now but six hundred left, and those unarmed, and
in great terror because of the Philistines: unless happily he went thither,
because it was his own city, a place of greater strength, and better assured
unto him then Gilgal was.

Verse. 17. And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in thru
companies, etc.] These were sent out to spoil the country, and to fetch in
booty to the camp, and therefore they went out three several ways, one to
Ophrah a city of Benjamin, Josh. 18.23. that lay southwest from Michmash; the
other to Bethoron a city of Ephraim, Josh. 16.3. that lay northwest; and the
third toward the valley of Zeboim, that is, the desert of Jordan, which was
eastward.

Verse. 19. Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel: (for
the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears.] This they
did after they had disarmed them; and for the same cause it may well be that
Nebuchadnezzar carried away all the craftsmen and smiths out of the land of
Israel, 2. King^ 24.14. And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the Princes,
and all the mighty men of valor, even ten thousand captives, and all the
craftsmen and smiths: and Jer. 24.1. Nebuchad-rezzar king of Babylon had
carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, and the
Princes of Judah, with the carpenters and smiths from Jerusalem, and had
brought them to Babylon. Now it is probable that the Philistines disarmed the
Israelites in those days when the Ark was taken, and that ever since that time
they had used this policy of keeping them from having any smith in Israel: for
first, after that solemn repentance of the Israelites in the days of Samuel,
chap. 7.3, 4. we read not of any memorable victory which the Philistines
obtained against the Israelites; but rather the contrary, chap. 7.13, 14. So
the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the coast of Israel:
and the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel, were restored to
Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath, and the coast thereof did Israel deliver out
of the hands of the Philistines: and secondly, though the Israelites prevailed
often against the Philistines, yet all this time they might have few other
weapons but such as in ancient times they most used, to wit, clubs, and bows,
and slings, etc. The chief victory they got was we see miraculous, not gotten
with sword or spear, but with thunder from heaven, 1. Sam. 7.10. and thirdly,
these craftsmen being once rooted out, in a short peace under Samuel they could
not easily be replanted again, the Philistines especially keeping garrisons
still for this purpose in their land.

Verse. 20. But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines to sharpen every
man his share and his coulter, etc.] That is, either into the land of the
Philistines, or rather to the garrisons of the Philistines that were in the
land of Israel, where it seems they kept smiths for this purpose.

Verse. 22. There was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the
people that were with Saul and Jonathan.] But how then a little before this did
Jonathan smite the garrison of the Philistines in Geba, verse. 3. I answer,
first, they might have clubs, and bows, and slings, and these were the most
usual weapons in those times, see 1. Chron. 12.1, 2. Now these are they that
came to David to Ziklag, while he kept himself close, because of Saul the son
of Kish: and they were among the mighty men helpers of the war. They were
armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in hurling
stones, and shooting arrows out of a bow: Judge. 20.16. Among all this people
there were seven hundred chosen men left handed, every one could sling stones
at an hair breath, and not miss: secondly, some iron arms they might hide and
keep secret from the Philistines: and thirdly, those happily that were better
armed of the three thousand mentioned verse. 2. were those that fled from Saul,
and the six hundred that stayed with him, were of the people that were come up
to him unfurnished of such arms: for it is very improbable which some say, that
those that ran not away from Saul, but followed him trembling, as it is said
verse. 7. did in their fear cast away their arms, or leave them in the camp
behind them.

Verse. 23. And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of
Mich^ash.] That is, the body of the Philistines army remaining in the plain
adjoining, there went out a company and took a passage near to them, which was
a place of advantage, and kept it against the Israelites.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. JOnathan the son of Saul said unto the young man that bare his
armor, Come and let us go over to the Philistines garrison.] This Jonathan
propounded by a special instinct of Gods spirit, for otherwise it would have
been a tempting of God, that having one man alone with him (his armor-bearer,
that is, his squire, as we use to call them) he should set upon a whole
garrison of the Philistines; and hence it was that he told not his father, to
wit, lest out of fear he should dissuade or hinder him.

Verse. 2. And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah, under a pomegran^e
tree, which is in Migron.] This is the name of some field or plain, near unto
Gibeah, mentioned, Esa. 10.28. He is come to Ajah, he is passed to Migron: at
Michmash he has laid out his carriages: where Saul with his company lay now
within their trenches and fortifications; in regard whereof also it is likely
the Philistines sent out those three spoiling bands to waste the country,
chap. 13.17. to see if by this means they could draw Saul out of his
fastnesses; and that the Philistines flouted Jonathan with this, verse. 11.
Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves.

Verse. 3. And Ahiah the son of Ahitub, Ichabodi brother, etc.] That is, he
also was with Saul in Migron; and it seems because of the straits the people
were in, he was come to bring the Ark thither, for the peoples encouragement,
as they had been wont formerly to do in the like case; for in the 18. verse it
is expressly said, that the Ark was there. It is evident that Ahimelech, who
gave the shewbread and Goliahs sword to David when he fled from Saul, and who
was thereupon slain by Saul's command, was the son of Ahitub, chap. 22.9. and
it is generally held, that he was then high priest; either therefore this Ahiah
was the elder son of Ahitub, and when he was dead then Ahimelech his brother
succeeded him in the high-preisthood; or else this Ahiah, who was come with the
Ark and the ephod to Saul, was the same that is there called Ahimelech, which
indeed most Interpreters do hold. After the death of Eli (his son Phinehas
being before slain in the battle) Ahitub his grandchild, the son of Phinehas
succeeded him in the preisthood, who it seems long enjoyed not that dignity,
but dyed; (for God had threatened Eli that his children should die in the flower
of their age, chap. 2.23.) and so Ahiah his son was now high-preist in his
room.

Verse. 4. And between the passages by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the
Philistines garrison, etc.] The description of this place, through or over
which Jonathan and his armor-bearer were to go, that they might come to the
garrison of the Philistines, is doubtless here inserted purposely to show how
hard an adventure it was that they undertook; but so exceeding intricate and
obscure it is, that it is very hard to conceive thereby, how these rocks and
passages lay; which may be the reason, that the most Expositours do not so much
as undertake to explain the many difficulties that are in the Text; and indeed
all that can be said herein, I conceive is this: It is evident that Michmash
where the Philistines camp was, and Gibeah where Saul and Jonathan, and the
forces of the Israelites were, chap. 13.16. lay North and South the one from
the other; and that these two rocks here mentioned, Bozez and Seneh lay
together in the midst, the one Northward, the other Southward; for how else
could it be said in the following verse, that the forefront of the one was
situate Northward over against Michmash, and the other Southward over against
Gibeah? But now the difficulty is, how therefore it can be here said, that
these rocks were between the passages by which Jonathan sought to go over, and
yet withal, that there was a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on
the other side, which seem to be contrary the one to the other. But for the
resolving of this, I know no other probable answer that can be given but this,
to wit, first, that the passages between which the rocks are said to be, were
the two several streights or inlets, whereat there was a passable way, though
craggy through these rocks, the one as they came from Michmash to go to Gibeah,
the other as they went from Gibeah to go to Michmash; so that indeed there was
but one passage through these rocks (and that was surely the passage mentioned
in the last verse of the foregoing chapter, which the Philistines had
surprised) only the two inlets into this are the passages here intended, the
one called the passage of Michmash, as we see chap. 13.23. the other the
passage of Gibeah. And secondly, that whereas it is said there was a sharp rock
on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other, the meaning is, not that as men
went along in this passage there was a sharp rock on each side, to wit, on the
right hand and on the left (for the rocks standing the one with the forefront
Northward, and the other with the forefront Southward, that could not be. He
that went through this passage from Gibeah to Michmash, must go over both
rocks, one after another, and could not have one on his right hand, and the
other on his left) but that there was a sharp rock on the one side toward
Michmash, and a sharp rock on the other side toward Gibeah, which is mentioned
to show that unless it were by that passage which the Philistines kept, there
was no going over; a sharp steep craggie rock making the way unpasseable in all
other places; all which notwithstanding, Jonathan with his armor-bearer
clambered over this rock on his hands and feet, and so got to the garrison of
the Philistines.

Verse. 6. Come, and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised.]
This calling the Philistines uncircumcised, was to intimate that Jonathan
relied upon the covenant which God had made with his people, and consequently
upon the promises which the Lord had given them that they should vanquish their
enemies, and happily more particularly, upon that which the Lord had said
concerning Saul, that he should save his people out of the hand of the
Philistines, chap. 9.16. Yet he adds, It may be that the Lord will work for
us; for though he were carried to this attempt by a powerful instinct of Gods
spirit, and a strong faith in the promises of God, yet because he had not a
special promise of victory at this time, he is not confident of the success,
but leaves that to God. It may be, etc.

Verse. 7. Behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.] That is, as willing
and ready to follow thee in this enterprise, as thine own soul can desire.

Verse. 9. If they say thus unto us, Tarty until we come to you; then we will
stand still* etc.] By the secret guidance of Gods holy spirit, he pitcheth no
doubt upon this, as a sign whereby he should know whether they might with hope
of success undertake this attempt, and no doubt prayed that it might prove a
true token, as Abraham's servant did in alike case, Genesis 24.13. (concerning
which see the note there.) Yet was not this chosen without some ground of
natural reason; for if they said, Tarry until we come to you, it might argue
courage and boldness: but if they said, Come up to us, that might bewray some
fearfulness in them.

Verse. 11. And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the
Philistines, etc.] To wit, in the way that led to the ordinary passage, which
was now kept by the Philistines. As for that scoff of the Philistines when they
espied them, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes, see the note
above, verse. 2.

Verse. 12. And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armor-bearer,
and said, Come up to us, and we will show you a thing.] This they say by way of
derision, as implying that they durst not come up, or that if they did, they
would give them their payment; but God intended it as a token advising Jonathan
what he should do.

Verse. 13. And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, etc.] To
wit, because the way where they went was so steep, that otherwise they could
not have clambered up, and because by this means they might the better shelter
themselves under the rocks, and so get up unespyed; for we must know that they
went not up in the ordinary passage which was kept by the Philistines, but when
they had discovered themselves to the Philistines in that way, and the
Philistines had in a scoffing manner challenged them to come up, as is before
noted, verse. 11, 12. then they turned aside and crept up on the sharp rock
above mentioned, verse. 4. where the Philistines never dreamt of an enemies
coming upon them, and so came upon them unawares. Had they climbed up in any
place where the Philistines could have seen them, we may well think that they
might easily have beaten them down; but they therefore wound about some other
way, and clambering up on all four (as we use to say) did shelter themselves
under the covert of those craggy rocks, till they were gotten up in a place
where the Philistines looked not for them.

Verse. 15. And there was trembling in the host, etc.] In these words is shown,
whence it was that Jonathan and his armor-bearer should so strangely beat down
the garrison of the Philistines before them, and that presently upon this, the
whole army of the Philistines should so easily be put to disorder and flight;
it was because the Lord had stricken them all with a mighty terror, there was
trembling in the host, etc. not only the garrison was thus affrighted whom
Jonathan at first assaulted, but those also in the camp, and the spoilers, to
wit, those mentioned before, chap. 13.17. they also trembled; all which too was
helped forward with a terrible earthquake that was sent at the same time; the
earth quaked, that is, that also was moved under them, and seemed as it were to
quake for fear; which, I say, no doubt the Lord sent, the more to terrify and
affright the Philistines.

Verse. 18. And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the Ark of God, etc.] This he
enjoined, that Ahiah having put on the Ephod, might enquire of God what was the
cause of that tumult in the camp of the Philistines, and what he should do.
Saul had already been a long time in great straits; for all his soldiers
except six hundred were gone away from him, the Philistines lay close upon him
with a mighty army, insomuch that he durst not stir out of his trenches in
Gibeah; and the enemy taking the advantage thereof, had sent out three
companies of spoilers to wast and spoil the country round about; and yet all
this while we read no that he enquired of God, though he had the Ark all this
while with him. But now when his watchman had descried a tumult in the camp of
the Philistines, and that he perceived by the absence of his son and his
armor-bearer, that they were engaged amongst them, and that it was probable by
the relation of his watchman, that the Philistines were disordered; now on a
sudden not knowing what he should do, the Priest was called to enquire of God;
and yet it was but a sudden fit of devotion to which he was forced by his
present distress, as is evident by that which follows immediately in the next
verse.

Verse. 19. The noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and
increased; and Saul said unto the Priest, Withdraw thine hand.] This did
notably discover Saul's profaneness; being at first perplexed and not knowing
what to do, he called for the Ark to enquire of God; but presently again
perceiving by the increasing noise and tumult in the camp of the Philistines,
that some grievous disaster had indeed befallen them, then away with the Ark,
away with the Priest and his Ephod; Ahiah, says he, withdraw thine hand, as if
he should have said, Give over, it is no time now to stand consulting and
enquiring of God; the increasing of the tumult shows evidently enough what we
have to do; we shall lose an opportunity of victory, which afterward we may
wish for when it is too late, and therefore must not now lose time to ask
counsel of God. And indeed, by the many sad effects that accompanied the
following victory, we may see how much God was displeased with this his profane
contempt of the ordinance of God.

Verse. 21. Moreover, the Hebrews that were with the Philistines, even they also
turned to be with the Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan.] That is,
their bondmen and servants; yea, and those also that for fear were forced to
come up with their carriages and provision, etc. to the camp of the Philistines.

Verse. 24. And the men of Israel were distressed that day.] Being weary through
labor and toil, and ready to faint, they durst not eat any thing because of
Saul's oath; and herein they were distressed. But if besides they were
hunger-bitten before, by reason of the spoiling bands of the Philistines, that
kept all provisions from them, this must needs make their misery the greater.

For Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eats any
food until evening.] That is, he had with an oath pronounced concerning the
people, that he should be accursed, and as an accursed thing should be put to
death, whosoever he was amongst them that should eat any thing until the
evening, as is evident by that sentence pronounced against Jonathan, when he
had only tasted of the honey in the wood, verse. 44. And Saul answered, God do
so, and more also; for thou shall surely die Jonathan. The reason why Saul did
this, was that the people might not loose any time from pursuing the enemy. But
the oath was rash and inconsiderate, and like enough to have proceeded from a
proud desire to seem very zealous in the pursuing of these enemies, against
whom erewhile he durst not show his head.

Verse. 27. He put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipped it in
an hony-combe, and put his hand to his mouth, and his eyes were enlightened.]
Being enfeebled with extreme labor and emptiness, his eyes waxed dim, which
now by this little refreshing were enlightened again.

Verse. 28. Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straightly
charged the people with an oath, etc.] That which is spoken with reference to
any thing before done by another man, is called an answer in the Scripture
phrase, as well as that which is spoken with reference to something before said
by another; so when Christ had whipped out those that profaned the Temple, it
is said, Joh. 2.18 Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign, etc.
and so it is here. Yet it may be conceived, that Jonathan encouraging the
people in the pursuit of the enemy, one of the company returned him this
answer, to show the reason why the soldiers were faint and could not follow on.

Verse. 31. And they smote the Philistines that day, from Michmash to Aijalon.]
Which was in the tribe of Dan, Josh. 19.42. and therefore not far from the
Philistines country: yet some hold that it was anothet Ajalon in the tribe of
Judah, 2. Chron. 11.10.

Verse. 32. And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep and oxen, etc.]
To wit, when the evening was come, and the time prefixed by Saul expired; being
then pressed with extreme hunger through long fasting and labor, they greedily
flew upon the spoil, dressed and eat it, not staying till it could be thoroughly
cleansed of the blood, the life as it were yet panting in the flesh, which was
contrary to the Law, Deuteronomy. 12.16. Only ye shall not eat the blood, ye shall
pour it upon the earth as water; and thus they that were so very careful to
observe the kings edict, never regarded the breach of Gods commandment.

Verse. 33. And he said, Ye have transgressed.] Or, Ye have dealt treacherously;
Thus he was eager against the people for eating with the blood, but never
charged himself, who by a rash vow had thus caused the people to sin.

Roll a great stone unto me this day.] To wit, either that thereon in Saul's
sight they might kill and eat, to the end he might see them let the blood run
clearly out from the cattle they killed: or else, for the building of the
Altar mentioned, verse. 35. that they might kill and eat as it were in the
presence both of God and their king, that so he might be sure to prevent their
eating with the blood any more.

Verse. 35. And Saul built an altar unto the Lord.] To wit, either as a monument
of this his late victory, or rather that he might offer thereon gratulatory
sacrifices for that glorious victory which God had given them. And this is said
to be the first altar that he built unto the Lord; either because those altars
in Gilgal and elsewhere, whereon he had formerly sacrificed, were built by
others before, and this was the first which he built himself, or else because
those altars were only set up for present use, and then demolished again; but
this was the first which he built for a standing continuing altar; which then
is noted, because it was directly against the law of God, as we may see in the
notes, Exodus 20.24.

Verse. 36. Then said the Priests, Let us draw near hither unto God.] That is,
let us enquire of God before the Ark: because the prosecuting of the enemies by
night, which Saul had motioned to the people, was an act of some danger, and
the people were very forward to do what he advised, therefore the Priest
interposed himself, and wished them by all means to enquire first of the Lord;
and this perhaps he did the rather, because he saw what ill effects had
followed upon Saul's neglecting to do this before, ver. 19. to wit, that Saul by
a rash and unadvised oath had weakened the hands of the people in the pursuance
of their victory, and had been withal the occasion of a grievous sin amongst
the people, which was their eating of the spoil with the blood, verse. 32.

Verse. 37. But he answered him not that day.] When Saul had enquired of the
Lord by the judgment of Urim and Thummim, the Lord answered him not: but
whence was this? doubtless the Lords displeasure was against Saul, not against
Jonathan, who though he had done what his father had forbidden, and that with
an oath, that whosoever should offend therein should be accursed, and so put to
death; yet he did it ignorantly, not knowing that his father had made such a
vow, and was compelled too by necessity, being ready to faint when he reached
out his rod, and so by tasting a little honey refreshed himself: yet it is
evident too, that the Lords refusing to answer Saul tended to this, that it
might be discovered that Jonathan had transgressed the command and vow of his
father; but why? not so much to discover Jonathan to be the party with whom the
Lord was offended; as first, to discover to Saul his hypocrisy, and the
rashness of his unadvised oath, who had hereby hindered the victory, caused the
people to sin, and now brought his own son under the danger of being
accursed and put to death: and secondly, to show the religious respect that was
due to an oath.

Verse. 38. And Saul said, Draw ye near hither all the chief of the people; and
know and see wherein this sin has been this day.] Saul concluded that God
was offended, when he had enquired of him by the Priest, and he would not
answer him: and therefore presently commanded all the chief of the people, that
is, all the heads of the Tribes and families to draw near unto him, to wit,
that by drawing lots it might be discovered who it was that had sinned and
offended God amongst them: for though himself had sinned in that rash and
unadvised oath that he took, ver. 24. and and that he knew the people had
sinned grievously in eating with the blood, verse. 32. yet like a true
hypocrite, he never minded these things, but concluded that the breach of his
vow and command, must needs be the great offense which caused the Lord to be
silent; and therefore for the finding out of this, he would have them draw lots.

Verse. 43. I did but taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in
mine hand, and lo I must die.] As if he had said, That which I did was a very
small offense, if any, especially considering that I knew not of the oath, and
yet it seems I must die for it.

Verse. 44. And Saul answered, God do so, and more also.] See the note Ruth.
1.17.

Verse. 45. As the Lord lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the
ground; for he has wrought with God this day.] That is, through Gods blessing
and assistance, he has been the means of procuring a most glorious victory to
the children of Israel.

Verse. 47. So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his
enemies, etc.] That is, being confirmed in his kingdom by this glorious
victory over the Philistines, he again undertook the managing and
administration of it; or else this may be spoken with reference to that which
went before, to wit, that thus as we have heard he took upon him the kingdom,
being chosen thereto of God, and in defense of the people fought against all
their enemies.

Verse. 49. Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, etc.] This Ishui is
also called Abinadab, chap. 31.2. and 1. Chron. 8.33. and 10.2. Ishbosheth (who
is also called Eshbaal. 1. Chron. 8.33.) is not here mentioned though now above
twenty years old, 2. Sam. 2.10. happily because he survived his father, and
those only are here mentioned that died with him, chap. 31.2. As for his
sons which he had by Rizpah, 2. Sam. 21.8. they are not here named, because
she was not his wife, but his concubine.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. SAmuel also said unto Saul, The Lord sent me to anoint thee to be
king over his people, over Israel.] That is, the Lord gave me commission to
anoint thee king (for Samuel went not to Saul, but Saul came to Samuel) and
this Samuel premised, before he gave him the following charge from the Lord,
that he should go and destroy the Amalekites, that the remembrance of this
honor, whereto God had exalted him, might make him the more careful exactly
to do what God had enjoined him.

Now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the Lord.] In this
word (now) Samuel covertly puts him in mind of his former transgression, chap.
13.8.9. As if he had said, though thou did formerly neglect to do what the
Lord enjoined thee, yet now remember what God has done for thee, and be sure
strictly to observe this which God has given thee in charge.

Verse. 2. I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him
in the way when he came up from Egypt.] Three several times God had foretold
that he would destroy the Amalekites, and that for the violence which they
offered to the Israelites* to wit, Exodus 17.14. Numb. 24.20. and Deuteronomy. 25.19.
And now Saul is sent to execute that vengeance upon them, which the Lord had so
long time since at several times threatened: for though the present king and
people of Amalek had been cruel and bloody adversaries to the people of God,
as Samuels speech to Agag seems to imply, verse. 33. As thy sword has made
women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse among women; and so had
deserved to be destroyed for their own sins; yet because the Lord would have
his people know that he had not forgot that former injury of their Ancestors
toward his people, though it were now above four hundred years since; but
intended now principally to be avenged on them for that, in the commission that
he sent now to Saul for the destroying of the Amalekites, he mentions no other
cause but that wrong which of old their fathers had done to his people,
expressing one circumstance as a great aggravation of their cruelty; namely,
that when his poor people had been so long under a miserable bondage in Egypt,
and were now newly escaped thence, then they came presently out against them,
and sought to destroy them. I remember, says the Lord, that which Amalek did
to Israel when he came up from Egypt. Nor need it seem strange that the present
Amalekites should be utterly destroyed, for that which their Ancestors had
done so many years ago; for though God destroys none everlastingly, but for
their own sins, yet with temporal punishments he does usually punish the
children for the sins of their Ancestors; especially when the children go in
their fathers steps, as by that which is said of Agag verse. 33. it seems these
did.

Verse. 3. Now go, and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have.]
That is, not the men and cattle only, as is afterward expressed, but their
cities also, and all the wealth therein, etc.

Verse 4. And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim.]
Which most Expositours conceive to be the city of Judah called Telem, Josh.
15.24. As for the following clause wherein those of Judah are numbered apart by
themselves, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah, see
the note upon chap. 11.8.

Verse. 5. And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley.] The
inserting of this here seems to imply, that either it was the first city he
came to, or that it was the city where their king was.

Verse. 6. And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get ye down from among
the Amalekites, etc.] This must be meant either of the posterity of Jethro the
Kenite, who though they had planted themselves in the tribe of Judah, Judge.
1.16. yet now happily they were removed further, because of the Israelites
wars, into the land of the Amalekites (for they dwelt in Tents, Judge. 4.17.
and therefore might easily remove from one place to another:) or else it is
meant of a people so called of whom Jethro was, Numb. 24.21. who are now spared
for Jethro's sake. Yet his redoubling the charge that they should get them
away, in those several terms, Go, depart, was to imply, that if they loved
their lives they should make haste away.

For ye showed kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out
of Egypt.] This is questionless meant of the kindness which Jethro the Kenite
and his family showed to the Israelites. He came out with much joy to meet
Moses, and to congratulate all the goodness which God had shown to the
Israelites: he gave him counsel for the well-ordering of the government of
Israel; and doubtless, he and his were eyes unto the Israelites in their going
through the wilderness, according to Moses desire, Numb. 10.31. And therefore
now Saul gave them warning to remove away, that they might not suffer together
with the Amalekites. As the Lord punished the Amalekites for the wrong their
Progenitors did to his people, so he spared the Kenites for the kindness
their Ancestors had shown them.

Verse. 7. And Saul smote the Amalekites, from Havilah, until thou come to
Shur, that is over against Egypt.] That Saul destroyed not all the whole nation
of the Amalekites, is evident, chap. 27.8. And David and his men went up, and
invaded the Geshurites, and the Gezrites, and the Amalekites. And chap. 30.1.
And it came to pass, when David was come to Ziklag on the third day, that the
Amalekites had invaded Ziklag, etc. Either therefore this must be meant of some
one part of their country; or that Saul slew throughout the land all that he
could get into his power; for Shur is the furthest border of their land toward
Egypt.

Verse. 8. And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly
destroyed all the people, etc.] Agag was the common name of the kings of that
land, Numb. 24.7. And his king shall be higher then Agag, etc. Now this Agag
whom above the rest he should have slain, Saul spared, either to make his
triumph more glorious, which he might think would be most for Gods glory; or
out of covetousness, to get a great ransom for him: or rather out of a
foolish pity, because he was a king: and indeed the confidence of Saul in his
answer to Samuel, verse. 20. Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have
gone the way which the Lord sent me. And have brought Agag the king of Amalek,
etc. makes it not very improbable, that in sparing Agag, he thought he had done
well.

Verse. 9. But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and
of the oxen, etc.] In sparing these cattle, they pretended a respect they had
to the glory of God; namely, that they spared them for sacrifice, as Saul told
Samuel afterward, verse. 15. The people spared the best of the sheep, and of
the oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord. Whereas indeed it is most probable, that
secretly they had a purpose to retain many of them for their own use; as those
words of Samuel seem to imply, verse. 19. Wherefore did thou not obey the
voice of the Lord, but did fly upon the spoil? However, when God had enjoined
them to destroy all the cattle, and not to spare any, for them to spare all
that was good, and to destroy those only that were vile and refuse, as it
follows in this verse, was all one in effect as if they had resolved, that in
those that were worth nothing God should have his desire, but that those that
were fat and good, they knew how to reserve for a better use.

Verse. 11. It repents me, that I have set up Saul to be king.] See the note
upon Genesis 6.6.

Verse. 12. Saul came to Carmel, and Behold, he set him up a place, and is gone
about, etc.] That is, he pitched their Tents in Carmell, and so stayed there a
while to refresh his army, and divide the spoil, and then went away to Gilgal:
or else the meaning may be this, he set him up a place in Carmel, that is, some
Pillar or Piramides, as a triumphant monument of his victory, and so went
thence away to Gilgal.

Verse. 13. And Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of the Lord; I have
performed the commandment of the Lord.] This confident boasting of Saul may
seem to imply, that he did think indeed that he had performed what God enjoined
him, as not thinking that his sparing of Agag, and some of the cattle for
sacrifices, would have been judged a transgression of Gods command; but yet
others conceive, that his own conscience told him that he had not done well;
and that thence it was, that now at his meeting with Samuel, he saluted him in
such a fawning manner, as by way of colloging with him; Blessed be thou of the
Lord, etc.

Verse. 15. For the people spared the best of the sheep, and of the oxen to
sacrifice to the Lord thy God.] It is evident that he consented at least, to
the sparing of those cattle they had brought from the Amalekites; for so it is
expressly said before, verse. 9. But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the
best of the sheep, etc. And yet now to excuse himself, he would make Samuel
believe, that if this were a fault, it was not he but the people that had
herein transgressed; only withal he alleges in the defense of the people,
that they had spared them only for sacrifices, which he hoped Samuel could not
but approve; and to make this take the better with Samuel, he says not only
that they were to be sacrificed to the Lord, but to the Lord thy God.

Verse. 16. Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the Lord
has said to me this night. And he said, Say on.] As happily expecting some
good message: so far does hypocrisy blind men, even when they have done that
which is notoriously evil.

Verse. 18. Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites.] That is, those
wicked wretches the Amalekites sinners, above others; so the word sinners is
elsewhere used, Genesis 13.13. and Matthew. 19.10.

Verse. 23. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as
iniquity and idolatry.] All unrighteousness and sin is in the Scripture
termed iniquity, as Genesis 15.16. For the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet
full. And Romans 4.7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, etc. But in
this sense how stubbornness may be said to be as iniquity, is not easy to
conceive. And therefore here by iniquity many Expositours understand the
aberration of men from the right rule of Gods worship (and therefore it is
joined here with idolatry) and is by many translated superstition,
stubbornness is as superstition and idolatry. But why does Samuel say (and
that doubtless in relation to Saul's sin) that Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry? I answer, First,
some take it to be spoken only comparatively, that rebellion and stubbornness
are as great sins, and as hateful to God as witchcraft and idolatry. And
secondly, others say, that the drift of these words is to show, that rebellion
and stubbornness are sins much of the same nature as are witchcraft and
Idolatry. Because as witches and idolatours do give away the glory of God to a
poor creature, and advance the creature above God; so they that have an
express command from God for doing of any thing, and will then consult with
their own reason, whether they shall do it or no, and will stubbornly and
rebelliously do contrary to what God has commanded, merely out of a conceit
that they judge it better to do otherwise; then they do as manifestly give away
the glory of God to a base creature, exalt the creature above God, as witches
and idolatours do. But thirdly, others (and I think upon the best grounds) do
conceive the intention of these words to be only this, That an act of
rebellion against any command of God (though had it not been for that command
of God, it would not have been otherwise unlawful,) is as manifestly a sin,
and may be in its degree as hateful to God, as those sins are that are
against the law and light of nature, and contrary to the truth and glory of
Gods nature and essence, such as witchcraft and idolatry are: Such was this act
of Saul's in sparing Agag, and the best of the cattle. There would have been no
evil in it, had not God commanded them to be destroyed: But being done so
expressly against the command of God, it was no less then rebellion, and in
that regard hateful to God as well as witchcraft and idolatry.

Verse. 24. And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned, etc.] Thus Saul at last
confessed his sin, but hypocritically, not sincerely; not because he was at
all humbled for what he had done, but only because he desired by this means to
pacify Samuel, and to see if he might revoke the sentence pronounced against
him concerning the loss of his kingdom: All which is evident in the following
clause, wherein he seeks to excuse, or at least to extenuate his offense, by
pretending that he did it for fear of the people, which true penitents are not
wont to do, I have transgressed, says he, the commandment of the Lord, and thy
words, because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice.

Verse. 25. Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me,
that I may worship the Lord.] Pardon my sin, that is, do thou forgive the
sin I have committed, and effect my reconciliation with God, And turn again
with me, that I may worship the Lord, to wit, both by way of thankfulness for
the Lords fighting for them against the Amalekites, and also to seek to God for
the pardon of this sin they had run into.

Verse. 26. And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee.] To wit, for
fear he should seem any way to allow or approve of that which he had done.

Verse. 27. And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt
of his mantle, and it rent.] He catched hold of the skirt of his mantle, as
being wondrous loath to have the people take any notice of Samuels and
consequently of the Lords displeasure against him. But the rending of the skirt
of his mantle, was of God as a sign that the kingdom should be rent away from
him* verse. 28. And Samuel said unto him, The Lord has rent the kingdom from
thee this day. And the Hebrews add, that it was also to show, that the man
that should hereafter tear off the skirt of his garment, should be the man that
should succeed him in the throne, and that hence was that which Saul said then,
chap. 24.20. And now behold, I know well that thou shall surely be king, and
that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.

Verse. 29. And also the strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, for he is
not a man that he should repent.] This last clause is added, because men are so
prone naturally to measure God by themselves. The greatest difficulty in these
words is, why Samuel affirming this of God, terms him the strength of Israel;
of which these reasons may be given, to wit, first, That it was to imply the
immutabilitie of God; for as the mutabilitie of man proceeds from man's
weakness, whence it is that the weaker men are, the more irresolute and
changeable they are; so the immutability of God argues Gods strength. Secondly,
It was to imply how unresistably able God was to effect what he had said
concerning the removing of the kingdom from Saul to David: Saul might hope to
settle the kingdom upon his posterity, but the strength of Israel had decreed
otherwise, and he would not lie nor repent, as being almighty and therefore
able to do whatever he pleased: in despite of all that Saul should do against
David, the kingdom should be taken from him and given to David. And thirdly,
It might be to answer an objection that might arise in Saul's mind: Saul might
think that surely the Lord would not indeed take away the kingdom from him,
because the Lord himself had said, that he should save Israel out of the hands
of the Philistines, chap. 9.16. To beat him from this refuge, Samuel puts him
in mind that God was the strength of his people, and so could save and deliver
them, and yet make good his word in removing him from being king.

Verse. 30. Then he said, I have sinned.] See the note, verse. 24.

Verse. 31. So Samuel turned again after Saul, etc.] Though he had formerly
refused to go with Saul, to wit, at that time, and that upon this ground, that
he might not seem to allow of Saul's sin; yet now upon another ground he
yields to go, to wit, that the people might not take any occasion of not
yielding to Saul that honor which was yet due to him as the anointed of the
Lord; the rather because he intended to take away the offense of seeming to
allow Saul's sin, by executing Gods sentence upon Agag whom Saul had spared.

Verse. 32. And Agag came unto him delicately.] That is, in the attire, and with
the gesture and gate of a king, as one that thought not of death, but only
took care that both his apparel and every thing else about him, yea his
deportment and carriage of himself should be Prince-like, and such as beseemed
the dignity of his person though now a captive. Because he was brought not to
Saul the king that had taken him prisoner, but to Samuel an aged prophet, this
it may be made him so confident, that now the danger of death was over; now
(thinks he with himself) Surely the bitterness of death is past.

Verse. 33. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal.] Whether
Samuel did this by himself or by others, he did it doubtless by the special
instinct of Gods spirit.

Verse. 35. And Samuel came to see Saul no more until the day of his death.]
That is, he never went after this to visit him, as formerly to give him
instruction and direction in his affairs. For that Samuel did before his death
see Saul after this, is evident chap. 19.24. And he stripped off his clothes
also, and prophesied before Samuel in like manner, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord said unto Samuel, How long will thou mourn for Saul,
seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel?] That it was a sin in
Samuel to mourn for Saul, when God had rejected him from being king, we cannot
say; for it is a work of charity well-pleasing to God, to mourn for wicked men
that lie under Gods wrath, and yet mourn not for themselves; especially in Gods
Prophets and Messengers, whose duty it is to interpose themselves when God is
angry with his people, and by their prayers and tears to sue for mercy for
them. And therefore we see the Lord complains of these prophets, Ezekiel. 13.5.
that had not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of
Israel, to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord. And besides, Samuel
might well fear, that if Saul were cut off, a great deal of trouble and
confusion might happen amongst the people. In which case he had just cause to
mourn in their behalf. And why then did the Lord expostulate with Samuel* How
long will thou mourn for Saul? etc. Surely, to make known to Samuel, that all
his mourning for Saul was in vain, partly because he continued still obstinate
and impenitent, and partly because God had absolutely rejected him from being
king. In which case though Samuel might bewail Saul's condition (for all
mourning for that which we know God has decreed is not unlawful; when we
loose dear friends, we know it is Gods will, and yet may mourn for their
death) yet he might not bewail it so as might imply an unwillingnesse to submit
to the will of God; and therefore we see it is not for his mourning, but for
his mourning so long, that God expostulates with him, How long will thou mourn
for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from being king.

Fill thine horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite,
for I have provided me a king among his sons.] Though the Lord intended not
that Saul should be presently deposed from being king (and therefore David
after he was anointed, did always acknowledge Saul to be his Lord and
Sovereigne, chap. 24.6. The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my
Master, the Lords anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he
is the anointed of the Lord,) yet he would have him anointed beforehand that
was to succeed Saul. 1. For the comfort of Samuel and others, that knew the
Lord had forsaken and cast off Saul; who by this might be assured, that for all
this God intended not to cast off the care of his people. 2. That David being
anointed, when he was in the eye of reason so unlikely to come to the Crown, it
might be the more evident when it came to pass, that it was of God. 3. That
hereby David might be supported in his many following troubles. And 4. That the
same hand that had anointed Saul, might testify Gods rejecting Saul's
posterity, by anointing one of another family, to succeed him in the throne:
for Samuel drawing now to his end, had therefore this business now imposed
upon him, and was sent to Jesse the Bethlehemite, who was the son of Obed*
and grandchild of Boaz and Ruth, the Lord making known to him, that one of his
sons was to be anointed king. The expression the Lord uses in making this
known to Samuel, is very observable, because it implies that the king that was
now to be anointed, was in a peculiar manner the Lords king: for (says he) I
have provided me a king among his sons. Saul was chosen by the Lord to be the
king of Israel, but it was upon the importunity of the people, who would needs
have it so, and could not be beaten off from it; so that Saul was the peoples
king rather then Gods, given them because of the peoples preposterous and
unruly desires, and therefore his government being abortive, continued not, nor
thrived well for the best things whilst it did continue: but how when David
was anointed king, there was no such matter, but he was merely chosen of God,
there was no body desired, or spoke the least word for the erecting of his
government; yea, even Samuel himself by his desire after Saul, and mourning for
him, did unwittingly what he could to oppose the advancing of David; only God
did then of his own freewill, when no body thought any thing of it, send Samuel
to anoint David; and so he was a king of Gods own providing, the king in whose
seed the kingdom was to be established, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come;
and who would in his government carefully perform the will of God, chap. 13.14.
The Lord has sought him a man after his own heart. And indeed in all these
things David was a notable type of Christ: for first, he was the Son of
David, Matthew. 1.1. and the king of Israel, Joh. 1.49. upon whom the kingdom
was settled for ever, Luke 1.33. And he shall reign over the house of Israel
for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end: secondly, he was given of
God to be the king of his Church, that he might save them out of the hands of
their enemies when no man desired it; when we thought not of any such mercy,
nor begged it of God, he of his own free grace gave us his son to be our
king. I have set my king upon my holy hill of Sion, says the Lord, Psalm. 2.6.
Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God,
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows, Heb. 1.9. and
thirdly, he does administer this kingdom according to Gods own heart: Psalm
40*7 8. Then said I, Lo I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me,
I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy Law is within my heart: which the
Apostle does plainly apply to Christ, Heb. 10.6, 7. So that besides the reasons
formerly given, why the Lord appointed the kings of Israel to be anointed with
oil, chap. 10.1. this also may be added concerning David and his posterity, to
wit, that they were anointed to shadow forth that there was a Messiah to come,
whom God had anointed to be king over his Church, even the Lord Christ, upon
whom the Spirit of God, and the true oil of anointing, was poured forth without
measure; whence it was that Christ did apply to himself that prophecy, Isa.
61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach
the Gospel, etc. Luke 14.18. It is much argued amongst expositours, whether
David and so his posterity also, if not all the kings of Israel too, were not
anointed with the holy oil of the Tabernacle wherewith the Priests were
anointed: and there are many, who though they think it altogether improbable,
that the Prophets would use the sacred oil of the Tabernacle in anointing the
idolatrous kings of Israel, yet they hold that David and his successors were
anointed with that oil: first* because it is said, that David was anointed with
holy oil, Psalm. 89.20. I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I
anointed him. And secondly, because it is expressly said of Solomon, 1. King.
1.39. that Zadok took an horn of oil out of the Tabernacle, and anointed
Solomon. But now on the other side, first, because that Law of the Priests oil,
Exodus 30.32. seems to imply, that it was not to be used for any other but the
Priests only: secondly, because we find no command that this service should be
performed with that sacred oil; and thirdly, because when David was anointed
the second time by the men of Judah, 2. Sam. 2.4. the Tabernacle was then at
Gibeon, and that was under the power of Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and so
David could not then be anointed with that oil of the Tabernacle; therefore it
is judged most probable by many other Expositours, that neither David nor
Solomon were anointed with that oil; but, say they, because the office and
employment of the supreme Magistrate, who sits in Gods seat, and executes Gods
judgments, may be called holy, as the Seat of Justice is called the holy
place, Eccles. 8.10. therefore it is said that David was anointed with holy
oil. And for that place 1. Kings 1.39. they answer, that it may well be that
this horn of oil wherewith Samuel was now sent to anoint David, was afterward
laid up in the Tabernacle, and so Solomon was anointed therewith. But however,
there was much oil in the Tabernacle, besides that which was made for the
Priests anointing, which Zadok might take thence for the anointing of Solomon.

Verse. 2. And Samuel said, How can I go? If Saul hear it, he will kill me.]
This question might well proceed both from a fearful apprehension of the
danger of this act, and a desire to be instructed, how with least danger this
business might be carried.

And the Lord said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice
unto the Lord.] Thus the Lord advised him to conceal the principal cause of
his coming, and to allege only that business which he had to do there, that
might be safely made known; which was not unlawful.

Verse. 3. And call Jesse to the sacrifice, etc.] That is, invite him to the
feast thou make with thy peace offerings.

Verse. 4. And the Elders of the town trembled at his coming, etc.] Bethlehem
was but a little obscure town, Micah 5.2. And thou Bethlehem-Ephratah, though
thou be little among the thousands of Judah, etc. Either therefore because it
was such news to see Samuel there, they feared he came, as a Prophet, with some
heavy message of Gods displeasure against them; or else, because he came so
unexpectedly, and withal so privately, and without attendance; they feared he
had fled from Saul (as having happily heard of that which had passed betwixt
him and the king, related in the former chapter) and so were troubled for him:
and withal perhaps afraid, lest Saul should be enraged against them for
entertaining him.

Verse. 5. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice.] That is, he appointed them to prepare and sanctify themselves both
legally and spiritually, that they might eat of the sacrifices. See the note on
Josh. 3.5.

Verse. 6. And it came to pass when they were come, that he looked on Eliab,
etc.] Somewhat is here left to be supposed, as necessarily following upon that
which is expressed, to wit, that Samuel had acquainted Jesse with the cause of
his coming: and that hereupon Jesse brought in his sons one by one into some
private place, whither before they sat down to eat of the sacrifice, they had
retired themselves for that purpose, that he might be anointed whom God had
chosen: and so when Samuel beheld Eliab the firstborn, he said to himself,
Surely this is the man: The comeliness of his person made him think, this was
he whom God had chosen: but herein he was led by his own spirit: as Nathan in a
like case was, when he encouraged David to build a Temple, 2. Sam. 7.3. And
Nathan said to the King, Go, do all that is in thy heart; for the Lord is with
thee: and hereby it was the more manifest, that it was not Samuel, but God that
chose David to be King.

Verse. 7. But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, etc.] To
wit, by a secret voice of his spirit within him.

Verse. 8. Then Jesse called Abinadab.] To wit, after Samuel had told him that
Eliab was not he whom God had chosen.

Verse. 9. Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by.] Called also Shumma, 1. Chron.
2.13.

Verse. 10. Again Jesse made seven of his sons, to pass before Samuel.]
Hereby it is manifest that Jesse had eight sons, as it is also expressed
chap. 17.12. Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehem-Judah,
whose name was Jesse, and he had eight sons, etc. though there be but seven
mentioned, 1. Chron. 2.13, 14, 15. because happily one of these died
immediately after this; and only those are mentioned there, that were men of
fame in aftertimes: for it has no probability in it which some say, that he
had amongst these brought one of his grandchildren to Samuel, since we see that
as yet he had not brought David his youngest son.

Verse. 11. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children?] Jesse had
omitted to bring his youngest son, as concluding that it could not be he of
all the rest whom God had chosen; which was doubtless so ordered by the
special providence of God, that Samuel being brought to this demurre, it might
be the more evident that David was truly chosen of God.

Verse. 13. Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of
his brethren.] That is, amongst all the sons of Jesse, Samuel by Gods
appointment anointed David, from amongst the rest of his brethren he was taken
and anointed to succeed Saul in the kingdom. The phrase is not unlike that,
Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst
of thee, of thy brethren, etc. The meaning is not therefore, that his brethren
stood about him when he was anointed: For though it be evident that Samuel
acquainted Jesse with that which God had commanded him to do, and that he was
an eyewitness of David's anointing; yet it is not likely that his brethren
stood by, and looked on when this was done, and heard what Samuel said unto
him; who no doubt made it known to David why he anointed him, as may seem to be
employed in that place, 2. Sam, 5.2. And the Lord said to thee, Thou shall feed
my people Israel, and shall be a Captain over Israel: For first, though Jesse
might be enjoined secrecy, yet it is not likely that his envious brethren,
seeing him anointed by Samuel that famous Prophet, should either not suspect
any thing thereby, or not blazon it abroad. And to what end was Samuel sent so
secretly, under the color of a solemn sacrifice, if David were to be anointed
so openly, amongst so many witnesses that might publish it wherever they came?
and secondly, how can we think that David's brethren (had they known of Samuels
anointing him) would have used him so scornfully as after this they did; chap.
17.28. And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spoke unto the men, and
Eliabs anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why came thou down
hither? and with whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know
thy pride and the naughtiness of thine heart, etc. Surely they would never
have used him with such scorn, had they known he was anointed by Samuel, yea
though we should suppose what some affirm, that they imagined that he was
anointed to be a Prophet, not a King: Many Expositours indeed answer, that
either they understood not, or believed not Gods purpose in the anointing of
David: But Samuel was a prophet of such fame in those days, that me thinks
such a solemn action of his should not so be slighted.

And the spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward.] That is,
the Lord gave him an extraordinary measure of the gifts and graces of his holy
spirit, whereof his anointing was an outward sign: and so he was moved and led
on by the spirit of God, to undertake great and noble enterprises, such as was
that of his killing the lion and the bear, mentioned in the following chapter,
verse. 34, 35, 36. Whence it was that he became so famous, that Saul's Courtiers
could say of him, verse. 18. that he was a mighty valiant man, and a man of
war, and prudent in matters. Yea, and besides it may well be, that from that
time forward he had also a spirit of prophecy, and the gift of Poetry and
Music conferred upon him, wherein he became afterward exceeding eminent.

Verse. 14. But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit
from the Lord troubled him.] That is, the Lord bereaved him of those gifts he
had formerly bestowed upon him, and then by degrees he began to be troubled
with melancholy and frantic fits, as is evident, chap. 28.10.11. And that by
means of an evil spirit sent from God (for even the devils stir not without
Gods allowance.) Doubtless he was tormented with the terrors of an evil and
guilty conscience; and oppressed with grief and sadness of heart for the loss
of his kingdom; and then Satan making use of this distemper both of body and
mind, drove him into fits of frenzy and rage, that he was for the time as one
possessed with a devil. He had preferred his own reason before Gods directions
in the business of the Amalekites, and so made an idol of his own wisdom and
reason; and now God deprives him of the use of his reason, and brake (as it
were) this his idol in pieces.

Verse. 15. And Saul's servants said unto him, etc.] That is, his Physicians who
were called to advise about this distemper of Saul.

Verse. 16. And it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon
thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shall be well.] Not that
Musical sounds have any force to drive away devils, but because they conceived
that his sad heart, his dead and pensive spirits (which were the instruments of
Satan's working) might be cheared and revived hereby, and his melancholy
passions much allayed, and so be the less subject to the devils operations.
And indeed, so as they said it fell out, verse. 23. And it came to pass, when
the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and played
with his hand; so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit
departed from him: yet not so much I conceive through the virtue or natural
power of music, as by the special hand of God, who was pleased
extraordinarily to cause it thus to work upon Saul: however, herein we may well
look upon David as a type of Christ who cast out many devils out of men
possessed; and now by the glad tidings of the Gospel, does daily cast them out
of the hearts of natural men, and quiets those souls that are distempered with
grief or fear: working peace unspeakable in those that lie under the greatest
terrors of conscience by reason of sin.

Verse. 18. Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is
cunning in playing, and a mighty valiant man.] Which he had approved in killing
the Lion and the Bear, chap. 17.34, and perhaps by some other such exployts
performed by him, since the Spirit of God came upon him, verse. 13.

Verse. 19. Send me David thy son which is with the sheep.] This last clause,
which is with the sheep, is added, to imply what an advancement it would be to
him to be taken from keeping sheep to attend upon Saul at the court. With such
contempt could Saul speak now of keeping sheep, that had himself been formerly
in as mean a condition.

Verse. 20. And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a
kid, and sent them by David.] Jesse knowing God had anointed him to succeed
Saul in the kingdom, might well fear to put him into Saul's hands, but his
faith overcame his fear herein.

Verse. 21. And he became his Armor-bearer.] See the note upon chap. 17.55.

Verse. 23. So Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed
from him.] That is, for a time his fits left him. See the former note, verse. 16.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. NOw the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and
were gathered together at Shochoh, etc.] Shochoh was a city of Judah, as we see
Josh. 15.35. where also, as here, Azekah is mentioned as a town not far from
Shochoh: it is not expressed what moved the Philistines again to invade the
land of Israel; but by other passages of the story of these times, we may
probably conceive that it was, first, a desire to revenge their former
shameful loss, when Jonathan and his armor-bearer put their whole army to
flight, chap 14. secondly, a jealousy of their increasing power, through many
victories by Saul obtained against his other neighbors, chap. 14.47. So Saul
took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his enemies on every
side; against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and
against the king of Zobah, and against the Philistines, and whither soever he
turned himself he vexed them: and thirdly* Some intelligence that might be
given them of Saul's distemper and frantic fits, which they hoped would be no
little advantage to them. But indeed the chief reason was, because that God
stirred them up to accomplish that which he had intended.

Verse. 3. And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and Israel
on a mountain on the other side.] Thus each part kept their ground of advantage
for a time, not joining in gross, but maintaining some skirmishes only, as
appears, verse. 20.

Verse. 4. And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines,
named Goliath of Gath.] See Josh. 11.22. We read also of a brother of his that
was likewise a mighty Giant, 1. Chron. 20 5. And Elhanan the son of Jair slew
Lahmi, the brother of Goliath the Hittite, whose spear-staffe was like a
Weavers beam.

Verse. 5. And the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass.] To
wit an hundred fifty six pound four ounces or thereabout.

Verse. 7. And one bearing a shield went before him.] This shield Goliath was to
use when he came to fight, but in the mean season for the greater state, he had
his Armor-bearer to carry it before him.

Verse. 8. Why are you come out to set your battle in array.] That is, what
need we bring a whole Army on each side to fight it out? Let us cast all upon a
single combat. It is like enough the remembrance of their former loss, chap.
14. made them somewhat backward to put it to a battle, and their confidence in
this Goliath, made them willing to decide all by a single fight. I (says he)
am a Philistine, and you servants to Saul. (The expression is observable, not
Israelites, but servants to Saul by way of contempt) And therefore do you
choose out a man from amongst you* and let us two decide the controversy.

Verse. 11. When Saul and all Israel heard th^se words of the Philistine, they
were dismayed, and greatly afraid.] They could not but know that God was able to
lay the huge bulk of this Giant under the feet of the meanest of them; and
besides as they had a promise from God, that one of them should chase a
thousand of their enemies; so likewise God had lately made good his promise in
the late routing of the whole Army of the Philistines, by Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer, chap. 14. And therefore it may seem strange that all their
hearts should tremble thus, and be so out-braved by this Infidel monster:
especially if we consider that Jonathan was amongst them, as it is evident he
was, because after that David had slain Goliath, it is said that Jonathan stood
by, and heard his father talking with him* chap. 18.1.) For that he also should
be afraid to enter the lists with Goliath, who had so often fought the Lords
battle with great courage, and had of late so miraculously put the whole Army
of the Philistines to flight, is indeed a matter of much wonder. But for this
we must consider, that both faith and courage are the gifts of God, which when
he withholds, the best, even those that are at other times as bold as a
Lion, may shrink for fear. God meant now to magnify David, and therefore he
left even Jonathan himself to the feebleness of his own spirit, that David
might undertake what none durst venture upon, and so might become famous
amongst the Israel of God, not a man was found that durst accept of Goliaths
challenge which he propounded twice a day, morning and evening, verse. 16. For
forty days together, no not after Saul had proclaimed in the camp great
rewards, yea even his own daughter in marriage to him that would undertake it;
all which rendered David's courage and victory the more glorious.

Verse. 12. Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehem Judah, whose
name was Jesse, and he had eight sons.] See the note upon chap. 16.10.

And the man went among men for an old man in the days of Saul.] And therefore
though his sons followed Saul to the war, yet he stayed at home.

Verse. 15. But David went and returned from Saul to feed his fathers sheep at
Bethlehem.] That we may not wonder how David was sent to the camp by his father
Jesse, when it was said in the former chapter, that he was in Saul's Court, and
made his Armor bearer: here we are told that he had before this time left the
Court, and was returned to keep his fathers sheep; the reason whereof might be
either, first* the alienation of Saul's affection that he began little to regard
him, and so David was desirous to return to his own home, (we know brainsick
men are usually unconstant, and seldom continue long in one mind) or secondly
because Saul being for a time recovered of his frantic fits, he had no more
need of David's music, and thereupon dismissed him (and happily indeed his mind
being wholly taken up with this war with the Philistines, he was not so much
disquieted with those corroding jealousies and fears, that had formerly vexed
and troubled his spirit) or thirdly, because Jesse having sent his three eldest
sons to the war; Saul was pleased to send David home, that he might be a
comfort to his aged father. But however this dispensation of Gods providence in
thus disposing of David is very observable: for first, by this means David even
after he was anointed to be king of Israel, continued a while in a mean and
obscure condition* keeping his fathers sheep in Bethlehem, and following the
ewes great with young, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 78.71. And herein was he
a notable type of Christ, who at first lived in the form of a servant, and
became of no reputation, being esteemed the son of a carpenter, born in a
stable, despised and rejected amongst those with whom he conversed, though God
had even then given him the Throne of his father David, Luk 1.32. Secondly,
hereby was the faith of David concerning Samuels anointing him notably tried;
when David was called to the Court to play upon his harp before Saul, and was
made his Armor bearer, there seemed to be some little ground of hope, that God
was then making way to his promised exaltation. But when afterward he was sent
back again to keep his fathers sheep, then that little spark of hope that
appeared before, was suddenly quenched again: To which David notwithstanding
did willingly stoop, and was contented to wait upon God for the accomplishment
of that which he had promised. And thirdly, hereby the Lords effecting that
which he had purposed without the help of man, was the more wonderfully
manifested. One would have thought that Jesse, who knew of David's anointing,
should have sent David to the war above all the rest of his sons, in hope
that thereby some passage might have been opened to him for his expected
exaltation: But Jesse never minding any such thing, but keeping him at home
with his sheep, and only casually as it were, sending him to enquire of the
welfare of his brethren; the Lords turning this to be the occasion of David's
exaltation, did the more admirably discover that there was a special hand of
God in bringing this about, no man at all contributing any help thereto.

Verse. 18. Look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.] That is, if they
have laid any thing to gage for their necessity, redeem it out; or bring me
some pledge or other from them, whereby I may be satisfied concerning their
welfare.

Verse. 19. Now Saul and they, and all the men of Israel were in the valley of
Elah, fighting with the Philistines.] To wit, In a mountain that lay close upon
the valley of Elah. The body of the Israelites Army, lay encamped against the
Philistines on a mountain, verse 3. And the Philistines stood on a mountain on
the one side, and Israel stood on a mountain on the other side, and there was a
valley between them. But from thence happily now and then they maintaind some
skirmishes with the Philistines; and thence it is said here, that they were in
the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.

Verse. 20. And he came to the trench, as the host was going forth to fight.]
That is, to skirmish with the enemy, or to stand in battle ray ready to fight,
if they could get any advantage against them.

Verse. 25. The man who kills him, the king will enrich with great riches, and
will give him his daughter, and make his fathers house free in Israel.] That
is, free from taxes, and other impositions, and so ennoble his family. With
these words the Israelites did as it were encourage one another in the hearing
of David to undertake the challenge of this daring Philistine, and by
propounding the great rewards promised to him that should undertake this
service; they did as it were covertly intimate that it seemed strange to them,
that no body should be won hereby to hazard their lives in such a noble
exploit: But in the mean season, even they that talked thus would not venture
their own persons, but hung off for fear no less then others; but thus indeed
it is usual with men to encourage others to undertake works of difficulty and
danger, which themselves will not come nigh in any degree.

Verse. 26. And David spoke to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall be
done to the man that kills this Philistine, etc.] Having heard what rewards
were promised to the man that should kill this champion of the Philistines, he
asks them again concerning that, not because it was the great rewards
proposed that drew him on, but that by this inquiry they might perceive his
inclination to undertake the combat. Doubtless, that which moved David to
think of undertaking the combat, was his zeal for the glory of God, and the
honor of his people. It tended exceedingly to their reproach and dishonor,
that a proud uncircumcised cai^iffe should come and out-brave the whole Army of
Gods people, and not a man amongst them should dare to grapple with him: And
this it was that made him think of entering the lists with him: though therefore
he enquired after the rewards promised; yet that was only to let the standers
by perceive that he had some thoughts of understanding the combat: for it was
to vindicate the honor of God and his people, that he hearkened to the motion
of fighting; and so much his words do indeed plainly import, what shall be done
unto the man that takes away the reproach from Israel? For who is this
uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the Armies of the living God?

Verse. 28. Why came thou down hither, and with whom have thou left those few
sheep in the wilderness?] Eliab David's elder brother, being filled with envy
against him, as disdaining that he should think of fighting with that Giant,
with whom, neither himself nor any other in the army durst encounter; brake out
into these words of reproach and scorn, twitting him with his sheep that he had
left in the wilderness; with whom, says he, have thou left those few sheep in
the wilderness? As intimat^ng that he was fitter to return to his sheep-hook,
and his harp again, then to intermeddle with martial affairs, and upbraiding
him with arrogance and ambition, I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of
thine heart; for thou art come down, that thou might see the battle: as if
he should have said, scorning to follow that employment which belongs to thee,
to wit, the keeping of our fathers sheep, nothing will serve thy turn but to be
a soldier, and therefore art thou come hither, to see if by any means thou
can wind in thy self, to serve here in the army.

Verse. 29. And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?] That
is, was there not a just cause for my coming hither? Did not my father send me?
And is there not just cause of speaking that which I have spoken? Is it not a
shame that this wretch should thus outface the armies of Israel, and no body
should dare to undertake him?

Verse. 34. And there came a Lion, and a Bear, etc.] That is, there came a Lion
at one time, and a Bear at another time; for it cannot be meant that they came
both together, and together took one kid out of the flock: and therefore also
in the next words he speaks of his killing them severally; I went out after
him, and smote him, etc. To wit, the Lion at one time, and the Bear at another.

Verse. 35. And when he arose, I took him by the beard, etc.] That is, by his
nether jaw, or the hair about his jaw. Had he killed him casually, by shooting,
or casting any thing at him it had not been so great a matter; but thus to kill
him was an act indeed of admirable courage.

Verse. 37. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the Lord be with thee.] It may
seem strange that Saul should yield to let David enter the lists with Goliath,
considering how unequal the match was in the eye of reason, and that Goliath
had propounded this as a condition in his challenge, that if he vanquished the
man that fought with him, then the Israelites should be for ever servants to
the Philistines: but doubtless however at first he slighted David's proffer,
and told him that he was every way unfit to grapple with such an adversary,
verse. 33. Yet when he had heard David's courage and resolution, and confidence
in Gods help, and the relation of these two miraculous exploits of his, against
the Lion and the Bear, this wrought in him some kind of faint hope; yea
perhaps some temporary faith, that God would miraculously assist him, and so he
gave him liberty, and wished him good speed.

Verse. 38. And Saul armed David with his armor, etc.] That is, with armor out
of his own armoury; for it is not likely that the armor which Saul used to
wear could fit David.

Verse. 39. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these; for I have not
proved them.] That is, I have not been used to wear such arms, and so they are
a burden to me.

Verse. 40. And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth stones
out of the brook, etc.] The sleighter the means were, whereby David overcame
this Giant, the more evident it was, that the victory was of God. And thus too
the means whereby Christ overcame Satan, were not likely in the eye of reason
to vanquish such an adversary; for he overcame him by the cross, death, etc.
Yea, this was indeed to kill that Goliath with his own sword: Heb. 2.14. That
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the
devil.

Verse. 42. And when the Philistine looked about and saw David, he disdained
him: For he was but a youth, and ruddy, etc.] That is, he had not the
countenance of a soldier, it was rather amiable then terrible.

Verse. 43. And the Philistine cursed David, by his Gods.] That is, he wished
some mischief or evil might be inflicted on him by his idol-god, to wit, that
Dagon might destroy him, or some other such like imprecation.

Verse. 45. But I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the
armies of Israel, whom thou have defied.] He tells him that he had defied the
Lord of hosts, because he had defied the Israelites his people: for God always
takes any wrong done to them, as done to himself; and by saying that he came
against Goliath, in the name of the Lord of hosts, he meant that he came
against him to vindicate the dishonor that he had done to the Lord, and that
by warrant from God, and in the assured confidence of his aid and assistance,
whence is that which he adds, verse. 46. This day will the Lord deliver thee
into mine hand, and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I
will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day, unto the fowls
of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth: that all the earth may know
that there is a God in Israel.

Verse. 47. And all this assembly shall know, that the Lord saves not with
sword and spear.] That is, that he can save without these, and is not tied to
such outward means.

Verse. 49. And smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into
his forehead, etc.] Either therefore the stone which David slung was cast with
such extraordinary force, through the special assistance of God, that it went
through his helmet of brass, and so into his forehead: or else the
Philistine, as not fearing any thing which David could do, never pulled down
his helmet over his face, but went with his face open to fight with David:
however, the very guiding of the stone so directly to the forehead of this
giant, was doubtless of God: for though it was usual with the Israelites to
be able to sling stones at an hairs breadth, Judge. 20.16. Among all these
people, there were seven hundred chosen men left handed, every one could sling
stones at an hairs breadth, and not miss: yet the mark was then fixed; and
Goliaths forehead, though it were a fairer mark, yet it was less easy to be
hit, because he was stirring; only God guided the stone, and so lodged it in
the forehead of this blaspheming Miscreant.

Verse. 51. And when the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they fled.]
God striking them with a secret terror; for else little might they have
regarded the loss of Goliath, being so strong as they were; nor the promise
which he had made verse. 9. that the Philistines should be servants to the
Israelites, in case their Champion should foil and kill him.

Verse. 52. And the wounded of the Philistines, fell down by the way to
Shaaraim.] A town in the borders of Judah, Josh. 15.36.

Verse. 54. And David took the head of the Philistine and brought it to
Jerusalem.] For though the strong hold of Sion was as yet in the possession of
the Jebusites, and so continued till David took it from them when he came to be
king, 2. Sam. 5.7. Yet the city of Jerusalem it self was long before this in
the possession of the Israelites, Judges 1.8, The children of Judah had fought
against Jerusalem and had taken it. And therefore the Israelites returning now
in triumph from the slaughter of the Philistines, David carried the head of
this Giant in triumph with him, and at last laid it up in Jerusalem as a
monument of this glorious victory: The rather perhaps choosing to carry it to
Jerusalem, that the Jebusites that hitherto kept that strong hold there might
be terrified with this sight.

But he put his Armor in his tent.] This is meant either of the tent which
David afterward provided for the Ark of God, 1. Chron. 15.1. and therefore
called his tent. Or else, rather it is meant of his own private tent, where it
seems, he kept all Goliahs armor for a time; though afterward it is evident
that his sword was laid up in the Tabernacle of the Lord at Nob, Chap. 21.9.
And the Priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine whom thou slewest in
the valley of Elah, behold it is wrapped up in a cloth behind the Ephod.

Verse. 55. He said unto Abner captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this
youth?] This may well seem strange, considering what is said before concerning
Saul and David, chap. 16.21. And David came to Saul, and stood before him, and
he loved him greatly; and he became his armor bearer. And indeed some
Expositours do certainly hereupon conclude, that there is here a transposition
of the history, and that these things related in this chapter were done before
that which is related in the foregoing chapter, concerning Saul's sending for
David to play before him, etc. But yet it is not safe to change the order of
the history without necessary cause, and that, here I find not. For,
notwithstanding all that had formerly passed between Saul and David: how this
might be that Saul should not now know David we may well enough conceive, if we
consider, First, That the countenance of young men when they grow toward
ripeness of years, and begin to have hair on their faces, many times does much
alter in a little while. Secondly, That great Personages do take little notice
of their meaner servants, and therefore easily forget them. Thirdly, That Saul
was troubled with melancholy and frantic fits, and such men will often forget
those that formerly they have seemed much to respect. For all this considered,
it needs not seem impossible that Saul should before this greatly love David,
(to wit, according to the respect which musicians or servants find with
Princes) and appoint him to be one of those that sometimes carried his shield
before him; and yet having afterward sent him home to his father, should not
know him when he came to the camp in other apparel and with another
countenance to visit his brethren. And as for Abner being a martial man and
often abroad, he might in those times take little notice of David.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul,
that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, etc.] That is, his
heart and affections were in an extraordinary manner set upon David; and the
causes thereof are easily conceived; to wit, First, Those amiable graces which
he discerned in David, his wisdom, his courage and undaunted spirit; his zeal
for Gods glory, and above all, his faith and confidence in Gods protection and
assistance. Secondly, The likeness and suitableness of their qualities and
dispositions: Jonathan was a stout courageous Prince, pious and faithful, and
therefore when David had manifested himself to be eminently such likewise, the
soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David. Thirdly, The glory that God
had done him in giving him the victory over that proud Giant that had both
defied and terrified the whole army of Israel; this showed plainly that he was
highly esteemed of God, and precious in his eyes, and so he loved him as one
that was dearly beloved of God. Fourthly, The gracious speeches that came from
David upon every occasion; for that seems to be specially aimed at in those
words, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, the soul of Jonathan was
knit with the soul of David, And Fifthly, There was doubtless a special hand
of God in inclining the affections of Jonathan thus unto David; for by this
means God provided David a friend in Saul's court to plead for him, to reveal
Saul's plots and intendments against him, and to be by his true love a comfort
and support to David in all his approaching troubles and sorrows.

Verse. 3. Then Jonathan and David made a covenant.] That is, a covenant of
entire friendship and brotherly love.

Verse. 4. And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave
it to David.] To wit, that hereby he might testify that he esteemed him as his
second self, and that whatever he had, all his authority, and power, and wealth
he should be always ready to bestow and employ it for David's welfare and
service.

Verse. 5. And Saul set him over the men of war.] That is, he made him a
Captain over some of his troops, and employed him as a commander in his wars;
For this is not meant of that dignity which Saul had formerly conferred upon
Abner, chap. 14.50. who was the Captain of his host, that is, the chief
General of his Armies: that place he still retained as is evident in many
places of the following story.

Verse. 6. The women came out of all the cities of Israel singing and dancing
to meet king Saul, etc.] It was it seems the usual custom of these times
amongst the people of God, that when God had given them any great victory over
their enemies, the women were wont with dances and songs of triumph to
celebrate the praises of God: For so it was with the women of Israel when the
Egyptians were drowned in the red sea, Exodus, 15.20. And with Jephthahs daughter
and her company, when Jephthah had vanquished the Ammonites, his daughter came
out to meet him with timbrels and with dances, Judges 11.32. And therefore now
from all the cities of Israel that Saul passed by with his army as he returned
home from the valley of Elah, where he had vanquished the Philistines, the
women came out with songs and dances to congratulate his victory. As women have
usually the heaviest share in the calamities of a land that is overrun by an
enemy, and that because they are least able to resist, and so are frequently
taken for slaves, ravished and abused in the most savage manner; so have they
likewise therefore the greatest cause to rejoice when the enemy is vanquished;
and hence it may be was this custom of women's triumphing at every great
victory. But however, in this triumphing of Gods people for the fall of
Goliath, and the vanquishing of the Philistines, there was a kind of figure and
shadow, of the triumphant joy of Gods elect people for Christ's conquest over
Satan, and their prevailing over their spiritual enemies through the merits
and assistance of Christ, Rev. 12.10, 11. I heard a loud voice saying in
heaven, now is come salvation and strength, and the kingdom of our God and the
power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, etc. and
they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony:
such was the rejoicing of the virgin Mary and Zachary, Luke 1.46. My soul does
magnify the Lord, says Mary, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.
And blessed be the Lord God of Israel, says Zachary, for he has visited and
redeemed his people, and has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the
house of his servant David, verse. 68.69. Yea thus do all Gods redeemed ones
triumph, because Christ has made them more then Conquerours over all their
enemies, Romans 8.33, 39.

Verse. 7. Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands,] To David
they ascribed ten times as much as to Saul, because by his killing of Goliath
he was the cause of the routing of the whole army. Now so solemn and glorious
was the triumph of the Israelites, and such general notice was taken of this
particular passage in the women's song, that it came to be reported and known to
the Philistines, as we may see, chap. 21.11. And the servants of Achish said
unto him, Is not this David the king of the land? Did not they sing one to
another of him in dances, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his
ten thousands? And chap. 29.5. Is not this David, of whom they sang one to
another in dances, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands?

Verse. 8. And he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me
they have ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?]
The meaning is, that from thenceforth he began to suspect that David was the
man of whom Samuel had told him, that should be king in his room, chap. 13.14.
The Lord has sought him out a man after his own heart, and the Lord has
commanded him to be captain over his people.

Verse. 9. And Saul eyed David from that day forward.] That is, he looked upon
him with an envious and malicious eye, and watched for an opportunity to make
him away.

Verse. 10. The evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the
midst of the house.] In his frantic fits it is said that Saul prophesied,
either because he sung songs, perhaps such hymns and songs as were usually sung
by the sons of the Prophets, which is usually called prophesying in the
Scriptures, as we may see in a former note, chap. 10.5. And this he might do by
the suggestion of Satan: Or else, because generally being besides himself, and
possessed with an evil spirit, both his behavior and speech in some regard,
was outwardly such as when the Prophets were stirred by the spirit of God, who
in their ecstasies and raptures had some uncomposed kind of motions and actions,
and were as men besides themselves for the time; and therefore often termed mad
men, 2. Kings 9.11. Wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? so Jer. 29.26.
Every man that is mad and makes himself a prophet, etc. Men possessed do many
times utter strange languages and words, which they formerly never learned nor
understood; yea, many times they will divine of secret things, as no doubt that
damsel did, that was possessed with a spirit of divination, Acts 16.16. As
therefore those idolatrous seducers of the people that were never sent of God,
were yet usually called prophets; so here Saul, because his speech and carriage
was in some particulars like that of Gods prophets, is here said to have
prophesied.

Verse. 11. And Saul cast the javelin, for he said, I will smite David to the
wall with it.] And this he did twice (perhaps in two several fits) as the
folloing words imply: and David avoided out of his presence twice. Whilst
David sought to cure Saul of his frenzy, Saul sought to take away his life.
And so likewise, whilst our Savior sought the health of the Jews, and their
recovery out of Satan's power, by preaching to them the glad tidings of the
Gospel, they often sought to kill him, sometimes openly, sometimes secretly,
that he was often forced to withdraw himself from them; as there at Nazareth,
Luke 4, 28, 29, 30. And they all in the Synagogue when they heard these things
were filled with wrath, And they rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and
lead him to the brow of the hill (whereon the city was built) that they might
cast him down headlong. But he passing through the midst of them went his way.

Verse, 13. Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his Captain over a
thousand, etc.] That is, a Colonel or a chief Commander in his army. Perceiving
that David by his watchfulness did still decline the stroke of his javelin,
and perhaps that he did forbear to come at him any more in his frantic fits,
he removed him from him, that is, he resolved to employ him abroad, that he
might not be vexed any more with the sight of him, and so he made him one of
his Colonels, hoping also, that he would some time or other be slain in the
battle; and thence it is said of David in the following words, that he went out
and came in before the people, that is, he led them out to battle, and brought
them back again.

Verse. 17. And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will I
give thee to wife.] And thus under a pretense of performing that promise
formerly made to him that should kill Goliath, chap. 17.25. he sought to expose
David to the sword of the Philistines: For this renewed promise of his daughter
he hoped, would make him the more eagerly prosecute his wars against them,
and then one time or other he thought the Philistines might slay him; but now
all this while he never seriously intended she should be his wife, or else he
soon changed his mind; for within a while after he gave her to another man; of
which see the note upon verse. 19.

Verse. 18. What is my life, or my fathers family in Israel, that I should be
son in law to the king?] What is my parentage, education, condition of life,
that I should think my self a fit husband for a kings daughter? And thus he
modestly refused the honor that was tendered him, as knowing that as yet they
understood nothing of his being anointed to succeed Saul.

Verse. 19. But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul's daughter should
have been given to David that she was given to Adriel the Meholathite to wife.]
This Adriel the Meholathite was the son of Barzillai, as is expressly noted,
2. Sam. 21.8. Where also it is recorded, that all the sons that he had by
this daughter of Saul, (that we may see how the curse of God followed this
unlawful match) were hanged up, in satisfaction to the Gibeonites; for they
are certainly Adriels sons by Merab that are mentioned there, only they were
brought up by Michal; of which see the note there. It seems the promise of
giving her to David to wife, carried on so far, that the time was set for
solemnizing the marriage, and yet then at the time when Merab should have been
given to David, she was given to Adriel: which is very observable in many
regards. For first, we see that God having appointed Michal not Merab to be
David's wife, the match propounded with Merab did not succeed: secondly, hereby
the malice and wickedness of Saul was notably discovered; it being evident,
that either he never meant this marriage, though he suffered it to go on so
far: or else, that suddenly he changed his mind, hoping by this disgrace to
drive David to some discontent and violent course, that so he might take
occasion from thence to cut him off: and thirdly, the wonderful wisdom and
patience of David was hereby manifested, who bare all this quietly, and stirred
not. It was a matter of great reproach and derision to David, that he should be
thus led on with hopes of a wife, and then in an instant another should get her
from him, and yet all this could not stir David to do any thing that was not
lawful or seemly for him.

Verse. 20. And Michal Saul's daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and the
thing pleased him well.] Not that he was pleased to see David beloved, (for we
see how highly he was displeased with Jonathan, because he loved David) but
because he hoped by that means to bring his purpose about, for the destroying
of David: and the very hope of doing hurt to a party hated, yields great
content to a malicious person.

Verse. 21. And Saul said, I will give him her that she may be a snare to him,
and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him.] This was Saul's plot,
but it proved contrary: for Michal proved a means to help him out of the snare
which Saul had laid for him, chap. 19.11, 12. and Saul fell afterward into the
hands of the Philistines, but not David.

Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shall this day be my son in law, in one
of the twain.] As if he should have said, Though I failed before, yet I will
make thee amends now; I have but two daughters, and one of the twain thou shall
have; And so being by this means my son in law, it will be no great wrong
though thou had not the eldest.

Verse. 22. And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David
secretly, and say, Behold, the king has a delight in thee, etc.] That is, as
if it came from your selves, and not from me. Because he had before twice
promised his daughter, and had not kept his word, he was fain to employ his
Courtiers now to persuade David to accept his offer, and to engage their
credit, that the king did really intend what he said.

Verse. 23. And David said, Seems it to you a light thing to be a kings son
in law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?] That is, not able
to give a dowry fit for Saul's daughter, and therefore was slighted about his
other daughter.

Verse. 25. Thus shall ye say to David, The king desires not any dowry, but an
hundred fore-skinnes of the Philistines, etc.] Why are the fore-skinnes
required, rather then the heads of the Philistines? First, to imply the ground
why Saul desired this, to wit, because they were enemies to God, and to his
people. Secondly, to enrage the Philistines the more against David; for hatred
to circumcision would make them abhor this act of David, of cutting off the
fore-skinnes from the dead bodies of their brethren, more then any thing that
could have been done to them.

Verse. 26. It pleased David well to be the kings son in law, and the days
were not expired, etc.] It seems that Michal was promised David, upon condition
that he should bring Saul an hundred fore-skinnes of the Philistines, within a
certain time prefixed: Or else there was a time set for the marriage, before
which he was to bring these fore-skinnes of the Philistines. And therefore it
is here noted, that before this time was expired, he did what was imposed; yea,
to make sure that Saul should not cavil, he brought two hundred, v. 27. in
stead of an hundred.

Verse. 29. And Saul was yet more afraid of David.] To wit, as considering now
that this marriage with his daughter, was a fair step to the crown and kingdom,

Verse. 30. Then the Princes of the Philistines went forth.] To wit, to make
war with the Israelites: And it may well be, that besides their desire to be
revenged on the Israelites for the late defeat of their armies when Goliath was
slain, even the late slaughter which David had made amongst the Philistines,
when he brought an hundred of their fore-skinnes to Saul, had mightily enraged
them; and this was the occasion of their present invading the land of Israel.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. ANd Saul spoke to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that
they should kill David.] Hitherto Saul had done all that he did against David
secretly; but now he grew impudent and shameless, Saul spoke to Jonathan his
son, and to all his servants, that they should kill David: For in these words
there are two things that discover how violently Saul's passion and rage against
David, did at length break forth: The first, that he did not impart his desire
to have him slain, to some few of his trustiest servants, but generally to them
all. The second, that though he knew the great league that was betwixt David
and Jonathan, yet he moved him also to join in this plot, hoping no doubt to
prevail with him, by urging his fear of David's getting the crown from him.

Verse. 2. And Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my father seeks to kill thee,
etc.] Whilst David was esteemed Saul's favorite, all his Courtiers carried a
fair show toward him, chap. 18.5. He was accepted in the sight of all the
people, and and also in the sight of Saul's servants: and who then could fawn
upon him more then they? ver. 22. Behold, the king has a delight in thee, and
all his servants love thee, now therefore be the kings son in law. But when
Saul had once discovered the ill will he bare him, and openly enjoined them to
make him away, not a man amongst them would open his mouth to Saul for him; or
do any thing to prevent the danger he was in: only Jonathan that did indeed
truly love him, did then discover to David his fathers bloody purpose, and
afterward spoke to his father in his behalf, though he now forbear to say any
thing for the present, because he saw that now he was in a rage, and judged it
therefore better to stay a while, till his fury was over.

Now therefore, I pray thee, take heed unto thy self until the morning, and
abide in a secret place, and hide thy self.] Jonathan here counsels David,
first, that he should be very careful to look to himself, that no evil was
done him the following night, before he could speak to his father for him, take
heed to thy self until the morning. And then secondly, that the next day he
should hide himself in some secret place, to wit, in the field where Saul was
wont to walk out and take the air, (and no doubt they agreed about the very
place) that so David might hear what passed betwixt his father and him, when
they talked together concerning David: for that this is the meaning of those
words, abide in a secret place, and hide thy self, is evident by the words that
follow, ver. 3. And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where
thou art, and I will commune with my father, etc. Only he adds, that if Saul
spoke so that David could not hear him, then he would afterward tell David
what he said, which is added in the last clause, and what I see, that I will
tell thee.

Verse. 4. And Jonathan spoke good of David unto Saul his father, etc.] Though
he knew that his father was troubled with frantic fits, and might in rage seek
to kill him for speaking in David's behalf; yet he resolved to hazard this
rather then desert David in a righteous cause. And observable it is, that
venturing himself thus for David, God so awed the spirit of Saul, that Jonathan
suffered no evil by it.

Verse. 5. For he did put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, etc.]
Concerning this phrase, he put his life in his hand, see the note, Judge. ^2.3.
By pleading the good service that David had done to the Church and
Commonwealth of Israel, in killing that formidable giant Goliath, he sought to
convince Saul, what an heinous sin it would be to seek now to kill him. But
most observable are the following words, wherein he presses this further upon
Saul, thou saw it, and did rejoice: for by putting Saul in mind what a
wonderful joy it was to him at that time when he stood by, and saw the
Philistine fall by the hand of David, he intimates what an high degree of
ingratitude it would be, so ill now to repay that noble exploit of his, which
when time was did so exceedingly affect him, that he would then have thought no
good he could have done him, a sufficient requital of his great merits.

Verse. 10. And Saul sought to smite David, etc.] See the note chap. 18.11.

Verse. 11. Saul also sent messengers unto David's house, to watch him, and to
slay him in the morning.] It is hard to say what the reasons were that moved
Saul to give these directions to the messengers that he sent to slay David, not
to break presently in upon him, and to slay him in the night, but to lie in
wait about the house, and then to slay him in the morning. Some conceive it
was, because when he came forth in the morning, they might happily kill him
suddenly and secretly, no body taking notice who had done it; and that this
Saul desired for fear of the displeasure and outcries of the people against
him: secondly again, others hold on the contrary, that this course was
prescribed, because the more openly it was done, the more likely the people
would be to think that it was done for some treachery of David's, and justly
done; whereas their doing it in the night would make them suspect that they did
it causelessely, and durst not avow the doing of it: and thirdly, others say,
(and that I think most probably) that this course was only taken, to make sure
that David might not escape their hands; (for indeed when Saul had openly
already commanded his servants and son to slay David, there was no thinking
to do it so, that Saul's malice against him should be concealed.) Had they
attempted the breaking in upon his house in the night, his wife, or servants,
or friends might by some means in the dark convey him away; but in the morning
he could not so easily slip away from them: and therefore they were ordered to
lie in wait secretly about the house in the night, and then early in the
morning to break in upon him. But however, there was doubtless an hand of
providence that did bend Saul's resolutions to this course, whatever the reasons
were that moved him thereto, that so David might not be suddenly surprised in
his house, but might have the more time and leisure to provide for his escape.

And Michal David's wife told him, saying, If thou save not thy life to night,
to morrow thou shall be slain.] For knowing the cause why David fled so lately
from Saul, and having perhaps casually discovered that Saul's servants were
watching about the house; she might easily guess their errand, or else some
friend might send her word of it.

Verse. 13. And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a pillow
of goats hair for his bolster, etc.] After she had let down her husband out of
a window, that so he might escape away for his life, she used this further
project to prevent the messengers surprising of him; expecting every moment
that they would break into the house to look for him; and conceiving that if
they found him not in the house, they would conclude he was escaped away, and
so would presently get them forth to pursue after him. To prevent this, she
resolved to make them believe he was sick in bed, and to that end laid an image
in his bed, as if a sick man had lien there; that so the messengers being
deluded hereby, might not suspect his escape, and so might be quite beaten off
from seeking further after him; or at least, that though they should discover
this deceit, yet they might for a while be thereby brought into such a demurre,
that her husband might have the more time to get away, beyond any likelihood of
their overtaking him. The word here translated an image, is in the Original
teraphim, whereby in the Scripture is usually meant certain idols which the
idolaters of those times did make use of as their Oracles, as is formerly noted
upon Judge. 17.5. But withal it may well be, that hereupon any image or statue
was also called teraphim: and so this which Michal now used* might be merely a
statue, perhaps David's own statue; or else some superstitious image which she
kept in the house in secret, David knowing nothing of it. As for the pillow of
goats hair which she used for a bolster, some conceive that this was laid, that
the curled locks of the goats hair about the head of the image, might resemble
the hair of David's head: for say they, David's hair was yellow, and so was the
hair of those goats that were bred in the land of Gilead; whence is that Cant.
4.1, Thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from mount Gilead. But because
the ground of this conceit is altogether uncertain, I rather think that this
was laid under the head of the image, because for the softness and warmth such
pillars were ordinarily used for them that were sick.

Verse. 14, And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is sick.]
It is but a weak conceit me thinks, which I find in some Expositours, to wit,
that this is not spoken of those messengers mentioned before, verse. 11. that
were first sent to slay David; but of others sent after them: The first say
they, waiting for David's coming forth, did not go into the house, and so Saul
sent others with the same directions that he gave to the first. But this is
supposed without any just ground in the text, who can think that the first
would wait so long for David's coming forth, and never go to search for him in
the house, till Saul should suspect they neglected their charge, and so send
others after them? No doubtless, these were the first messengers mentioned
before; only Saul's sending them, is here repeated again. And the words
therefore must be thus understood: When Saul sent messengers to take David she
said, He is sick, that is, when the messengers came that Saul had sent, (which
doubtless they did betimes in the morning) she answered, He was sick; and
carrying them up to his chamber, showed them the image in the bed; which they
thought had indeed been here husband, and so went away.

Verse. 16. And when the messengers were come in, beh^ld there was an image in
the bed, etc.] Before happily when they went in to Michal they might only look
upon the bed afar off, and so the room being dark, as it is wont to be where
sick folks lie, they might easily be deceived by the cunning of Michal* and
think it was David that lay there a bed. But being now sent back again by Saul,
and appointed to bring him sick or well, they went up now to the bed to lay
hold on him* and then Michals fraud was soon discovered; And the
unexpectedness of this which they found is here employed in this word behold.
Behold there was an image in the bed; They thought verily before, that they had
seen David there, and when they came now again they found nothing there, but an
image of wood or stone dressed up like a sick man.

Verse. 18. So David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel* etc.] To wit, to
bewail to him his misery, and to show, how far otherwise things went with him
then he expected* in regard Samuel had anointed him to succeed Saul in the
throne, and withal, to be advised by him what he should do.

And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.] Which was a College of prophets:
whither Samuel brought David. First, because Saul was not likely to look him
there. Secondly, because here Samuel hoped he should be as in a little
sanctuary, and as it were in a special manner put into Gods custody. And
thirdly, because with that holy company, and sacred exercises there used, David
might be much comforted in his afflictions.

Verse. 20. And Saul sent messengers to take David.] To wit, at Naioth, where he
heard David was, as is expressed in the foregoing verse. Doubtless they that
told him that he was at Naioth, told him also that he was with Samuel there.
And yet he gave no order to his messengers to meddle with Samuel, because he
had entertained the man, whom he pursued, but only to take David. It was a
sign of extreme rage that he would have David fetched away by force out of the
College of the prophets: But yet withal it argued some remainders of respect
toward Samuel that were still in Saul's heart; that all the while the least
word was not spoken against him.

And when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing
as appointed over them, etc.] That is, when the messengers came and found the
prophets prophesying, and Samuel as the chief of the quire, or as their
instructor and chief moderatour in those holy and spiritual exercises wherein
they were employed, then they prophesied with them, as men that had quite
forgot the bloody errand they came about, and were changed into other men. And
indeed, not much unlike this, was that which befell the messengers sent by the
Pharisees to apprehend Christ, John 7.45, 46. Then came the officers to the
chief Priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, Why have you not brought
him? The officers answered, Never man spoke as this man. What is meant by the
prophesying of these prophets, see before in the note upon chap. 10.5.

Verse. 23. And he went on and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah.]
When Saul had heard that the three companies of his servants whom he had sent
to Naioth to apprehend David, prophesied when they came there, and never minded
the business that he had given them in charge, he resolved to go and fetch
David himself: though once before he himself had prophesied amongst the
prophets, by the supernatural working of Gods spirit upon him, chap. 10.6.
(concerning which, see the note there) Yet he resolved, that he would now fetch
David out of his sanctuary, as if he had done it in defiance of God. And
behold, whereas his servants prophesied not till they came amongst the
prophets, he prophesied as he went, and when he came there, fell down in a
trance, etc. So that the more he hardened himself against God, the more did God
show his power upon him.

Verse. 24. And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel in
like manner, and lay down naked etc.] That is, he laid aside his upper
garments, his princely robes and military apparel, behaving himself now as any
other common person. And this is all the nakedness intended in the following
words, as in the same regard, the like is said of the prophet Isaiah, Isa.
20.2. At the same time spoke the Lord by the prophet Isaiah the son of Amos,
saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from thy loins, and put off thy shoe from
thy foot: And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. And of David, 2. Sam.
6.20. Who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of his handmaids of his
servants, etc. And of the prophet Micah, chap. 1.8. I will go stripped and naked.
As for that which is said here of his lying down, or falling down, some
understand this only of his falling down to humble himself in prayer as the
other did: But I rather conceive, that this is to be understood of his falling
down and lying in a trance, as Balaam did, Numb. 24.4. When he had prophesied a
while with the other, this at length befell him peculiarly: For, hereby the
power of God was the more magnified, and Saul exposed to shame and reproach
amongst all that should see, how in the midst of his fury he was cast down,
bound and manacled by the mighty power of God, and then withal, David had the
freer, and longer liberty to escape for his life. It is expressly said, that
all this was done before Samuel, which seems to contradict what was said
before, chap. 15, 35. But of that, see the note there.

Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets?] See the note, chap.
10.11.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. ANd David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before
Jonathan, etc.] Taking the opportunity of Saul's ecstasy, wherein he continued
all day and all night, David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came to Gibeah of
Saul where Jonathan was.

Verse. 2. And he said unto him, God forbid; Thou shall not die.] It seems
Jonathan knew nothing of all that Saul had done against David, related in the
former chapter; at least he might think, that if he had done any thing against
David, it was only in some frantic fit; and therefore was he thus confident,
that David had no such cause of fear as he deemed he had: and that the rather
too, because of the oath his father had taken, Chap. 19.6. And Saul swear, as
the Lord lives he shall not die. And because his father used to acquaint him
with what he purposed to do, My father, says he, will do nothing either great
or small, but that he will show it me, etc.

Verse. 5. Behold, to morrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with
the king at meat, etc.] David fearing to venture himself in Saul's presence any
more, till he were better satisfied how he stood affected toward him, does
here prescribe a way to Jonathan, how this might be discovered; namely, that
whereas the feast of the new moon was to be kept the next day, at which time he
used to sit with the king at the table, he would absent himself for three
days, and if Saul should be highly enraged at this, hereby Jonathan might know
that his father intended some mischief to him, and so was mad that he was
disappointed of his purpose. The feast David here speaks of when he was by
their ordinary course to sit with the king at meat, was doubtless a holy
feast, kept with the peace offerings of the new moon festivitie, as is evident,
verse. 26. Where Saul concludes of David's absence the first day, that by reason
of some legal pollution that had befallen him he absented himself, He is not
clean, says he, surely he is not clean; and observable it is, that Saul as bad
as he was, yet was careful to keep this feast of the new moon, and to have his
chief princes keep it with him, To morrow, says David, is the new moon, and I
should not fail to sit with the king at meat: As for the three days wherein
David says he would absent himself, But let me go, that I may hide my self in
the fields, unto the third day at even, this time was prefixed by David,
because sooner Jonathan might not be able happily to enform him, how Saul took
his absence from the feast: For though the festivitie of the new moon lasted
indeed but one day, to wit, the first day of the month, Numb. 28.1.
(Concerning which, see the note there,) yet some kind of peace offerings, which
were offered on that day, to wit, those that were offered for a vow, or
voluntary offering, might be eaten not only on the same day whereon they were
offered, but also the day following, Levit. 7.16. Therefore it seems the feast
that was begun on the new moon with their peace offerings, was continued the
next day, as is evident, verse. 27. And it came to pass on the morrow, which
was the second day of the month, that David's place was empty etc. And so then
the third was allowed for Jonathan to inform David how Saul was affected with
his absence from the feast.

Verse. 6. If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked leave
of me, that he might run to Bethlehem, etc.] It seems in Saul's absence they
used to ask leave of Jonathan ere they left the Court, especially at such a
festivity as that of the New Mood was, and therefore David desires Jonathan to
say, that David had asked leave of him, that he might go and keep the New Mood
feast with his kindred at Bethlehem. Though David left Saul in a trance at
Naioth, chap. 19.23, 24. yet he might be returned thence before this conference
which David had with Jonathan; at least he might suppose that he would soon
come back again to Gibeah. But how could he conceive that Saul would expect
David sitting at his table in the feast of the New Mood, as in former times,
when he had been forced so lately to fly for his life, both from him, and from
his messengers sent to apprehend him? chap. 19. I answer, No doubt Saul
persuaded himself, that David would think that what he had done, he had done
only in his fits of frenzy, and that being now come again to himself, he
would be as far from laying violent hands upon him, as ever before. Now
though David were not so simply credulous as to think so, but discerned his
settled malice against him, and verily believed that for all his prophesying at
Naioth, he would thirst after his blood as formerly; yet supposing rightly as
it was, that Saul in this his confidence and dissimulation, would expect him at
the feast the next day; he advises Jonathan to observe how he would take his
absence, as concluding that thereby they might discern what his purposes were.
As for David's appointing Jonathan by an untruth to excuse his absence, in this
doubtless David, as the best are wont to do, forgot himself.

Verse. 8. For thou have brought thy servant into a covenant of the Lord with
thee.] That is, a covenant made in the presence of God, wherein God was
invocated to bear witness against, and to punish the party transgressing the
covenant,

If there be in me iniquity, slay me thy self, etc.] It may be that David spoke
this to Jonathan, as to one that had power under his father, even to punish
with death those that were liable to such a sentence.

Verse. 10. Then said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? etc.] That is,
seeing it will not be safe for you to come to me, nor yet to trust such a
message with any of your servants, how shall I know whether your father be
enraged at my absence, or no?

Verse. 11. And Jonathan said unto David, Come, let us go out into the field.]
Because he could not, it seems, speak his mind so freely to David in the place
where they were, without some danger of being overheard, therefore Jonathan
desired David to go with him out into the field: or rather in answer to the
question David had propounded in the foregoing verse, he invites him to go out
with him into the field, that there he might show him, how by the token of
shooting his arrows, he meant to inform him, whether there were any cause why
he should flee from his father, or no

Verse. 13. The Lord be with thee, as he has been with my father.] That is, the
Lord advance thee to the kingdom as he did my father, and make thee victorious
over thine enemies, as my father has been. Whether he had heard of David's
anointing, either by David himself or any other, it is hard to say; most likely
it is that he knew of the doom which Samuel had pronounced against his father,
and observing the special hand of God that was with David, did thereupon
conclude that doubtless he was the man to whom God intended the kingdom,
whereto he willingly yields, and only seeks to make a covenant with David, and
therefore we see afterward also, how confidently he spoke of David's being
king: chap. 23.17. And he said unto him, Fear not, for the hand of my father
Saul shall not find thee, and thou shall be king over Israel, etc.

Verse. 14. And thou shall not only while yet I live show me the kindness of
the Lord etc.] That is, either first, the kindness which the Lord requires us
to show one to another, and which is so pleasing and acceptable to him: or
secondly, the kindness which the Lord is wont to show to his faithful
servants, and wherein thou shall approve thy self like unto God: or thirdly,
the great kindness which by covenant made in the Lords presence, thou have
bound thy self to show me. And thus whilst David was in an humbled and
afflicted estate, Jonathan beheld him as king of Israel, and so did the
believing thief look upon Christ, when he hung upon the cross: Luke 23.42. And
he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.

Verse. 16. Let the Lord even require it at the hands of David's enemies.] And so
consequently of me, if I keep not covenant but prove an enemy to David.

Verse. 17. And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him.] As
desirous to make a sure and steadfast league with him, whom he so dearly loved.

Verse. 18. Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the new moon, and thou
shall be missed, etc.] See the notes verse. 5, 6.

Verse. 19. Thou shall go down quickly, and come to the place where thou did
hide thy self when the business was in hand, and thou shall remain by the
stone Ezel, etc.] According to this Translation of ours, the meaning of these
words must needs be this, that Jonathan advised David, that on the third day he
should go down to the place where he hid himself at the first, and should stay
there till he came thither, and did by his shooting of arrows, according to
their following agreement* secretly inform him whether he might safely come to
his father or no. Now the place intended, was doubtless that where David hid
himself when Jonathan first gave him notice of his fathers purpose to kill him,
chap. 19.2. Saul my father seeks to kill thee, now therefore I pray thee take
heed to thy self and hide thy self etc. and therefore Jonathan says, Where
thou did hide thy self, when the business was in hand, because then was the
first time when Saul did discover his purpose to kill David. As for the stone
Ezel, that is, that shows the way, which was hard by that place, it was
probably some stone to direct travelers the way they were to go.

Verse. 20 And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, etc.] The reason
why Jonathan did not agree to meet with David, and so to make known to him how
his father stood affected toward him, but rather to give him warning thus
secretly by shooting of arrows, was because he desired to decline as much as
might be his fathers jealousy of any intercourse that was betwixt him and
David.

Verse. 27. And Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side, and David's place
was empty.] To wit, Jonathan arose to Abner coming to sit down, as thereby
testifying his respect of him, etc. It seems that Saul and Jonathan were set
down at the table before Abner came; and so when he came, Jonathan rose as by
way of honor to Abner, because he was the kings cousin, and captain of the
host, and then Abner sat by Saul's side, and David's place was empty; whereby it
may appear that (as Josephus says) Jonathan sat at the right hand of the king,
and David used to sit on his left hand, as being his son in law, and so Abner
now sitting on that side, he was next Saul, because David's place was empty: yet
the meaning of those words and Jonathan arose, may be, that Saul being set down
in his seat, Jonathan arose to sit down at the table by his father.

Verse. 26. Something has befallen him, he is not clean, surely he is not
clean.] See the note verse 5.

Verse. 27. Saul said unto Jonathan his son, Wherefore comes not the son of
Jesse, etc.] This title be gives him the son of Jesse, shows in part his
discontent and displeasure against him.

Verse. 30. Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, etc.] As if he had
said, thou art right thy mothers son, she has been always perverse and
rebellious, and so art thou: We need not enquire wherein Jonathans mother had
deserved this censure; for this is the property of wrathful persons, to spare
none in their anger, but to speak any thing that may grieve or dishonor the
party against whom their spirit is stirred; and therefore he adds also, Thou
have chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and to the confusion of
thy mothers nakedness: that is, to the dishonor and shame of thy mother, to
wit, by bereaving her of the honor of having a king for her son, yea, by
bringing a stain of dishonesty upon her: because if David should succeed in the
kingdom* and Jonathan be passed by, it would imply that Jonathan were
illegitimate, and base born, and so not fit to inherit, and that therefore
David that was only Saul's son in law, was chosen in his room,

Verse. 40. And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad.] That is, his quiver,
bow, and arrows.

Verse. 41. And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward
the south, etc.] When they first agreed that Jonathan should give notice to
David, how his father stood affected toward him by the shooting of his arrows,
and the words he should speak to the lad that was sent to fetch them, they
agreed upon this secret way of giving David intelligence, because they thought
some body might be present in the field where it was done, and hardly could
hope for an opportunity to meet and consult together; yet when Jonathan had
done that, and looking about perceived the coast was clear, he sent away the
lad, and then David arose out of a place toward the south, that is, the place
where he had hid himself, southward of the field where all this had been done,
and so they had an opportunity beyond their expectation to mourn with one
another, and confer together before their parting.

And they kissed one another, and wept one with another till David exceeded.]
His condition being now in the eye of reason most grievous and most miserable.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. THen came David to Nob to Ahimelech the Priest, etc.] It is of no
great importance to know whether this Nob were that without Jordan in the tribe
of Manasseh, which is called Nobah, Numb. 32.42. and Judge. 8.11. or that in the
tribe of Benjamin near to Anathoth, and therefore joined often with Anathoth,
as in Neh. 11.32. yet most probable it is that it was that within Jordan in the
tribe of Benjamin: for certain it is that here the tabernacle was, though the
Ark was at Kiriathjearim, chap. 7.1.) as is evident verse. 9. where it is said,
that the sword of Goliath was here wrapped up in a cloth behind the ephod: And
well it may be which some conceive, that as the Tabernacle was placed in
Shiloh, a city of Ephraim in the days of Joshua, who was of the tribe of
Ephraim, and the Ark was in the tribe of Judah in David's time; so likewise in
the days of Saul who was of Benjamin, by his advise and for his benefit, the
Tabernacle was removed from Shiloh to Nob, which belonged to his tribe, and
hereupon it was that there were so many Priests dwelling here at Nob, in regard
whereof it is called the city of the Priests, chap. 22.19. to wit, that they
might attend upon the service of the Tabernacle: for in the 21. chapter of
Joshua, where the cities are expressed that were given to the Priests, we do
not find Nob mentioned amongst them: and doubtless David being resolved to
fly for his safety out of the land, came hither first, not only to get there
a supply for his wants, but also especially to visit the Tabernacle, that he
might there worship the Lord before his departure, and seek unto him for help
and comfort in this hour of adversity. Though he could not but know that there
was much danger of being discovered here, because hither to the Tabernacle,
they came from all places of the land: yet he would not neglect the visiting of
this house of God, before he fled out of the kingdom. As for this Ahimelech,
the Priest to whom David addressed himself for succor, either it was the same
that is before called Ahiah, who was with Saul in Migron, chap. 14.3. or else
Ahiah and Ahimelech were brothers (for as it is there said of Ahiah that he was
the son of Ahitub; so also it is said of this Ahimelech, chap. 20.9.) and
Ahiah being dead, Ahimelech his brother was now high Priest in his room: yea,
it may seem that this Ahimelech was also called Abiathar: for Mark 2.26. it is
said, that David went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high
Priest, and did eat the shewbread: unless we say, as some do that Abiathar
there by our Savior mentioned, was that Abiathar that was the son of this
Ahimelech, chap. 22.20. because he stood by (as the second Priest) and did
consent to give the shewbread to David, and that he is there called the high
Priest, because he did afterward succeed his father in that place.

And Ahimelech was afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art
thou alone, and no man with thee?] Christ says, Mark 2.26. that David did not
only eat the shewbread himself, but gave it also to them that were with him:
It is evident therefore that he had now some of his servants, whom perhaps
Jonathan had sent after him* going along with him, to whom he carried part of
the shewbread; but those he had left in some other place, as himself says
verse. 2. I have appointed my servants to such and such a place, and came alone
to the tabernacle, which Ahimelech could not but much wonder at, and be
troubled about it, as fearing that he was fled from Saul, and that if it were
so, it would be dangerous for him to give him entertainment.

Verse. 2. And David said unto Ahimelech the Priest, the king has commanded me
a business, etc.] And thus that he might procure from Ahimelech food for
himself and his servants, David did not only conceal the business of his
fleeing from Saul; but also told him a direct lie, that Saul had sent him about
a secret business, and enjoined him to let no body know of it, and so he had
appointed his servants to meet him elsewhere; and what was the issue of this?
surely it proved the occasion of Saul's slaying Ahimelech, and the rest of the
Priests of that city, fourscore and and five persons that wore a linen ephod;
yea, of the utter destruction of the city and all the inhabitants thereof,
both men, women, and children, as we read in the following chapter, verse. 18,
19. A sad calamity; just cause had David to rue these lies of his so long as he
lived, and so no doubt he did, we see he charged it upon himself when Abiathar
brought him the tidings of it, chap. 22.22. I have occasioned, says he, the
death of all the persons of thy fathers house; and it is thought that the
remorse for this very sin, was fresh in his heart, when he wrote that passage
in the 119. Psalm, v. 28, 29. My soul melts away for heaviness, strengthen
thou me according to thy word: Remove from me the way of lying, etc.

Verse. 4. And the Priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread
under my hand.] There is no question but the high Priest had in his house bread
enough, provided for those of his family; but it seems David was in such haste,
that he would not stay for any, but what was there in a readiness in the
Tabernacle, that he might take it presently and be gone; and as it follows,
verse. 6. there was no bread there but the shewbread; and therefore it was too
that Ahimelech used that expression, There is no common bread under mine hand.

But there is hallowed bread* if the young men have kept themselves at least
from women.] By the Law of God the Priests were only to eat of the shewbread,
Lev. 24.9. yet the Priest knowing well that charity is to be preferred before
all ceremonies, and that in case of necessity the ceremonial Law was to give
way to the moral, he condescended to relieve them with the shewbread; and
what he did herein is approved by Christ, Matthew. 12.3, 4. yet withal he adds
this condition, If the young men have kept themselves at least from women,
whether their wives or others. Indeed if this had not been so* the same
necessity that dispensed with one part of the ceremony, might dispense with the
other, had they been legally unclean in regard of carnal copulation, according
to that law, Lev. 15.18. The woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of
copulation, they shall both bath themselves: they must not therefore have
starved rather then have eaten of the shewbread: but in this case a double
impediment would have made the case the more questionable; and therefore the
Priest adds this clause, If the young men have kept themselves, at least from
women.

Verse. 5. Women have been kept from us about these three days* since I came
out, and the vessels of the young men are holy.] By the vessels of the young
men is meant their bodies, according to those expressions; 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.4. For
this is the will of God, that you abstain from fornication, that every one of
you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification: and 2. Cor. 4.7.
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels: yet it may be meant too of all
they had about them.

And the bread is in a manner common, etc.] That is, it is as any other
ordinary bread prepared to be the food of the priests: Had it been standing
upon the table before the Lord it had been another matter, but being taken
thence* though it were sanctified this day in the vessel* however it was
reserved only to the priests because it had been hallowed to the Lord, yet to
them it was but as any other common bread, and therefore he needed the less to
scruple in case of necessity, to give to others.

Verse. 7, Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day,
detained before the Lord, and his name was Doeg, an Edomite.] To wit, by birth,
or because he had dwelt there, as upon the same ground, chap. 26.6. Ahimelech
is called the Hittite: yet in profession of Religion he was an Israelite; (for
why else was he now detained in the tabernacle, to wit, by some vow?) but a
wicked wretched man he was known to be; a man of ill fame, and therefore now
feared by David, Chap. 22.22. And David said unto Abiathar, I knew that day,
that Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul.

Verse. 8. And David said unto Ahimelech, and is there not here under thy hand a
spear or sword?] This he spoke no doubt, as desiring Goliaths sword.

Verse. 10. And David arose that day, and fled for fear of Saul, and went to
Achish the king of Gath.] That is, he fled into his country. This Achish is in
the title of the thirty fourth Psalm called Abimelech; which was the usual
title of the kings of the Philistines, Genesis 20.2. Doubtless he hoped here to
have sojourned unknown; but however, though he could not but apprehend much
danger in flying thither; because the Philistines were at present deadly
enemies to the Israelites, and his name was above all others abhorred amongst
them, in regard of the many victories he had gotten over them, and the cruel
slaughters he had made amongst them, and particularly, for his killing of
Goliath who was of Gath, chap. 17.4. Yet such was Saul's rage and David's fear,
that he had more hope of safety there, then in the land of Israel.

Verse. 11. And the servants of Achish said unto him, Is not this David, the
king of the land? etc.] Having discovered and caught David, as it is in the
title of the 56. Psalm, Michtam of David, when the Philistines took him in
Gath, they brought him to Achish and made known who he was, that he might
consider what was fit to be done with him, Is not this David, say they, the
king of the land; that is, a prince or ruler in the land, or, is not this David
that is designed to be king in the land; for it may well be thought, that the
report that David should be king, and that Saul persecuted him because of this,
was now so rife and common in Israel, that it was spread even unto the land of
the Philistines.

Verse. 13. And he changed his behavior before them, and feigned himself mad,
etc.] Yet still withal he sought by prayer to God, his hope being in him
(though he used this plot as a means of escape) as appears by the 34. and 56.
Psalms, which were made by him at this time and upon this occasion; and
indeed, had not the Lord infatuated Achish, whereby it was that he altogether
slighted the matter, how easily might this dissimulation of David's have been
discovered in time?

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. DAvid therefore departed thence and went to the cave of Adullam.]
Which was in the Tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.21, 35. a place of good strength, as
appears, 2. Sam. 23.13. and thither no doubt David went, hoping to find relief
and comfort in his own tribe, and here perhaps he made the 142. Psalm; for
that was made when he was in a cave, as appears by the title, Maschil of David
a prayer when he was in the cave.

And when his brethren and his fathers house heard it, they went down thither
to him.] To wit, as being or fearing to be persecuted and oppressed by Saul for
David's sake; and this no doubt added much to his affliction, not only because
it must needs greive him to see them forced to fly from their lands, houses,
and estates for his sake; but also, because it may well be, that his brethren,
who did formerly cast an envious eye upon him, and upbraided him with the pride
and naughtiness of his heart, would now perhaps, upbraid him with the miseries
he had brought upon them; telling how much better it had been for them, if he
had contented himself with that meaner condition wherein before he lived in his
fathers family. But besides, in that which David's brethren suffered for David's
sake, Christians may see what they must look to suffer for Christ's sake; they
are dear and precious to Christ as his mother and brethren* Luke 8.21. My
mother and my brethren are these, which hear the word of God* and do it: But
because of this, therefore does the world hate them: Matthew. 10.22. Ye shall be
hated of all men for my names sake: See also, John 15.19* 20, 21.

Verse. 2. And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt,
etc.] These doubtless aimed at the sheltring themselves, though they
strengthened David by coming in to him. But was it well done in David to
entertain such as these? I answer, that what David did herein, he might do it
by a special instinct of the spirit of God, and so that might be lawful in
him, which would not be lawful in an ordinary way: but then besides, much may
be said in defense of David herein, even in an ordinary way. For first, David
might not know of the several engagements by debt, or otherwise, of those that
came in to him. Secondly, he had no purpose to shelter them against any that
should demand justice against them. Thirdly, he meant not to make use of them
against Saul, or to make a prey of the people, but only for his own just
defense; we see what a testimony Nabals servants gave of David's soldiers,
Chap. 25.15. The men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt neither
missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them when we were in
the fields. And fourthly, It is probable, that by this time it came to be
generally known, that Saul persecuted David because he was anointed of God by
Samuel to succeed him in the throne; and if they came, pretending this for
their coming, the cause they alleged was just, and how could David then reject
them? It is likely indeed, that the mouths of many were opened against him,
because of those that followed him* alleging that they were a company of needy
and discontented people, men that had exhausted their states, and durst not
before show their heads, the very scumme and dregs of the people, fit only to
prey upon the estates of others; and that David showed now what love he bare to
his country, and what loyalty to his Prince, in giving entertainment to such
as these. But so long as David's cause was just, and that he did not undertake
to defend them in any evil, nor made use of them to oppress others, these
reproaches were unjustly cast upon him; yea in this, as in other things, David
was a notable type of Christ. For such as these that came into David, were
whilst Christ lived upon earth, and still are usually the disciples of Christ;
to wit, first, poor and despised men and women, whence was that of the
Pharisees, Joh. 7.48. Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees, believed on
him? Ye see your calling brethren, (says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.26.) how that
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called,
etc. and chap. 14.13. We are made as the filth of the world, and are the
offscouring of all things unto this day: and secondly, men and women that lay
under the burden of a grievous debt of sins; for publicans and harlots
followed Christ, when the self-righteous Pharisees, and many of the civiler
sort of people were enemies to him, Matthew. 21.31, 32. and at this the world
took great offense: Why eats your Master with Publicans and sinners, Matthew.
9.11. and again, Matthew. 11.19. the son of man came eating and drinking, and
they said behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and
sinners, and hence is that too, in the same chapter, verse. 5.6. The poor have
the Gospel preached to them, and blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended
in me: some are of opinion, that it was when David was in this hold of Adullam,
that those worthies came to him also, that are spoken of, 1. Chron. 12.16. etc.
but of that see the note there.

Verse. 3. And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab, and he said unto the King of
Moab, etc.] Because his parents, by reason of age, were not able well to endure
the hardness of being with him in the cave, therefore David went to Mizpeh of
Moab, to provide them a place there to stay a while in; hoping that the king of
Moab would favor him out of hatred to Saul, who had made war against Moab:
1. Sam. 14.47. Let, says he, my father and my mother come forth, that is, out
of the land of Israel, and be with you, etc.

Verse. 4. And they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the hold.]
That is, in the cave of Adullam. Most Expositours indeed understand this of a
hold in Mizpeh of Moab: but first, there is no such hold mentioned in the
foregoing words; and secondly, had David been in Mizpeh of Moab, why should it
be said he left his father and mother, with the king of that country.

Verse 5. And the Prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold, depart,
and get thee into the land of Judah.] The cave, or hold of Adullam, was indeed
in the tribe of Judah; but the Lord appoints him not to hide himself any longer
there, but to go forth abroad and to show himself openly in the land of Judah,
and that no doubt partly for the trial of his faith, that it might be seen,
that his confidence was in the Lords protection, and partly that he might by
degrees gain esteem and respect amongst the people.

Verse. 6. Now Saul abode in Gibeah, under a tree in Ramah, etc.] This may be
translated under a tree in a high place (as it is in the margin of our Bibles)
and then the meaning of the words is clear, to wit, that Saul was in some hill
or high place in Gibeah, but according to that translation which is here in our
Bibles, Saul abode in Gibeah, under a tree in Ramah: it may be questioned how
it can be said, that he was in Gibeah, and in Ramah too; and no other answer
can be given, but that Ramah, or the land about it, was in the territories of
Gibeah, and so because he was under a tree in, or near unto Ramah, it is said
that he was in Gibeah, under a tree in Ramah; as for that clause which next
follows, having his spear in his hand, this is added either, first, to imply
how full of iealousies and fears Saul was, as one that had scarce any
confidence, in any that were about him, he had still his Javelin or his spear
in his hand; or secondly, to intimate that he had mustered his forces, and was
ready to go forth in the pursuit of David, or thirdly, because in those times,
kings were wont to use spears in stead of Sceptres, as the Ensign of their
Regal powers, which is indeed expressly affirmed in many humane Authors.

Verse. 7. Hear now ye Benjamites, Will the son of Jesse give every one of
you fields and vineyards, etc.] To wit, as I have done, and am ready still to
do; and thus he puts them in mind that David was not able to prefer them as
he was, nor yet likely to do it if he were able, because David was not of their
tribe as he was.

Verse. 8. There is none that shows me that my son has made a league with
the son of Jesse, etc.] Because David (as he had heard) was returned into the
land, and Jonathan since that displeasure taken, chap. 20.24. had perhaps
forborne to come into his presence; he suspects there was some conspiracy
betwixt David and him (as thinking that David durst not else have entered the
land, having no greater a power then he had) and condemns his followers for
not revealing it to him, intimating the more therewith to affect them, what an
odious thing it was, that his own son and servant, should conspire against
him.

Verse. 9. Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set over the servants of
Saul, etc.] That is, over his herdmen: see the note chap. 21.7. the bait of
preferment, which Saul had cast forth in the foregoing verses, this profane
Edomite quickly snapped at, and thereupon accused Ahimelech to Saul.

Verse. 10. And he enquired of the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, etc.]
Which Ahimelech acknowledged, verse, 15, but whilst Doeg told Saul this, like a
malicious wretch, he spoke not a word to him of David's excuse, wherewith
Ahimelech was deceived, whence are those words of David, Psalm. 52.2, 3. Thy
tongue devises mischief like a sharp Rasour, working deceitfully, thou love
evil more then good, and lying rather then to speak righteousness:) for that
Psalm was composed upon this occasion, as is evident by the title: A psalm of
David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is
come to the house of Ahimelech.

Verse. 12. And Saul said, Hear now thou son of Ahitub.] So he calls him by
way of contempt, as when they called David the son of Jesse, in a way of
sleighting him.

Verse. 15, Did I then begin to enquire of God for him? Be it ^arre from me.
etc.] That is, this was not the first time that I have enquired of the Lord for
him; and what I have done without blame at other times, what cause had I to
question the doing of it now? so that it is clear that I intended no such evil
in this as is now suspected; had I done it now only (when it seems there was
some jealousy of David) it had been another matter; but to intend the aiding
of one that should rise up against my Lord and Sovereigne, was never in my
heart, be it far from me, says he, that is, God forbid I should have such a
thought in my heart.

Verse. 16. And the king said, Thou shall surely die Ahimelech, thou and all thy
fathers house.] Thus he that was so pitiful, that he would needs spare Agag,
whom God had commanded him to destroy, was now so hard hearted, that he could
command eighty and five of the Lords Priests to be slain in his sight: and
afterward the city to be destroyed, and all that was in it, old and young,
and never be troubled at it.

Verse. 18. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the Priests, and slew
on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen Ephod.] Thus that
which the Lord had threatened against the house of Ely, chap. 2.31, 32. was in
part fulfilled; for of that family these priests were.

Verse. 19. And Nob the city of the Priests smote he with the edge of the sword,
etc.] The Tabernacle was at this time in Nob, as is before noted, ver. 1. and
therefore it is probable, that upon the occasion of destroying this city at
this time, the Tabernacle was removed from hence to Gibeon, where it continued
to the days of Solomon. 2. Chron. 1.3. So Solomon, and all the congregation
that was with him, went unto the high place that was in Gibeon: for there was
the Tabernacle of the congregation of God, etc.

Verse. 20. And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named
Abiathar, escaped and fled after David.] To wit, to Keilah, chap. 23.6. This
Abiathar was he that succeeded his father Ahimelech in the place of high
Priest, and continued in that place and office, till he was removed by Solomon,
1. Kings 2.27.

Verse. 22. And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day when Doeg the
Edomite was there, etc.] The meaning of this is, that his heart misgave him,
that it would be so, when he saw Doeg there.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. THen they told David, saying, behold the Philistines fight against
Keilah, etc.] Keilah was in the land of Judah, Josh. 15.44. Being therefore now
invaded by the Philistines their near neighbors, because David lay with his
men not far from them, in the forest of Hareth, chap. 22.5. and so might
afford them that speedy succor which Saul could not, it seems that some body
from them, or in their behalf, acquainted him with this, and desired his help.

Verse. 2. Therefore David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go and smite
these Philistines?] Though David could not but be willing to approve his
faithfulness both to Saul and his country, by seeking to help them against
the Philistines; and might well think that God would approve his fighting
against Gods enemies in the defense of his people: yet, because he was not yet
actually king, and and used hitherto to go forth against them only at Saul's
command; and besides, he would not rashly go forth against the Philistines with
so little strength, as he had now about him, without a special commission and
promise from God, therefore he enquired of the Lord. But by whom? It is most
likely that it was by Gad the prophet, of whom mention is made before, that he
was with David, chap. 22.5. for ^^ seems, by verse 6. that Abiathar came not to
him with the Ephod, till he was come to Keilah; but of this, see the note there.

Verse. 3. And David's men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in Judah
etc.] In this speech of theirs, they labor to discourage David from going to
Ke^lah; for, say they, being here in Judah, that is, in the midst of the land
of J^^^* we are in continual jeopardy and fear, to wit, least Saul or any of
his troops sh^^^ come upon us, how much more dangerous must it then needs be
for us to go ag^^^ such a potent enemy as the Philistines, and that even in the
borders of their (...) where we may happily be hemmed in with the Philistines
before, and Sa^^^^ ^is men behind us.

Verse. 4. Thou David enquired of the Lord yet again.] Though David (...) ^^^ly
satisfied upon his first enquiring of God, having received that express (...)
(...) and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah: yet because his men were
(...) credulous and fearful, for their better satisfaction and encouragement,
he enquired again.

Verse. 5. So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines,
and brought away their cattle, etc.] That is, either the cattle which they
had brought out of their own country for the provision of their armies (for
Keilah lay close upon the land of the Philistines) or the cattle which the
Israelites found in Palestina, the land of the Philistines, when having
vanquished them at Keilah, they chased them a while in their own country.

Verse. 6. And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to
David to Keilah, that he came down with an Ephod in his hand.] Which was more
then if many thousand soldiers had come to David; for this bringing of the
Ephod to him, was a visible pledge, that God had totally forsaken Saul, and
would be with him to direct him in all his ways: yea, and some conceive also,
that this is here the rather expressed, to let us know how David enquired of
the Lord, as in the foregoing verses, it is twice said he did, namely, by the
priests wearing the Ephod, according to the judgment of Urim and Thummim: for
by Abiathars coming to David to Keilah, they understand only that he came to
David when he was near about Keilah.

Verse. 9. And David knew that Saul secretly practiced mischief against him.]
This word secretly makes it manifest that though Saul called the people
together to besiege David and his men, as it is said in the foregoing verse,
that is, with a purpose so to employ them, yet he did not openly profess that,
but pretended, he raised those forces to fight against the Philistines.

Verse. 11. And the Lord said, He will come down.] That is, if thou stayest here
(for that it was which David desired to know, whether if he stayed in Keilah
Saul would come against him) and doubtless had he stayed he would have come
against him: for God knows future contingent things that shall never be, even
what might be and would be, if he did not otherwise dispose of it.

Verse. 13. Then David and his men, which were about six hundred, arose, etc.]
It seems the number of David's followers still increased: for before he had but
four hundred, chap. 22. but now he had six hundred with whom he departed out
of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go; that is, being perplexed, and
not knowing whither to go, they sought up and down for some place or other, to
shelter themselves in.

Verse. 16. And Jonathan Saul's son arose, and went to David into the wood, and
strengthened his hand in God.] That is, he labored to make him comfortable and
courageous, by putting him in mind of Gods promises, and Gods power, and by
assuring him of Gods grace and favor toward him.

Verse. 17. Thou shall be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee.] To
wit, by promise and covenant betwixt them: But God otherwise disposed of it*
Jonathan was taken to a better kingdom, and never lived to see David sit in
the throne of Israel.

Verse. 18. And they two made a covenant before the Lord.] That is, a covenant
confirmed by oath as in Gods presence.

Verse. 19. Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah saying, Does not David
hide himself with us? etc. [Though David had lately driven the Philistines out
of the land, yet like ungrateful wretches, partly to curry favor with Saul,
partly perhaps terrified with that severity which Saul had used against Nob,
and the Priest of the Lord, chap. 22.18.19. they went to him, and discovered
where David was in a wood near them, to wit in the wilderness of Ziph. This no
doubt sorely wounded David's heart, that his own brethren of the tribe of Judah
should deal thus treacherously with him. But therefore we see that God had
immediately before this trial, sent Jonathan to comfort him, and strengthen
his hand in God, ver. 16. that so he might be the better able to endure it, as
captains use to encourage their soldiers before the fight, and as Physicians
use to give some preparative before sharper physic, that it may not be too
tedious and hard to be born: and indeed, that David did support himself now
with hope in Gods promises, is evident by the 54. Psalm, which he composed at
this time, as appears by the express words of the title of that Psalm; A
Psalm of David when the Ziphims came and said to Saul, Does not David hide
himself with us?

Verse. 24. But David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain
on the south of Jeshimon.] For it was told David that the Ziphites had
discovered him, and that Saul with them and his army was coming to take him, as
is expressed in the next verse they told David: and thereupon he left the
wilderness of Ziph, and fled to a plain in the wilderness of Maon, which lay
more southward from Jeshimon.

Verse. 29. And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at Engedi.]
Called aso Hazazon Tamar, 2. Chron. 20.2. a city of Judah, Josh. 15 62. It was
it seems a place exceeding fruitful for vines and other pleasant fruit, whence
is that expression in Solomon's song chap. 1.14. My beloved is unto me as a
cluster of camphire in the vineyards of Engedi: but yet there was a wilderness
adjoining to it, whither it was that David now fled, chap. 24.1.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Verse. 2. ANd went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.]
That is, high, steep, and craggy rocks* such as wild goats do usually delight
in, and this is thus expressed* to show the violence of Saul's rage, and how
greedily he thirsted after the destruction of David: We may see that he
resolved to leave no place unsearched, when he looked up and down for him in
these rocky places, which could not but be very tedious both to himself and his
soldiers to march in.

Verse. 3. And Saul went in to cover his feet.] Concerning this phrase of Saul's
covering his feet, see the note, Judge. 3.24.

And David and his men remained in the sides of the cave.] It may seem strange
that David and his six hundred men chap. 23 13. could be in this cave, and yet
Saul when he came into it should not perceive it; but it is well known by the
testimony of many writers, that in some countries there are such huge caves,
that many soldiers may lie within them; as also that those that are in such
caves, may see what is done in the mouth of those caves, when they which are at
the entrance, perceive not what is within, and such a cave was this, wherein
David and his men had hid themselves, that Saul might not find them out.

Verse. 4. Behold the day of which the Lord said unto thee, Behold, I will
deliver thine enemy into thy hand, etc.] There might be some particular
promise, though it be no where expressed in the story, which David had received
from Gad, or Samuel, or which God had immediately by his spirit given him,
concerning Saul's falling into David's hands, of which his followers did now put
him in mind; but because such a promise might imply, that the Lord intended
David should cut off Saul, it seems most probable that this word of the Lord
which they spoke of, was only either that promise which Samuel had made him
concerning the kingdom; or else some general promise, that he should prevail
over all his enemies, which they now reached further then God intended them; as
if the promise of conferring the kingdom upon David did by consequence imply,
that he might take away his life that now stood in his way to keep him from it;
or the promise of prevailing over his enemies, did include this of putting him
to death, if God should deliver him into his power. At least from this act of
Gods providence in bringing Saul into his power, they sought to persuade David
that God intended he should be cut off, and that David should wilfully despise
Gods favor to him, if he should not do it.

Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's garment privily.] To wit,
that he might thereby afterward make it evident to Saul, that he could as well
have killed him. But how could he do this and Saul not perceive it? I answer,
first, considering the tumult of the soldiers without might drown the noise
within, it is probable enough that David might in this dark cave steal behind
Saul, and cut off the outward lap of his garment, without being felt or
perceived: Secondly, if Saul came in to ease himself, it is likely he had laid
aside his upper robe or garment, to which David might go closely, and unespied
might cut off the skirt of it: but thirdly, if we understand those foregoing
words, that Saul went into the cave to cover his feet, of his going in to lie
down and sleep there, then there can be no more question made how David should
cut off the lap of his garment and yet Saul never feel him.

Verse. 6. And he said unto his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing
unto my Master, etc.] To wit, when they provoked him to lay hands upon Saul,
ver. 10. which indeed was a great proof of his sincerity, that rather then he
would do this, he would venture the displeasing and enraging of all his
followers; who were like doubtless to be highly offended, that he would
wilfully neglect this opportunity to put an end to all their dangers and fears.

Verse. 9. Wherefore hear thou men's words, saying, Behold David seeks thy
hurt?] Thus David did with great wisdom, cast the blame of Saul's violence
against him, rather upon Saul's wicked counsel, and those flatterers about him,
that did daily incense him against David by their false slanders, then upon
Saul himself.

Verse. 11. Moreover, my father, See, etc.] David calls Saul father, either
because he had indeed married his daughter, or because it was a title usually
given to kings, as the fathers of the people.

Verse. 12. The Lord judge between me and thee, etc.] Thus David referred his
cause to God, and hereby also it is evident, that this it was that did comfort
David against Saul's injuries, and made him patiently bear the wrong he did him,
and restrained him at this time from avenging himself upon Saul, namely, that
he considered that God was the judge of all; and that he would therefore
certainly plead his cause and take occasion sooner or later to revenge the
injuries that he had suffered.

Verse. 13. As says the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceeds from
the wicked, but mine hand shall not be upon thee.] By alleging this proverb,
David intimated: first, that a good man could not allow himself to do that
which a wicked wretch would make no conscience to do: secondly, that though
wicked men may counsel and advise to do that which is evil, yet a good man
would not hearken to that counsel: and thirdly, that though unconscionable men
deal wickedly with the righteous servants of God, yet the righteous will not
thence take liberty to deal wickedly with them: So that summarily this is the
drift of this proverb, that no example, nor persuasion, nor provocation of
wicked men, should win the servants of God to draw the same guilt upon
themselves.

Verse 14. After whom do thou pursue, after a dead dog, after a flea?] That
is, after a man of no estimation, nor power, one not worthy thy jealousies and
fears; but besides, it may be that David had also respect in these words to his
humble deportment of himself, hitherto free from all ambition: had he made a
party amongst the Nobles or Elders of Israel* there had been some pretense of
suspecting him; but considering his lowly carriage of himself all the time he
had been in Saul's court, Saul's proceeding against him in that manner he did,
was as if a man should have come with an army of soldiers against a flea, or
against a dead dog.

Verse. 22. And Saul went home: But David and his men gat them up unto the
hold.] Namely of Engedi, verse. 1. having found David and his men hemmed up in a
cave, it was much that Saul would overslip such an opportunity to put an end
to his fears; but his conscience was strongly convinced, and thereby God
carried him away, and hereby David found, that his confidence in God manifested
in the 57. Psalm, was not in vain; for that Psalm was penned, as is most
probable, when he hid himself in this cave, as we may gather from the title,
Michtam of David, when he fled from Saul in the cave.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. ANd Samuel died, and all the Israelites were gathered together and
lamented him, etc.] Under Saul's government they had found what cause they had
to respect Samuel, and how much better it had been for them, to have lived
under a judge of Gods appointing, then a king of their own choosing; and
therefore now they lamented Samuels death, and buried him in his house in
Ramah: In Ramah Samuels father dwelt before him, 1. Sam. 1.1. and there, in the
ancient burial place of his family was Samuel buried.

And David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.] Which bordered
upon the south of the land of Judah* not far from the desert of Maon: It
seems Samuels death added to David's fears; he had lost him to whom he was wont
to go for counsel and comfort, and was like enough now to have more enemies and
fewer friends; and therefore now he was glad to flee to a wilderness, without
the borders of Isreal's land.

Verse. 2. And there was a man in Maon whose possessions were in Carmel and that
man was very great, etc.] Because Carmel was nearer to the wilderness of
Paran* whither David was removed, then Maon was, therefore this is expressed
concerning Nabal* that though he dwelt in Maon, yet his possessions were in
Carmel, and so there he sheared his sheep, which was the occasion of David's
sending to him; and indeed, Maon, Ziph, and Carmel, were all in the tribe of
Judah, not far it seems asunder, and therefore joined together, Josh. 15.55.
his great riches are here mentioned, as an aggravation of his inhumanity
toward David's followers; had he been a man of a mean estate, he might have
pleaded that he was not able to send relief to David's six hundred men, but
being a man of so vast an estate, he might have sent somewhat to David and his
men, and have been never the worse for it, and therefore there could be nothing
said by way of excusing him.

Verse. 6. Peace be both to thee, and peace be to thine house, etc.] This modest
manner of their seeking some relief from Nabal is therefore expressed, to let
us see, that they spoke nothing that could provoke him to answer them so
bitterly, and so churlishly as he did.

Verse. 7. For we come in a good day, give I pray thee, whatsoever comes to
thine hand, etc.] In these words, For we are come in a good day. Two reasons
are employed to move Nabal to satisfy their desire. First, because he had now
provided a liberal feast, out of which he might well spare them somewhat.
Secondly, because it was a day of rejoicing, at which times men's hearts are
freer to give, and so thence he concludes, Give I pray thee whatsoever comes
to thine hand, that is, whatsoever thou think good to bestow upon us.

Verse. 9. They spoke to Nabal according to all those words in the name of
David, and ceased.] These last words, and ceased, are added to imply, that this
before mentioned was all they said; they were neither importunate, nor insolent
in their speeches; but in a fair manner spoke what David had given them in
charge, and then they had done.

Verse. 10. There be many servants now adays that break away, every man from
his master.] Herein covertly he upbraids David. First, for flying from the king
his master, and standing out in rebellion against him. And secondly, for giving
entertainment to fugitive servants, that were run away from their Lords and
masters.

Verse. 13. And David said unto his men, Gird you on every man his sword.] As
having vowed to go immediately to Nabals house, and there utterly to destroy
both Nabal and his family, for so much is afterward expressed, ver. 21, 21.
Indeed this was a bloody and unlawful vow as himself afterward confessed, for
it belonged not to him to revenge himself upon those that had wronged him; and
besides, Nabals churlishnes and base covetousness were not sins to be punished
with death, much less were his innocent family to be slain for his offense:
But David was now in a fury and rage, even he that could with such wonderful
patience endure all the wrongs that Saul had done him, could not now
over-master his passions, but being exceedingly enflamed with wrath, nothing
would satisfy him but the death of Nabal, and all his family.

Verse. 20. She came down by the covert of the hill, and behold, David and his
men came down against her, etc.] That is, she came down in a hollow way,
wherein by reason of the covert of the hills, she could neither see David and
his men coming down on the hill right against her, nor could they see her: and
so they discovered not one another till they met together.

Verse. 22. So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of all
that pertain to him, etc.] That is, let the Lord deal with mine enemies, as I
shall be constant in performing what I have resolved on, not to leave any alive
that belong to Nabal, by the morning light, to wit, either by prospering them
if I do it not, or by destroying them together with Nabal if I do it. According
to the ordinary manner of using this form of imprecation, the curse should have
been wished upon himself, So and more also do God unto me, if I leave, etc. as
we see Ruth 1.17. concerning which see the note there: But naturally men are
loath to pronounce a curse upon themselves, which happily caused David rather in
the imprecation to mention his enemies (as we see in these times what strange
expressions in their execrations some men will use, even out of a natural
lothnesse to curse themselves, Would I might never swear, As I hope to be
saved, etc.) but by this means David's speech is somewhat confusedly intricate,
and his meaning not so clearly expressed: as for that expression, any that
p^sseth against the wall, thereby he meant that he would not leave so much as a
dog of all that he had, or else it is meant of all the males in his family both
men and children: but most Expositours understand it according to the first
exposition, because David's saying that the Lord had kept him back from hurting
Abigail, verse. 34. does plainly imply, that he resolved to kill both males and
females.

Verse. 24. Upon me my Lord, upon me, let this iniquity be.] Thus by desiring
that his displeasure might fall upon none but her, whose innocence and
solicitous care to satisfy his desires he might clearly see, she does in a
sweet and elegant manner seek to save her whole family from the revenge he had
resolved upon; for her innocence and simplicity she knew would secure her,
that he would not punish her that had not deserved it.

Verse. 25. For as his name is, so is he: Nabal is his name, and folly is with
him.] Herein she would imply, that he was not worthy of David's anger, and
therefore not to be regarded; for wisemen always judge the contempt and
reproaches of children and fools not worth the minding.

Verse. 26. Seeing the Lord has withholden thee from coming to shed blood, and
from avenging thy self.] That is, seeing God by his providence has sent me
forth to stay thee from seeking thine own revenge, (which she puts him in mind
of, as a strong inducement to appease his wrath.) Now let thy enemies and they
that seek evil to my Lord, be as Nabal: that is, thou giving over thine own
quarrel, may all thine enemies be as vild and hateful to God and man, as weak
and unable to hurt thee, and as sure to be punished by the hand of God, as
Nabal is, or as thou did intend Nabal should have been. So that one
principal thing employed in these words, I conceive is this, that if David
would commit his cause to God, and not take revenge on Nabal himself, then God
would certainly do it for him: as we see indeed it fell out verse. 38. when God
struck him with sudden death.

Verse. 27. This blessing which thy handmaid has brought unto my Lord, let it
even be given unto the young men,] Herein she modestly extenuates the worth of
her gift as no^ being a present good enough for David, only she desires he
would accept them, and bestow them amongst his followers.

Verse. 28. For the Lord will certainly make my Lord a sure house, because my
Lord fights the battles of the Lord, etc.] That is, the battles undertaken by
warrant from the Lord, and in the just defense of the Lords own cause and
people; but why is this added concerning the prosperous estate, to which the
Lord would raise David? Surely that having laid this ground, she might thence
infer what she adds afterward, verse. 30.31. to wit, what an advantage it
would then be to him, not to have his conscience rising upon him for shedding
innocent blood, as it would doubtless, if he should seek to revenge himself as
he had determined.

Verse. 29. Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and seek thy soul; but the soul
of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord thy God.] That
is, the Lord shall make precious account of thy life, and shall carefully
preserve it: because men are wont to bind up those things in bundles which they
are careful to keep, and so lay them up charily, where no body may meddle with
them, hence is this expression concerning the provident care of God over David
for the preservation of his life, The soul of my Lord, shall be bound in the
bundle of life with the Lord thy God; he was but a man as great as he was, that
sought to cut him off, and that man's rage must needs be vain, that seeks to
destroy him, whom the Lord God has undertaken to preserve.

Verse. 31. This shall be no grief unto thee, nor offense of heart unto my Lord,
etc.] That is, thou shall not have this to trouble thee, That thou have shed
blood causeless, etc. and so withal, she implies, that if he did go on in his
vow, this would be hereafter a continual vexation to him, and deprive him of
all the comfort he might otherwise enjoy in the great good that God would do
for him.

Then remember thine handmaid.] That is, remember that which I have said, and
think of me accordingly.

Verse. 37. His heart died within him, and he became as a stone.] That is, he
fell as it were into a swoun, and so there he lay like a stock or stone for ten
days together, the very thinking how near he was to death (upon his wives
relation) made his heart to die within him.

Verse. 39. And wen David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be the
Lord, etc.] Though he rejoiced not in the evil that was fallen upon Nabal, yet
he could not but rejoice in the manifestation of Gods justice upon him in his
behalf, and in seeing that the Lord had pleaded his cause against him.

And David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.] David
would rather send then go himself, that she might the more freely either grant
or deny his suit, and that it might be the more evident that he took her not
by force and violence.

Verse. 41. Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
servants of my Lord.] Herein was the faith of Abigail discovered, who could
think so honorably of David, when he lived in such a persecuted estate, and
despised condition.

Verse. 43. David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel.] A town in Judah, Josh. 15.56.

Verse. 44. But Saul had given Michal his daughter David's wife, to Phalti, etc.]
This Phalti of Gallim (a place in the tribe of Benjamin, ^a^. 10.30.) is also
called Phaltiel, 2, Sam. 3.15. to whom Saul gave Michal David's wife, not only
out of hatred and malice against David; but also out of policy as he thought,
that the title of having his daughter to wife, might not be any furtherance to
him in climbing to the kingdom.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 1. ANd the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Does not David
hide himself, etc.] Though David had been once before in great danger in these
parts, the Ziphites discovering him to Saul, and seeking to entrap him; yet
hither he was come again from the wilderness of Paran, chap. 25.1. and good
reason might be given for it: For it might be occasioned by his marriage with
Abigail, whose estate lay in these parts; and again, his hope that Saul would
keep his covenant and oath, chap. 24. might encourage him, the rather, because
since that for a time he had now been quiet, but he found his enemies as
violent as ever: Indeed if David should come to the crown, the Ziphites might
well fear the^ former treachery would be remembered, and therefore it stood them
upon, to seek David's ruin, if by any means they could.

Verse. 3. David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him,
etc.] But why is it said in the very next words* verse. 4. That he sent forth
spies, and so understood that Saul was come in very deed: I answer, that these
first words are meant only of some notice that David had of Saul's coming: of
the certainty whereof, he was not at first fully satisfied, and so sending out
scouts to see if it were true, was by them fully informed that it was so indeed.

Verse. 6. Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai
the son of Zeruiah brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me, etc.]
The two Captains whom he desired to go with him to Saul's camp, were Ahimelech
called the Hittite (either because he was so by birth, though in Religion he
was an Israelite, or else, because though he was an Israelite by birth, yet he
lived among the Hittites,) and Abishai the son of Zeruiah David's sister, 1.
Chron. 2.15.16. (and therefore it is, that she the mother is still mentioned,
and not the father, who was perhaps of meaner descent, at least not of so great
a family.) David having before closely approached Saul's camp (alone by himself
as is before noted, verse. 5.) and finding them all fast asleep, being carried
no doubt also, by a special instinct of the spirit of God, he resolved once
more to manifest his fidelity to Saul, and therefore demanded of these his
followers, which of them would venture to go with him into the camp to Saul,
where he had found all the Army securely sleeping.

Verse. 8. Then said Abishai to David, God has delivered thine (...) thine hand
this day etc.] David's sparing Saul in the like case formerly, ha^ done no good
upon him; and besides, the Lords proffering him the like opportunity (...)
second time, seemed to Abishai a manifest declaration of Gods will, that he
wou^ have him cut off Saul; and therefore, though he rejected this motion
before (...) Abishai hoped he would hearken to it now; and therefore again
pressed him (...) might be done.

Verse. 10. The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come, etc.] That (...)
God should strike him with sudden death, or he should die his natural (...)
other men die by sickness, or old age; or he should come to his end by some
casualty, as by being slain in battle, etc.

Verse. 11. Take thou now the spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse of
water, etc.] Which stood happily by him, for the quenching of his thirst, or
else to wash with: for some conceive, that in those hot countries they used to
wash sometimes in the night, especially if any pollution had befallen them.

Verse. 14. Then Abner answered, and said, Who art thou that criest to the
king?] That is, say some, to the disturbance of the king in his rest? But I
rather think, that though it be only expressed in the foregoing words, that
David cried to the people, and to Abner, yet he mentioned also the king, at
least, so far as to ask, Who is there about the king? whereupon Abner
answered thus, Who art thou that criest to the king?

Verse. 19. If the Lord have stirred thee up against me, let him accept an
offering.] Some understand this as if David had said, that in case it were
manifest that it were of the Lord only that Saul was stirred up against him,
he for his part would most willingly yield himself to the trial of justice,
that he might if he had offended undergo deserved punishment, and so this might
be accepted of the Lord as a sacrifice well-pleasing in his sight. But there is
another exposition given by others, which is plainer, and seems more clearly to
be gathered from the text, to wit, that David desires that the Lord might be
appeased by sacrifices, if really it were of him that Saul was stirred up
against David, and of no body else: David considered that perhaps no enemy
urged Saul to these courses, but that it was of God (to wit, by letting loose
the evil spirit upon him, 2. Sam. 24.1.) and that herein the Lord might have
respect both to the sin of David, and Saul: why then says David, if the case
be so, let us both labor to make our peace with God, let us offer up
sacrifices that may be acceptable in his sight, humbly acknowledging our
offenses, and calling to him for pardon; and that because there is mercy with
him, and power to withdraw these turmoils, if he be once appeased toward us.

They have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord;
saying, Go serve other gods.] That is, by causing me to be thus continually
persecuted, not giving me any resting place in the land of Canaan, they have
done what in them lay to drive me from amongst the people of God, to go and
live amongst idolaters, that so I might be entangled by them, and corrupted in
their idolatrous practices.

Verse. 20. Now therefore let not my blood fall to the earth, before the face of
the Lord.] As if he had said, Do not cause my blood to be shed and spilt like
water upon the ground causelessely, the Lord seeing and beholding it. For in
those last words before the face of the Lord, David implies a reason to move
Saul to take heed of she^ding innocent blood, to wit, because the Lord would
see it, and not suffer it to go unpunished.

For the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, etc.] See the note chap.
24.14.

Verse. 21. Behold, I have played the fool and erred exceedingly.] Thus Saul did
not only confess his fault, but did also with much detestation judge and
condemn himself for his gross folly therein, and that also to his great shame
openly, in the ^aring of all his captains and soldiers that were about him.

Verse. 23. The Lord render to every man his righteousness, etc,] For all Saul's
fair promises, David having had frequent experience of his fickleness this
way, slyeth from him to Gods goodness, and puts all his trust and confidence
in him, as is evident in these two verses.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. THere is nothing better for me, then that I should speedily escape
into the land of the Philistines, etc.] This was no warrantable course which
David here pitched upon for his preservation; for first, God had once before
commanded him to abide in the land of Judah, by the Prophet Gad, chap. 22.5.
secondly, having been such a deadly enemy to the Philistines, and so hardly
once before escaped with his life, when he sought for shelter amongst them;
there was no likelihood he should be now entertained by them upon any other
terms, then that he and his soldiers should turn to the Philistines, and
become enemies to the king and people of Israel: and thirdly, to the great
grief of those that were righteous in the land, the enemies of David would
exceedingly triumph in this, alleging that now he had discovered what he was,
in deserting his people, and religion, and joining himself to their
uncircumcised enemies: but thus it is usually with men when their hearts sink
through infidelity, as David's now did; they will seek to help themselves by any
unlawful means, as men ready to sink in the water, will be catching at any
thing to save themselves from drowning.

Verse. 2. And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that
were with him, unto Achish, etc. To Achish king of Gath David fled once before,
chap. 21.10. (yet some think that this was not the same Achish, and that to
distinguish this from him, formerly mentioned, this is said to be the son of
Maoch) but David went in another manner now then he went before; then he went
secretly, and alone by himself, hoping to have lived there unknown: now he went
openly, attended with six hundred followers, and their several households, ver.
3. and therefore now it is likely that he had beforehand procured from Achish
assurance, that he and his should live safely in the land, to which indeed
policy might persuade him, in regard of the hatred wherewith Saul, that made
continual wars with the Philistines, was known to prosecute David.

Verse. 5. Let them give me a place in some town in the country, etc.] David's
aim in this request might be: first, that he might have the more freedom for
the service of God, and the exercise of his religion; and might keep his
soldiers from being corrupted with the sins of the Philistines, especially
of their Court-sinnes: secondly, that he might avoid the better the envy of
the Philistines: for being retired to some obscure corner of the country,
where he should be less in their eye, there would not be so frequent occasion
of offense and stirring their spirits against him; and besides, all suspicion
would be taken away of his affecting any advancement, or place of eminency in
their Court or State: and thirdly, that he might thence prey upon the enemies
of Gods people secretly, without having any notice taken of it: but all he
pretends was only, as out of modesty, that it was not fit for him a stranger
to live with the king in the royal city, especially having so much people
with him, who must needs be burdensome, and might prove sometime offensive,
both (...) him, and to the inhabitants.

Verse. 6. Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day.] Policy would have advised to
place him for the better assurance in some town in the midst of the land, and
not in a town that bordered upon his own country, as Ziklag did; but this
shows that God had blinded Achish for David's good.

Wherefore Ziklag pertains unto the kings of Judah, unto this day.] Ziklag
was long since allotted to the tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.31. and afterward was
given to Simeon, Josh. 19.5. though ever since detained by the Philistines; but
now it came into the possession of those to whom God had given it, and was not
only joined to Judahs portion, but was also upon this occasion designed to be
for ever after, a part of the Grown-land of the kings of Judah.

Verse. 8. And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the
Gezrites, and the Amalekites, etc.] Under a pretense of invading Judea, he bent
his forces another way, and smote the Amalekites, and others, which are thought
to be the remainders of the Canaanites, to wit, the Geshurites, that is, those
that dwelt formerly in Geshur in Gilead, Josh. 12.15. and the Gezrites, that
had dwelt in Gezer, which belonged to Ephraim, Josh. 16.3, who perhaps at the
first coming of the Israelites, fled thence to the Amalekites, and had ever
since dwelt amongst them. And thus he not only provided for the maintenance of
his army, by the spoils he took, and deluded Achish, who thought he had
pillaged the land of Israel; but withal he destroyed those accursed nations,
whom God had at first appointed to be rooted out, and continued still enemies
to the Israelites.

Verse. 10. And David said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of
the Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.] It cannot be
conceived that David pretended the invasion of so many places in one day. The
meaning therefore of this passage must needs be this, That when ever Achish
asked him that question; Whither have ye made a rode to day? he answered,
sometimes that he made a rode against the south of Judah; and sometimes again,
that he had made a rode against the south of Jerahmeelites (who were a
particular family of the tribe of Judah, 1. Chron. 2.9.25.) and sometimes also
against the south of the Kenites; and thus he either told Achish again and
again many deliberate lies, to secure himself and his from danger; or at least
he purposely deceived Achish with the ambiguity of his words (which ill-became
so good a man) intending that Achish should understand him, that he had invaded
the south parts of Judah, etc. whereas he meant he had invaded those bordering
countries that lay southward of Judah, and of the Jerahmeelites, and of the
Kenites.

Verse. 11. Lest they should tell on us, etc.] To wit, because these nations
were tributaries to Achish, or at least his confederates and neighbors. It is
strange indeed how these things could be concealed from the Philistines: but
first, we must consider that the people smitten dwelt somewhat far from the
Philistines, and scattered in several places of a solitary wilderness; and
secondly, there might be some special hand of God in concealing these things
for David's safety.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. THe Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight
against Israel.] That is, not only Achish, but with him all the other Princes
of the Philistines, encouraged no doubt by the distractions that were now in
the land of Israel, and the weak state of the kingdom by means hereof.

Verse. 2. And David said to Achish, Surely thou shall know what thy servant can
do.] The ambiguity of these words seems to imply, that he meant not fight
against the people of God, though he durst not but make semblance of being
ready to do what the king should require.

And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head
forever.] That is, I will make thee Captain of my lifeguard, so long as we
shall live together.

Verse. 2. Now Samuel was dead, etc.] This is here inserted because of the
following story, wherein is related how Saul being destitute of all counsel,
sought to have Samuel raised from the dead, that he might talk with him; of
late Saul disregarded Samuel, now he would have wished he had been living.

And Saul put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the
land.] This is added to show, that Saul seeking to the witch, sinned against
his own conscience.

Verse. 4. And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came, and
pitched in Shunem.] A town in the border of Issachar, Josh. 19.18.

Verse. 5. And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his
heart greatly trembled.] Through the terrors of a guilty conscience, which now
seized upon him.

Verse. 6. And when Saul enquired of the Lord, the Lord answered him not, etc.]
How Saul enquired of the Lord it is not expressed, only this we may conclude
that by Urim he could not enquire of God, and that because Abiathar had carried
away the high priests Ephod to David, wherein the Urim was, chap. 23.6. only
because the holy Ghost would the more fully express the comfortless condition
of Saul, how wholly he was forsaken of God, and left destitute of all direction
from him; amongst other ways, whereby he could have no answer from God, this
of the Urim is also put in; the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams nor by
Vrim: to wit, because the Urim was now with David, and not with him. Most
probable it is, that Saul enquired of God, partly by prayer, partly by
consulting with the priests and Prophets: for it is evident in several places
of this history, that there were at this time diverse Colleges of Prophets in
the land, and like enough it is, that though before he had killed Gods priests,
and despised his Prophets, yet now in his distress he was glad to seek both to
priests and Prophets, to try if they could advise him, or would enquire of God
in his behalf; but however, by what means soever he enquired, it was not done
in faith (for had he sought in faith, he would have continued seeking, and not
have given over to run to a witch) and therefore, 1. Chron. 10.14. it is said,
that he enquired not of the Lord: and accordingly we see the Lord dealt with
him; the Lord answered him not, neither one way nor other, which was an
evidence that the Lord was highly displeased with him; for the like is
mentioned we see elsewhere, as a great argument of Gods high indignation
against his people, Lam. 2.9. The Law is no more, her Prophets also find no
vision from the Lord.

Verse. 7. Then said Saul to his servants, Seek me a woman that has a familiar
spirit, etc.] It seems that in those days women, by reason of their weakness,
were most deceived by Satan, and brought to give themselves to sorcery and
witchcraft; and therefore he commanded his servants to seek him out a woman
that had a familiar spirit* not doubting but there were still some of these,
that lurked secretly in the land, though he had endeavored to root them all
out, verse. 3. and this is here recorded as the last, and most desperate
wickedness that he fell into, and upon which he was immediately cut off by
Gods revenging hand, as is fully expressed, 1. Chron. 10, 13, 14.

Behold there is a woman has a familiar spirit at Endor.] A town of the
Manassites within Jordan, Josh. 17.11.

Verse. 8. And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, etc.] This he
did not only that the witch might not know him, and so not fear to satisfy
his desire, but also doubtless out of very shame, because he now yielded to
make use of those base courses, which himself ere while, had so severely
punished.

Verse. 9. Behold thou know what Saul has done, how he has cut off those
that have familiar spirits, etc.] Thus is Saul put in mind (even by the words
of the witch, though she intended it not) how hainously he now sinned, in
seeking to the devil for help, even against the light of his own conscience.

Verse. 10. As the Lord lives, there shall no punishment happen to thee for
this thing.] That is, I will not discover thee.

Verse. 11. And he said, Bring me up Samuel.] Saul despised Samuel when he
lived, and would not follow his direction, and now his thoughts could be
satisfied with nothing, but to speak with Samuel, and rather then fail herein,
he would go to a witch to raise up the Ghost of Samuel to talk with him.

Verse. 12. And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud voice,
etc.] It was not doubtless Samuel himself that appeared now to the Witch, but
the devil in Samuels likeness: for first, the souls of Saints departed, are
presently at rest with God, and are taken up when they die, out of the devils
reach, he has no power over the spirits of Gods faithful servants departed;
for then he would abuse the souls of the dead at his pleasure to deceive the
living: secondly, it is no way likely that the Lord, who had so lately refused
to answer Saul by the Prophets, would now raise up Samuel from the dead to
answer him: we see what was said in a like case to the rich man in hell: Luke
16.31. If they hear not Moses, and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead: thirdly, even the mantle wherein he
appeared verse. 14. was an evident sign, that all was counterfeit; for did
Samuel think we, carry his mantle with him into heaven, or into the grave?
fourthly, had the Prophet Samuel been sent of God (which is the only evasion
the Papists have to maintain this error; the witch, they say, did not conjure
him up, but God sent him to appear to Saul) he would never have said as this
counterfeit Samuel did, ver. 15. that the witch by Saul's means had raised him
up, Why, says he, have thou disquieted me to bring me up? It was therefore
doubtless, by the witches enchantments that this Samuel was raised, and
consequently it was not Samuel indeed, but the devil in Samuels likeness, and
therefore called Samuel here: when the woman saw Samuel, etc. and that it was
that made her cry out so violently as soon as she saw him: when the devil was
raised, it seems according to the accustomed manner, the witch was presently
possessed with a spirit of divination, and hereby knevv Saul, for whom she
had done this, and hereupon cried out, as apprehending he was come to ensnare
her; that having discovered her he might put her to death: Why, says she, have
thou deceived me? For thou art Saul: all which shows plainly, that the
Author of that Apocryphal book of Eccclesiasticus, vvrote not by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, who says of Samuel (as in relation to this
history) chap. 46.20. After his death he prophesied, and show the king his end,
etc,

Verse. 13. And the king said unto her, be not afraid for what saw thou?]
Hereby it appears, that Saul saw not the apparition at the first, though
afterward he was admitted to the sight of it; and that happily, because the
woman was at first apart by her self, as witches indeed use not to be seen when
they work their feats.

And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.] This she
spoke, either because he appeared in such an attire, etc. that she might easily
perceive it was some Magistrate, or personage of great eminency and worth, and
such are called Gods, Psalm 82.6. I have said ye are Gods: or else, because
this evil spirit, now a counterfeit Samuel, did rise up with such a divine kind
of splendor and brightness; as we know he can change himself into an Angel of
light, 2. Cor. 11.14. That the poor woman unacquainted with such apparitions,
was even astonished with beholding it.

Verse. 14. And Saul perceived it was Samuel, and he stooped, etc.] Saul at
length is admitted to the sight of this counterfeit Samuel, though it seems he
were not by, when the witch first conjured him up, verse. 12.13. and so Saul
addressing himself to enquire of this infernal prophet, the witch it seems
withdrew her self, as appears, verse. 21, where it is afterward said, The woman
came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled.

Verse. 17. And the Lord has done to him as he spoke by me.] That is, to David;
the man to whom the Lord has betaken his favorable presence since he departed
from thee.

Verse. 18. Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, nor executedst his
fierce wrath on Amalek, etc.] When Saul was in consultation about sparing Agag
the Amalekite, the devil no doubt then suggested whatever might encourage and
embolden him thereto, but now, when he come to be affrighted with the
apprehension of Gods wrath, even that fact of his he alleged against him,
thereby to add to his terrors, and to drive him to despair, and that under a
color of speaking as a Samuel.

Verse. 19. And to morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me.] That is* ye
shall be slain, and so not be any longer amongst the living, but with me
amongst the dead: But how came the devil to be of Gods counsel, that he can so
certainly determine the period of their lives? I answer, first, that the devil
can and does many times by strong conjectures foretell many future things,
which accordingly come to pass. Secondly, that he does not here define the
time of their death certainly, but speaks darkly and deceitfully: for to morrow
does not only signify the day immediately following, but also, the time to
come indefinitely, Exodus 13.14. And it shall be when thy son asks thee in
time to come, (or to morrow) what is this, thou shall say unto him, etc. and
Matthew. 6.34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow, etc.) as indeed it seems
it was not the very next day, that Saul and his sons fell before the
Philistines: and so we see in another particular, he speaks ambiguously, Thou
and thy sons shall be with me, which might either be meant of* their dying
only, as spoken with respect to Samuel, or of being with Satan; and then that
as concerning Jonathan we are sure he lied grossly; but thus will the devil
still preach comfort to those at last that will not away with the preaching of
Gods prophets, when they sharply reprove them for their sins.

Verse 21. And the woman came unto Saul and saw that he was sore troubled, etc.]
Hereby it appears, that the witch had withdrawn her self, whilst Saul and her
familiar spirit, then Samuels counterfeit, had been talking together.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. NOw the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek.] A
town in the tribe of Asher, Josh. 19, 24, 30.

Verse. 2. But David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.] Though
Achish was king of Gath only (which was but one of the five principalities of
the Philistines,) yet it seems he was the chief among all the princes, and had
therefore the honor of leading up the rereward, and that therein too, he had
given the honor to David and his men of being as it were his own life guard,
and therefore it is said, that they marched on with Achish in the rereward.

Verse. 3. Then said the princes of the Philistines, what do these Hebrews
here.] This is not meant of those Lords that were subjects to Achish the king
of Gath, (as is indeed evident by the roughness of their language, verse. 4.
And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him, and the princes of the
Philistines said unto him, make this fellow return. etc.) but of the princes of
the other places of Palestina; for these all joined their forces with Achish,
in this invasion of the land of of Israel, the common sort had indeed as much
cause to suspect David's perfidiousnesse, and to provide for their safety as the
princes had; but the princes had a special spleen against him, because of the
honor Achish had done him, and therefore they presently combined together to
complain of him, and would have him removed.

Is not this David the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which has been with
me these days, or these years, etc.] That is, or rather these years: for he
had been with him a full year and four months, which was a good part of
another year, chap. 27.7. The time that David dwelt with the Philistines was a
full year and four months.

Verse. 26. Then Achish called David and said unto him, Surely as the Lord
lives, thou have been upright, etc. In the Original it is, as Jehovah lives;
for in those times these idolatrous nations had a reverent opinion, not only
of their own peculiar gods, but of those also which they esteemed the gods of
other nations; and so having so much knowledge of the God of the Hebrews, that
they knew he was called Jehovah; Achish swore therefore As Jehovah lives,
perhaps the rather to please David herewith: yea, it is probable that even
amongst the heathen, that were aliens and strangers from the commonwealth of
Israel, there were from former times some remainders of truth conveyed
concerning God, which were still retained amongst them; as this of the name
Jehovah, from whence no doubt came that name of Jupiter or Jove, which was in
after times so rife amongst them.

Verse. 8. What have thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee,
unto this day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my Lord the
king?] David doubtless would not for his life have drawn his sword against the
people of God; but yet that Achish and the Philistines might not be jealous of
him, and so for the better assurance of his life amongst them, he was glad to
put on a countenance, as if he had greatly desired to aid the Philistines
against the Israelites, and as if it had troubled him much that he might not do
it.

Verse. 10. Rise up early in the morning with thy masters servants that are come
with thee.] That is, Saul's servants that are come with thee; and he calls them
not David's servants, but Saul's, his masters; to imply the ground of the
jealousy of the Philistine Princes, to wit, the relation which they had to
Saul, that they were his subjects, his servants, etc.

And as soon as ye be up early in the morning, and have light, depart.] Lest the
lords of the Philistines should in their rage fall upon David, he advises him
to make all the haste away that possibly he could: and this was all Achish
intended in this his advice: But God had a further aim in it, for by this means
he was not only freed from the danger of being forced, either perfidiously to
betray Achish who trusted in him, or else to fight against his brethren, but
also hasted homeward that he might come in time to rescue the prey out of the
hands of the Amalekites, which they had carried from Ziklag: as we see in the
following chapter.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. ANd the Amalekites had invaded the south and Ziklag, and smitten
Ziklag, and burnt it with fire.] That is, they had invaded the south of Judah,
and of the Philistines country, and amongst the rest particularly they had
sacked Ziklag, and destroyed it with fire; for so we find this place explained
afterward, ver. 14. where the Egyptian they took confesses to David, We made
an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites (that is, the Philistines) and
upon the coast which belongs to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb, etc. This
no doubt the Amalekites did, to revenge the spoil which David and his men had
made in their country, chap. 27.8, taking the opportunity of doing it at this
time, when the Philistines and David's men were gone out to make an invasion
into the land of Israel. But God had herein a further end; for by this means,
first, David was chastened for his sins, who out of his distrust of Gods
promises and providence, had sought to help himself by unlawful means, by
fleeing to the Philistines, by lying and dissembling, and now of late by
pretending to Achish that he had a desire to fight against Saul, and against
the Israelites: secondly, his faith was exceedingly tried; for never was he in
greater straights then he was at this time: thirdly, the Amalekites Gods
enemies, were smitten with a great destruction: and fourthly, David was
indeared to his own people, when there was most need of it, because they were
now immediately to receive him to be their king, both by the fame of his
victory, and the presents he sent them, verse. 26. etc.

Verse. 2. And had taken the women captives, that were therein; they slew not
any, etc.] And this no doubt was of God, that they might by David be recovered
again; for otherwise how unlikely a thing was it, that they should be so
carried away with a covetous desire to make a gain of them, by keeping them
prisoners; that they should not think of using these that were now in their
power, as David and his soldiers had a while before used them, chap. 27.8, 9.
And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, etc.

Verse. 5. And David's two wives were taken captives, etc.] This is inserted,
first, to set forth in what a sad condition David was at present: secondly, to
show how wholly he submitted himself to the will of God, that could depend upon
Gods direction, whether he should pursue the Amalekites or no, verse. 8.
notwithstanding, that his wives that were so precious in his eyes, were by them
carried away.

Verse. 6. And David was greatly distressed; for the people spoke of stoning
him, etc.] As laying all the blame upon him: first, because he had provoked the
Amalekites by spoiling their country, chap. 27.8. secondly, because he had now
to no purpose carried them all away after Achish, and left the city without
any defense.

But David encouraged himself in the Lord his God.] David was at this time in
great distress; his wives were taken captives to Achish, he durst not return,
(for he would have been enraged at him for the loss of Ziklag, burnt by the
Amalekites in revenge of his former inrodes upon them) to fly to Saul was in
vain; for he was his deadly enemy, and at this time invaded by the Philistines;
yea his town followers began to speak of stoning him. But though all this were
so, yet now David raised up his heart, by remembering the power and the
goodness and the promises of God, and so by this means he encouraged himself.

Verse. 10. For two hundred abode behind, which were so faint that they could
not go over the brook Besor.] And these therefore David left with the
carriages, that with the other four hundred he might the more speedily pursue
the Amalekites, as we see, verse. 24. And thus the Lord both tried the faith of
David, by depriving him of the third part of his forces, when he was to go
against an enemy that had a mighty great army: (for there fled away as many of
the Amalekites, as David had in all with him, to wit, four hundred, verse. 17.)
and withal, he made it the more manifest, that the victory which afterward
they obtained, was of him; and not of themselves.

Verse. 11, And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David,
etc.] Thus the Lord by his providence provided a guide for David, to lead him
readily to the enemies whom he now pursued; and withal punished the inhumane
cruelty of that Amalekite, who had in so barbarous a manner cast off this his
sick servant, by making that very servant the means of bringing destruction
upon the whole army.

Verse. 14. We made an invasion upon the South of the Cherethites, and upon the
coast which belongs to Judah, and upon the South of Caleb.] By the
Cherethites are meant the Philistines, verse. 16. They were eating, and
drinking, and dancing, Because of all the great spoil which they had taken out
of the land of the Philistines, etc. Some part of the land of the Philistines
was it seems called Cherith, and thence the Philistines are in several places
of Scripture called Cherethims or Cherethites, as Ezekiel. 25.15, 16. Thus says
the Lord, Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, etc. I will stretch
out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethims, etc. So
again in Zeph. 2, 5. Where plainly judgment is denounced against the
Philistines under these words, Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coasts, the
nation of the Cherethites. And for the south of Caleb, thereby is meant the
south of Judah belonging to Calebs posterity, Josh. 14.13.

Verse. 15. And I will bring thee down to this company.] Hereby it appears, that
this Egyptian had heard them say where they meant to encamp; yea, perhaps they
had told him, that if he recovered he might come to them.

Verse. 17. And David smote them from the twilight, even unto the evening of the
next day.] That is, from the evening when he came upon them to the evening of
the next day. Some think it was only from the twilight of the morning unto the
evening, (which was the beginning of the next day.) But it is evident, that
David began to smite them when they were eating and drinking and dancing, etc.
and it is more likely that this was in the evening, then so early in the
morning.

Verse. 20, And David took all the flocks and the herds which they drove before
the other cattle, and said, This is David's spoil.] That is, he took all the
flocks and the herds which the Amalekites had taken from other places, and not
from Ziklag: He did not only recover all which they had carried away from
Ziklag, as it is said in the former verse; but besides, he took all the cattle
which they had driven away from other places. And these the soldiers drove
before those other cattle which belonged to the inhabitants of Ziklag, and
extolled David as they went along (even the same men that ere while had spoken
of stoning him) acknowledging, that it was of him that they had gotten this
great booty; for that is the meaning of these words, This is David's spoil.
Songs of triumph they sung as they went along, and the foot of their song was
still, This is David's spoil.

Verse. 22. Because they went not with us we will not give them of the spoil,
etc.] This was the base resolution of some of those, that had with David
vanquished the Amalekites, concerning those two hundred of their brethren that
had staid behind at the brook Besor; for which they are termed in the foregoing
words wicked men and men of Belial. Though first, it was not cowardice, but
mere faintness and weariness that made those men stay behind: and secondly,
in staying behind with the carriages to defend the stuff, and in being in a
readiness to aid their fellows, had they been forced to retire, they did good
service as well as the other: yet so partial were they in their own cause,
that they would have had all the spoil, and these their brethren must have
nothing but only their wives and children again.

Verse. 23. Then said David, You shall not do so, my brethren, with that which
the Lord has given us, etc.] As if he had said. The Lord has given us the
victory, and we should ill repay the Lord for this mercy, if we should ascribe
so much to our selves, as upon that ground to deal so injuriously with our
brethren. It is the very same argument which our Savior uses, Freely you have
received, freely give, Matthew. 10.8.

Verse. 24. For who will hearken unto you in this matter?] In these words David
implies, that this which they desired was so unequal, that they would scarce
find any body of their mind; every body that should hear of it, would blame
them for it.

Verse. 25. And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute, and
an ordinance, etc.] To wit, that the spoil of war should be equally divided
betwixt those that fought with the enemy, and those that stayed with the stuff.
And indeed in making this ordinance, David had not only the clear light of
nature to direct him, but also a president of the Lords own prescribing, Numb.
31.26, 27. Take the sum of the prey that was taken, etc. And divide the prey
into two parts, between them, who took the war upon them, who went out to
battle, and between all the congregation.

Verse. 26. And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders
of Judah, even to his friends.] To wit, first, by way of restitution, because
much of this prey had been taken by the Amalekites from the south parts of
Judah, v. 14. and secondly, by way of thankfulness, because of the many
courtesies he had received from them in those places, when Saul hunted him from
one place to another* And this was a good preparation to incline the hearts of
men in all places to him at this time: for just about this time, Saul and his
sons were slain by the Philistines, and so way was made for him to come to
the crown.

Verse. 31. And to all the places where David himself and his men were wont to
haunt.] Whereby it appears, that the Lord provided David some friend or other,
in every place where he came.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 2. ANd the Philistines slew Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, Saul's
sons.] And thus the Lord did provide, to clear the way the better for David's
advancement to the kingdom, that he might have the less trouble by the
surviving posterity of Saul: even Jonathan for this cause did fall amongst the
rest; for if Ishbosheth, a base and worthless man, found so many of the people
so ready to side with him against David; what would they have done for
Jonathan, so brave and hopeful a Prince, had he outlived his father? As for
Abinadab here named, he is also called Ishui, chap. 14.4. and Ishbosheth Saul's
fourth son, it seems was left at home, perhaps to take care of the government
of the kingdom in Saul's absence: for God intended by him further to try the
faith and patience of David.

Verse. 3. And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him, etc.]
Saul therefore fell not at the first onset, but for his greater terror, and
sorer punishment, first he saw the army routed, and his sons together with many
of the people slain, and then at last he was wounded and pursued so closely,
that there was no hope of escape.

Verse. 4. Draw out thy sword and thrust me through therewith, lest these
uncircumcised come and thrust me through.] Thus at the very hour of his death,
yea when he was ready to lay violent hands upon himself, Saul could despise the
Philistines, and speak reprochfully of them, and that because they were
uncircumcised, and consequently none of Gods peculiar people, as he was;
whereas being such a wicked wretch, his condition was the worse, because he was
circumcised, and one of Gods peculiar people. No Philistine could be so bad as
he in this regard.

Verse. 4. Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.] And thus with the
sword he had drawn against David, he slew himself, the Lord in his just
judgment giving him over to this desperate impatience, whereupon it is said
that the Lord slew him; 1. Chron. 10.14. and enquired not of the Lord,
therefore he slew him, etc.

Verse. 6. So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armor-bearer, and all
his men, etc.] That is, not all his soldiers (for many of them fled and
escaped) but all his household servants, and those perhaps too that were the
guard of his body.

Verse. 7. They forsook the cities and fled, and the Philistines came and dwelt
in them.] That is, some of the men of Israel the inhabitants of some cities on
the other side of the valley, to wit, the valley where this battle was fought;
and on the other side of Jordan, fled out of their cities upon this defeat, and
so the Philistines came and dwelt in their room: Whereby I conceive is meant,
that at the present they did pursue their victory for a time, and pursuing it
took those weaker towns out of which the inhabitants were fled for fear, and
then left garrisons in them: for it is not likely that presently they removed
colonies of the Philistines to dwell there.

Verse. 9. And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armor.] As David had
done to Goliath, chap. 17.54. and 21.9.

Verse. 10. And they fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan.] His head they
put in the temple of Dagon, 1. Chron. 10.10. but his body and the bodies of his
sons also, verse. 12. they fastened to the wall of Bethshan, that is, to a
wall in the street of Bethshan, 2. Sam. 21.12. a town that belonged to the lot
of Manasseh, though not yet recovered from the Philistines, called also
Bethshean, Judge. 1.27.

Verse. 11. And when the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead heard of that which the
Philistines had done to Saul, etc.] As being thankfully mindful of that which
Saul had done for them, 1. Sam. 11. when he came and helped them against the
king of the Ammonites that had besieged their city: and besides no doubt the
Lord intended a little hereby to revive the dead hearts of the poor distressed
Israelites.

Verse. 12. And took the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons from the
wall of Bethshan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.] This was not the
ordinary use of the Israelites; and therefore two reasons are given for this by
Expositours: 1. That it was because the flesh was now corrupt and putrified. 2.
Lest the Philistines should again get their bodies into their power.

Verse. 13. And they took their bones and buried them under a tree at Jabesh,
and fasted seven days.] The flesh being burnt from off their bones, they
gathered up their bones, which would not be so soon burnt as the flesh was, and
buried them solemnly in Jabesh; and there they continued till toward the end of
David's reign, when he took up their bones, and buried them in the sepulcher of
Kish the father of Saul, 2. Sam. 21.12. etc. As for their fasting seven days,
to wit, till the evening of each day, when they had thus buried the bones of
Saul and his sons, that was done doubtless, not only by way of bewayling
the death of Saul and his sons* but also especially that they might seek unto
God in the behalf of the whole land and people of God, who were now in a sad
condition, by reason of this great defeat which the Philistines had given them.
Nor is it necessary that we should think that they did neither eat nor drink
all these seven days (some masters of Physic have concluded, that it must
needs be mortal to be without all nourishment for seven days together) rather
we may think that they afflicted themselves with fasting for seven days
together, only taking still at night some small refreshing: and yet indeed in
those east countries, they will far longer endure fasting, then we can do in
the^ pa^.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the second book of SAMUEL, Otherwise called, The second book
of KINGS.
CHAP. I.
NOw it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the
slaughter of the Amalekites, etc.] This book contains the history of David's
reign, who was chosen of God to succeed Saul in the kingdom; yet because
hereby is shown the accomplishment of Samuels prophecy concerning the kingdom
of David, therefore it is called The second book of Samuel. And the first thing
here related is, how the tidings of the death of Saul and his sons were first
brought unto David, whilst he was yet in Ziklag. David was lately returned
thither from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and had been preparing and
sending away presents to his friends in Judah of the spoil he had taken from
them; when behold on a sudden their great joy was damped with the sad tidings
of the overthrow of Gods people, the death of Saul and his sons, even
Jonathan amongst the rest, the dearly beloved friend of David. And thus though
a way was opened for David to come to the crown, yet it was by a sad calamity,
that must needs allay his comfort therein with a great deal of sorrow.

Verse. 2. A man came out of the camp with his clothes rent, and earth upon his
head.] See the notes, Genesis 37.29. and Josh. 7.6.

Verse. 4. And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee tell me.]
This eagerness of David to know what had passed betwixt the armies of the
Israelites and the Philistines that had invaded their land, discovered plainly
how solicitous he was for his brethren, though he sojourned at that time in the
land of the Philistines.

Verse. 6. As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold Saul leaned upon
his spear, etc.] By the relation we have of Saul's death in the last chapter of
the former book, it is evident that Saul killed himself, and that many several
passages in the relation which this Amalekite here makes of his death, were
merely feigned by him, that he might the more ingratiate himself to David; For
first, it is expressly said that Saul's armor bearer killed not himself till
he saw that his Lord and master was dead, verse. 5. When his armor-bearer saw
that Saul his master was dead, he fell likewise upon his sword, and died with
him. Secondly* It is no way probable, that after Saul had been first so sorely
wounded by the Philistine archers, that he could not get away from those that
pursued him, and then thrust through by himself with his own sword, he should
still be able to talk with the Amalekite. Thirdly, If he were so loath to be
killed by the uncircumcised Philistines, why should he desire an uncircumcised
Amalekite to kill him? And fourthly, whereas this Amalekite pretends here, that
he was fallen upon his spear, which he had thrust into his body (for so those
Expositours understand these words, Saul leaned upon his spear, that hold that
this Amalekite killed him) and that therefore he desired him to stand upon him,
verse. 9. to wit, to force the spear through his body, that so he might die:
this could not be, for it is expressly said, 1. Sam. 31.4. That Saul thrust
himself through with his sword, and not with a spear, Saul took a sword and
fell upon it; it seems therefore, that this Amalekite lighting upon Saul when
he lay dead in the field he apprehended that if he should carry the first
tidings of Saul's death to David, (who was by general fame known to be the man
whom Samuel had anointed to succeed Saul in the throne) and together with those
tidings Saul's crown and bracelets, he should not miss of some fair reward for
the present, and some great preferment afterward; and so thereupon, away he
went presently to find out David; only withal, as supposing that this would
endear him the more to David, and make his reward the greater, he resolved to
add this lie besides, to wit, that he found him leaning upon his spear, as not
being able to stand, because of the deadly wounds the archers had given him,
and being entreated by him to kill him, and so to put an end to his misery, he
did what he desired of him, verse. 10. I stood upon him, says he, and slew him.

Verse. 9. Stand I pray thee upon me, and slay me, (for anguish is come upon me,
etc.] Some translate this last branch, as it is in the margin of our bibles,
my coat of male (or my embroidered coat) hinders me that my life is yet whole
in me; and accordingly they conceive, that the reason that Saul alleges why he
lay in such extremity and yet could not die, but continued heart whole, as we
use to say, was because his coat of male, or his embroidred coat hindered the
spear from passing through his body, and that thereupon, he desired this
Amalekite to stand upon him, to wit, to force the spear through him and so to
slay him; but because there is no likelihood that Saul would attempt to kill
himself in that manner, when he had a coat of male or any other garment on that
should hinder the spear from piercing through him. I rather approve of that
translation in our bibles, Stand I pray thee upon me and slay me, for anguish
is come upon me, etc. and then by standing upon him, he meant only, that he
should stand over him, and slay him, the very same that is else where expressed
by a like phrase of falling upon men to slay them, as verse 15. of this
chapter, where David enjoined one of his young men to slay the Amalekite, David
called one of the young men, and said, Go near and fall upon him, and he smote
him that he dyed.

Verse. 11. Then David took hold of his clothes, and rent them, etc.] See the
note, Genesis 37.29.

Verse. 12. And they mourned and wept, and fasted until even for Saul and for
Jonathan, etc.] Though Saul was David's enemy, and with an implacable hatred
did continually persecute him, yet he was the Lords anointed, and had been a
valiant defender of Israel; and besides the uncircumcised enemies of Gods
people, were like to insult over them because of this victory, and to
blaspheme the name of God; and this grievous calamity that was fallen upon
them was a sign of Gods wrath against the whole people; and therefore no
marvel though David mourned bitterly, not only for Jonathan, but also for
Saul and for the people of God.

Verse. 13, And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou?
etc.] He had before told David how he had answered Saul when he asked him this
very question, to wit, that he was an Amalekite; but it seems David disturbed
with the tidings he had brought him, minded it not, and so asked him again
whence he was, and accordingly, he answered again, I am the son of a stranger
an Amalekite, and lived amongst the Israelites though he were not of that
nation.

Verse. 16. And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head, etc.] See the
note, Lev. 20.9.

Verse. 18. Also he bad them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow.]
Besides, upon occasion of this heavy overthrow (which made David compose this
mournful ditty) wherein Saul and Jonathan were overcome and slain by the
archers amongst the Philistines, David took order that his people should be
taught the use of the bow: and perhaps indeed (as some think) this might be one
end why David composed this dittie, that being used frequently in the tribe of
Judah, it might stir them up to labor to be expert in the skill of shooting.

Behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.] This seems to have been a
general Chronicle of the memorable acts of this nation, which was continued
from time to time by the prophets. See Josh. 10.13.

Verse. 19. How are the mighty fallen!] This clause is three several times
repeated, to wit, here, and verse. 25. and 27. as is usual in songs.

Verse. 20. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest
the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, etc.] This is only a poetical
expression of David's desire that it might not be; or a bemoaning of that which
he knew would be; for he knew that the Philistines would rejoice, and make
great triumph for this, and at such times the women used to go forth with
music and songs. See the note 1. Sam. 18.6.

Verse. 21. Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be
rain upon you, etc.] This is also a poetical expression of the great and
grievous loss of the Israelites, in the death of Saul and Jonathan, and of
their just sorrow for it; that they had cause enough to wish, if so it might
be, that the place where they were slain, might for ever be a sad and doleful
monument of this lamentable accident: it is much like that of Job, chap. 3.3.
Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said,
there is a man-child conceived.

There the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as
though he had not been anointed with oil.] To wit, because he fell and died as
any other of the common soldiers.

Verse. 22. From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty the bow of
Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul turned not empty.] The sword in
war is said to devour in the Scripture phrase, Shall the sword devour for
ever? sath Abner to Joab, chap. 2.29. And thence that which is translated the
edge of the sword, is in the Hebrew, the mouth of the sword, and in reference
to this it is said here, that Jonathans bow, and Saul's sword returned not empty
from the blood of the slain, and from the fat of the mighty, meaning that they
did always devour the blood and flesh of the stoutest enemies; for fat is
mentioned to imply men lusty, healthful, and strong.

Verse. 23, Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in
their death they were not divided.] By this that they were lovely and pleasant
in their lives, is meant that they were dearly beloved of one another, and
indeed, though Saul was sometimes enraged against Jonathan, yet it proceeded
from his fatherly affection to him, because he was ^ealous of David for
Jonathans sake, and how piously affected Jonathan was toward his father, he
now manifested, by dying with him in this battle against the Philistines; and
indeed it is likely that this clause of Jonathans living and dying with his
father, is the rather inserted, to clear him from that suspicion of having
conspired with David against him.

They were swifter then eagles.] This may be meant, first, of their nimblenesse
and agilitie of body, which is in soldiers very commendable* because it is a
great advantage for the evading of the stroke of an enemy, and for striking
home upon them, and especially for the pursuit of them when they are put to
flight, though men be never so strong, yet if they be lumpish and heavy, an
active nimble man of less strength may do better service then they: and
secondly, of their speedy prosecuting any noble service they had undertaken or
resolved upon, they were not slothful, but active and quick; and were often
upon their enemies before they could well hear any tidings of them.

Verse. 24. Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul who clothed you in scarlet,
etc.] To wit, partly by the spoils taken from the enemy in his war, wherein
he was always victorious, according to that expression, Psalm 68.12. Kings of
armies did flee apace, and she that tarried at home divided the spoil: and
partly by the benefit of his government, under which they grew rich and
wealthy; and observable it is, that speaking of the rich and costly attire
wherewith they were enabled to adorn themselves, through the flourishing
prosperity they enjoyed under Saul's government; he addressed his speech in this
to the women of Israel. Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul who clothed you
in scarlet, etc. because women are most delighted in glorious attire.

Verse. 25. How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle!] These words
in the midst of the battle, may be addde to imply, how valiantly they died,
not as cowards flying and pursued by the enemy; but as gallant men standing it
out stoutly against the violent assaults of the Philistines, till they fell
down dead in the place.

Verse 27. How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!] This
last clause is either added by way of bewailing the loss of their arms in that
last battle fought with the Philistines, or else, to set forth the worth of
those gallant men that fell in that fight, and then it is all one as if it had
been said, that all the glory of war was perished with them.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. DAvid enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up to any of the
cities of Judah?] Though David knew that he should be king, and that Saul being
now dead, the Diadem, which by Gods special providence was put into his hand,
belonged unto him; yet where or by what means the Lord would open a way to him,
that he might possess and enjoy it, he knew not, and therefore for this he
enquired of the Lord, to wit, by the Ephod, as formerly, the rather doubtless,
because he knew that Gods answer herein, would be a great encouragement, both
to him and to his followers.

And David said, whither shall I go up? And he said unto Hebron.] This was at
present the chief city of the tribe of Judah, and withal it was the place
where Abraham; Isaac, and Jacob were buried: and thus the kingdom of David was
first erected where they lay enterred, to whom long since the land of Canaan
was promised, the Scepter of Christ and the kingdom to be established in the
tribe of Judah, which was to be a type of the kingdom of Christ.

Verse. 2. So David went up thither, and his two wives also, etc.] That as they
had been sharers with him in his sufferings, so they might have their share in
his prosperity too; and thus they that are married to Christ, and partake with
him in his sufferings, shall be sure also to partake with him in his glory,
Luke 22.28, 29. Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And
I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me: 2. Tim.
2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him, if we deny him, he also will
deny us.

Verse. 3. And they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.] That is, in Hebron and the
towns and cities adjoining, in that mountainous tract of land that belonged to
Hebron. See Josh. 21.11, 12.

Verse. 4. And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over
the house of Judah.] Though many of the other tribes came into David, whilst
he was yet at Ziklag, even some that were Saul's brethren, of the tribe of
Benjamin, 1. Chron. 12.1, 2. and therefore it is likely, that even now too,
when he was come to Hebron, some of every tribe came in to him, to wit, so many
as were convinced that David had been anointed by Samuel at Gods appointment,
and therefore judged they should rebel against God, if they should not submit
to his government; yet because the generallity of the other tribes, stood for
the settling of the kingdom upon Saul's posterity (though indeed they did it at
least many of them, because they durst do no other, for fear of Abner: Ye
sought for David in times past to be king over you, says Abner to the
Israelites, chap. 3.17.) And only the tribe of Judah did generally at this
time come into David, therefore it is said, that for the present he was only
anointed king over the house of Judah. Hitherto David had been extremely
persecuted by Saul, and had endured a great deal of trouble and sorrow; but now
at last God made good his word: and settled him in the throne which he had
promised him; and herein was David a notable type of Christ, who through many
sufferings entered into glory, he endured the cross, despising the shame, says
the Apostle, Heb. 12.2. and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
Yea and the voluntary submission of these men to the government of David, was a
type of the voluntary submission of Christ's subjects to his Scepter, according
to that prophetical expression, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power. Indeed this was the very reason why they anointed David
now again at Hebron, whereas he had been before anointed by Samuel; namely,
that they might thereby testify their approbation of that which God had
appointed, and how freely and cheerfully they did all consent, to accept of him
as their king and sovereigne.

And they told David, saying, That the men of Jabesh-Gilead were they that
buried Saul.] It may well be that David made enquiry after the bodies of Saul
and his son, as intending to have them honorably buried, and that hereupon
he was told what had been herein done, by the men of Jabesh-Gilead.

Verse. 6. And now the Lord show kindness and truth unto you.] That is, may the
Lord recompense the kindness which you have showed to Saul, by being
constantly kind and gracious to you; these two words kindness, and truth, are
often joined together in the Scripture, to signify a constant sure hearty
kindness.

Verse. 7. Your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed
me king over them.] This clause is added to show the reason why he sent this
message to the men of Jabesh-gilead, to wit, because he was now anointed king
in Saul's room* and he would not have them entertain any thoughts of jealousy,
that he would bear them any spleen for their kindness to Saul, but would
rather study to requite them for it; thus by kindness he sought to win the
other tribes to submit to his government.

Verse. 8 But Abner the son of Ner, Captain of Saul's host, took Ishbosheth the
son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim, etc.] To wit, that he might
there anoint him king, in the room of his father Saul, as it follows in the
next verse. And he made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over
Jezreel, (not that of Judah, Josh. 15.26. but that of Issachar, Josh. 19.18.)
and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel, that is, over all the
other tribes of Israel, except the tribe of Judah, that had anointed David;
Abner was Saul's cousin german (for Ner the father of Abner, and Kish the father
of Saul, were brothers) and in Saul's time he was the Lord General of all his
forces, fearing therefore that he should be displaced and disregarded, if David
were king, at least that he could not hope for the preferment, and favor under
David, that he might expect under a king of his own kindred and family,
especially if he were the chief means to make him king, he resolved to continue
the kingdom, if he could in Saul's family; and because Mephibosheth Jonathans
son, the heir apparent to Saul, was but five years old, and now lately lamed
in his feet, chap. 4.4. therefore he rather thought fit to proclaim Ishbosheth
king, who was the only son of Saul that was now left, except those that he
had by his concubines: and to that end he took him, and carried to Mahanaim,
which was a city in Gilead, beyond Jordan in the tribe of Gad, choosing there
at first to settle his new made king; either because he had heard of the
message which David had sent to the men of Jabesh-gilead, and so desired to
strengthen himself in those parts, lest they should be won to fall off to
David, or else only because this being one of the remotest parts of the
kingdom, Ishbosheth might be here safest from David's party. It is indeed
evident, that Abner knew well enough that David was anointed by Samuel at Gods
appointment, to succeed Saul in the throne; for we see that afterward in his
anger, he could tell Ishbosheth, that he would translate the kingdom to David,
even as the Lord had sworn to him, chap. 3.9. But what do ambitious Athesticall
men care for Gods command? He considered at this time that Ishbosheth was his
near kinsman, and that being but a weak feeble-spirited man, he might use him
as a scale, and in the mean time rule all himself, and therefore he made no
bones in the pursuit of these his ambitious designs, to set up a king contrary
to what he knew God had appointed.

Verse. 10. Ishbosheth Saul's son, was forty years old when he began to reign
over Israel, and reigned two years.] Some therefore conceive, that Ishbosheth
took not the kingdom upon him, till five years after his fathers decease; but
I should rather think the meaning of this clause is, not that Ishbosheth
reigned but two years in all, but that he had reigned but two years, when Abner
led forth an army against David, and was overcome by Joab, as is related in the
sequel of the chapter, for had not Ishbosheth reigned longer then two years,
why is it said, chap. 3. verse. 1. that there was long war between the house
of Saul, and the house of David; and why was it seven years and odd months,
ere the rest of the tribes accepted of David for their king. Yet some
Expositours hold, that it was above five years after the death of Saul, ere
Abner rose up against David, and made Ishbosheth king.

But the house of Judah followed David.] To wit, even after the other tribes
had made Ishbosheth king: which is doubtless noted to the praise of the men of
Judah. They might well assure themselves that if they still stuck to David it
would make a dangerous rent in the kingdom, and that would prove the occasion
of a civil war, wherein much blood was like to be shed, and yet because it
was of Gods appointment that David should be king, they are commended for this,
that they did still hold fast with David, leaving the event for other things to
God.

Verse. 12. And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbosheth the son
of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.] To wit, to make war against
David, as is evident in the sequel of the story.

Verse. 14. And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play before
us, etc.] The meaning of this is, that when both armies were met together, as
is before said, Abner sent a challenge to Joab, to wit, that a certain number
of their young gallants on each side might come forth, and show both armies
some pastime in a fight together; and this no doubt he did in a bravery as
hoping by this vaunting flourish of the courage of his men, to daunt those that
were with Joab; but Joab soon accepted the challenge, and sent forth twelve of
his men to enter the lists with twelve of Abners; and we may well think that
the sad event of this combat was of God, to show how he abhorres such
vainglorious challenges.

Verse. 17. And there was a very sore battle that day.] Each part happily being
enraged by the death of their fellows slain in the combat, both armies did
presently with great fury fall upon each other, and so there was a sore battle,
though at last Joab and his men won the field, who fought for David the Lords
anointed; as it follows in the next words, Abner was beaten, etc. and yet
considering that Abner had all the tribes of Israel on his side save that of
Judah, it is very probable that his army was far greater then Joabs.

Verse. 21. Lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his armor.] As
if he should have said, Set upon one that is thy match, and content thy self
with taking the spoil of his armor from him; or else I shall soon make thee
know that thou art not able to deal with me.

Verse. 22. How then shall I hold up my face before thy brother.] Hereby it
appears that Abner began now to think of obtaining a peace from David, and was
troubled to think that he should have Joab his continual adversary, if he
should now slay his brother Asahel.

Verse. 23. Abner with the hinder end of his spear smote him under the fifth
rib, etc.] About the place where the short ribs are; which is added, because in
that place the blow must needs be mortal: and it was done with the hinder end
of the spear, that is, with the pike in the lower end of the spear, for their
spears had pikes at both ends.

Verse. 25. And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after
Abner, etc.] That is, some of his broken troops gathering together about Abner
on the top of an hill, encouraged with the advantage of the place, and night
approaching, began to make head against Joab again.

Verse. 26. Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?
etc.] That is, though in your heat of prosecuting the victory you have gotten,
the blood of our brethren is not minded, yet afterward it will cause bitter
sorrow, even these few of our army which are left, when they see their
condition is desperate, may happily sell their lives amongst thy followers at a
dear rate; but however, the shedding of so much blood of Israel, your
brethren, will end at last in bitterness, and therefore desist: How long shall
it be ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?

Verse. 27. Unless thou had spoken, surely then in the morning the people had
gone up every one from following his brother.] That is, unless thou had by
challenging the young men on our side, provoked the people, (and he means that
challenge mentioned verse. 14.) so far we were from desiring to shed the blood
of our brethren, that purposely to prevent it, we were minded to have retired
in the morning before the battle was fought.

Verse. 28. So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people, etc.] Though Joab
doubtless was greatly incensed for the death of his brother Asahel, yet hoping
that Abner began to bethink himself of the loss they had sustained, and
especially to prevent the further shedding of the blood of their brethren, he
sounded a retreat, neither fought they any more, to wit, at this time: for
afterward the war was renewed again, as is evident in the next chapter,
verse. 1.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. BUt David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed
weaker and weaker.] Herein was David's kingdom (as in many other things) a type
of Christ's, and that both generally in the whole Church, and particularly in
the heart of every true Christian: for thus shall it always be betwix: the
kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of Antichrist, between the flesh and the
spirit in the regenerate. The Church of Christ shall grow stronger and
stronger, and Antichrist shall consume away, and grow weaker and weaker; though
he may seem to gather strength for a time, yet by degrees he shall loose again
more then for that time he had gotten; and so he shall waste and consume away,
till at last his kingdom shall be utterly ruined; and so it is likewise with
the kingdom of Christ erected in the hearts of all true believers, though the
spiritual part be never so weak at the first, yet it shall by little and
little grow in strength; and the flesh on the other side shall grow weaker and
weaker. There is a crown and kingdom promised them, and though there be never
so much opposition, Christ's promise shall at length be made good unto them, as
here Samuels was unto David, they shall subdue all their enemies, and shall be
crowned at last triumphantly in heaven.

Verse. 2. And unto David were sons born in Hebron, etc.] And herein Gods
providence notably appeared, to wit, that David all the while he was in exile
had no children, whilst they were like to be an occasion of much care and
encumbrance to him. But being now settled in his kingdom, he had many sons;
for that all these were born to him in Hebron, is yet more clearly expressed,
1. Chron. 3.1, etc.

Verse. 3. And his second Chileab, etc.] Called also Daniel in that 1. Chro. 3.1.

And the third Absalom, the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of
Geshur.] There was an inrode made by David into this land of Geshur, whilst he
lived with Achish, 1. Sam. 27.8. and therefore some think that David then took
this Maacah captive, and so took her to wife, as is permitted by the Law, Deuteronomy.
21.13. And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and shall
remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a full month* and
after that thou shall go in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy
wife. But Absaloms flying to this Talmai his grandfather by the mothers side,
chap. 13.37. may rather imply, that he had her by way of peaceable treaty, and
that was doubtless unlawful unless she yielded to become a proselyte.

Verse. 5. And the sixth Ithram, by Eglah David's wife.] This clause, David's
wife, is here added, either because her parentage was not known, which is
expressed in the rest of his wives, and therefore this title is added in stead
of that, or to distinguish this Eglah from some other woman of the same name;
or else to imply the same concerning the rest before named, and that he had
these children in Hebron by his wives, besides those which he had by his
concubines, 1. Chron. 3.9.

Verse. 7. And Ishbosheth said to Abner, Wherefore have thou gone in unto my
fathers concubine?] It is not expressed that Abner had lien with Rispah his
fathers concubine, but only that Ishbosheth charged him with it; and therefore
we cannot say whether it were so indeed, or whether Ishbosheth out of some
groundless jealousy or false report did only suspect it was so. But however,
most probable it is that Ishbosheths discontent was not only because he took
it to be a dishonor to his father, that his servant should lie with his
concubine; but also especially because he apprehended it was out of some close
and secret affectation of the kingdom. It seems that the taking of the
deceased kings wives or concubines, was in these times esteemed dangerous for
the raising of the spirits of those that did it to seek the crown, and that
therefore it was judged fit, that the succeeding king should take all the wives
and concubines of his predecessor the deceased king, into his power; whence
was that which the Lord by the Prophet Nathan said to David, chap. 12.8. I gave
thee thy masters house, and thy masters wives into thy bosom, etc. and
therefore as Solomon conceived of Adonijahs desiring Abishag for his wife, who
was David's concubine, to wit, that he did it out of an ambitious affectation of
the kingdom, 1. Kings 2.22. So did Ishbosheth conceive of Abners going in to
Rispah, Saul's concubine; namely, that he had therein some plot by degrees to
thrust him out, and to wind in himself to be king in his room, and therefore
charged him so sharply with it.

Verse. 8. Am I a dogs head, which against Judah do show kindness this day unto
the house of Saul, etc.] By this answer of Abners to Ishbosheth, we cannot
conclude neither whether he were guilty or no, of that which Ishbosheth had
charged him with; for the meaning of these words may be either that he thought
himself greatly wronged, that Ishbosheth should suspect him for, or accuse him
of, such a foul fact as this, of committing whoredom with his fathers
concubine, or else that he took it in high disdain that Ishbosheth should
esteem so meanly and basely of him, as to make such a matter of it, and to take
it to be so great a disparagement and dishonor both to him and to his father,
that he should go in to one of his fathers concubines: But yet I conceive it
more probable, that the last of these was Abners meaning; First, because that
phrase, Am I a dogs head? does rather import the worthlesnesse of his person,
then his lustfulnesse in that fact he was charged with, as some would have it;
for so we see the like phrase is used elsewhere, as 1. Sam. 24.14. After whom
do thou pursue? says David to Saul, after a dead dog, after a flea? etc. 2.
Sam. 9.8. What is thy servant that thou should look upon such a dead dog, as
I am, says Mephibosheth to David: and secondly, because that which Abner here
alleges concerning his siding with him against the house of Judah, must needs
be alleged, to show how little cause he had so to vilify him, by whose means
he was made king, and had been hitherto supported in his kingdom, and in whose
power it was if he pleased, to deliver him up into the hands of David. So that
it seems by this answer of Abners, that he did purposely wave the making any
reply to the fact he was charged with, either by denying or justifying of it,
and only quarrelled that Ishbosheth should think so meanly of him, as to take
it for such a disgrace to his family (whether it were true or false) that he
should lie with one of his fathers concubines. Am I (says he) a dogs head,
that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman?

Verse. 11. And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him.]
From this which is here said of Ishbosheth, some Expositours conclude, that he
was a poor and low-spirited man, and the rather, because they observe too,
that he alone of all the sons of Saul went not forth to war against the
Philistines, when Saul and his sons were slain. But indeed, considering what
exceeding power these men had amongst the people, that commanded in chief over
the Militia, it is no wonder that he should be so daunted, when Abner in a rage
answered him so insolently, and threatened him openly with revolting to David.
Nor could it be concluded from hence alone, that he was a man of no great
metal and courage: for even David himself upon the same ground, was overmuch
awed with Joabs power, and durst not do to him what otherwise he would have
done, verse. 39. I am this day weak though anointed king, and these men the
sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me.

Verse. 12. And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf? saying, Whose is
the land, etc.] This clause in Abners message to David, Whose is the land?
might be meant two several ways, to wit, either to intimate, that he had the
land of Israel in his power, and could as he pleased either settle it upon the
house of Saul or remove it to David; or else to imply that he did now
acknowledge that the land did indeed belong to David, whom God by Samuel had
anointed to be king over Israel, and that therefore he was now willing to
transfer the kingdom to him; only he desired that he would first assure
him, that he would pardon all that was past, and upon good conditions make a
league with him. And thus he pretended to come in to David, merely because the
land was his, and the kingdom his by Gods appointment, when indeed he did it
merely to be revenged on Ishbosheth, and to procure peace, and perhaps
advancement too for himself: even as many men in these days of the Gospel,
come unto Christ, pretending they do it for the truths sake, when indeed they
seek themselves only in some carnal respects, as Abner did.

Verse. 13. Thou shall not see my face, except thou bring Michal Saul's daughter
when thou come to see my face.] Though she had lived many years with another
husband, yet David's earnestness to have her restored to him, and that with a
purpose to have her live with him again as his wife, as she did, needs not seem
strange to us, if we consider, first, that she was his first wife, and had been
faithful to him in preserving his life, 1. Sam. 19.11, 12. and had been forced
by her father to marry this man when David was fled, 1. Sam. 25.44. secondly,
that David could no way better show his love to her, then by rescuing her from
the sin and infamy of living in adultery with another man: thirdly, that it
might be in policy a matter of great importance to settle peace in the
kingdom, and to establish the kingdom to David, that this his wife should be
restored to him again, because she was Saul's daughter: and fourthly, that by
this means he should make trial of the fidelity of Abner.

Verse. 14. And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son, saying, deliver
me my wife Michal, etc.] Thus it seems David and Abner had contrived the
business, that David should send to Ishbosheth for his wife, and that then
Abner should second the motion and procure it to be done: for that Abner had a
hand in causing Ishbosheth to restore David his wife, is evident, verse. 16.
because Abner went along with her to Bahurim. Now in the challenge that he
makes of his wife, Deliver me my wife Michal which I espoused to me for an
hundred foreskins of the Philistines, he mentions only a hundred foreskins;
because so many only David was by covenant bound to bring, though he brought
two hundred, 1. Sam. 18.25, 27.

Verse. 16. And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim.]
A town in the tribe of Benjamin, chap. 19.16.

Verse. 17. And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye
sought for David in times past to be king over you.] Hereby it appears, that
many of the Israelites would have followed David before this, but that they
durst not for fear of Abner: For the least we can conclude from hence is, that
before Ishbosheth was made king by Abner, the Israelites were divided, some
standing for David, others for Ishbosheth Saul's son.

Verse. 19. And Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that
seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.]
That is, to the greatest part of them, 1. Chron. 12.29. Abner having treated
with the elders of Israel about their accepting of David to be their king, and
more particularly with those of Benjamin, because they were like to be
hardliest won in regard of their especial relation to the house of Saul who
was of their tribe; he went to David (perhaps under pretense of carrying his
wife Michal to him, to which Ishbosheth had consented) and so then acquainted
him how tractable he had found the Israelites, and how willing to submit to his
government: yea even the men of Benjamin amongst the rest, of whom David had
most cause to fear that he should have found them refractory.

Verse. 25. Thou know Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee,
etc.] And thus though Joab doubtless was chiefly enraged, because he feared
Abner would insinuate himself into David, and prove a corrivall to him in his
honors and preferments; and withal, because his heart was full of revengefull
thoughts against him for the death of his brother Asahel, yet he alleged none
of this to David, but only that he was solicitous for him, as being confident
that Abner came only as a spy, and sought to get some advantage against David.

Verse. 26. And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after
Abner, etc.] Having spoken his mind to David, it may seem that he flung away in
an anger, not vouchsafing to hear what David would answer, and so being come
out, he sent messengers after Abner to bring him back, and happily he sent in
the name of the king (which might be one cause why David was so careful
afterward to clear himself of it,) but doubtless he pretended that he had some
business of importance to impart to him: or else, it is not like that Abner
would have come back again.

Verse. 27. Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote
him there under the fifth rib, etc.] Thus Joab and Abishai had plotted the
business before hand, whence is that verse. 30. So Joab and Abishai slew Abner
because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle, etc. by
this means (though the fact in Joab was foul and wicked) God punished Abner for
his rising up against David, and making so light account of shedding so much
blood, chap. 2.14. And Abner said to Joab let the young men now arise and play
before us: and withal, God removed him out of the way, that David might come
to have all Israel submit themselves to him without the help of Abners
treachery; for that phrase of smiting under the fifth rib, see the note, chap.
2.23.

Verse. 28. I and my kingdom are guiltless before the Lord for ever from the
blood of Abner, etc.] Because the Lord many times plagues the whole land for
the magistrates shedding innocent blood, therefore David in this protestation
that he makes of his innocence, mentions the kingdom together with himself, I
and my kingdom are guiltless. etc.

Verse. 29. Let there not fail from the house of Joab one that has an issue,
etc.] David knew well that it was much to be suspected, that the people would
think that Abner was slain by his command, or at least not without his consent,
and how likely this was to alienate the hearts of the people from him; In a
business therefore that so nearly concerned him, no marvel though in the
bitterness of his spirit he poured forth these heavy imprecations against Joab
and all his posterity, Let there not fail from the house of Joab one that has
an issue, that is, the running of the reins, (see the note, Lev. 15.21.) or
that is a leper, or that leans on a staff through lamenesse or weakness; and
why he did not proceed further to do justice upon Joab, which would have been
of all, the best way to clear his own innocence himself shows, verse. 39. I
am this day weak though anointed king, and these men the sons of Zeruiah be
too hard for me: the Lord shall reward the doer of evil according to his
wickedness.

Verse. 30. So Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain
their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.] These words, in the battle,
are added as an aggravatian of Joabs sin: For Abner slew Asahel in open
battle, and was forced thereto by Asahels pursuit of him; but Joab slew Abner
treacherously, when he pretended to speak peaceably with him; why Abishai is
here joined with Joab, see the note above, verse 27.

Verse. 31. And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him,
Rent your clothes, etc.] That is, he enjoined them to bury Abner with a solemn
funeral, thereby testifying his sorrow for his death, and clearing himself
before all the people from having any hand in it. Neither was it unfit that
Joab amongst others should be enjoined to be a public mourner at his exequies:
for first he had more cause to mourn then any man, because of his sin: David
therefore requiring him thereunto did that which was fit; if Joab therein
dissembled, it was his own fault. Secondly, it might be imposed as a kind of
punishment that he should publicly by being one of the mourners bear witness
of Abners worth, whom in his rage he had slain. Concerning the custom of
renting their clothes, see the note, Genesis 37.29.

Verse. 33. And the king lamented over Abner, and said, died Abner as a fool
dies?] That is, he died not as a fool dies; his hands were not bound, etc.
the meaning is, that he died not as a weak and cowardly man, that is, taken in
war and led captive, his hands being bound, or as a malefactor that is cast
into prison and bound in fetters, (no says he, he that slew him, had he done
it in open fight, he should have found that his hands were not bound, etc.) but
he was slain, as the valiantest man in the world might have been slain, to wit,
treacherously; by one that pretended peace and smote him unawares. Perhaps this
was the elegy which David composed to be sung at Abners funeral.

Verse. 35. And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat, etc.] By
these words is intimated, that there was a solemn feast at the funeral of
Abner, where all the people, that is, the guests invited, or some in the name
of all, seeing or hearing that the king refused to eat, labored to persuade
him to eat, till with such earnestness he protested to the contrary: and
indeed that it was a custom amongst Gods people in the time of the law to have
feasts at their funerals, either thereby to allay their grief, or to testify
their hope concerning the good estate of their deceased friends, may be
gathered from other places. For thence are those expressions, Jer. 16.7, 8.
Neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning to comfort them for the
dead: neither shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their
father, or for their mother. Thou shall not also go into the house of feasting:
to sit with them to eat and to drink. and Ezekiel. 24.17. Forbear to cry, and make
no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy
shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men. As
for David's oath when he replied that he would not eat, So do God to me and more
also, see the note, Ruth 1.17.

Verse. 36. As whatsoever the king did, pleased all the people.] This is
referred by some Expositours to this particular of David's ordering the funeral
of Abner, that whatsoever the king did herein, pleased the people; but yet it
may also be understood more generally, to wit, that the king was so highly
esteemed and beloved of the people, that they were still inclinable to approve
of any thing that he did.

Verse. 39. And I am this day weak, though anointed king, and these men the
sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me, etc.] By alleging the power of Joab and
Abishai, and the unsettlednesse of his estate in the kingdom for the present,
he labors to excuse himself for not punishing Joab for this fact of his
according to the law. Indeed by many things related both of Joab and Abner it
appears, that these that were generals over the men of war were very potent.
But why then did not David execute justice upon Joab afterward, when he was
established in his throne? Doubtless it was an infirmity in David, and before
his death it seems he repented of his error, which that charge of his to
Solomon may probably imply, 1. Kings 2.5, 6. Moreover thou know also, what
Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, and what he did to the two captains of the
host of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of
Jether, whom he slew and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of
war upon his girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on
his feet. Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go
down to the grave in peace.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 1. ANd when Saul's son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands
were feeble, etc.] That is, he was so dismayed and discouraged, Abner being
slain on whom he wholly relied, that there was no power in him to do any thing
for himself: the like phrase we have, Ezra 4.4. And the people of the land
weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building; and
Neh. 6.9. They all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from
the work that it be not done. Now therefore O God, strengthen my hands. Yea,
and thus it was too with all the tribes of Israel, as it follows in the next
words, and all Israel were troubled, to wit, because they had opposed David,
and now their general on whose counsel and power they had hitherto stayed
themselves, was taken away; yea, and that when he went about to yield himself
to David, and further his title to the crown. So that should they go forward in
that resolution of revolting from Ishbosheth to David, they suspected they
should find no more favor then Abner had found.

Verse. 2. For Beeroth also was reckoned to Benjamin, etc.] This is added, to
show why Rimmon the father of the two forenamed captains, is called a
Beerothite, to wit, because he belonged to Beeroth a city in Benjamin, Josh.
18.25. For though they dwelt not indeed at present in Beeroth, but sojourned in
Gittam another town in Benjamin, Neh. 11.33. yet that was because the
Beerothites fled to Gittam, and were sojourners there, (to wit, when Saul and
his sons were slain) leaving Beeroth to the Philistines, who came and dwelt
in it, 1. Sam. 31.7. and so still they were called Beerothites after the place
of their former habitation, and lived but as sojourners in Gittam amongst their
brethren the children of Benjamin.

Verse. 4. And Jonathan Saul's son, had a son that was lame on his feet,
etc.] This is here inserted, to imply, what it was that did chiefly encourage
these men to murder Ishbosheth, to wit, because he being taken away, there
would be no legitimate issue of the royal stock of Saul left, but only
Mephibosheth, who being but a child of twelve years of age, and withal lame in
his feet, was altogether unfit to succeed in the kingdom; whence they infer,
first, how advantageous this their intended fact would be unto David: secondly,
how likely they were to be highly rewarded by him: and thirdly, how safely they
might do it, because there would be none left of Saul's house to revenge the
death of Ishbosheth.

And his name was Mephibosheth.] He is also called Meribbaal, 1. Chron. 8.34.
So Jerubbaal, Judges 6.22. is called Jerubesheth, 2. Sam. 11.21. and Ishbaal,
1. Chron. 8.33. is the same Ishbosheth, whom Abner now made king over Israel.
Some think that in detestation of the heathen idols the Hebrews were wont many
times to leave out the word Baal, and to put in the room of it this word
bosheth, or besheth which signifies a shameful or infamous thing, Hos. 9.10.
They went to Baal-peor and separated themselves unto that shame.

Verse. 5. Who lay on his bed at noon.] Though it be not simply evil to lie on a
bed at noon, yet considering that the Scripture sets forth Ishbosheth in other
things to be a man of a slothful and dull spirit, not active in any thing, but
leaving all to Abners disposing, we may justly think that it is purposely noted
here, as the just reward of his idleness and sloth, that as he slept away his
time, so he dyed at last sleeping.

Verse. 6. And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they
would have fetched wheat, etc.] The meaning of this is, either that they came
in the disguise and habit of countrymen or merchants that came to buy wheat,
or of porters that came to fetch away wheat that was bought, or else rather,
that being known Captains of Ishbosheths bands, under a color that they came
to fetch corn for the soldiers or for themselves, (for the soldiers in those
times had usually their pay in corn) they had free access into the house, and
so went in where he lay, and slew him, and that by smiting him under the fifth
rib; of which, see the note, chap. 2.23. and this doubtless they did, hoping
that David would reward them for it: for though David seemed greatly to take to
heart the death of Abner, and to be highly displeased with Joab for it, yet
because he did not punish him, these captains perhaps concluded, that David was
well enough pleased with it, though he would not be known of it, and so he
would be with them too, if they should kill Ishbosheth; and hereby it is likely
they encouraged themselves in this treacherous villainy against their Lord and
Master.

Verse. 11. How much more when wicked men have slain a righteous person.] That
is, in respect of them which conspired against him; he had deserved well of
them, and for them therefore thus treacherously to slay him, in his own house
upon his bed, when he thought of no danger, was a villainy that did far more
justly deserve death: and the rather too, because they durst do this,
notwithstanding David had so severely punished him that pretended he had slain
Saul.

Verse. 12. And they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and
hanged them up over the pool in Hebron.] To wit, that all men might see how
much David abhorred this fact of theirs, and how far he was from knowing any
thing of it, or giving the least encouragement to them that did it.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. THen came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, etc.] That
is, many of all the tribes of Israel in the name of the rest; not only the
elders and heads of each tribe as is expressed, verse. 3. So all the elders of
Israel came to the king to Hebron, but multitudes also of the people that bare
arms, as is more largely expressed, 1. Chron. 12.23. where it is particularly
expressed, how many thousands of each tribe there came, as likewise how they
were there with David three days eating and drinking and making merry
together, verse. 39.40. For says the text, their brethren had prepared for
them, and there was joy in Israel; And indeed though the greatest part of these
tribes had for seven years stood out against David for Ishbosheth and the house
of Saul; yet because now at last they were not subdued by the sword and forced
to submit, but came in freely of their own accord, God enclining their hearts
thereto, even this submission of theirs did also shadow forth the willing
submission of believers to Christ's scepter and government: as is noted before
concerning the men of Judahs taking David to be their king, chap. 2.4. as
likewise David's free accepting of these, did shadow forth Christ's gracious
acceptance of those that do at length come in, and submit to him, and that he
never will cast off any for their former obstinacy and rejecting of grace.

Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.] That is, Israelites as thou art;
Herein they might imply their hope, that in this regard he would receive them
into his favor, though they had hitherto sided with the house of Saul against
him: but doubtless they principally alleged this as one of the main motives
that now induced them to accept of him for their king, to wit, because though
he were not of any of their tribes, yet he was an Israelite, and the law
enjoined them only to this that their king should be one from amongst their
brethren, Deuteronomy. 17.15. Thou shall in any wise set him king over thee, whom the
Lord thy God shall choose. One from among thy brethren shall thou set king over
thee: thou may not set a king over thee which is not thy brother: and seeing
the hand of God was so evidently with him, why therefore should they oppose
him? and indeed this also brings in all believers to stoop willingly (as was
prophesied, Psalm 110.3.) to the scepter of Christ, Ephesians. 5.29, 30. For no
man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes it and cherishes it, even as
the Lord the Church. For we are members of his body, of his flesh and his
bones: and Heb. 2.14, 16, 17. Forasmuch therefore, as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same*
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the devil. For verily he took not on him the nature of angels, but took on him
the seed of Abraham; Wherefore in all things it behooves him to be made like
unto his brethren, that he might be made a merciful and faithful high priest,
in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people.

Verse. 2. Also in times past when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that
leadest out, and broughtest in, Israel, etc.] That is, thou were our captain
that (...) lead forth our armies, and bring them back again. Two other reasons
are here alleged by the Israelites, whereby they were now moved to come in and
submit themselves to David's government: The first is, that they considered how
well David had deserved at their hands, and that indeed during Saul's reign, he
had been their chiefest support and defense under God, against their enemies:
and the other is, that God had by Samuel appointed him to rule over them, and
they were bound by the law of God to take a king of his choosing, Deuteronomy. 17.15,
Thou shall in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose, and^. and this they allege as the chief motive in the following words,
And the Lord said to thee, Thou shall feed my people Israel, that is, as a
shepherd provides for his flock, so must thou provide for my people, and thou
shall be a captain over Israel, and indeed this is the chief reason too, that
brings men to submit to Christ's government: to wit, because God the father
appointed him to be our king, according to that, Psalm. 2.6. I have set my king
upon my holy hill of Sion: and in that David rejected not these Israelites,
that so long opposed the government which they knew God had appointed, there is
an intimation of comfort for those, that being convinced of the truth of the
Gospel, do yet stand out a long time against knowledge, to wit, that if at last
yet they repent and come in, Christ will not reject them.

Verse. 3. And king David made a league with them in Hebron before the Lord.] To
wit, concerning the government, they binding themselves to obey him as their
king, and he binding himself to forget all that was past, and to govern them
like a good king according to the Law; and because this was done with
invocation of God as a witness of their league, therefore it is said that this
league was made before the Lord.

And they anointed David king over Israel.] This was the third time that David
was anointed king and so was Christ three times by an audible voice from
heaven, declared to be the Son of God, and the promised Messiah: First, at
his baptism, Matthew. 3.16* 17. And Jesus when he was baptized, went straightway
out of the waters; And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the
Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: And lo, a voice
from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son* in whom I am well pleased.
Secondly, at his transfiguration* Matthew 17.5. While he yet spoke, behold a
bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold, a voice out of the cloud which
said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: Hear ye him. And
thirdly, a little before his death, whilst he was teaching the people; John
12.28. when Christ had said, Father, glorify thy name, then came there a voice
from heaven, saying, I have glorified it, and will glorify it again.

Verse. 4. David was thirty years old when he began to reign.] At the same age
was Christ also inaugurated as it were into the office of the Mediator, Luke
3.22, 23.

Verse. 6. And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites the
inhabitants of the land, etc.] Jerusalem stood in the very confines of Judah
and Benjamin, so that part of it which stood on the hill Salem, was in Judahs
lot; and part of it, yea the greatest part of it, which stood in mount Sion,
was in Benjamins; the men of Judah took that part of it which belonged to them,
and smote it with the edge of the sword, Judge. 1.8. But the children of
Benjamin could not drive out the Jebusites out of their portion, Judge. 1.21. no
not when they had the help of their brethren, the men of Judah, as may be
gathered by that whith is written, Josh. 15.63. As for the Jebusites, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive them out; but
the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day: And
therefore we read, that afterward it was a city of strangers, when the Levite
and his concubine went that way, Judge. 19.10, 11, 12. yea, so it continued till
this time, when David intending (not without the instinct of the spirit of God)
to make Jerusalem the chief seat of his kingdom, and having now the advantage
of a mighty assembly of the men of war of Israel that were come up armed to
Hebron to make him king, took this opportunity, and led them forth against
Jerusalem, resolving that the wresting this out of the Jebusites hands, should
be his first enterprise.

Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in hither,
etc.] There are many several expositions of this passage, concerning the
Jebusites scoffing at David when he came to besiege them. But two expositions
there are which are both very probable: The first, which indeed most
Expositours follow, is this, That being over-confident in the strength of the
place, they in a flouting manner answered David, when he required them to yield
up the fort, that except he could take from them the blind and the lame amongst
the inhabitants, he should not come in thither; implying, that though they
should man their walls only with the blind and the lame of the people, even
they should be able to defend that place against him and all the forces he
could make. And indeed, it seems to have been a place of exceeding great
strength, because they had held it ever since Joshua entered the land; that is,
almost four hundred years, and yet it was even in the heart of their country.
The second Exposition is, That they spoke this of their gods, in whom they were
never a whit the less confident, because the Israelites despised them; except
thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in hither, that is,
even those gods of ours, which you in contempt call blind and lame gods, shall
easily defend us against all thy forces, and will in that be found to be
neither lame nor blind. And indeed this exposition seems best to agree with the
following passages in the 8. verse: And David said on that day, Whosoever
gets up to the gutter, and smites the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind
that are hated of David's soul, he shall be chief captain, Wherefore they say,
The lame and the blind shall not enter into the house. Nor need it seem
strange, that they call their own gods blind and lame: for this they might do
purposely, to let the Israelites see how little they were discouraged by these
reproaches which the Israelites cast upon their idol-gods, from putting their
trust in them, as being most confident of their aid and assistance.

Verse. 7. Nevertheless, David took the strong hold of Sion, the same is the
city of David.] For David having proclaimed, that whosoever should first scale
the walls, and so get up to the gutter, as it is expressed in the next verse,
and enter the fort, he should be chief captain, that is, the General of his
forces, Joab the rather happily that he might recover David's favor, whom he
had highly offended by killing Abner* did hereupon first scale the walls, and
so was made the Lord General of the kings forces, as it is more fully
expressed, 1. Chron. 11.6. and this was that strong hold of Sion, which because
it was taken by him, was afterward called the city of David.

Verse. 8. Whosoever gets up to the gutter, and smites the Jebusites, and
the lame and the blind, that are hated of David's soul, etc.] That is, the blind
and the lame Jebusites, wherewith they had, or pretended they could manne their
walls, and that it should be sufficient for the defense of the place, which are
here said to be hated of David's soul, because of that bitter taunt wherewith he
had been flouted concerning them; and herein David gives his soldiers to
understand, that if they took the fort, his mind was all should be put to the
sword, not so much as the blind and the lame should be spared, and that because
he had been upbraided with them; but according to the second Exposition of that
speech of the Jebusites, that it is meant of their blind and lame gods (which
may seem the more probable, because here the Jebusites, and the blind and lame,
are distinguished from each other, who so smites the Jebusites, and the blind
and the lame; the meaning of this clause is more evident, to wit, that these
their idol-gods were abhorred of David, and that he would utterly destroy them.

Wherefore they said, the blind and the lame shall not come into the house.]
That is, it grew to be a Proverb, to wit, the blind and the lame shall not come
into the house. They that understand that speech of the Jebusites, verse. 6
Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in hither, of
the blind and lame amongst the people, find it somewhat difficult to give the
sense of this Proverb. Some conceive that against those that were confident of
keeping any fort, which they could not keep, or (generally) that bragged of any
thing which they could not effect, this used to be objected as a Proverb, the
blind and the lame shall not come into the house, that is, take heed your
confidence prove not like that of the Jebusites, or if you do it, it must not
be by the blind and the lame, as the Jebusites thought to defend their walls;
or take heed that be not done to you, which you threaten against others, as
David cast out the blind and lame, which should have kept out him: others think
that the people did thus insult over the Jebusites, your blind and lame, that
should have kept out us, are never likely to enter again into this fort; or
that David did indeed make this order, as a perpetual monument of this
victory, that neither blind nor lame should enter his palace, called the city
of David (but did Mephibosheth think we, never enter it?) But now if we
understand that speech of the Jebusites, verse. 6. of their idol-gods, then the
meaning of this Proverb is plain, to wit, that no blind nor lame gods should be
tolerated in the Temple or in the city, or any where amongst them that were
the people of the everliving God.

Verse. 9. And David built round about, from Millo and inward.] This Millo was
the townhouse in the city of David, where the people had their solemn
assemblies, or rather some tower or fortress and place of munition belonging
to the city; for 2. Chron. 3.5. it is said of Hezekiah, that he repaired Millo
in the city of David, and made darts, and shields in abundance, and we see
there was the like place in Shechem or near unto it, Judge. 9.6. And all the men
of Shechem gathered together and all the house of Millo, and went and made
Abimelech king. Now from thence inward only David is said to have built,
because the rest of the city without, Joab repaired, 1. Chron. 11.8. And he
built the city round about, even from Millo round about: and Joab repaired the
rest of the city.

Verse. 11. And Hiram king of Tire sent messengers to David, and cedar trees,
and carpenters, etc.] This may be inserted here, either with reference to that
which is related in the foregoing verse, concerning the continual increase of
David's glory and greatness, David went on and grew great; and so though
hitherto we read of no Embassy, that any of the neighboring kings sent unto
him, yet now Hiram king of Tire sent messengers unto him, to wit, to
congratulate his settling in the kingdom; or else, to the last words of the
former verse, and the Lord God of hosts was with him, to wit, as an effect of
Gods favor, the Lord being with him, even Hiram though a stranger showed him
great respect, and kindness; howsoever, we may surely conclude, that it was
upon David's request, that he sent in these Cedar trees, and Carpenters, and
Masons; it seems that when Hiram sent his Ambassadors to David, David took
this occasion to desire of Hiram both Cedar trees, and workmen to build him an
house, because there was plenty of Cedar trees in Lebanon, which was, the
greatest part at least, in his dominion, and the Tyrians were esteemed the most
excellent workmen that were, both in wood and stone, and so the king of Tire
fulfilled his desire; and indeed the like is clearly expressed concerning
Solomon, 1. Kings 5.1, 2, 3.

Verse. 12. And David perceived that the Lord had established him, etc.] That
is, he saw it by daily experience, the spirit of the Lord withal inwardly
persuading his heart, that it was so.

Verse. 13. And David took him mo^ concubines, and wives, etc.] Which was
expressly against the Law of God, concerning the kings of Israel, Deuteronomy. 17.17.
Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away.

Verse. 14. Shammua, and Shobab, etc.] This Shammua is called Shimea, 1. Chron.
3.5. and so also Elishua verse. 15. Elishamah, 1. Chron. 3.6. and Eliada verse.
16. Beeliada, 1. Chron. 14.7.

Verse. 17. But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king
over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David.] Whilst there were
civil wars betwixt David and Ishbosheth, they were content to stand by and
look on, but when they saw the people generally to submit to the government of
so puissant a Prince, and that he had driven out the Jebusites from Jerusalem,
and that the king of Tire had made a league with him, they thought it was time
then for them to oppose him, and what they could to hinder the growth of his
Royal power.

And David heard of it, and went down to the hold.] To wit, there to muster and
arm his soldiers, that then he might go out against the Philistines, 1. Chron.
14.8. And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all
Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David: and David heard of it, and
went out against them. It may be meant of any strong fort, but most probably we
may think, that it was some fort nigh the Philistines, convenient for the
keeping of them in, that they might not invade the land of Israel.

Verse. 18. The Philistines also came, and spread themselves in the valley of
Rephaim.] Or, the valley of the giants, which was in the border of Judah, Josh.
15.8.

Verse. 20. And David came to Baal-perazim, etc.] A place so called, because of
the victory here obtained, whither the Philistines were now come up from the
valley of Rephaim, 1. Chron. 14.11. So they came to Baal-perazim, and David
smote them there: then David said, God has broken in upon mine enemies by mine
hand, like the breaking forth of waters: therefore they called the name of that
place Baal-perazim, and so much is expressed in the following words of David,
the Lord has broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the breach of
waters, which has reference either to the dispersion of the enemy, who were
scattered; as water in an earthen vessel, will run about when the vessel is
broken: or to Gods power in driving away the enemy, as when waters break
through the banks, and sweep away all before them, and thence this place was
called Baal-perazim, or the plain of breaches: and to this the Prophet does
allude, Isa. 28.21. For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be
wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work,
and bring to pass his act, his strange act.

Verse. 21. And there they left their images, and David and his men burnt them.]
That is, the soldiers burnt them at David's command* for so it is expressed, 1.
Chron. 14.12. And when they had left their gods there, David gave a
commandment, and they were burnt with fire; and this was according to the Law,
Deuteronomy. 7.5. Thus shall you deal with them, Ye shall destroy their altars, and
break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their graven
images with fire. Now the leaving of their gods there, is a sign of the
terror wherewith they were stricken.

Verse. 23. Thou shall not go up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come
upon them over against the mulberry trees.] That is, thou shall not go up
directly against them, but fetching a compass about, shall set upon them over
against the mulberry trees, to wit, that setting suddenly upon them, where they
looked not for him, the assault might strike them with the greater terror.

Verse. 24. And let it be when thou hear the sound of a going in the tops of
the mulberry trees, that then thou shall bestirre thy self, etc.] When David
heard the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, not a noise of
the shaking of the tops of the trees, with a wind, but a sound, as if some body
were going upon the tops of the trees; then he was to break forth suddenly upon
the Philistines, whether this sound of going were as if an army of men,
horsemen and chariots had been marching over the tops of the trees, as some
conceive, we cannot say; but doubtless it was appointed as a sign of Gods
going forth with his holy angels, to destroy the Philistines before them,
wherewith David being encouraged, was presently to break forth and set upon
them; and therefore it was upon the tops of the trees, not on the ground, to
signify forces that were sent from on high from heaven, and such as needed not
the ground to support them, but could march through the air, to come in, to
the help of his people.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. AGain David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty
thousand.] The ark, the especial sign of Gods presence amongst his people,
and from whence he had promised to answer them concerning all things, he would
give them in charge, had been in the private house of Abinadab in Kirjathjearim
about seven and forty years, ever since the Philistines sent it back to the
land of Judah, 1. Sam. 7.1. now because being there in a private house the
people began by degrees to neglect it, as if they had forgot what a treasure it
was, so soon as David was established in the kingdom and had driven the
Jebusites out of Jerusalem, he thought presently of fetching up the ark from
Kirjath-jearim to Jerusalem; first, as judging it most for the honor of God
and of his ark, that it should not lie hid in a private family, but be settled
in the chief city of the kingdom in a place purposely appointed for it: and
secondly, that being in the heart of the kingdom, and in Jerusalem the royal
city, the people might the more conveniently resort unto it, to consult with
God and to perform the duties of his worship and service. In the 1. Chron.
13.1, 2, etc. it is said, that first David called together all the captains,
and elders, and heads of the people, and imparted to them what he thought, and
then consulted with them, whether it would not be best to gather together all
the chosen men of Israel that they might in a solemn manner fetch up the ark of
God unto Jerusalem; and that when they had approved of this his purpose, then
he gathered together this great assembly of the people, even thirty thousand as
is here related; and indeed the reason why the relation of the fetching up the
ark is in that first book of Chronicles set before the relation of the two
victories which he obtained over the Philistines, whereas here the story of
those two victories is set down first in the latter end of the former chapter,
may well be this, because that consultation with the captains and elders, was
before the invasion of the Philistines, but the assembling of the people to
fetch up the ark was after it, as here it is set down.

Verse. 2. And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him from
Baale of Judah, etc.] That is, being come with all those chosen men of Israel,
whom he had gathered together to Baale of Judah, (that is, to Kirjath-jearim,
1. Chron. 13.6. which was also called Kirjath-baal, Josh. 15.9. and Baalah or
Baaleh of Judah, where the ark had been so long a time saving only when it was
upon extraordinary occasions brought into the camp, as there, 1. Sam. 14.18.)
David arose and went thence to carry the ark unto Jerusalem.

Verse. 3. And they set the Ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of
the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah.] That is, a hill or high place so
called in Kirjath-jearim, of which see the note, 1. Sam. 7.1. doubtless
because it was a long way to carry the ark from Kirjath-jearim to Jerusalem,
therefore they put it in a cart, encouraged thereto by the example of the
Philistines, and thence it was that they put it into a new cart as they also
did, 1. Sam. 6.7, 8. Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine,
and take the ark of the Lord, and lay it upon the cart, etc. But herein they
manifestly transgressed the law of God, which expressly appointed that the
Levites should carry it upon their shoulders, Number. 4.15. and 7.9. and so this
was the first occasion of Gods displeasure, and of that dismal accident that
followed in the death of Uzzah, verse. 6. for so much David himself
acknowledged, when he came up the second time with the Israelites to fetch away
the ark, 1. Chron. 15.12, 13. Sanctify your selves, says he to the Levites*
both ye and your brethren that you may bring up the ark of the Lord God of
Israel, unto the place that I have prepared for it; for because ye did it not
at first* the Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not
after the due order. It is indeed very strange that when David had called
together thirty thousand men of the chief of Israel, both priests and others,
there should not be one amongst them all that should stumble at this, but that
they should all run on so confidently in so gross an error. But we must
consider that they had been long strangers to the ark, and never questioned but
that they might safely do, what the Philistines had done before them without
any danger; and then besides, God would let us see how easily multitudes of
Gods people may err, if they do not the more heedfully examine all by the
rules of the word.

Verse. 4. And Ahio went before the Ark.] To wit, to look to the oxen, as Uzzah
went behind to take care of the cart and the ark that was in it.

Verse. 6. And when they came to Nachons threshing floor, etc.] This Nachon is
also called Chidon, 1. Chron. 13.9. and the last clause of this verse which is
here translated, for the oxen shook it, is there translated for the oxen
stumbled, and it may well be that the oxens stumbling shook the ark, and so
thereupon Uzzah laid hold on the ark to stay it, for fear it should have
fallen. Where this threshing floor of Nachon or Chidon was, it is not
expressed, but most probable it is, that they had not gone far from the house
of Abinadab in Kirjath-jearim ere the Lord by this sad disaster testified his
displeasure against them for carrying the ark in a cart.

Verse. 7. And God smote him there for his error, etc.] To wit, because having
put the ark into a cart which should have been carried on the Levites
shoulders, he now also laid hold on the ark, which no man might touch but the
priests only, Number. 4.15. The sons of Kohath shall come to bear it: but they
shall not touch any holy thing lest they die. Indeed the ark was to be covered
by the law, but perhaps in this as in other things, they had neglected the
direction of the law; or else, being covered only with a loose covering, that
might fly up with the tottering of the cart, Uzzah might touch the bare ark
with his hand; and for this God presently struck him dead in the place. A most
remarkable example of Gods severity against those that will not keep close to
the direction of his word in all things that concern his worship, upon what
pretense soever they do it. Though Abinadab the father of this Uzzah had
entertained the ark in his house above forty years together, and took it in at
a time when others were afraid to receive it through the terror of the
judgment which fell upon the men of Bethshemesh, 1. Sam. 6.19, 20. Yet was his
son now struck suddenly dead, because he reached forth his hand and touched
the ark; and yet he did it too with a good intention to stay the ark from
falling; and suddenly, not thinking of the unlawfulness of this act, as is
intimated in these words, God smote him there for his error, or rashness, as
it is in the margin of our bibles.

Verse. 8. And David was displeased, because the Lord had made a breach upon
Vzzah.] That is, he was grieved, troubled, and disquieted because of this heavy
judgment wherewith the Lord had broken forth upon Uzzah. Some will have this
understood, that David was merely displeased with themselves for their
heedlesnesse, as thinking it too harsh to say of David that he was displeased
with God; but doubtless it was partly the very judgment it self that befell
Uzzah that he was troubled at; he could not well keep his heart from murmuring
and rising against this severitie of God, in striking Uzzah dead in the place
for so small a matter, he was discontented, that when they had undertaken such
a work of piety, on a sudden all the joy of the people should be dashed and
damped with such a sad disaster; and so, partly because he did not so quietly
stoop at first under Gods hand as he ought to have done, therefore it is said,
David was displeased.

Verse. 9. How shall the ark of the Lord come to me?] That is, I shall not do it
without danger, yea it seems the Lord is not pleased that the ark should be
carried to Jerusalem; and therefore it will be safer to desist from my purpose.

Verse. 10. But David carried it aside to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.]
Who it seems gladly entertained it. Though no doubt he knew well enough what a
slaughter was made amongst the men of Bethshemesh, at the first coming of the
ark thither; and though now also perhaps he saw when Uzzah was stricken dead by
the hand of God for touching the ark, and that David himself trembled and was
afraid to to carry home the ark to his house, yet considering that there was no
danger in harboring the ark if they carried themselves with that respect and
reverence therein that God required, he gladly received the ark into his house.
That this Obed-edom was a Levite is evident, 1. Chron. 15.17, 18. and therefore
it seems he is here called Obed-edom the Gittite, because he was of Gathrimmon
a city which was given in common by the tribes of Dan and Manasseh to the
Levites of the family of Kohath, as we may see, Josh. 21.24, 25.

Verse. 12. And it was told king David, saying The Lord has blessed the house
of Obed-edom, etc.] It is not expressed what it was wherein they perceived that
God had blessed Obed-edom and all his family; but doubtless it was some
extraordinary and wonderful blessing that God poured forth upon him and his,
in the increase of his cattle and the success of all his affairs, etc.
because it was so presently discovered and notice taken of it by those that
dwelt about him in so short a time; for the ark was in his house but three
months in all, as is noted in the foregoing verse. Indeed in the 1. Chron.
26.5. it is said that the numerousnesse of his children was, because the Lord
blessed him; but this could not be the blessing here spoken of, that in the
space of three months was so clearly discerned by those that lived about him.

So David went and brought up the Ark of God, etc.] That is, perceiving by Gods
bounty to Obed-edom, that the ark might be entertained without danger, he at
length found out where their former error had been, and so resolving to amend
that, he undertook again to fetch the ark to Jerusalem; and having again
assembled the people, and given the Priests and Levites their charge, to wit,
to carry the ark on their shoulders, he fetched it with great solemnity from
the house of Obed-edom; as is largely related in the 15. and 16. chapters of
the first book of Chronicles.

Verse. 13. When they that bare the ark of God had gone six paces, he sacrificed
oxen and fatlings.] And this he did, First, by way of testifying their
thankfulness to God, for their successful entrance upon this great work; so
soon as David perceived that they had begun this work, and that as yet there
was no sign of Gods displeasure against them, as there had been formerly in
the smiting of Uzzah, it greatly cheared his heart, and thereupon he judged it
fit to stay a while there, and offer God some sacrifices by way of
thanksgiving, to wit, upon some altar for that purpose erected. He knew well
that it was of Gods mercy that they had found out their former error, in
carrying the ark in a cart, and had now reformed it, by appointing the Levites
to carry it on their shoulders according to the Law: and he considered besides,
that for many other things the Lord might have taken advantage against them*
and punished them as formerly; and therefore presently by way of thankfulness,
he sacrificed oxen and fatlings; and indeed so much is plainly intimated, 1,
Chron. 15.26. where also the number of the sacrifices offered is expressed; And
it came to pass when God helped the Levites that bare the Ark of the covenant
of the Lord, that they offered seven bullocks and seven rams. And secondly,
by way of imploring Gods mercy, that he would show them favor in the rest of
the way, as he had done hitherto. The remembrance of that doleful disaster
that befell Uzzah, made him the more fearful, and so the more careful to seek
Gods favor.

Verse. 14. And David was girded with a linen ephod.] That is, a linen garment,
like that of the Priests ephod; which doubtless he put on, not only that he
might be lighter to dance before the ark, but also to show his devotion.

Verse. 17. And they brought in the ark of the Lord* and set it in his place in
the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it.] For the tabernacle
and altar of burnt-offerings which Moses had made, were both still at Gibeon:
2. Chron. 1.3, 4. So Solomon and all the congregation with him, went to the
high place that was at Gibeon: for there was the tabernacle of the congregation
of God, which Moses the servant of the Lord had made in the wilderness. But
the ark of God had David brought up from Kiriath-jearim, to the place which
David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem: and
1. Chron. 21.29. For the tabernacle of the Lord which Moses made in the
wilderness* and the altar of the burnt-offerings, were at that season in the
high place at Gibeon. At this time David did also deliver to the Levites a
Psalm to be sung before the ark, as we may see, 1. Chron. 16.7, etc.

Verse. 20. Then David returned to bless his household.] That is, to rejoice
with them in private, and to worship God with them, and to crave a blessing
from God on them, as he had done on the people.

How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in
the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, etc.] That is, who forgetting or
casting off the respect of his regal dignity, both in apparel and behavior,
mixed himself with the base multitude, dancing and leaping in the open streets,
as fools will do and vain men, when they are hired to make others sport, as one
of the vain fellows shamelessely uncovereth himself. Some conceive, that
whilst David danced, having only a loose linen garment upon him, some part of
his bare legs or thighs might be discovered, which they judge the more
probable, because his wife upbraids him that he had uncovered himself in the
eyes of the handmaids. But I conceive there is no necessity, that the
discovering his naked skin should be hereby meant, but only that laying by his
princely attire, he had used light behavior, not beseeming the gravity of a
king, and had thereby exposed himself to the scorn and contempt of every girl
that came to see the pomp of this removal of the ark.

Verse. 21. And David said unto Michal, It was before the Lord, which chose me
before thy father, etc.] Considering how grievous a thing it is to any woman to
be upbraided with the faults and miseries of her parents, and how far every
husband is bound to bear with the infirmities of his wife, as the weaker
vessel, it may seem that David was somewhat too tart in this reply of his upon
his wife; for it must needs cut her to the heart to hear her self twitted with
the Lords rejecting of her father and his family. But indeed David had just
cause to be thus sharp, not only because the flouts and insolences of a wife
are most insufferable; but also especially because it was his zeal and devotion
in the service of God, which she derided; that it was, that chiefly moved his
spirit, that it should be cast in his teeth as a matter of reproach and
disparagement, that he had humbled himself so in a way of religion; which was
indeed a reproching of God.

Verse. 23. Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul, had no child unto the day of
her death.] And thus when David came to bless his house* Michal by her sin
brought a curse upon it. If she were barren before (as indeed we read not of
any children she had hitherto) yet David's prayers might have prevailed for this
blessing; but now because of this wickedness, God adjudged her to perpetual
barrenness, and so she died childlesse.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass when the king sat in his house, etc.] This
clause when the king sat in his house, is here inserted, First, to imply,
though* more obscurely, what is afterward more fully expressed, to wit, that
David for the present had rest from war, he sat quietly in his house, the
Lord had given him rest round about from all his enemies, (as it follows in the
next words) and so being freed from former troubles, he began to think of
further promoting the cause of religion, and of building a temple for the ark,
which he had lately brought to Jerusalem. And secondly, to intimate what it was
that made him think of building a temple, to wit, that he was come to dwell in
that stately house, which he had built for himself (for the building whereof
Hiram had sent him, both cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons, chap. 5.11,)
and so sitting in this his palace, he began to think with himself, how
unreasonable it was, that he should dwell in such a stately house, and the ark
of God should be lodged the whilst in a poor tent or tabernacle: for though
when the people of Israel removed from one place to another, the Lord chose to
dwell in a tent which might be removed, yet now that Israel had been a long
time settled in the land which God had given them, it was no longer necessary
that Gods dwelling place should be a tent; and therefore David conceived, that
his purpose of building a settled house for God, would not be a crossing of
that which God himself had ordered* in choosing a tent to be his dwelling place.

Verse. 3. And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart, etc.]
Yet afterward by express direction from God, he was appointed to cross this
which now he said; whereby is manifest, that the Prophets had not always the
spirit of prophecy upon them, but spoke sometimes as private men, as Samuel
did, 1. Sam. 16.6. And it came to pass when they were come, that he looked on
Eliab, and said, Surely the Lords anointed is before him: and 2. Kings 4.27.
And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught him by the feet:
but Gehazi came near to thrust her away. And the man of God said, Let her
alone, for her soul is vexed within her; and the Lord has hid it from me, and
has not told me. But before Nathan came to David with that message, this
present approbation had encouraged him to bind his resolution with a solemn
vow, to wit, that which we read of, Psalm. 132.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Lord remember
David, and all his afflictions. How he swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the
mighty God of Jacob. Surely, I will not come into the tabernacle of my house:
nor go up into my bed. I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine
eyelids; Until I find out a place for the Lord; an habitation for the mighty
God of Jacob.

Verse. 5, Shall thou build me an house for me to dwell in?] That is, thou shall
not. The Lord purposed to have a house built which should be the peculiar place
of his worship and service, and had made known so much long since to his
people, Deuteronomy. 12.11. Then there shall be a place which the Lord your God shall
choose, to cause his Name to dwell there, thither shall ye bring all that I
command you: your burnt-offerings and your sacrifices, etc. But David was not
the man he had appointed for this work, and therefore though the Lord commended
David for this holy intention, as is evident, 1. Kings 8.18. And the Lord said
unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house unto my
Name, thou did well that it was in thine heart, and made many gracious
promises unto him at this time, ver. 10, 11, 12, etc. to testify how well he
took it that he had such a purpose in his mind: yet withal he made known to
him, that he meant not that it should be done by him* but by his son, and
showed him also the reasons why he might not do it, (though they be not here
expressed) to wit, First, because he should still be so encumbred with wars,
that he should not have leisure or opportunity to effect so qreat a work: 1.
Kings 5.3. Thou know how that David my father, could not build an house unto
the Name of the Lord his God, for the wars that were about him on every side,
until the Lord put them under the soles of his feet. Secondly, because he had
been a man of war, and had shed blood; 1. Chron. 22, 7, 8. And David said to
Solomon, My son, as for me it was in my mind to build an house unto the Name
of the Lord my God. But the word of the Lord came to me, saying, Thou have shed
blood abundantly, and have made great wars; thou shall not build an house
unto my Name, because thou have shed much blood upon the earth in my sight: and
it must be a peaceable king that was to build the Temple, that he might be a
type of Christ, the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6.

Verse. 6. Whereas I have not dwelt in any house* since the time that I brought
up the children of Israel out of Egypt, etc.] Though David's intent was
generally in it self good, insomuch that the Lord himself commended him for it,
as is manifest in that place before cited, 1. Kings 8.18. yet it was not
without some mixture of error: for herein he failed, because he undertook to
do it without any particular direction or warrant from God, led hereto only by
the judgment of his own reason, that it was not fit God should dwell within
curtains, when he dwelt in an house of cedar; and therefore though the Lord
told him that his purpose was in the general commendable, yet withal he
rejected his purpose, and discovered thereby that he should have waited his
leisure and direction, and disproved his reason, showing that till he required
a Temple to be built, the ark was altogether as well in a tabernacle, as in a
Temple; which was evident, because he had never charged any of the Judges with
this fault, Why build ye not me an house of cedar? See the note upon 1. Chron.
17.6.

Verse. 8. Thus says the Lord of hosts, I took the from the sheep-cote from
following the sheep, etc.] That David might not be discouraged, and fear that
this inhibition that he should not go forward in the work intended, did proceed
from the Lords disregarding of him, or from any displeasure the Lord had
conceived against him (as a loving wife will grieve if her husband refuse any
service she proffers to do him) in these following words he shows how well he
esteemed of him, both by recounting what he had done for him, and by promising
what he would do more. But yet withal, in these words, I took thee from the
sheep-cote, etc. to be ruler over my people, the Lord implies, that in doing
this, for which he had exalted him, in ruling his people, he might sufficiently
approve his thankfulness to God, and leave the care of building a Temple, to
whom God should choose.

Verse. 10. ( Moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will
plant them, etc.] This passage included in our Bibles in a Parenthesis, is very
intricate and obscure. According to our translation, the meaning I conceive is
this. Because the glory and happiness of a king, depends much upon the
pro^perous and flourishing estate of his people; therefore the Lord does
promise David, that the Israelites should be now settled peaceably and quietly
in the land of Canaan, and should not be molested and oppressed, as they had
formerly been in the days of the Judges; I will appoint a place, says the
Lord and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move
no more, that is, I will now settle them so in the land of Canaan, that they
shall quietly enjoy it, as their own lawful inheritance, and not be
dispossessed and tossed up and down, as formerly they have been; neither shall
the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as before time; that is,
neither shall they be molested and vexed continually by their oppressing
neighbors, as in former times they have been (and observable it is, that
speaking of those that had afflicted and distressed the poor people of God, he
terms them in that respect, children of wickedness) and as since the time that
I commanded Judges to be over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest
from all thine enemies, that is, and as they have been oppressed, ever since
that I appointed Judges to govern and defend them, even unto this time, that I
have now given thee peace and rest, from thine enemies round about. This I
conceive must needs be the meaning of this passage, according to our
translation: for though it may be questioned, why the Lord should say, I will
appoint a place for my people Israel -- that they may dwell in a place of their
own. Since God had done this long since (he had long since appointed the land
of Canaan to be theirs, and had driven out the inhabitants that had dwelt in it
before, and had put them into possession of it, and they had enjoyed it as
their own for many years together) yet for answer to this, we must know, that
because hitherto the Philistines and other of the old inhabitants of Canaan,
had still kept some good part of the land from them, and by them and other
neighboring nations, they had been hitherto ever and anon molested, they being
still ready upon all advantages to challenge their land, and to seek to wrest
it from them; therefore the Lord speaks of the peaceable possession of the
land, as a thing that was not yet made good to them; but should be now in the
days of David and Solomon. And whereas again it may be objected, that much
seems here to be promised, which was never made good to the Israelites, as that
the Lord would so plant them in a place of their own, that they should thence
move no more, and that the children of wickedness should not afflict them any
more, as before time. etc. whereas we see, that after Solomon's days, both the
kingdom of Israel and Judah, were often invaded and wasted by many of the
neighboring nations, and that the Israelites were at last carried captive to
Assyria and Babylon, and other countries; to this the answer must be, that
either this must be restrained to the time of David and Solomon his son, in
whose time the Israelites did at last peaceably enjoy their land as their own,
without any molestation from the neighboring nations; or else it must be
understood as a conditional promise, God reserving liberty to himself, to deal
otherwise with them, if they should rebel against him (and indeed accordingly
we see how marvelously they flourished, till in the end of Solomon's reign they
fell again to idolatry) or else we must expect the full accomplishment hereof,
when this people shall come in to Christ, and so shall be planted again in
their own land, never to be removed thence any more, nor ever more to be
afflicted by the children of wickedness.

Verse. 11. Also the Lord telletb thee, that he will make thee an house.] That
is, that he will rear up of thy posterity, on whom the kingdom shall be
established after thee, from one generation to another, till it comes at last
to be established in Christ: see the note, Exodus 1.21.

Verse. 13. He shall build an house for my name.] That is, a house for my
worship and service; of which see the note, Deuteronomy. 12.4. and it is meant of
Solomon's building the Temple; for though David in his life time prepared great
store of materials for this great work, 1. Chron. 22.14. and did also give
unto Solomon the pattern of the house, and the services thereof, which he had
received from the Lord, 1. Chron. 28.11. Then David gave to Solomon his son
the pattern of the porch, etc. and again, verse. 19. All this, said David, the
Lord made me understand in writing by his hand upon me, even all the works of
this pattern, yet David laid not so much as the foundation of the building, but
Solomon began and finished the work, 1. Kings 5.1. etc. But withal it is meant
likewise of Christ the son of David, by whom only the Church is built, that
house of God of which the Temple was a type, 1. Pet. 3.5. Ye also as lively
stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Verse. 14. I will be his father, and he shall be my son, etc.] This clause is
also meant both of Solomon, and Christ. That it is meant of Solomon is clear,
1. Chron. 28.6. where this prophecy is repeated, Solomon thy son he shall
build my house, and my courts; for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will
be his father; and that it is also meant of Christ is as evident, Heb. 1.5.
where the Apostle proves by this place, that Christ was far above the angels;
For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee? and Again, I will be to him a father, and he shall be to
me a son? Indeed the following clause cannot be meant of Christ, If he commit
iniquity I will chasten him, etc. for though sin was imputed to Christ,
Isaiah 53.6. The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all: yet it cannot be
therefore said of Christ, that he did commit iniquity. The rule therefore for
understanding these prophetical passages, is this, That only those passages
are to be applied to Christ wherein Solomon was a type of Christ; the first
therefore is meant both of Solomon and Christ, I will be his father, and he
shall be my son, but in a different respect, God was a father to Solomon by
adoption and grace, to Christ, by natural generation; but then the second, is
meant only of Solomon, If he commit iniquity I will chasten him with the rod
of men, and with the stripes of the children of men, and thereby some
understand that men should be the rods wherewith Solomon should be chastised;
and so indeed it was with Solomon when he fell to idolatry in his latter days,
God corrected him for this, by the rebellions of Hadad, and Rezon, and Jeroboam
against him, 1, Kings 11.14, etc. but rather I conceive the meaning is, either
generally, that as men use to correct their sons, whom they love most dearly,
so God would correct Solomon, though he would not cast him off as he cast off
Saul, yet he would make him smart for it, if he sinned against him; or else
that God would correct him with moderation and gentleness: for indeed, gentle
correction may well be termed the rod of men, and the stripes of the children
of men, both because such correction is fitted to the weakness of men, and
because men are wont so to correct their children with a light and gentle hand;
or else in opposition to the strokes of Gods revenging justice: for as the
heaviness of Gods judgments upon Babylon is employed in that expression, Isa.
47.3. I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man; so on the
contrary, Gods gentleness may be well intended by this expression, I will
chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men.
If God should plead against us with his great power, as Job speaks, chap. 23.6.
it would soon grind us to powder; but his purpose in smiting his children is
only to amend and not to destroy, and therefore he does it with great
moderation and pity.

Verse. 15. But my mercy shall not depart away from him, etc.] That is, I will
not cast him off from being king, as I did Saul: It is not that mercy which is
the portion of Gods redeemed ones, of which the Lord says here, that it should
not depart away from Solomon, as he took it from Saul; for Saul never had any
share in this mercy, and where God affords this mercy, he never takes it away.
But the mercy here spoken of, is only that of continuing the kingdom to him:
this mercy the Lord says should not depart from Solomon, he would not utterly
cast him off from being king as David had seen Saul cast off, whence is that
last clause, whom I put away before thee.

Verse. 16. And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee, etc.] These words before thee, are added, because his kingdom
should be established in him unto the day of his death, and should whilst he
yet lived, be settled upon his son, and so should continue in his posterity,
they seeing and enjoying it till the coming of Christ, in whom it should be
established for ever.

Verse. 17. According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so
did Nathan speak unto David.] And herein did Nathan approve his integrity and
fidelity; he was not ashamed at Gods command to unsay and recant what he had
formerly said, and to contradict the counsel which himself had given to David,
ver. 3. And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart, for the
Lord is with thee.

Verse. 18. Then went king David in, and sat before the Lord, etc.] That is, he
went into the tent where the ark was, and continued there before the Lord: for
the Hebrew word here used, signifies as properly and usually to remain and
abide in a place, or at a thing, as to sit, as Genesis 27.44. Lev. 14.8. 1. Sam.
1.22. and 20.19. I deny not but that perhaps David might in these his private
soliloquies, even sitting (as elsewhere walking, and lying in his bed) power
forth his soul unto the Lord in prayer, as Moses prayed sitting, Exodus 17.12.
But Moses hands were heavy, and they took a stone and put under him, and he sat
thereon: and Elijah, 1. Kings 19.4. But he himself went a days journey into
the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested
for himself that he might die, and said, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my
life. But the more probable opinion is, either that by this word (sat) is
meant, tarried before the Lord, or else that he at first sat down in the
tabernacle, and meditated of Gods goodness and mercy to him, and afterward
addressed himself to pray unto the Lord, and that kneeling, as the greatest of
Gods servants were wont to do; Psalm. 95.6. O come, let us worship and bow down;
let us kneel before the Lord our maker: 1. Kings 8.54. It was so, that when
Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto the
Lord, he arose from the altar of the Lord* from kneeling on his knees, with his
hands spread up to heaven.

Verse. 19. And is this the manner of man, O Lord God?] That is, this is not the
manner of man. And some Expositours understand this thus, that the settling of
such blessings, as God had promised, upon his posterity, was not according to
the law of nature, that children should inherit the estates and honors of
their parents, but of Gods mere grace and good will to them. But there is more
I conceive then this intended in these words: David having acknowledged the
great goodness of God, in promising the kingdom to his seed after him, and
especially in assuring him that his seed should be the Son of God, and should
rule over his people for ever, he breaks forth at length into an admiration of
this wonderful goodness and mercy of God, And is this the manner of man, O
Lord God? thereby implying either that it was not the manner of man to afford
such favor of mere grace, above all desert, or to deal so freely and
familiarly with those that are beneath them, as God had dealt with him; or else
that this goodness and mercy of God, especially in giving his own Son to be
made man* that he might redeem them to himself, that were before the enemies of
God* and the slaves of Satan, and so rule over them as his own peculiar
people, was far above the mercy that could be expected from the most gracious
and merciful man; or else* that poor base man could not be in any degree
worthy of such mercies as those were, nor indeed capable of them, according to
the ordinary condition of man; and so is this place parallel with that Psalm.
8.4. What is man that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man that thou
visitest him? which the Apostle applies particularly to Gods mercy, in the
incarnation of his only begotten son; and the advantages and honor that
redound to man by this, and by the work of our redemption performed by him*
Heb. 2.6 etc.

Verse. 20. And what can David say more unto thee? for thou Lord God know thy
servant.] The first clause here, And what can David say more unto thee? may be
understood two several ways, either that David knew not how to ask more then
God of his own free grace had promised him, and was ready to confer upon him,
and indeed as this passage of David's prayer is expressed, 1. Chron* 17.18. it
seems best to bear this sense, And what can David speak more to thee, for the
honor of thy servant? But then the meaning of the next clause is this, For
thou know thy servant, that is, thou know what is good for me, thou
know my wants and desires better then I can discover them to thee, according
to that of our Saviors, Matthew. 6.8. Your father knows what things ye have
need of before ye ask them: or else, that he was not able to express how
highly he esteemed of that goodness and mercy he had shown to him; and then
the next words, for thou Lord know thy servant, are added to imply, that God
knew well enough the motions and desires of his heart to praise his name,
though with his tongue he was not able to express them.

Verse. 21. According to thine own heart, have thou done all these great things
to make thy servant know them.] That is, of thine own free grace have thou made
all these glorious promises to me and mine, that thy servant might know what
thou meanest to do, for him and his, in time to come.

Verse. 23. And to do for you great things and terrible, etc.] By a certain
figure called Apostrophe, David being now speaking to God, turns his speech
as it were abruptly, to the people of God, And to do for you (that is, for you
O Israel) great things, and then in the next words directs his speech again to
God, for thy land, before thy people which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt,
from the nations, and their gods, delivering them from all the nations that
fought their ruin, and from the false gods on whom their enemies relied for
help: so that here David joins together the deliverance of the Israelites both
from the Egyptians, and from the Canaanites, and other nations that sought to
oppress them; as it is also expressed, 1. Chron. 17.21. What one nation in the
earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem to be his own people,
to make thee a name of greatness and terriblenesse, by driving out the nations
from before thy people whom thou have redeemed out of Egypt? See the note upon,
Exodus 12.12.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. ANd after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines,
and subdued them.] In this chapter the wars and victories of David are
recorded, both to discover one cause amongst others, why the Lord appointed him
to give over his purpose of building the temple, to wit, because he should not
have leisure to do it, by reason of his many wars; and also to show how the
Lord performed his promises made to David in the former chapter, concerning the
prosperity and flourishing estate of his kingdom and people.

And David took Metheg-ammah out of the hand of the Philistines.] That is, Gath
and her towns, 1. Chron. 18.1. This Gath called afterward Dio-caesaria, stood
on the frontier of Palestina at the entrance into Judea and Ephraim, and the
mountainous tract of ground whereon it stood, was it seems called Ammah, or
Amgar, whereupon it was called, Metheg-ammah or the bridle of ammah, because
being a town of great strength, it was as it were the bridle whereby the whole
country about was kept in aw.

Verse. 2. And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down
to the ground, etc.] The Moabites were always deadly enemies to the
Israelites, as is evident, Number. 22.1, 2, etc. and therefore though the king of
Moab gave entertainment to David's father and mother, taking him then to be an
enemy to Saul and his people, 1. Sam. 22.3, 4. David went thence to Mizpeh of
Moab, and he said unto the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray
thee, come forth and be with you, till I know what God will do for me. And he
brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with him all the while
that David was in the hold. Yet when David was once established king of Israel,
it is likely the Moabites bare now the same hostile mind against David, which
they had formerly against Saul, and might give just occasion to David to make
war against them: yea indeed the Lord had commanded the Israelites always to
account them enemies, Deuteronomy, 23.6. Thou shall not seek their peace, nor their
prosperity, all thy days for ever; and thereupon, he smote Moab and measured
them with a line, that is, he did so absolutely vanquish them, that they were
wholly at his mercy, he might dispose of them as seemed good to himself,
slaying and sparing whom he pleased, and had made such havoc in the country,
levelling their towns and cities with the ground, that it lay open before him
to be measured with a line, to be divided and disposed of, as a place newly to
be planted and inhabited; this phrase of measuring with a line, is grounded
upon the custom of absolute conquerours, who having gotten a land into their
power, do divide it amongst those that shall dwell in it, as the Israelites did
the land of Canaan, or else, it is a similitude borrowed from husbandmen that
measure out land, some for tillage, some for wood, some for pasture; or rather
from carpenters, who with a line strike their timber to set out how much shall
be hewed off, and how much reserved for the building; implying that even so
David slew and kept alive of the Moabites taken prisoners whom he pleased, even
with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep
alive, that is, he slew two third parts of the people, and one third part he
kept alive, that the land might not lie wholly desolate, and so now was that
prophecy in part fulfilled, Numb. 24.17. There shall come a star out of
Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of
Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth; and Moab became David's washpot, as
David sung, Psalm. 60.8. Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast my shoe,
which was composed at this time.

And so the Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts.] To wit, by way
of tribute.

Verse. 3. David smote also Hadadezer the son of Rehob king of Zobah, as he
went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.] With this Hadadezer (or
Hadarezer, 1. Chron. 18.3.) king of Zobah, called Syria Zobah, and with his
father Rehob Saul had wars, 1. Sam. 14.47. He grew now exceeding powerful,
and had it seems subjected Damascus or Aram (another part of Syria lying north
east of the land of Canaan, as Syria Zobah also did; for the Syrians of
Damascus were engaged in this war no doubt by his command, verse. 5. And when
the Syrians of Damascus came to succor Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of
the Syrians twenty thousand men; and 1. Kings 11.23. Rezon a servant to this
Hadadezer taking advantage of this overthrow of his Lord mentioned, chap.
10.16, 17, 18. gathered together a band of soldiers, happily the remainder of
Hadadezers broken troops, and made himself king of Damascus, and as it seems of
all that was his Lords. David therefore considering how mighty this neighbor
king began to be, who was always an enemy to the Israelites, and knowing of
this his expedition, for the recovering or establishing the border of his
dominion at the river Euphrates, he raised an army under the command of Joab
(as is evident in the title of the 60. Psalm, To the chief musician upon
Shushan-Eduth, Michtam of David, to teach. When he strove with Aram Naharaim,
and with Aram Zobah, when Joab returned, and smote of Edom in the valley of
salt, twelve thousand) and Abishai, 1. Chron. 18.12. and so encountering with
Hadadezer (who must need pass either through some part of David's kingdom on
the other side Jordan, or close by it) he utterly overthrew his armies. Others
conceive indeed, that it is David of whom it is here said, that he went to
recover his border, at the river Euphrates, and that upon that occasion he
vanquished Hadadezer, that sought to oppose him; but however, thus that
prophecy was in part fulfilled, Genesis 15.18. that the Lord would give unto
Abraham's seed that land, even unto the great river Euphrates, that country
becoming now tributary to David: and upon the occasion of this victory, David
composed the 60 Psalm, as is evident in the title before expressed.

Verse. 4. And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred
horsemen, etc.] That is, seven hundred decuries, seven hundred companies or
ranks of horsemen, having ten in each company, or in each rank: for so it
must necessarily be expounded, to reconcile this with, 1. Chron. 18.4. where it
is said, that David took from them seven thousand horsemen, unless the chief
be here only expressed, and all there.

And David houghed all the chariot horses, etc.] He reserved only for an
hundred chariots, as having respect to that which God had said of the kings of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 17.16. But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the
people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses, the rest
he houghed to make them unserviceable for the wars, though useful
otherwise, as we see the like done by the Lords direction, Josh. 11.6. Thou
shall hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.

Verse. 7, And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.] And so laid them by for the building
of the Temple, verse. 11.

Verse. 8. And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David
took exceeding much brass.] These cities are called Tibhath, and Chun, 1.
Chron. 18.8. Happily, because their names were afterward changed, when that
history was written.

Verse. 10. Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David to salute him, and to
bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer, etc.] That is, to
congratulate his victory, and withal no doubt, for fear of David; this Joram
the son of Toi is also called Adoram, 1. Chron. 18.10.

Verse. 11. Which also king David did dedicate unto the Lord, with the silver
and gold, etc.] Thus Christ vanquishing Satan, converted the spoils to the
use of the Church, and the glory of God; those that had been in bondage to him,
he made Apostles and teachers, and those precious arts which had formerly been
used in the devils service, were afterward employed in the building of the
Church.

Verse. 12. Of Syria and Moab, and of the children of Ammon, etc.] See chap.
10.22.

Verse. 13. And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the
Syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.] That is, David
grew very famous by those victories, especially because returning with his
armies, he obtained another very glorious victory in the valley of salt,
wherein he slew eighteen thousand of his enemies; this valley of salt was it
seems, in the country of the Edomites, 2. Kings 14.7. He slew of Edom in the
valley of salt, ten thousand, and took Selah by war; yet the enemies which
there he slew, are here called Syrians, though they are said to be Edomites,
both in the title of the 60. Psalm, To the chief musician upon Shushan eduth
Michtam of David, to teach. When he strove with Aram Zobah, when Joab returned,
and smote of Edom in the valley of salt, twelve thousand, and in 1. Chron.
18.12. Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah, slew of the Edomites in the
valley of salt, eighteen thousand. But the reason of this must needs be,
because many of the Syrians were now joined with the Edomites, in this battle
which they fought with David. And as for the number of the enemies slain, which
is diversely related here, and 1. Chron. 18.12. and in the title of the 60.
Psalm, the most probable opinion is, that Abishai did at first set on them,
and slew six thousand, that afterward Joab came upon them, and slew twelve
thousand more, as is expressed, Psalm. 60. in the title, all which together,
makes eighteen thousand as here; which whole sum of eighteen thousand is
ascribed to Abishai, 1. Chron. 18.12. because he first beg^n the battle, and
brake the troops of the enemy; and here to David, because both Joab and
Abishai were his captains, and fought under his conduct and command.

Verse. 14. And he put garrisons in Edom, etc.] And thus they became
tributaries, and had hence forth, even unto the days of Jehosaphat, a viceroy
or deputy appointed over them, 1. Kings 22.47. There was no king in Edom, a
Deputy was king. That prophecy therefore concerning Esau and Jacob, that the
elder should serve the younger, Genesis 25.23. began now to be literally
accomplished: more of this story, and of the flight of Hadad into Egypt, see 1.
Kings 11.14.

Verse. 16. And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host.] Joab was the son
of Zeruiah David's sister, but was made General of his forces, because of that
exploit of his, in winning the castle of Sion from the Jebusites, 1. Chron.
11.6. And David said, Whosoever smites the Jebusites first shall be chief, and
captain. So Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was chief.

Verse. 17. And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar
were the priests.] Zadok was of the stock of Eleazar, 1. Chron. 6.4.8. and was
afterward by Solomon made high priest, in the room of Abiathar, 1. Kings 2.35.
Ahimelech the other priest here named, was of the stock of Ithamar, and as it
seems, the son of Abiathar, who fled to David from Saul, 1. Sam. 22.20. these
were the priests in David's time, that is, they were the two chief priests of
these two several stocks, and had the chief command (under the high priest
Abiathar the father of this Ahimelech) of the other priests, each over the
priests of his own family: for David had divided the priests into two parts,
according to the two families of Eleazar and Ithamar, 1. Chron. 24.3.4. And
David distributed them, both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of
the sons of Ithamar, according to their offices in their service. And there
were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar, then of the sons of
Ithamar, and thus they were divided; Among the house of Eleazar, there were
sixteen chief men of the house of their fathers, and eight of the sons of
Ithamar, according to the house of their fathers; and these two were appointed
to be chief of each family, and to have the oversight of the rest.

Verse. 18. And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, was over both the Cherethites,
and the Pelethites.] The opinion of Interpretours differs much concerning
these Cherethites, and Pelethites, so that it is hard to say what they were, or
why they were so called. The most probable opinion is this, that they were two
bands of select soldiers, chosen to attend upon the kings person, as his
guard, at least in their courses, chap. 15.18. And all his servants passed on
beside him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the
Gittites six hundred men, which came after him from Gath, passed on before the
king: and 20 7. And there went out after him Joabs men, and the Cherethites,
and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of Jerusalem, to
pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri: and 1. Kings 1.38.44. So Zadok the
Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the
Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down and caused king Solomon to ride upon
King David's mule; but why were they so called? Some derive their names from
certain Hebrew words, which may imply, that the Cherethites were the kings
executioners that did cut off malefactors, and the Pelethites were excellent
men, and chosen to defend his person: but because we find, that the Philistines
were called Cherethites, 1. Sam. 30.14. We made an invasion upon the South of
the Cherethites, and upon the coasts which belongs to Judah: and Cherethims,
Ezekiel 25.16. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will stretch out mire hand upon
the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethims; and the nation of the
Cherethites, Zeph. 2.4, 5. Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation:
they shall drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall be rooted up. Woe
unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the Cherethites: the word
of the Lord is against you: I rather subscribe to those that hold, that the
Cherethites were such garrison soldiers of the Israelites, as were seated in
Chereth of the Philistines, from whom there was still a band chosen to attend
the kings person, as the guard of his body, because they were the most expert
and able soldiers; and so also the Pelethites might be garrison soldiers
amongst the Japhlethites, Josh. 16.3. And goes down westward to the coast of
Japhleti.

And David's sons were chief rulers.] In 1. Chron. 18.17. chief about the king.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. ANd David said is there yet any left of the house of Saul? etc.] Thus
David began now to call to mind the covenant he made with Jonathan, 1. Sam.
20.14, 15. And thou shall not only while yet I live show me the kindness of
the Lord that I die not. But also thou shall not cut off thy kindness from my
house for^ever, no not when the Lord has cut off the enemies of David. It may
seem strange indeed, that David did not long ago think of this, or that now
thinking of it, he should know nothing of Mephibosheth Jonathans son; but for
the first of these we may ascribe it to the continual wars wherewith he had
been hitherto encumbred, and besides, we know that in the sacred History all
things are not set down in the very same order wherein they were done: and for
the second, we must consider, first, that David having lived as an exile both
from the court and kingdom of Israel a long time, might happily know nothing
of this child of Jonathans when he came to the crown: secondly, that the
friends of Saul might purposely conceal him for fear of David: thirdly, that
David was not through jealousy and fear inquisitive after Saul's posterity: and
fourthly, that there is no cause why we should be so solicitous to clear David
from being too remiss in taking care of performing the covenant which he had
made with Jonathan. However observable it is, that when he enquired whether
there were any left of Saul's family he expressed the reason, That I may show
him kindness for Jonathans sake: for doubtless this was added purposely, that
his courtiers might not forbear to deal plainly with him, for fear he should
enquire after them with an ill intent.

Verse. 3. Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may show the
kindness of God unto him?] That is, that great kindness that in the presence
of God I promised to Jonathan; or the kindness which God shows to the
fatherless and afflicted, yea to his very enemies, and which he likewise
requires, that we should show to them that are in distress and misery, that we
may be like herein to God. All this may be comprehended in this expression; and
it was indeed in the very same terms challenged from David when Jonathan made
a covenant with him, 1. Sam. 20.14, 15. And thou shall not only while yet I
live* show me the kindness of the Lord that I die not: But also thou shall not
cut off thy kindness from my house for ever* etc.

Verse. 4. Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel in
Lodebar.] A place beyond Jordan, see chap. 17.27. so far from Jerusalem he
was perhaps purposely removed, that he might be the better concealed from David.

Verse. 6. Now when Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, etc.] Who is also called
Merib-baal, 1. Chron. 8.34.

Verse. 7. I will surely show thee kindness, for Jonathan thy fathers sake, and
will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father, etc.] This land of Saul's had
been hitherto it seems in David's hands, either by way of confiscation, because
of Ishbosheths rebellion, or by title of succession, as crown lands belonging
to the king of Israel, or by right of inheritance, because David had married
Saul's daughter, according to the law, Number. 27.8. If a man die and have no
son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass to his daughter.

Verse. 10. And thou shall bring in the fruits, that thy masters son may have
food to eat, etc.] That is, that Mephibosheth thy master Saul's son may have
wherewith to nourish and provide for his son, and the rest of his family.
Many Expositours hold, that by his masters son in these words is meant Micha,
mentioned verse. 12. the son of Mephibosheth, who was now Ziba's master; and
so they take the drift of David's words to be this; that with the fruits of the
land he should nourish Micha his master Mephibosheths son, and that
Mephibosheth himself should live with him in his Court, and eat at his table;
but because in the verse immediately before this by his masters son is meant
Mephibosheth, I have given to thy masters son all that pertains to Saul,
and to all his house: and so likewise in the words immediately following, But
Mephibosheth thy masters son shall eat bread always at my table; I cannot
think that in these words between, he should not mean the same by his masters
son; only indeed it is plain by these words* that thy masters son may have
food to eat, is only meant, that he might have food in his house for his
family to eat; for the next words show, that himself was to be continually at
David's table, But Mephibosheth thy masters son shall eat bread always at my
table.

Verse. 12. And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha.]
Mephibosheth was but five years old, when Saul and Jonathan were slain, chap.
4.4. and now he had a young son: so long it was after Saul's death, ere David
began to think of requiting the love which Jonathan had shown to him.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 2. THen said David, I will show kindness unto Hanun the son of
Nahash, as his father showed kindness unto me.] It is no where expressed what
this kindness was which David here speaks of, most probable it is, that Nahash
did some way succor David, or at least give friendly entertainment to him in
the time of his troubles, and that because he was persecuted by Saul, whom he
might the rather hate, because he had been discomfited by him before
Jabesh-gilead, 1. Sam. 11.1, 11. and had continual war with him, 1. Sam.
14.47. Indeed we read before, chap. 8.12. of spoils taken by David from the
children of Ammon; but that is meant of this war which here the sacred
History enters upon; for till this time David molested them not.

Verse. 4. Wherefore Hanun took David's servants, and shaved off the one half of
their beards, etc.] Doubtless because he desired to expose these ambassadors
of David, to the derision and scorn of every one that should see them;
therefore he chose to shave off only the one half of their beards; yet it may
well be that he did the rather pitch upon this way of disgracing them, as it
were in contempt of their religion, because by the Law of God they were
forbidden to cut or shave their beards at all, even in their greatest mourning:
Lev. 19.27. Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shall thou
mar the corners of thy beard. And indeed, why else did David when he heard of
this, verse. 5. appoint them to tarry at Jericho till their beards were grown;
when the Ammonites had shaven off one half of their beards, it had been an
easy matter by shaving off the other half, to have taken away the deformity of
half a beard; and at the worst, they had only then looked as they did in their
younger years: but it seems the shaving of their beards at all, was in it self
a reproach to the Israelites, and therefore he would not suffer them to stir
abroad, till their beards were grown on the other side. As for that other
disgrace he put upon them, to wit, that he cut off their garments to the
middle, even to their buttocks, that was a greater reproach then the other,
because the Israelites wore not breeches, as we do, but only long loose
garments, and the discovering of those parts, by the light of nature all men
abhor; whence is that of the Prophet, concerning the stripping of the
Egyptians that should be carried away captives, Isa. 20.4. So shall the king of
Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young
and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame
of Egypt.

Verse. 5. When they told it unto David, he sent to meet them, etc.] To wit, to
comfort them, to clothe them anew, and to appoint them to stay by the way at
Jericho till their beards were grown, as it follows in the next words;
concerning which see the foregoing note. Indeed it was long after this ere the
city Jericho was built up again, as we see 1. Kings 16.34. where it is noted
of Ahabs reign, In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho. But it
seems there were some cottages already in this place, for the use of those that
kept their cattle, and in these the ambassadors might be appointed to stay;
for the more desolate the place was, the fitter it was for them to stay in,
till their beards were grown again.

Verse. 6. The children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Beth-rehob, and
the Syrians of Zoba, etc.] These Syrians he hired with a thousand talents of
silver,, and with these here mentioned those also of Mesopotamia, and two and
thirty thousand chariots, 1. Chron, 19.6, 7. When the children of Ammon saw
that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon
sent a thousand talents of silver, to hire them chariots and horsemen out of
Mesopotamia, and out of Syria Maachah, and out of Zobah. So they hired thirty
and two thousand chariots: who were all ready enough to engage themselves in
this war, as hoping to free themselves from that yoke which David had laid
upon them, and to revenge that loss they had formerly received; for he had
lately vanquished them, and made them a tributary people, chap. 8.6. Then David
put garrisons in Syria of Damascus, and the Syrians became servants to David,
and brought gifts.

Verse. 7. And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the
mighty men.] As thinking it best policy to be beforehand with them, and to
fight with them in their own country.

Verse. 8. And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at
the entering of the gate.] To wit, of Medeba a city in the borders of Ammon,
Number. 21.30. where they assembled together, 1. Chron. 19.7. So they hired thirty
and two thousand chariots, and the king of Maachah and his people, who came and
pitched before Medeba.

And the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ishtob, and Maacah, were by
themselves in the field. etc.] To the end that they might hemme in the
Israelites, and set upon them both in the front and in the rear, the Syrians
were appointed to pitch by themselves in a place of the field apart from the
Ammonites, either openly or in secret, as lying in ambush (for they would not
trust these their mercenary auxiliaries of the Syrians, with the guard of the
city) and the Ammonites themselves pitched their soldiers before the city.

Verse. 9. He chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array
against the Syrians.] Being persuaded that these mercenary Syrians would
soonest shrink, if they were courageously assaulted, he chose out the slower of
his army to set upon them, not doubting but if they were routed, the Ammonites
would soon be discouraged, and sly too.

Verse. 12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for
the cities of our God, etc.] Thus Joab did encourage his captains and soldiers
to fight valiantly; first, by putting them in mind that they were to fight for
their own country and people, to defend them against cruel adversaries, who
if they prevailed, would certainly over-runne their land, lay waste their
cities, and make havoc amongst their brethren: and secondly, by remembering
them that it was for Gods cause and party, the people of God, and the land
which he had chose for his inheritance.

Verse. 16. And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond the
river, etc.] That is, beyond Euphrates: Hadarezer and his Syrians fearing that
David would be revenged on them for aiding the Ammonites, resolved that there
was no way but to stand it out; and therefore made themselves as strong as the
could, that they might assay to cast off David's yoke.

Verse. 18. And David slew the men of seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and
forty thousand horsemen, etc.] To wit, seven thousand men which fought in
chariots, besides forty thousand footmen, which though not here expressed, are
yet mentioned 1. Chron. 19.18. But the Syrians fled before Israel, and David
slew of the Syrians seven thousand men* which fought in chariots, and forty
thousand footmen. The greatness of this overthrow makes it probable, that at
this time it was that Rezon a servant to this Hadarezer, revolted from him, and
made himself king of Damascus, 1. Kings 11.23, 24. And God stirred him up
another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah, which fled from his Lord
Hadadezer of Zobah: And he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a
band, when David slew them of Zobah: and they went to Damascus, and dwelt
therein, and reigned in Damascus.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass, that after the year was expired, at the time
when kings go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, etc.] That is, in the
spring of the year following, after the overthrow of the Syrians mentioned in
the former chapter (for then the year was accounted to begin, because then the
sun returns to the place whence it went forth in the former year.) After
those victories obtained, whereof mention is before made, the winter
approaching, David and his captains gave over the prosecuting of their new
conquest in the land of the Ammonites: but in the Spring of the next year
(which was the usual time when in those countries they went out to war,
because then they had the Summer before them, for the perfecting of any hard
siege they should undertake, and then in those regions both grass and corn
began to ripen and so they might have food and relief both for themselves and
their horses) David sent out Joab with a great army to perfect the conquest of
the Ammonites, which the year before they had begun, and so besieged Rabbah,
the chief city of the Ammonites, afterward called Philadelphia.

Verse. 2. And it came to pass in an evening tide that David arose from off his
bed, and walked* etc.] The occasions of David's fall into that grievous sin of
adultery with the wife of Uriah, are here set down. First, he went not out
himself to war against the Ammonites as formerly he had wont to do, but sent
out Joab, as is expressed in the former verse: and secondly, being at home, he
gave himself to his ease; having spent some good part of the day in stretching
himself upon his bed, in the evening he arose and walked upon the roof of his
house, (which were amongst the Jews built flat upon the top) and so was there
entangled with the sight of Bathsheba. As long as David was persecuted by Saul
he kept close to God, nor do we read of any scandalous sins he fell into, but
when he was settled in the kingdom, and so lived in the plenty, pomp, and
state that became so great a king, but especially, when he came to take such
liberty for his ease, as to lie upon his bed at noon and to spend his time in
walking upon his house top, then we see into what a grievous sin he fell with
this wife of Uriah. Running streams are clear and wholesome, but standing
waters are usually muddy and unsavory, and apt to gather all kind of filth and
corruption.

And from the roof he saw a woman washing her self.] To wit, to purify her
self from her menstruall uncleanness according to the law, Levit. 15.27, 28.
for so it is expressed. verse. 4. For she was purified from her uncleanness. It
is not probable indeed, that Bathsheba would wash her self, especially in this
kind, where she thought any body might see her, but only her servants that
were with her; but lust is quick sighted, and some want of wariness and care
it seems there was in her, and so David espied her from the top of his house,
and so by that means his eye proved an inlet of lust into his soul.

Verse. 3. And David sent and enquired after the woman.] When the sight of naked
Bathsheba had kindled lustful thoughts and desires in David's heart, had he
presently cast out those unclean motions, and set his mind upon better things,
perhaps he had never gone further; but we see he went on thinking of the sight
he had seen and sent to enquire what woman it was, and so suffering the
poisoned arrow to lie rankling in his heart, at length the wound grew
incurable, and he could not be satisfied till he had enjoyed her.

And one said, Is not this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Vriah
the Hittite?] Bathsheba is called Bathshuah, 1. Chron. 3.5. as also Eliam her
father is there called Ammiel. Why Uriah is called the Hittite, we may see by
that which is noted, 1. Sam. 26.6.

Verse. 4. For she was purified from her uncleanness.] That is, from her
menstruall uncleanness, Lev. 18.19. and hereby she was the more apt to
conceive.

Verse. 5. And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am with
child.] To wit, as bewailing her condition, and to see if he could or would do
any thing, to prevent those miseries that were like to come upon her, and
wherein he also was sure to have a great share: now she began when it was too
late, to bethink her self how her husband would be enraged against her, and
what in his rage he might do to her; day and night it ran in her mind, what
shame and reproach her great belly when it came to be known, would bring upon
her; how every one would look upon her and despise her as an harlot; loathing
her the more, because she was unfaithful to so brave a man, as her husband
Uriah was; and that too, when he was abroad fighting for his country; and how
at length she must be brought forth, and put to death as the law had appointed;
and thus being overwhelmed with sorrow and fear, she sent to impart it to
David, as having this only hope, that he might happily find out some way to
prevent these miseries.

Verse. 7. David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how
the war prospered.] Thus we see how David faultered in seeking some prete^e
for sending for Uriah to come home to him; for were not these very weak
pretenses for fetching home such a worthy as Uriah was, from a service of such
concernment, as was the siege of Rabbah? Alas, these things he might have
known, and did daily hear by every messenger that came from the camp; and
enough it was to make Uriah suspect some underhand plot, to see that he should
be sent for upon so slight an occasion, as to satisfy such trivial queries
as these were. But David was forced to dissemble and pretend somewhat, and
could not act this part artificially.

Verse. 8. And Uriah departed out of the kings house, and there followed him a
mess of meat from the king.] To wit, that this might be an occasion of inviting
him to make merry with his wife, and so to lie with her.

Verse. 9. But Vriah slept at the door of the kings house with all the servants
of his Lord.] That is with the kings guard, whose custom it was, to watch at
the door of his house all night.

Verse. 11. And Vriah said unto David; The ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in
tents, etc] They used in perilous wars to carry the ark with them into the
camp, both as a testimony of Gods presence, and that they might ask counsel of
God as occasion served; as is evident, 1. Sam. 4.4. and 14.18. and therefore
the most of Expositours conceive, that accordingly at this time, the ark was
with Joab in the camp at the siege of Rabbah; and that this was the reason why
Uriah spoke of the arks abiding in tents, together with Israel and Judah: but
yet because it seems not probable, that they would carry the ark, the sign of
Gods presence amongst his people out of the land of Canaan into the country of
the Ammonites; I should rather think, that being to speak of the abiding of
Israel and Judah in tents, in regard that the ark was also in the tent which
David had set up for it, chap. 6.17. Therefore only it is, that he joins the
ark with Israel and Judah; The ark, says he, and Israel and Judah abide in
tents, and my Lord Joab and the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open
fields; shall I then go into mine house to eat and to drink, and to lie with my
wife? etc. But however, the drift of these words is evident, to wit, that Uriah
herein rendered a reason why he would not go home to his house, namely, because
he judged it unfit and unreasonable, that he should take his ease and pleasure,
whilst his General and his brethren lay abroad in continual danger in the
open fields: and then besides, there was withal in these words, by the
providence of God, a secret check given to David, that Uriah should make
conscience of taking pleasure with his own wife, at a time when the people of
God were in continual danger, and yet David had not scrupled at that very
time, to satisfy his lust with the wife of Uriah.

Verse. 13. And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him, and
made him drunk.] It is not probable, that Uriah that had so resolutely refused
to feast and frolic with his wife; would yield to do that with the king, which
he had refused to do with his wife; only when David had invited him to his
table, he thought it too much to reject the kings favor, and therefore
resolved to yield herein to the kings commandment no further then might stand
with his resolved course of austerity; fully purposing not to let loose himself
to any delight or freedom in eating or drinking: but we see the event; by
degrees he was overtaken and e^snared, contrary to what he had purposed with
himself, and so was made drink which was that David aimed at, hoping that when
he was heated with wine, he would then go home to his wife, which hitherto he
had refused to do.

And at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but
went not down to his house.] He went not to sleep as the night before, at the
door of the kings house, verse. 9. (to wit, because he had drunk too freely)
but yet he went not home to his wife, but lay in the court amongst the kings
household servants: so that though he were a little overgone with excess, yet
he still remembered and stuck to his former resolution of not going home to his
wife: A passage very observable, whilst David used all his skill to get him
home, doubtless his wife was not wanting to act her part too: it cannot be
thought, but that she sent and came to him again and again, and solicited him
earnestly to come home to her, (for it much concerned her) and yet all this
could not move him; even when he was drunk he would not home to his house: for
whence was this? doubtless there was a secret hand of Providence in it; it is
like enough he was displeased that he was so causelessely taken off from that
noble enterprise of the siege of Rabbah, and deemed it unfitting, as he had
said before, to take his pleasure, whilst his brethren and fellow soldiers
were in such hard service: but yet considering how many means were used to
overcome him; we may well conclude, that there was a special hand of
Providence, in the firmness of his resolution; the Lord intending hereby to
counterplot David, and not to suffer him to smother his sin, as he desired to
have done.

Verse. 16. He assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.]
To wit, that he might be slain by them, as David had in his letter commanded*
There was no reason given in the letter, why this plot must be laid for his
life; it was sufficient to Joab that the king commanded it; he knew how much
advantage it might be to him, to have the favor of his prince, and what danger
there might be in opposing his commands; and therefore he stuck not at doing
what he had enjoined: yea and perhaps too, remembering what himself had done in
the murder of Abner, he was the more willing that David should be involved in
the same sin, as thinking that he would be the readier to pardon him, when
himself was become guilty in the s^e kind.

Verse. 21. Wh^ smote Abimelech the son of Jerubesheth.] That is, Gideon who
was called Jerubbaal, Judges 6.32.

Verse. 25. Let not this thing displease thee: for the sword devoureth one as
well as another, etc.] The time was, when David's conscience smote him for
cutting off tho lap of Saul's garment, though he was his deadly enemy; and yet
now his heart being hardened upon his adultery with Bathsheba, he could slight
the murder of Uriah, and many other of Gods people slain by his means, as if it
had been a matter of nothing.

Verse. 26. And when the wife of Vriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead,
she mourned for her husband.] Considering what shame would have fallen upon
her, if her husband had lived, and the hope she might well conceive of becoming
now the wife of so great a Prince as David was, we may well think that she was
inwardly glad of these tidings; but yet the better to conceal her sin, she
would not omit the customary ways that were used in those times, of mourning
for her deceased husband.

Verse. 27. But the thing that David had done, displeased the Lord.] This is
added, to show the vanity of David's comforting himself in what was done; he
chuckered himself now, as concluding that now the shame he feared would be
prevented, and so all would be well: But says the text, the thing that David
had done, displeased the Lord, and this he found to be bitterness in the end;
little cause had he therefore to be so well satisfied with the secrecy of his
sin, the Lord being so highly offended with him.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord sent Nathan unto David, etc.] It was now about three
quarters of a year, since David committed that foul sin with the wife of
Uriah (for the child she then conceived, was now born, verse. 14.) in all which
time, though doubtless his conscience did often gall him, yet he strived to
harden himself against such fears, and only took care to conceal his sin
that it might not be known (which yet he could not do; for however, he did it
secretly, and had done what he could to keep it close; yet by reason of his
marriage with the wife of Uriah, etc. it began now to be by some suspected, and
blazoned abroad; and therefore Nathan tells him, verse. 14. that by this deed he
had given great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme:) now therefore the
Lord in mercy sent Nathan to him, that he might be brought to confess his
sin, and unfainedly to rise out of this sad condition.

There were two men in one city, the one rich, and the other poor, etc.] As a
Surgeon will hide his instrument, wherewith he intends to lanch a sore,
under an handkercheif, or some such thing, so does Nathan at first hide his
reproof under the vail of a Parable, that David might the better be brought to
pass sentence against himself, in a third person. For the intention and
application of the Parable, it is this: by the rich man, that had exceeding
many flocks and herds, he meant David, who had very many wives and concubines:
by the poor man that had nothing, save one little ewe-lambe, is meant Uriah,
who had it seems but one wife* to wit, Bathsheba; and she is not only compared
to an ewe-lambe, but also to such a lamb, as we use to call cade-lambes, or
cosset-lambes, which without a damme, are brought up by hand; and therefore it
is said, it was a lamb which he had bought (for husbands in those times, used
to give dowries for their wives) and nourished up, and it grew up together with
him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, (or as it is in the
original, of his own morsel; implying, that though the poor man had but a
little, yet he gave his darling lamb part of it) and drank of his own cup, and
lay in his bosom: which does sweetly express the condition of a wife, whom
the husband ought to esteem his only darling and delight, and make her a
sharer of all that he has; as indeed men are the liker to do when they have
but one wife. Again, whereas it is said, verse. 4. that There came a travailer
into the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock, and of his own herd,
for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb,
and dressed it for the man that was come to him. By this traveller, or
wayfaring man, for whose entertainment the rich man took away the poor man's
ewe-lambe, is meant the devil, by means of whom indeed it was, that David
incroached upon the bed of Uriah, and lay with his wife, though he had so many
wives and concubines of his own, and the allusion is very fit: first, because
the devil may well be compared to a traveller, in regard of his continual
traversing the earth, from one place to another, that he may tempt, and seduce
men to sin; when the Lord asked Satan whence he came, Job. 1.7. he answered,
from going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it; and S.
Peter says, 1. Pet. 5.8. that As a roaring lion, he walks about seeking whom
he may devour: secondly* because hereby is sweetly employed, a notable
difference betwixt the temptations of the regenerate, (such as David was) and
the sins of wicked men; to the one the devil comes now and then, as a
traveller, and wayfaring man, and finds for the time too good entertainment;
but in the other, he dwells as a Lord and master, ruling and reigning in them at
all times: and thirdly, because when men especially such good men as David was,
do give any entertainment to the devils temptations, for the committing of any
sin, they feast the devil herewith; it is meat and drink to him, to win
such men to sin against God.

Verse. 5. And he said to Nathan, As the Lord lives, the man that has done
this thing shall surely die.] That is, he shall not only restore the lamb
fourefold according to the Law, Exodus 22.1. If a man shall steal an ox, or a
sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four
sheep for a sheep; but besides, he shall be put to death: Thus David in his
wrath threatens a heavier punishment then God in his Law had appointed; as
accounting it such a merciless act, and so, such a singular wickedness, that
fourefold restitution was not punishment enough; for so much he expresses in
the following words, verse. 6. And he shall restore the lamb fourefold, because
he did this thing, and because he had no pity: and so unwittingly passes a
most heavy sentence against himself.

Verse. 8. And I gave thee thy masters house, and thy masters wives into thy
bosom, etc.] That is, I advanced thee to such an estate, that all that was thy
masters was in thy power, even his wives and concubines were at thy disposing;
and indeed it seems kings had in those times many which they took for wives and
concubines, whom they never carnally knew, and of such this might be meant.
Doubtless it was unlawful for David, to marry any of Saul's his father-in-laws
wives, to wit, such as he had carnally known; for she that was Saul's wife, was
David's mother-in-law, and such he might not marry, Levit. 18.8. The nakedness
of thy fathers wife thou shall not uncover; it is thy fathers nakedness:
either therefore the meaning of these words, if meant of such, must be only
this, that Saul's wives and concubines were in David's power, that he might have
taken them, though he did it not; or if it be conceived that David did indeed
take to him any of Saul's wives or concubines, we must understand these words [
I gave] only of Gods bringing them into his power (though he made use of his
power unlawfully) not of Gods approving of this fact of his against the Law, as
in the like sense this word is used again, verse. 11. I will take thy wives
before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor* etc.

Verse. 9. Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil
in his sight?] Because when men embolden themselves to do that which they know
is contrary to Gods commandment, only because they can do it secretly, and no
body shall come to know of it (and yet they cannot be ignorant that God is
privy to all they do) this is an evident argument, that in effect they make
light of transgressing Gods Law, and care not much for displeasing God, so no
other inconvenience be like to come upon them; hence it is that the Prophet
Nathan charge David with despising the commandment of the Lord, in doing that
which was evil in his sight.

Thou have killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to
be thy wife, etc.] First, the person whom David had caused to be slain, is so
expressly named, the rather because Uriah was a man of such eminency, one of
David's worthies, chap. 23.39. and one it seems that feared God, and was zealous
for God and his people, as appears by that he said to David, chap. 11.11. The
Ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents, and shall I then go home into mine
house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? and so the worth of the
party murdered did much aggravate his sin. Secondly, even his marrying with
Bathsheba is mentioned here as a branch of his sin; for because he had
accomplished this marriage by such wicked means, to wit, by causing her husband
to be killed, that he might marry her, and had done it purposely to conceal his
adultery, and having brought this to pass, did now chucker himself, as if all
had been well, even by this marriage he had highly provoked God to displeasure
against him. And thirdly, this is mentioned as a great aggravation of his
sin, that he had slain Uriah with the sword of the children of Ammon: and
indeed there was much evil wrapped up in this: For first, there was a treachery
in this; a sin which God greatly abhorres; they set him upon a desperate
service, and then according to the plot they had laid, when he was engaged,
they retired from him, and so basely betrayed him to the sword of the enemy:
secondly, by this means many of Gods people were slain together with him:
thirdly, the Ammonites were encouraged hereby, and took occasion to insult over
Gods people, and over the truth and religion they professed; yea, perhaps over
the God of the Israelites, as regardlesse of those that served him, or not able
to protect those that fought in his cause: and fourthly, the hearts of Gods
people were exceedingly sadded and discouraged thereby.

Verse. 10. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house.] This
may be referred not only to the violent death of his three sons Amnon,
Absalom, and Adonijah, who were all slain with the sword; but also to the
bloody wars wherewith the posterity of David were continually molested,
especially betwixt them and the kings of Israel, the successors of Jeroboam.

Verse. 11. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out
of thine own house, etc.] This is meant of Amnons incest, and Absaloms
rebellion, and other abominable wickedness: for though God be not the author
of sin, yet his providence concurres in the worst evils that men do: and so
it did both in the rebellion and in the incest of Absalom; concerning which,
that is meant which follows in the next words, and I will take thy wives
before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy
wives in the sight of this sun: where by his neighbor is meant one that was
nigh to him; and who was nigher to him then his own son; and it is said that
this should be done before David's eyes; because it was done whilst he lived,
and he came to know of it; and in the sight of the sun, because Absalom did
it openly, in the sight of all Israel, chap. 16.22. and in a tent which they
spread for him in Jerusalem, upon the top of the house; perhaps the same house,
from the roof whereof David did first cast a lustful eye upon the wife of
Uriah, chap. 11.2.

Verse. 12. For thou did it secretly; but I will do this thing before all
Israel, and before the sun.] And thus God threatened to punish him with that,
which should be a shame and reproach to him amongst all the people, because he
had been more afraid of shame amongst men, then of his displeasure.

Verse. 13. And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord.] If we
compare together Saul's confession of his sin to Samuel, 1. Sam. 15.24.25.
with this of David's to Nathan, there seems better expressions of a true
penitent in that of Saul's, then in this of David's: for Saul confessed his sin
in appearance more fully, I have sinned, says he, for I have transgressed the
commandment of the Lord, and thy words, because I feared the people, and obeyed
their voice: besides, he entreated for pardon, verse. 25. and desired Samuel
that they might go and worship the Lord together, as it were to seek atonement
with him. But now David only said, I have sinned against the Lord; which is
the ordinary confession of those that most slight their sins; and yet Saul
was rejected, and David had an answer of pardon presently returned to him. But
for this we must know, that David's heart was truly humbled, which Saul's was
not, and thence was the difference: doubtless David was so overwhelmed with
shame and godly sorrow, that he could not speak, he could say no more, but I
have sinned against the Lord, and much ado perhaps he had to say that; but
afterward we see he confessed his sin more fully to the whole Church of God:
for having penned the 51. Psalm, (which contains his acknowledgement of this
sin, and the profession of his repentance) he committed it to the chief
musician to be published in the sanctuary, as by the title of the Psalm we may
see, To the chief musician a Psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came unto
him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.

And Nathan said unto David, The Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall
not die.] That is, neither eternally, nor by any sudden stroke or judgment of
God, both which his sin had deserved: even himself had so judged against
himself, verse. 5. and he might the rather fear it, because of those words,
verse. 10. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because
thou have despised me, and have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy
wife.

Verse. 14. Howbeit, because by this deed, thou have given great occasion to the
enemies of God to blaspheme, etc.] Two several ways had David given occasion
to the enemies of God to blaspheme: to wit, first, because by causing Uriah and
others of the people of God to be slain by the Ammonites, he gave occasion to
them (who were the enemies of God in regard they were the enemies of Gods
people) to insult and triumph over them; and so at least in effect to blaspheme
the Lord God of Israel, as not able to defend his people against them; as it is
said of the Assyrians when they oppressed grievously the people of God whom
they carried away captives, Isaiah 52.5. They that rule over them make them to
houl, says the Lord, and my name continually every day is blasphemed: and
secondly, because by his gross sins he had given occasion to wicked profane
men (whom God esteems his enemies) to speak evil of that which God had done for
David; yea and of all the godly that walked strictly with God as David had
done, and of all such ways of piety and zeal as David had hitherto walked in.
What? might they say, is this the man after Gods own heart, of whom Samuel
promised such great matters? Did Saul ever commit adultery with another man's
wife as he has done? and why then was Saul cast off, and he anointed in his
room? but thus indeed it is with all those that make such a show of religion,
and seem so zealous of religion, there are none so bad as they: this is the
fruit of their hearing and praying so much, etc. Thus wicked and profane
wretches were like to descant upon these sins of David, and so to blaspheme
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 2.24. where having spoke much of the
great wickedness of the Jews, he adds, For the name of God is blasphemed
amongst the Gentiles through you; and for this cause the prophet tells David
here, that the child he had begotten of the wife of Uriah should die; Because
by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme: the child also that is born unto thee, shall surely die. For though
it were in some regard a benefit both to David and Bathsheba that this child
died, (so did God temper his displeasure with goodness, for as long as this
child had lived it would have been a memorial of their sin and shame both to
themselves and others) yet considering the affection they bare to their child,
and the manifestation of Gods displeasure therein; it was indeed a sharp
affliction, and caused David a great deal of sorrow.

Verse. 16. David therefore besought God for the child, etc.] For though Nathan
had told him that the child should surely die, yet he might hope that this was
threatened conditionally, and that upon his tears and repentance this sentence
might be reversed; as was afterward that of Hezekiah his death, and the
destruction of the Ninivites.

Verse. 18. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died.] That
is, the seventh day after he fell sick, or (as many take it) the seventh day
after he was born; and if we thus understand the words, then the child died,
before he was circumcised, and yet after he was dead, David cheared up himself
we see, not doubting of the child's salvation, yea though he was begot^en in
adultery, verse. 23. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring
him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

Verse. 20. Then David arose from the earth, and washed and anointed himself,
and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord and worshipped,
etc.] There is a law, Number. 10.14. That when one died in a tent, all that came
into the tent and all that was in the tent, should be unclean seven days, yet
David presently after the death of this infant, washed himself, and went up
into the house of God: either therefore this law when they came to dwell in
houses, was understood to extend no further then to the room where the party
died, not to the whole house; or else, the child died not in the same house
wherein David was, but in some other house not far from David's palace. Many
reasons may be conceived, why David, his conscience being now awakened, was so
eager to worship God in his house; to wit, partly that he might bless God for
calling him to repentance, when he lay in such a dangerous condition, for
giving him assurance by the prophet that his sin was pardoned, and for
enabling him to bear with patience the loss of his child; and partly that he
might further acknowledge and bewail his sins before God, and pray for mercy
in regard of those remaining corrections which God had threatened him with, at
least that God would strengthen him to bear them, and sanctify them to his
good. However observable it is, that so eager he was upon these duties of Gods
worship, that though he had fasted all the time the child lay sick, yet he
would not eat any thing till he had first been in the house of God, that is,
the tabernacle which he had set up for the ark; but when once he had been there
and had there worshipped the Lord, Then, as it follows in the next words, he
came to his own house, and when he required they set bread before him, and he
did eat.

Verse. 24. And David comforted Bathsheba his wife.] Both concerning the loss
of her child, and concerning her adultery with David, for which it is likely
she was also at present much afflicted upon this discovery of the Lords
displeasure against them; and indeed some Expositours conceive, that Bathsheba
was so far troubled about it, that she questioned whether she might as yet
safely live as a wife with David, till he comforted her and satisfied her
herein; which they gather from the order of the words in this place, And David
comforted Bathsheba his wife and went in unto her and lay with her.

And she bare a son and called his name Solomon.] Which signifies peaceable,
and it was by express direction from God, that David gave his newborn son
this name as is evident, 1. Chron. 2^.9. where David tells Solomon how he had
herein received a charge from God. Behold a son shall be born unto thee, who
shall be a man of rest, and I will give him rest from all his enemies round
about: for his name shall be Solomon; and I will give peace and quietness unto
Israel: where we see the reason of his name is also expressed: because of the
great peace the Israelites should enjoy under his reign, therefore was his
name called Solomon, that is peaceable: and herein was Solomon a type of
Christ, who is styled, Isaiah 9.6. The Prince of peace, and partly because his
subjects do even here in this world enjoy peace with God, to whom he has
reconciled them by the blood of his cross; and peace with their own
consciences, yea and with all the creatures; but especially because in heaven
they shall enjoy a perfect and solid peace unto all eternity.

Verse. 25. And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet, and he called his
name Jedidiah.] That is, the Lord sent Nathan to David to tell him, that his
child should be called not Solomon only, but also Jedidiah; that is, Beloved
of the Lord, to wit, because of Gods singular love to him; and thus did the
Lord cheer David by the same prophet; by whom he had humbled him. Nathan it was
that told him that his former child born of Bathsheba should surely die; and by
Nathan now the Lord assured him concerning this child that he should be
Jedidiah, that is, The beloved of the Lord, and herein also was Solomon a type
of Christ, Matthew. 3.17. And so a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved
son* in whom I am well pleased.

Verse. 26. And Joab fought against R^bbah of the children of Ammon and took the
royal city.] Rabbah (it seems) consisted of two parts, which were as it were
two cities joined together, and one of them was called, both the royal city,
because there the king had his palace; and the city of waters, because it was
environed with waters; or at least lay upon the side of some river, as it is
expressed, verse. 27. I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken the city of
waters. Now Joab having continued almost a year in b^s^^ging this city (as
indeed it was no wonder that God gave him no better success abroad, David
having so displeased him by his sin at home) at length he took this royal
city, or city of waters; and knowing that the other could not now long hold
out; because this was far the strongest piece, and the other depended upon
this; and had happily their water from this which was now cut off; he therefore
sent to David to come thither, that he might have the glory of taking the city.

Verse. 29. And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and
fought against it, and took it.] It may justly seem strange, that David should
go with a numerous army, out of the land of Israel, into the land of the
Ammonites, only to take a city that was in a manner taken already; and which
they were afraid would be won before he came; and that for no other end, but
that David might have the name of taking the city. But for this we must
consider: first, that even the best of Gods servants are naturally
vainglorious, and too much transported with a desire of having their name
famous and renowned; and secondly, there might be other occasions of David's
going thither, as for the prosecuting of their conquests in the land of the
Ammonites, and for giving directions for the punishment of those, that had with
such scorn abused his ambassadors; and that Joab knowing this, did advise him
only, the rather to hasten his coming thither, that the city might be taken
by him; and so he might have the glory of this great piece of service.

Verse 30. And he took the kings crown from off his head; the weight whereof was
a talent of gold, with the precious stones, etc.] There was but a talent of
gold in the golden candlestick of the Sanctuary, Exodus, 25.39. which is thought
to have been at least an hundred and twenty pound weight; but the common
talent, some say, was but half so much as the talent of the Sanctuary, to wit,
sixty pound weight; and so much it may be therefore this crown weighed: and if
so, doubtless it was too massy to be usually worn. Rather it was a crown of
state, which was only set upon the heads of their kings, at their coronation;
or hung over their heads in some chair of state, and so happily at this time it
was set upon their kings head, and then taken off, and set upon David's; to
show, that now the royal dignity was transferred from him to David: and
indeed, because the brother of this king, the son of Nahush, succored David
when he fled from Absalom, chap. 17.27.28. it is most probable, that Hanun was
now either deposed, or put to death by David, and his brother made governor of
Rabbah, whence it was that he showed such respect to David in that time of his
troubles.

Verse. 31. And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them
under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron; and made them
pass through the brick-kiln.] Thus severely David punished them (whether by
express direction from God; or otherwise we cannot say) because they had
against the law of nations, so shamefully abused David's messengers; withal
having perhaps respect to their inhumane idolatry, in causing their children to
pass through the fire to Molech; which was their idol, 1. Kings 11.7. Yet it
is like that only, the principal ringleaders in that barbarous usage of
David's messengers, and the stirring up of the neighboring nations against him,
were thus punished.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. ABsalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar;
and Amnon the son of David loved her.] Tamar was Amnons sister as well as
Absaloms (for they were all David's children) but she is called peculiarly
Absaloms sister, because she was his sister both by father and mother; for both
Absalom and Tamar, were born to David of his wife Maacha the daughter of Talmai
king of Geshur; and observable it is, how much sorrow David had in both these
his children, which he had by the daughter of an heathenish idolatrous king,
the incestuous rape of the one, and the unnatural rebellion of the other, were
a fair evidence to let him see that his matching himself with such a wife was
not pleasing to God.

Verse. 2. For she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do any
thing to her.] That is, being a virgin, and so strictly kept, and looked to, he
thought it would be an impossible thing for him, ever to get an opportunity of
satisfying his lust with her.

Verse. 4. Why art thou, being the kings son, lean from day to day?] Two
reasons may be given why Jonadab, wondering that Amnon should so droop and pine
away as he did, amplified his wonder from this, that he was the kings son: to
wit, first, because he thought the happiness of being the kings son, might
easily overweigh any cause of sorrow he could possibly pretend: and secondly,
because there was nothing almost which he could desire, which he might not
have; Why art thou, being the kings son, lean from day to day? as if he
should have said, Being the kings son, thou may command what thou will;
and wherefore then do thou vex and afflict thy self?

And Amnon said, I love Tamar, my brother Absaloms sister.] He calls her here,
not his sister, but Absaloms, thereby seeking to palliate, or extenuate his
sin in lusting after her; by intimating that she was his sister only by the
half-bloud, and not his sister by father and mother, as she was Absaloms, and
yet afterward he calls her his sister, the better to hide his purpose from his
father, verse. 6. Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my sister
come, etc.

Verse. 6. The king was come to see him.] No sooner did Amnon pretend himself
sick; but presen^ly his father came to see him. No doubt his late loosing of
his child, that he had by Bathsheba made him the more fearful of his loosing
this son too; and being also his eldest son, he could not but lay it the
more to heart; and yet how well had it been for David, if he had been sick
indeed, yea sick unto death; considering how much b^tter sorrow, he immediately
brought upon him, by that unnatural villainy of his in ravishing his own sister.

Verse. 7. Then David sent home to Tamar, saying Go now to thy brother Amnons
house. etc.] This doubtless did afterward much add to David's sorrow, that
himself was made an instrument to further such an execrable fact and that by
his command, he had cost his poor child into the snare of so grievous a
mischief.

Verse 10. And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber etc.] He
calls her into a more inward room, that if she should cry out, yet she might
not be heard.

Verse. 12. And she answered him, Nay my brother, do not force me, etc.] By many
several arguments Tamar endeavors here to dissuade Amnon, from seeking to
satisfy his lust upon her, to wit, first, by putting him in mind that he was
her brother* Nay my brother; for hereby she gives him a hint, what a high
degree of wickedness this was which he went about, no less then incest in a
high degree: being her brother he was bound by the law of nature, to be a
refuge to her against any other that should seek to defile her, and for him
therefore to defile her himself his own sister, was a most heinous wickedness:
secondly, by pressing that aggravating circumstance of humbling her by violence
and force, Nay my brother do not force me, though it were bad enough to commit
uncleanness with one that consents to it, yet to force a poor woman, that had
rather loose her life then her purity, in this regard if she knew how to avoid
it, is far worse: thirdly, by alleging what a dishonor such sins brought
upon the whole people of God, and the Religion they professed, which is employed
in those words, for no such thing ought to be done in Israel, and fourthly by
alleging the shame that this would bring upon them; And I, says she, whether
shall I cause my shame to go? that is, I never shall be able to free my self
from shame and reproach, I shall be ashamed to show my face any where, as long
as I live* and thou shall be as one of the fools in Israel: that is, every body
will account thee a graceless wretch, and judge the unworthy to succeed thy
Father in the throne.

Verse. 13. I pray thee, speak unto the king, for he will not withold me from
thee.] When nothing else would prevail with him, being in a straight, she
advises him to desire her of his father for his wife, not as thinking that
this could be done; but only as desiring by any means to put him off for the
present, from the prosecuting of this his wicked purpose.

Verse. 15. Then Amnon hated her exceedingly, etc.] Those pangs of grief and
remorse of conscience, which men usually feel after an act of uncleanness
committed, do naturally alienate the affections of men, from those that have
been the occasions of their sin, and make them oft-times to loath them more
then before they loved them: and so it seems it was with Amnon, but then
besides there was no doubt a special hand of God in this, whereby way was made
to the publishing of this sin for the punishment of David.

And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.] It is a wonder that Amnon should
thus put her forth, even because of the respect he might have had to his own
credit and safety; had he kept her a while with him, by many entreaties, and
tendering what satisfaction could be made her, he might have persuaded her to
conceal what he had done, whereas her blubbered eyes, and such other signs of
the force done to her, being presently thrust out of doors, must needs make
that wickedness which had been secretly done, either vehemently suspected, or
manifestly known, and so expose him to the wrath of his father, the punishment
of the law, (which in case of a rape was death) and shame amongst all that
should hear of it: but God infatuated him, and why? he meant by this incest of
Amnon, and Absaloms murdering his brother in revenge of this rape, to punish
David for his adultery with Bathsheba, and murder of Uriah, and therefore by
occasion of this mad rage of Amnon, it must be published and known.

Verse. 16. This evil in sending me away, is greater then the other that thou
did unto me.] To wit, because this turning her our in such a condition, would
expose her to so much shame and reproach, and not only discover that she had
been defiled, but perhaps also raise an opinion in some, that she had
consented, and thereupon was hated and cast off by Amnon, as strumpets use to
be by those whom they have inveigled to commit folly with them; and withal
because hereby the name of God would be blasphemed amongst his enemies, when
they should hear of such a fact committed amongst his people, the people of
God would be scandalized, and the heart of their father deeply and sorely
wounded. It is true indeed, that if by evil here, only sin be meant, she
might well say in that sense in some regard, that the evil in sending her away,
was greater then that of defiling her: to wit, in regard this was an act so
full of inhumanity and cruelty, and for which there could not be pleaded such
an over-bearing temptation as there was in the other: but yet there is little
question I think to be made, that by evil here is meant the evil of injury, or
mischief done to her, and so it is no wonder that she should say, that the evil
in sending her away, was greater then that of his defiling her: for however the
ravishing her was an incomparable wrong, yet considering how grievous the shame
necessarily following the discovery hereof, would be to her, she might well
judge this, in her passion especially, far worse then the former evil.

Verse. 18. And she had a garment of diverse colors upon her, etc.] That is, a
garment of wrought, or embroidered work; and that which is added, that with
such robes were the kings daughters, that were virgins apparelled, is to show,
that the rending of her virgin attire, verse. 19. And Tamar put ashes on her
head and rent her garment of diverse colors: did as it were secretly discover,
that her virginity had been by force rent from her.

Verse. 19. And Tamar put ashes on her head.] See the note, Josh. 7.6.

And laid her hand on her head, and went on, crying.] Which was the usual
custom of women in extremity of sorrow, seeking as it were to cover and hide
themselves, Jer. 2.37. Thou shall go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine
head: for the Lord has rejected thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in
them.

Verse. 20. He is thy brother, regard not this thing.] It seems when Tamar was
turned out of doors she went not to her father, as being happily most ashamed
to see him, and sensible what an exceeding grief it would be to him, but to her
brother Absalom, who was near and dearer to her then the rest of her brethren,
because he was her brother both by father and mother, who thereupon did what he
could to pacify her: Hold now thy peace, says he, my sister; he is thy
brother, regard not this thing, as if he should have said, his shame will be
the shame of us all, and therefore be silent: and thus he endeavored to say
something to appease her sorrow for the present, though himself were even at
the same time highly enraged at what his brother had done, and fully resolved
to be revenged on him.

Verse. 21. But when king David heard of all these things, he was very wroth.]
This is noted, as an inexcusable weakness in David: when he heard how Amnon
had ravished his sister, and considered that he had made use of him to get his
sister into his hands, that he might defile her, he was highly enraged at it,
but for all this his anger, he let him pass unpunished; for what a poor
punishment was the cheeks or frowns of a father, for such a foul abomination?

Verse. 22. And Absalom spoke unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad, etc.]
To wit, concerning this abuse of his sister, as knowing this to be the best way
to accomplish the revenge he intended. Had he quarrelled with Ammon, or shown
himself discontented, this would have made Amnon the more jealous and wary of
him; whereas now by carrying the matter so smoothly as he did, Amnon feared
nothing, and so fell easily into the snare he had laid.

Verse. 23. And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had
sheepshearers, etc.] When Absalom, after two years waiting, saw well there
would be no course taken against Amnon, by David their father (the Lord having
in this given him up to the inordinate love of his children, that Absalom
provoked hereby, David might be now punished with the sword also) and hoped,
that now they might think that Absalom had forgotten that which Amnon had done
to his sister, he resolved to take this occasion of his sheep-shearing feast,
to invite his brother home to his house, intending there to kill Amnon.

Verse. 24. Behold now thy servant has sheep-shearers: Let the king I beseech
thee, and his servants, go with thy servants.] Doubtless the chief reason why
Absalom invited all his brothers to his sheep-shearing feast, yea and his
father too, was, that Amnon might not suspect any thing; yet it may well be
also (as some expositours have noted) that he desired his father should have
been an eye witness of the tragical execution of his incestuous darling,
because he had all this while forborne to punish him: and yet at this time was
David so tender over this his ungracious son, that he would not go with his
servants to his feast, only lest they should be too chargeable to him, as it
is expressed in the following words, Nay my son, says he, let us not all now
go, lest we be chargeable unto thee.

Verse, 25. And he pressed him, howbeit he would not go, but blessed him.] That
is, he desired the Lord to be with him, and so sought to dismiss him.

Verse. 27. But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon, and all the kings sons
go with him.] It was strange, that neither Amnon nor David should suspect any
thing* when Absalom was so earnest to have Amnon come to his house, that he
would not take a denial of his father, but pressed him till at last he
consented to it: but when the Lord means to correct his children, or to punish
wicked men, he is wont thus to take away their wisdom and understanding from
them, so that they shall not see the danger approaching, though never so
evident, but shall go on, as blind men into a trap; when any body that had
their eyes in their heads, might easily discern it.

Verse. 28. Mark ye now, when Amnons heart is merry with wine, and when I say
unto you, Smite Amnon, then kill him, etc.] David by making Uriah drunk, sought
to hide his sin, and now Absalom by causing Amnon to drink, sought to
accomplish the murder of his brother, because he had formerly defiled his
sister; for doubtless the revenging of his sister Tamars rape, was the chief
thing that drew on Absalom to this bloody fact, though withal, his ambitious
desire of the Crown might help forward this resolution of cutting off his elder
brother.

Verse. 29. And every man gat him up upon his mule, and fled.] Hereby it
appears, though the Israelites were forbidden to suffer the cattle of diverse
kinds to engender together Lev, 19.19. yet they might use the cattle so
engendered; for such mules were, of which see the note Genesis 36.24.

Verse. 32. And Jonadab the son of Shimeah, David's brother, answered and said,
Let not my Lord suppose, that they have slain all the young men the kings
sons, etc.] This Jonadab was the main cause of Amnons ravishing his sister,
and consequently also of Absaloms murdering Amnon, as is noted in the beginning
of this chapter: yet we see here how smoothly and impudently he could now talk
of Amnons forcing his sister Tamar, which he had plotted and contrived, as if
he had no way been concerned in the business.

Verse. 37. And went to Talmai, etc.] His mothers father, chap. 3.3.

Verse. 39. And the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom, etc.]
That is, he began to desire his return again, and had it not been for shame, he
could have found in his heart to have gone himself, and fetched him home:
because his conscience told him it was not fit he should show such favor to
his own child being guilty of so foul a murder, he was ashamed and afraid to do
it; but in the mean season his heart yearned after him, his grief for his other
son* time by degrees had worn away, and so now he began to wish, that he had
his Absalom at home again with him; only he knew not how he should with his
credit bring it about.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. NOw Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the kings heart was
toward Absalom, etc.] In seeking to fetch home Absalom, Joab knew well, that
he should gratify him that was now in the eye of all men the heir apparent to
the crown and kingdom of Israel: but the main thing that moved him was, as
here is said, that he saw David inclined to it, though he were restrained by
the conviction of his own conscience: for had he not found David desirous of
his return, he would hardly have ventured to displease David, that he might
curry favor with Absalom; and therefore we see, verse. 28.29. when David would
not see the face of Absalom, Joab would not come at him neither.

Verse 2. And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said unto
her, I pray thee feign thy self to be a mourner, etc.] This Tekoah was a city
of Judah, 2. Chron. 11, 5, 6. the very same where the prophet Amos lived, Amos
1.1. The words of Amos, who was amongst the herdmen of Tekoah, etc. Now Joab
resolved to employ a woman in this plot that he had in hand: first, because men
are most ready to pity them in their misery: and secondly, because he thought
a woman fittest to counterfeit and dissemble; a man he thought, would hardly
have told a forged tale with such lively expressions of bitter sorrow, nor
would have been so nimble and ready to make fit replies to any thing that David
should say, and therefore he determined to have a woman to be his instrument,
because none can better feign themselves to be mourners then women can; why he
pitched particularly upon this woman of Tekoah it is not expressed, only we
may guess, that she was a woman singularly famous for her wisdom, or happily,
one of those who were usually hired to mourn at funerals, and so being grown
famous for her notable artificial performance of that service, was therefore
chosen to be the agent in this plot.

Verse. 5. And she answered, I am indeed a widow-woman, and my husband is dead.]
This she premiseth, that thereby she might win the king the more to
commiserate her condition: for first, being a widow, she was the less able to
defend her self against those that were risen up against her: secondly, being
under such a heavy weight of sorrow for the loss of her husband, any addition
of further grief must needs press her the more sorely: and thirdly, having
lost already the stay and support of a husband, she was far the more unable
to bear the loss of her only son too.

Verse. 6. And thy handmaid had two sons, and they strove together in the
field, etc.] In these words, she seeks to extenuate the pretended offense of
her son in killing his brother, to wit, that he did it in heat of blood,
without any premeditated malice; being together in the field, where there was
no body by to part them, they fell out and quarrelled, and so at last fighting
together the one (happily being sorely first wronged and provoked) killed the
other.

Verse. 7. And behold the whole family is risen against thine handmaid, etc.] To
wit, as knowing that my sons inheritance should come to them, if he were put
to death; and indeed to this, those following words seem to have relation,
which she pretends her kindred had spoken, and we will destroy the heir also,
namely that by that means the land may come to us; but yet some Expositours do
otherwise understand those words, to wit, that the kindred did thereby imply
one chief reason why they desired her surviving son should be put to death:
which was that he by killing his brother might not come to inherit his estate.

And so they shall quench my coal which is left, etc.] As if she should have
said, this son is the only comfort that is left me in the world, like one
poor coal in a heap of ashes, so is he left alive in the sad ruins of our
family, so that by seeking to take away his life, they go about wholly to
extinguish my husbands name, and to leave me destitute of all comfort.

Verse. 9. My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me and on my fathers house: and
the king and his throne be guiltless.] Because David might happily scruple,
whether he should do well to shelter one that had killed his brother upon any
pretense whatsoever, therefore to remove this scruple, she offers to take the
sin upon herself. My lord, O king, the iniquity be upon me, etc. there is
indeed no weight at all in this kind of pleading: for when men are persuaded to
do evil, if they that persuade them do engage themselves to bear the punishment
that they are liable to, set consenting to do it, they engage themselves for
that they cannot make good; for God will punish both the one and the other: but
yet because, first, there is in this a kind of slattering insinuation which may
ingratiate men to those they persuade, namely, that they had rather the evil,
if there were any to be feared, should fall upon themselves then them: and
secondly, it implies so great a confidence in those that engage themselves,
that there is indeed no evil like to follow upon it, therefore it has been
always a plea usual with men; so Rebecca pleaded with her son Jacob, when
he scrupled the course prescribed him for deceiving his father. Genesis 2^.^2.
Upon me be thy curse my son, only obey my voice; and so the Jews sought to
win Pilate to yield to the crucifying of Christ, Matthew. 27.25. His blood be
on us, say they, and on our children.

Verse. 11. Then said she, I pray thee let the king remember the Lord thy God*
etc.] That is, let the king be pleased to remember that this which thou have
said, has been promised as in Gods presence, that thou will not suffer the
avengers of blood to destroy my son: and thus she covertly also presses
David to confirm what he had said with an oath, as we see thereupon he did, And
he said, As the Lord lives there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the
earth, indeed nothing the woman had said concerning her supposed son that had
killed his brother, contained any just reason why he should not be put to death
(for the law of God did expressly enjoin that all manslayers should be put to
death, excepting none but those that do it by chance, or in their own defense)
and therefore it is strange, that David should undertake so solemnly to secure
him from punishment. But it seems David's heart did incline to the saving of his
own son Absalom, who was guilty of the like offense, and by this byas was
his heart drawn aside, to spare unjustly this widows son too.

Verse. 13. Wherefore then have thou thought such a thing against the people of
God? and] As if she should have said, since thou dislikest the violence of the
men of my family against me, in seeking to deprive me of my son, because he
contending with his brother slew him, why then should thou entertain the
very like thoughts against the whole people of God, which they have entertained
against me? They would deprive me of my only comfort, and quench my coal that
is left, even so have thou sought to deprive Gods people of thy son Absalom,
upon whom their eyes are set as the man that should succeed thee in the throne,
in whom the light of Israel should be renewed when thou art gone, and that
because he has slain his brother that had grievously provoked him, by
ravishing his sister: thus Joab by his instrument the widow of Tekoah, sought
to persuade David that the people were much grieved, and were like indeed to
suffer very much several ways, because Absalom the kings heir (for it seems
by this, that Chileab his second son, chap. 3.3. was dead also) should thus
long live as an exile amongst an idolatrous people, and so endeavors to
convince him, that he was blame worthy for this his severity against his son,
by his own sentence in her cause, as is more fully expressed in the next words,
For the king does speak this thing, as one that is faulty, in that the king
does not fetch home again his banished, that is, in judging that it is fit my
son should be spared, thou have condemned thy self as faulty, in that thou
have not fetched home thy banished son.

Verse. 14. For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which
cannot be gathered up again.] Some Expositours understand this of the people of
Israel, and the state of their kingdom and commonwealth, to wit, that their
welfare did so depend upon Absaloms, that if he were not fetched home again,
they esteemed themselves but as dead men, and that the state of their kingdom
must needs come to nothing, and be dissolved without hope of recovery, even as
water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again: and thus she
proves that the king was in the same manner faulty against the people of God,
in not fetching home his Absalom, as the revengers of blood were against her,
in seeking to bereave her of her only son. But rather I conceive it is meant
of the inevitable lot of all mortal men, to wit, that they must need, die and
that being dead they cannot be recalled, no more then water can be gathered up
that is spilt upon the earth; for this is the plain sense of the words, and is
pertinent to make good that which she had said, that the continuing of Absaloms
banishment would leave Gods people in as desolate a condition as she should be,
loosing her second, and now only son: for though David were yet living; and
Absalom (though in a strange country) yet against this she opposes the
uncertainty of their lives; who knows how soon David might die? or Absalom
living in such sorrow as a banished man? if either of these should happen, they
should be forlorn, loosing him whom they esteemed the coal that should renew
the light of their Israel, when it seemed to be extinguished by David's death;
or else it may be referred to Amnon; that he being dead could not be recalled,
and why then should they for him, take away the life of Absalom too?

Neither does God respect any person, yet does he devise means, that his
banished be not expelled from him.] In these words, she moves David to show
mercy to Absalom, even from the example of the Lord himself: if David should
say, that though he be his son, yet he must not be respected in point of
Justice, she has given here an answer to this, that neither does God respect
any person, yet does he devise means, that his banished be not expelled from
him, that is, though to show his detestation of bloodshed, he has imposed a
kind of banishment upon those that kill a man unwillingly, yet he has
appointed cities of refuge for them, in the land of Israel, and has not
expelled them from him out of the land, to live where their souls should be
endangered, amongst an idolatrous people; yea, he has devised a means, that
their banishment should not be hopeless there, for he has given way, that at
the death of the high priest, they should be freed from that restraint, Numb.
35.25. Some Expositours do otherwise understand this which is said, that the
Lord does devise means, that his banished be not expelled from him: for some
conceive it is meant of his favor, in receiving repenting sinners, that though
without respect of any man's person, he has cast off all mankind for sin, yet
he has devised a means, that such as will repent, submit, and believe in
Christ, should be received into his favor again; and thus they conceive, that
this woman did covertly put David in mind of Gods pardoning his adultery with
Bathsheba, and murder of Uriah, as a strong inducement to move him to show
mercy unto Absalom. Others understand it of Gods providence in regard of
Absalom, to wit, that though he had chastised him by this banishment he had
suffered, yet he had hitherto kept him alive, and had now moved the people to
set this woman a work to solicit David for him, and so had devised a means
that his banished, that is, Absalom should not be for ever expelled from him;
but the first exposition I conceive is most proper.

Verse. 15. Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my Lord the
king, it is because the people have made me afraid.] That is, because their
discontent made me fear what the event of this would prove; or, because I was
afraid for the peoples sake, to wit, first, lest he should make an invasion
upon the land, being aided therein by his father-in-law, the king of Geshur, to
whom he is fled: or secondly, lest the people should rise up in some uproar,
because of him, and send for him home without thy consent, and perhaps proceed
further to some more mutinous and mischeivous courses: or thirdly, lest the
people should hereafter be corrupted in point of Religion, by means of him, who
has lived so long amongst idolatrous heathens.

Verse. 16. For the king will hear to deliver his handmaid, etc*] As if she
should have said, I reasoned thus with my self, surely the king will hear me
his poor handmaid in this case of my son; and if so, his answer will be
comfortable also, when I come to propound the case of his own; now this
confidence of hers, that the king would grant her request, she alleges here,
not only to show what it was that did embolden her to come to the king with
this request, but also as an argument whereby to move him to satisfy her
desire; for all men are naturally loath to deny those that come to them with
full assurance, that what they crave shall be done for them.

Verse. 17. For as an Angel of God, so is my Lord the king, to discern good and
bad.] That is, thou art exceeding wise to discern between good and evil in any
thing that is propounded to thee: some Expositours hold that she said, David
was as an Angel of God to discern good and bad, because he was a Prophet, and
inspired by God, to judge of any thing propounded to him. But I rather join
with them that say it was proverbiall phrase used in those times, to express a
man's excellency in any thing, by comparing him to an Angel of God: for thus
Achish said to David, 1. Sam 27.9. thou art good in my sight, as an Angel of
God: and Mephibosheth to David, chap. 19.27. My Lord the king is as an Angel of
God: however, the aim of the woman of Tekoah in extolling David thus, was
partly to give a reason why she was so confident that he would rightly judge in
this cause, and partly to curry favor with him, that hereby he might be the
better won to grant her desire, and therefore we see in what an excessive
strain she extolls his wisdom (as flatterers are wont to do, when they extol
Princes) verse. 20. My Lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an Angel of
God, to know all things that are in the earth.

Therefore the Lord thy God will be with thee.] Because thou judge rightly
(and no doubt wilt so do in this which I have adventured to commend to thee)
the Lord will be with thee to bless thee in all thy enterprises, prospering
thy government, and making thy kingdom to flourish.

Verse. 22. And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and
thanked the king, etc.] Though Joab knew well that David desired Absaloms
return more then he (for this it was which put him at first upon this plot, as
is expressed before verse. 1.) yet because David would seem to do it merely upon
his request, and he knew it would endear him to David, that he should desire
and rejoice at the welfare of his children, therefore he also carried himself,
as if he thought that David had done it for his sake, professing that he
accepted it with much thankfulness, and as a clear argument of the kings
favor to him.

Verse. 24. And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him not
see my face.] This David enjoined: first, to humble Absalom the more for his
sin, and that too that the recovery of his fathers favor, might not embolden
him to do evil again: and secondly, out of a respect to his own credit amongst
the people, that he might not seem too facil, to one that was guilty of so foul
a fact, but that rather it might be thought he was in a manner constrained to
fetch him home: and thirdly, to deter others from doing the like.

Verse. 25. But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom,
for his beauty etc.] This mention of Absaloms rare beauty, is here inserted to
intimate one reason of David's strong affection to him, and to show how hard it
was to hide himself from him, or it is prefixed before the story of his
rebellion: first, because this was one main thing that made him so proud and
high minded: and secondly, because this was one thing that did much win the
hearts of the people toward him.

Verse. 26. He weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels, after the
kings weight.] Which was about four pound weight.

Verse. 27. And unto Absalom there were born three sons, etc.] Chap. 18, 18.
It is said he had no son, of which see the note there.

Verse. 29. Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king, etc.]
This being thus prefixed before the story of Absaloms rebellion, it makes it
probable, that the discontent he took at this, did first stir in him that
purpose of rising against his father, and knowing not well how to accomplish
this as long as he continued banished from the court, this might make him so
violently earnest to be brought again into the kings favor.

Verse. 32. Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it had been good for me to have
been there still.] First, because his fathers displeasure was far the more
grievous the nearer he was to him: secondly, because the infamy of not being
suffered to see his father, would not have been so notorious and remarkable had
he continued in Geshur, as it was now that he was come home to Jerusalem: and
thirdly, because in Geshur he enjoyed his liberty, whereas now he was cooped
up in his house, and might not come to the court, therefore he professes that
he had rather have stayed in Geshur still, then live in that manner as he did.
It seems he minded not much the liberty of Gods ordinances, which he was
wholly deprived of in Geshur, and now might enjoy again being returned to
Jerusalem. No, what cared he for Gods ordinances? because he might not come to
the court, Jerusalem was to him no better then Geshur.

Now therefore let me see the kings face, and if there be any iniquity in me,
let him kill me.] That is, if he will not suffer me to see his face, as being
one that have deserved to die, let him put me to death: for I had rather die
then live thus: but whence was this confidence of Absalom? perhaps out of an
opinion that he did well in revenging the rape of his sister, but especially
from a secret persuasion he had of his fathers gentleness and indulgence
toward him, by reason whereof he knew he would not put him to death.

Verse. 33. So Joab came to the king and told him, and when he had called for
Absalom, he came to the king, etc.] As soon as David heard that Absalom took it
so heavily, that he was debarred from his fathers presence, and that he chose
rather to die then not to see his face, he concluded, that now he was thoroughly
humbled, and that this proceeded from tender affection to his father (when
indeed there was no such matter, but he desired only to be at the court, that
he might ingratiate himself amongst the people, and advance himself to his
fathers throne) and so thereupon he sent for him, kissed him, and was fully
reconciled to him.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. ABsalom prepared him chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before
him.] This is doubtless noted as an unusual state in the princes of those
times, and as the first course he took, both to make known to the people that
he expected to succeed his father in the throne (for in the great state he took
upon him, they might see what his hopes were) and also to gain upon the
affection of the people; for outward pomp, and shows, and magnificence, are
wont mightily to work upon the common people, who by the outward bravery of men
are still ready to conclude, that they are men of brave and gallant spirits:
David we must know began now to be aged; Absalom therefore remembering how his
father had showed his displeasure against him for killing his brother Amnon,
and fearing least for that fact of his, he should be judged unworthy to succeed
him; yea, and hearing perhaps some rumors to that purpose scattered abroad
concerning Solomon, through he were David's eldest son, yet he thought it not
safe to abide his fathers death, but resolved to see if he could make himself
king, his father being yet living; and to that end, first he sought secretly to
win unto himself a popular reputation, and so to steal away the hearts of the
people from his father, and then brake forth into an open insurrection against
him: and thus the Lord did not only correct David for his sins in the matter
of Uriah, according to that which the Lord had said to him by the prophet
Nathan, Behold I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house. chap.
12.11. but also, for his fond indulgence toward this his ungratious son:
when he had killed his brother, he was pardoned and was not cut off according
to Gods law, and now did he lay a plot against his father, that had ^o spared
him, and sought to take away both his crown and his life too.

Verse. 2. And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate,
etc.] That is, the gate of the kings palace, or the gate of the city, the
place of judicature; and his rising early to come thither is noted, because
even by this circumstance, he did insinuate himself into the hearts of the
people, that he was so diligent and zealous in enquiring into the causes of
them that were oppressed, rising up early to look after the affairs of the
people.

Verse. 3. See, thy matters are good and right: but there is no man deputed of
the king to hear thee.] Or as it is in the margent of our bibles, none will
hear you from the king downwards. And indeed however the words are read, the
meaning of these words of Absalom was, not that the king had deputed no
subordinate Judges or Magistrates, to hear the causes of those that resorted
thither for justice, (for who can think that David had no judges under him to
relieve those that came to complain) but that none that were deputed to that
office, would hear them uprightly and do them justice.

Verse. 6. And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel, that came to the king
for judgment, etc.] That is, thus he flattered them all as is before related,
verse. 3. whether their cause were good or bad, it was all one to him, his
answer was still the same, See, thy matters are good and right: but there is no
man deputed of the king to hear thee: and thus he would embrace and kiss them
all as is said in the foregoing verse, he made no difference between rich and
poor, but would kiss and embrace the poorest man that came thither as soon as
the greatest; and this is noted first, to show his desperate wickedness, in
seeking so generally to spread the disparagement of his fathers government* by
pretending that there were none deputed of the king that would hearken to the
just complaints of his subjec^s; had he whispered this in the ears of some
few, the wrong had been great, but to spread it abroad so generally, made his
villainy the greater: secondly, to show and set forth how basely this proud
wretch could stoop, that he might accomplish his ambitious designs: and
thirdly, to intimate by what means the people were so generally afterward,
inclinable to favor his conspiracy, to wit, by this his screwing himself
generally into the affections of the people, that came to the king for justice
(for by this means, as it follows in the next words, Absalom stole the hearts
of the men of Israel:) and it is said, that he stole away their hearts, first,
because he won them to a desire that the crown might be transferred from
David to him: their affections might have been to him as their Prince, without
any wrong to David; but to draw off those affections of the people from David,
which they did owe him as their sovereigne the Lords anointed, and to win
them so to himself, that they should wish that he were their king, this was
manifest theft; because thus their hearts should have been set only upon
David: and secondly, because he did this so secretly, closely, and cunningly,
that David discerned it not, nor did the people at first discover his aim; he
did not openly persuade them to revolt from his father, but by courting the
people, and seeming to bewail their condition, that they had not such a refuge
in the seat of justice as they should have, he did covertly and slily draw off
by degrees the hearts and affections of the people, from the king to himself.

Verse. 7. And it came pass after forty years, that Absalom said unto the
king, I pray thee, let me go, and pay my vows, etc.] Had he gone away with such
a number of the people after him, as he had drawn into his conspiracy, and not
acquainted his father beforehand with it, this might have been suspected: under
pretense therefore of a vow which he had made in Geshur, to wit, that he would
offer to God certain peace offerings, gratulatory sacrifices, if God should be
pleased to open a way for his return from that idolatrous place, to live again
amongst the people of God, and in his fathers favor, he begged leave of his
father, that he might go and pay this his vow at Hebron, the place where he was
born, and where his father was first crowned and anointed king, and where was
one of the chief high places in the tribe of Judah, whether in those time they
resorted to offer sacrifices; and this he did, first, because this show of
devotion he knew would please his father, and easily procure him liberty to go:
and secondly, because when they offered these peace offerings, they used to
make great feasts therewith, and so under that color he might invite thither
his friends and followers, and many of the people, whom he might hope to win
to join with the rest, in his intended conspiracy: the greatest difficulty of
this place is, whence we must count these forty years, after which it is said
here, that Absalom got leave to go to Hebron, intending there to make himself
king: that which would most readily come into any man's mind at the reading of
these word is, that these forty years must be counted from the beginning of
David's reign, and then because David reigned in all but forty years, chap.
5.4. the meaning of the words must needs be this: And it came to pass after
forty years, that is, in the fourtieth year, to wit, the last year of David's
reign, that Absalom said unto the king, I pray thee let me go, and pay my vow,
etc. And indeed some of our best Expositours judge this account the most
probable; partly, because there can, they say, no just reason be given, why we
should count these forty years from any other time, but the beginning of
David's reign; and partly, because in the last year of David's reign we may
the better conceive why Absalom should break forth into these open and violent
practices against his father, and should find so many so ready to assist him
herein, namely, because his father began then to be very aged, and there could
not but be some discovery by that time of David's purpose to establish Solomon
in the throne; but yet because it is very hard to conceive how all that which
is afterward related concerning David's reign, could possibly be done in one
year, and particularly, how there could be within the compass of one year,
so great a change in David, that he should in the time of Absaloms rebellion,
be able to fly on foot out of Jerusalem, as it is said he did, verse. 14. yea
and that barefoot too, verse. 30. and yet afterward before the year was ended,
lie bedrid with age, so extremely cold, that though they covered him with
clothes, yet he could get no heat, as it is said he was before he died, 1.
Kings 1.1. therefore indeed the most of Expositours do otherwise compute these
forty years, as that it is meant of Absaloms age, or of the forty years from
the anointing of Saul, or of the forty years of the current Jubilee, etc. of
which all that I can say is this; namely, that there are only two of these
ways of accounting these forty years, that have any great show of probability
in them: first, that of those that account from David's first anointing, 1. Sam.
16.13. and secondly, that of reckoning them from the first setting up a king
amongst them, which was when Saul was anointed, and indeed upon such a
remarkable change in the government of the commonwealth of Israel as that was,
it may well be that they used still to reckon the years from that observable
change, as they have done in many other kingdoms upon the like occasion.

Verse. 10. But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, etc.]
The meaning of this is, that at the same time when he had plotted his journey
to Hebron, when he intended amongst his conspiratours to be anointed king, he
appointed also certain men as spies to go severally into all the tribes of
Israel, who were to search and to sift the hearts of the people in all places,
and to prepare and fit them for this change; and at the set time agreed upon
between them, to wit, when he was to be anointed king at Hebron, upon the sound
of trumpets they were to say, Absalom reigns in Hebron: As soon, says he, as
ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom reigns in
Hebron: whereby is meant, either that upon the sounding of the trumpets in
every tribe, these spies should make known the reason of it to the people;
namely, that it was because Absalom was made king in Hebron in stead of his
father, that so then the people mighty cry out, as is usual at such times, God
save king Absalom; or rather, that when the people were summoned by the sound
of the trumpet to come to Hebron, then these spies should make known the cause,
why they were called together, to wit, because Absalom in Hebron was newly
crowned king.

Verse. 11. And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jer;usalem, that were
called and they went in their simplicity, etc.] That is, being invited to the
feast of Absaloms peace offerings, they went in the simplicity of their
hearts, merely as invited guests not knowing any thing of the plotted
conspiracy: but why would Absalom invite such of whom he could have no
assurance whether they would further his designs or no? I answer, that
several reasons might induce him hereto, to wit, first, because he knew that
the people generally favored him, and therefore hoped that when they came
thither and saw what was done, they would soon approve of it, and join in the
conspiracy: secondly, because however, if they proved firm to his father, then
his fathers party would be weakened by drawing so many out of the city, that
would there have taken his part against Absalom: and thirdly, because by
inviting such known faithful men, that meant no ill, his plot intended would
be the better concealed.

Verse 14. Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from Absalom,
etc.] David was a man of great courage, the fort of Zion where he now was, was
a place of great strength, bands of garrison soldiers he had, that attended
him, as his guard the Cherethites, Pelethites, and Gittites, that were
experienced soldiers, and men of tried valor, and many of the people there
were too that were very faithful to him: and yet when he heard that the hearts
of the Israelites were generally for Absalom, he would not stay in Jerusalem,
but fled presently away, and he gives two reasons for it, one lest Absalom
should surprise him, and the other lest the city Jerusalem should be smitten,
whilst some stood for him, and some for his son Absalom; which rather then
he would hazard, he resolved to flee abroad, and cast himself there upon the
providence of God make speed, says he, to depart, lest he overtake us
suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and s^te this city with the edge of the
sword: by the third Psalm which David penned at this time (the title of it is,
A Psalm of David when he fled from Absalom his son) it is clear that he was
greatly cheared with the hope of Gods help; I will not, ^aith he, be afraid of
ten thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about:
though remembering that the Lord had threatened to raise up evil against him out
of his own house, this might make him the more subject to be frighted and
terrified: yet it seems at other times he encouraged himself in the Lord his
God; so that his fleeing was only because he saw that to be the safest and
surest way, both for his own preservation, and the good of the city: he saw
the people were divided in every place, some holding with him, and some with
the traitor his son; what party his son had in the city, as yet he knew
not, and should the adverse party prevail, he might by them he delivered up to
his son Absalom, and the city in that dissension might be utterly ruined,
and therefore that he might have time to discover how the people stood
affected, and to use some means to defeat his sons attempts, he judged it
best for the present, not to trust himself in Jerusalem, but to encamp abroad
in the fields and deserts.

Verse. 16. And the king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the
house.] It is hard to say what David's intention was, in leaving these his
concubines to keep his house: and indeed the less cause there was for it, the
more evident it was that there was an overruling providence of God in it, for
the effecting of that which he had threatened against David, chap. 12.11. I will
take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall
lie with thy wives, etc. but yet the most probable conjecture is, that he left
them there to secure his palace: not that he thought they were able to guard
his house against Absalom and his crew, but that he conceived that Absalom
would not for shame cast them out, because they were women and because they
were his fathers wives, so that if he had any regard to his father, he would
not use them despitefully for his fathers sake.

Verse. 17. And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and tarried
in a place that was far off.] That is, being gotten away some reasonable
distance from the city there he stayed a while to wait for those that would
come out to him, and that he might observe the ways and courses, which the
rebels would take.

Verse 18. And all his servants passed on besides him, and all the Cherethites,
and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites.] Concerning these Cherethites and
Pelethites, see the note. chap. 8.18. the Gittites doubtless were the garrison
soldiers that kept Gath, which David had taken not long before from the
Philistines, chap. 8.1.

Verse. 19. Then said the king unto Ittai the Gittite, wherefore go thou also
with us? etc.] This Ittai was one of David's principal Captains, to whom he
committed the third part of his army when they went out against Absalom, chap.
18.2. and had fled (as it seems) from the Philistines or some other of the
neighboring nations (for why else is he called a stranger and an exile,) and
so living with David was become a Proselite, and was at present the Captain of
the Gittites. Now first, because he was a stranger and an exile, and therefore
too, not like to be suspected or hurt by the new king or his followers, he
thought it unequal to engage him in their dissentions; to make him that had
lost all in his own land by siding in their combustions, to be as unsafe in
Israel whither he had fled for sanctuary, as he had been before in his own
country, he judged a very unreasonable thing: and secondly, because he was
upon some occasion very lately come from Gath with his soldiers, he judged it
too much to make them presently march up and down with him, before they had
well rested themselves, and therefore he disswades them from going with him,
though he had all the reason in the world to strengthen his party as much as he
possibly could; yet thinking it not fitting to take them along with him for the
reasons here alleged, and being confident in Gods assistance, as is evident,
Psalm. 3.6. he was not so eager upon any outward helps for the strengthening of
himself, as to do any thing that had but a show of unwarrantablenesse in it,
and therefore he earnestly persuades him to return with his men and to abide
with the new proclaimed king, that is Absalom, Return, says he, to thy place,
and abide with the king, etc. hoping also perhaps in their troubles to make the
same use of him that he did afterward of Hushai. verse. 34. If thou return to
the city, and say unto Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king: as I have been
thy fathers servant hitherto, so will I now also be thy servant; then may
thou for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel.

Verse. 20. Mercy and truth be with thee.] As if he had said, as thou have been
merciful, true and faithful to me, so I desire that thou may find God and
man merciful true and faithful to thee.

Verse. 23. The king also himself passed over the brook Kidron.] Which was
between Jerusalem and that mount Olivet, over which our Savior passed, John
18.1. when he was in danger of the Jews, as David did now when he fled from his
rebellious son Absalom.

Verse. 24. And lo Zadok also, and all the Levites were with him bearing the ark
of the covenant of God.] Whose course it seems it was at this time to attend
upon the service of the ark: for it is evident, that by Samuel first, and David
afterward, there were certain courses appointed for the priests attendance on
the sacred ministry as we may see, 1. Chron. 9.22. All these which were chosen
to be porters in the gates were two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by
their genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the Seer did ordain
in their set office.

And they set down the ark of God, etc.) That is, when they came to the place
where David and his company resolved to stay a while, waiting and observing how
things would pass, there they set down the ark; but as for Abiathar who was
now the high priest, and went also out of Jerusalem together with David, it is
here said that he went up until all the people had done passing out of the
city: either because he went in the forefront of the people that came along
with David, and so stayed not, but led them up mount Olivet until all the
company that followed him were passed over the brook Kidron and were come to
the place where the ark was set down: or else, because he went up to that part
of mount Olivet where the ark was set down, and there stayed till all the
people were come thither that followed David out of the city; and being
happily in a high place, he might thence see the people coming, and when they
left coming out of the city.

Verse. 25. And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the
city, etc.] Though David knew that the ark was a visible testimony of Gods
presence, and could have been glad to enjoy it; yet partly, because he desired
to make use of the priests who attended the ark, and without whom he might not
keep the ark, to give him intelligence out of the city of all the counsels and
practices of Absalom against him, verse. 35.36. And have thou not there with
thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests, therefore it shall be that what thing
soever thou shall hear out of the kings house, thou shall tell it to Zadok and
Abiathar the priests. Behold they have there with them their two sons, and by
them ye shall send unto me every thing that ye can hear: and partly perhaps,
because he was loath to bring them in danger, remembering what the priests had
formerly suffered at Nob for his sake, he was contented for the present to want
the presence of the ark, as having his confidence in God, and not relying
altogether upon the external sacrament, and so advised them to carry it back
again into Jerusalem.

Verse. 27. The king said also unto Zadok the priest, Art not thou a seer? etc.]
Some conceive that Zadok is here called a seer, only because he was now in the
course of his attendance upon the ark* as is noted above, verse. 24. and was to
enquire of the Lord for the people upon all occasions, and to return them Gods
answer; which cannot be, because he was not the high priest, who only might
wear the Ephod; but others conceive that he was also a prophet, and had that
extraordinary gift of foretelling things to come, for such were called Seers,
1. Sam. 9.9. or that he was a man expert in the oracles of God, and
consequently, that the drift of David's mentioning this, may be either to imply
that in this regard, he was the better able to judge whether the advice he gave
were not right and fit to be followed; or else, to show the cause why it was
fit he should return (to wit, because he was in this his course the public
minister appointed to attend the ark for the service of the whole Church, and
withal, might there consult with God in his behalf, and give him notice of any
thing that concerned him, as occasion served: Return says he, into the city in
peace, and your two sons with you; but yet that their two sons Ahimaaz and
Jonathan went not with their fathers into Jerusalem, is evident, chap. 17.17.
Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by En-rogel, for they might not be seen to come
into the city: and therefore it seems their fathers appointed them to stay at
En-rogel.

Verse. 30. And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went
up, and had his head covered, etc.] His weeping was no doubt especially because
he was afflicted with the remembrance of his sin, that had brought these
troubles upon him, and his covering his head was suitable hereto; for so was
the custom of mourners, to wit, partly that their tears might not be seen, and
partly that the seeing of other objects, might not divert their minds from
intending their sorrows, as being desirous to give up themselves wholly to
bewail their mi^eries, of which custom, see Jer. 14.3. And their nobles have
sent their little ones to the waters, they came to the pits, and found no
water, they returned with the vessels empty: they were ashamed, and
confounded, and covered their heads: chap. 19.4. The king covered his face, and
cried with a loud voice, etc. and Esther 6.12. Haman hasted to his house
mourning and having his head covered.

Verse 32. When David was come to the top of the mount, where he worshipped God,
behold Hushai the Archite came to meet him, etc.] He worshipped the Lord on the
top of the mount, because thence he might best behold the ark the testimony of
Gods present, as the priests were carrying it back to Jerusalem, and be
thereby stirred up the more affectionately, and effectually to call upon the
Lord, and because being gone over that mount, he was like for a time to see it
no more; but that which is most observable is, that no sooner had David prayed
against the counsels of Ahithophel, O Lord, I pray thee, turn the counsel of
Ahithophel into foolishness but presently there came to him Hushai (who is
called the Archite, from the place of his birth or habitation, to wit, Archi, a
place mentioned Josh. 16.2. which was in the borders of the children of Joseph)
by whom God had determined to defeat his counsels.

Verse. 33. Unto whom David said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shall be
a burden unto me.] Whereas by going back to Jerusalem, he might there do him
better service, and withal be no way burdensome to him, and indeed though
David had cause enough to be glad to see his party increase, yet no wonder it
is, that he should tell Hushai, that staying with him he would be a burden to
him: first, because he and his attendants that came with him, would help to
expend their provision, which was yet but small: and secondly, because his care
for those that went with him, and his grief for the misery they were like to
sustain was ^ch, that the more his company increased, the more his burden
increased too.

Verse. 34. Say unto Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king, etc.] Herein David
teaches Hushai to dissemble with Absalom, and an easy thing it is for the
best men in their extremities, to pitch upon such counsels as are not exactly
such as they ought to be.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. ZIba the servant of Mephibosheth met him with a couple of asses
sadled, etc.] Though David was under a cloud for the time, yet Ziba concluded
that ere long this rebellion against him would be suppressed, and then they
that showed him favor in this time of his affliction, would be well rewarded
for it, and this made him come now with these presents to David. And thus many
side with Christ, and that too in the time of persecution and trouble, that yet
have false hearts, and aim merely at their own advantage; though his Church be
for the present the weakest, yet they hope it will prove the strongest, and
upon that ground they side with them; they follow Christ for his loaves, and
fishes, Joh. 6.26.

Verse. 2. And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these?] The king
might easily guess that the provision which Ziba brought, was brought for his
supply, yet to invite him to declare why he had brought them, the rather
happily, because he questioned whether it was done by his masters command, or
of his own mind, he asks him concerning those things, What meanest thou by
these?

And Ziba said, The asses be for the kings household to ride on, and the bread
and summer-fruit^ for the young men to eat, etc.] As if he should have said,
the things which I have brought, though too mean for thy self, yet might, I
thought, be useful for thy servants, and such as belong to thee.

Verse. 4. Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine are all that pertained to
Mephibosheth.] It is very strange that David, so just and good a king, should
now when the hand of God was upon him, pronounce such an unjust sentence as
this was, against a poor cripple, that was not very likely to affect the
crown, as Ziba had slandered him, nor very well able to come and plead for
himself; yea against the son of his dear friend Jonathan, who had always
been so loving to him, and with whom he had made a solemn covenant, that he
would show kindness both to him, and to his seed after him, 1. Sam. 20.14.17.
but for this we must consider: first, that there were many probabilities to
induce David to believe that false tale that Ziba had told him; as because
Mephibosheth came not out to David, as other his friends did, and because for
all his lamenesse, Mephibosheth the true heir of Saul, might in these troublous
times, hope that Saul's family might be remembered, and so might prove
treacherous, as many others did: and secondly, that David did this in a passon,
being mightily enraged to hear, that Mephibosheth should so requite all the
kindness he had shown him: and thirdly, doubtless God was pleased herein to
leave David to himself, that so he might see by this gross failing, that it
was not for any merits in him, but of Gods own free grace, that his enemies
were afterward suppressed, and he again settled in the throne.

And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee that I may find grace in thy sight, my
Lord, O king.] That is, I acknowledge thankfully the bounty of my Lord, yet I
esteem thy favor more then the gift which thou have given me; I came not to
accuse Mephibosheth, that so I might wrest his estate from him, but I came to
procure thy favor, O king, and that it is which I chiefly desire may be
continued to me.

Verse. 5. And when king David came to Bahurim.] See the note, chap. 3.16.

Verse. 8. The Lord has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul,
etc.] Shimei might in these words have respect to the death of Ishbosheth and
Abner, as pretending that David had secretly a hand therein: yea, and perhaps
too it was before this, that those seven sons of Saul were delivered up to
the Gibeonites to be hanged by them, though the story of that be related after
this, chap. 21. but besides all this, it is very probable, which some say, that
the enemies of David did charge him, that he had stirred up the Philistines to
make that invasion upon the land wherein Saul and his sons were slain, and
therefore Shimei here charge all the blood of the house of Saul upon David.

And the Lord has delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son.] As
thou have done to others, so now through Gods just judgment, others do to
thee; thou did rise up against thy father-in-law to take the kingdom from
him, and now thine own son is risen up to take the kingdom from thee: thus
David lying under the cross, is reviled, as our Savior was by the Jews when
he was crucified for our sins.

Verse. 10. And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of
Zeruiah?] As if he had said, trouble me not, I will in this take none of your
counsel, nor will I have a hand in your ways of revenge.

Verse. 12. It may be, that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the
Lord will requite good for his cursing this day.] This hope of David's was
grounded doubtless upon the Lords usual dealing with his children; for as
Physicians are wont to give cordialls after purges, to support and cherish the
spirits of their patients; so when the Lord suffers wicked men to abuse his
servants, he is wont usually as pitying them for their sorrows, to recompense
the evil they have done them, even here in this world, with some special mercy.

Verse 13. And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on the
hills side over against him, and cursed as he went, etc.] This is added; first,
to show the violence of Shimie's malice: secondly, the constancy of David's
patience; and thirdly, the obedience of David's captains, who now were quiet,
though Shimei still ceased not to revile their Lord, and would not give over.

Verse. 14. And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary, and
refreshed themselves there.] That is, at Bahurim, verse. 5.

Verse. 16. Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king, etc.] This Hushai might
mean of David; and so also that he adds afterward, verse. 18. And thus he
deluded Absalom with ambiguous speeches.

Verse. 17. And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend?
etc.] This he says to sift and try Hushai, as wondering at, and suspecting his
revolt from David, not as disliking any such ingratitude; for why then should
he not as well condemn himself for rising up against his father that begat him,
and that had always been so loving, yea indulgent toward him; and indeed in
his speaking of this to Hushai, one may see that his conscience did inwardly
accuse him for doing as bad himself, as that he seemed to charge Hushai with,
and therefore he said not, is this thy kindness to my father thy friend? and
why wentest thou not with my father? but is this thy kindness to thy friend?
and Why wentest thou not with thy friend? as being ashamed to mention the name
of father, or to utter a word that would condemn him of so foul a sin.

Verse. 21. All Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father, then
shall the hands of all that are with thee be strong.] That is, then shall all
thy followers be bold, and resolutely firm for thee, when they shall see by
this fact of thine that there will be no possibility of reconciliation.
Ahithophel know well how easily parents and children are reconciled,; if it
should to prove betwixt David and Absalom, what would become of him and the
rest of Absaloms abettours: yea, if the people did but fear this, it might keep
them from siding with Absalom; to prevent these mischiefs, therefore he seeks
to engage Absalom in this (as he judged) unpardonable villainy.

Verse. 22. So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house, and Absalom
went in unto his fathers concubines, etc.] And thus was that accomplished which
God had threatened, chap. 12.11. of which see the note there: he that slew Amnon
because he had committed incest with his sister Tamar, did now himself commit
the same sin with his fathers concubines; and this he did too, not drawn
thereto with the strength of his lusts, but advisedly upon politic respects,
led thereto by the counsel of Ahithophel, which doubtless was a great
aggravation of his sin.

Verse. 23. And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counseled in those days,
was as if a man had enquired at the Oracle of God.] That is, it was highly
prized, and for the success counted most sure and certain.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 2. ANd I will come upon him while he is weary and weak-handed, etc.]
That is, whilst he is weary with the great march he has taken, that he might
suddenly get out of thy reach; and weak-handed, as being daunted with the
suddenness of this rising of the people against him.

Verse. 4. And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the Elders of Israel.]
This is noted to show the villainy of Absalom, who could applaud him, that had
counseled to have his father slain by a sudden surprise, but especially as a
circumstance that did wonderfully illustrate the mighty power of God, in
defeating the counsel of Ahithophel, that however at the first propounding of
his advice at the counsel board, it seemed incomparably good, not to Absalom
only, but to all the rest of his counsel, yet God so brought it about, that
afterward the same Absalom misliked this counsel, which he had at first so much
applauded, and preferred the counsel of Hushai before it.

Verse. 8. They be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear
robbed of her whelps in the field.] That is, running up and down in the fields
when she has lost her whelps: both their known valor and their anger, being
now driven from their wives, children, and estates, might assure Absalom that
it would not be so easy a matter to terrify them, and make them flee with a
sudden assault, as Ahithophel had suggested.

And thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.] That
is, he is a man skillful in martial affairs, and knows well how to order his
affairs for the prevention of all the dangers of war, and therefore knowing
that your aim will be presently to surprise him, if it be possible he will not
at this time lodge in the ^amp amongst the soldiers, for fear there should be
any traitors amongst them that should seek to betray him, but in some other
place, so that it will not be so easy a matter to smite the king, and seize
upon the king, and so put an end to the war as Ahithophel has apprehended it
will be: thus these words of Hushai must be understood; for he does not speak
this, as if Generals expert in war, used never in those times to lodge with
the people; but as with reference to David's present condition, to wit, that as
things now stood with him, he was too cunning to be where he should be in
danger of being surprised by his enemies; he would hide himself a while till he
had gotten a stronger party about him.

Verse. 9. Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place, etc.]
These words may be understood either with relation to that which went before
showing more fully how unlikely it was, that they should cease upon David,
though they should presently pursue him, to wit, because he would not at that
time lodge in the camp with his soldiers, but in some pit or cave, well known
to him since in those places he used to hide himself from Saul and so would
escape, though any distaster should happen to his followers; or else with
relation to that which follows, knowing that David, as an experienced
soldier, was like enough to lie in ambush with his followers in some cave, or
such secret place, whence, says he, suddenly rushing out upon thy men that
pursue them, it is like they will put them to the worst, at least at first, and
then, says he, it will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown, that is,
some of those twelve thousand which Ahithophel intends to lead forth against
thy father, the report will be, that thy soldiers are slaughtered, whosoever
hears will say, There is a slaughter among the people that follow Absalom,
and so the stoutest of thy followers will be quelled, he whose heart is as the
heart of a lion, shall utterly melt: all will be appalled, and the business we
have in hand, utterly and irrecoverably ruined.

Verse. 10. For all Israel knows, that thy father is a mighty man, and they
which be with him are valiant men.] This is added to prove what Hushai had said
to Absalom, to wit, that upon the killing of some of his men at the first
assault, there would be a report raised of a great slaughter amongst his men,
and so all would be quelled and put to flight; how likely this was to be, he
shows by this reason, taken from the great opinion which all the people had, of
the exceeding valor of David and his men; namely, because this would make men
the more inclinable, both to believe and to spread abroad such a report, and it
would make the report also the more terrible to all that heard it.

Verse. 11. Therefore I counsel, that all Israel be generally gathered unto
thee, from Dan even to Beersheba, etc.] Hushai aimed at David's good in this
counsel, that he might have the more respite to strengthen himself, and might
not be suddenly surprised; yet it was so ordered too, that it was very like to
take with Absalom: for first, it was cunningly fitted to this young gallants
ambitious and insolent humor, who was like to desire to have the leading forth
of his army himself (whereas Ahithophel advised that he might go out with a
party) and to be enflamed with the thoughts of having all Israel gathered, to
follow him, from Dan, even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for
multitude: and secondly, it carried a fair show of wisdom, to make as sure
work as could be, in a business of such consequence, namely* by raising all
the strength that possibly they could, ere they set upon David.

Verse. 12. We will light upon him, as the dew falls on the ground.] That is,
as the dew when it falls, overspreads the whole face of the earth, so shall we
overspread the whole country where we come, by reason of the multitude of our
army, so that wherever he is, we shall light upon him.

Verse. 13. If he be gotten into a city, then shall all Israel bring ropes to
that city, and we will draw it into the river, etc.] Big and brave words to
inflame the spirit of this proud prince. Now in speaking of pulling down this
city, he mentions the pulling of it into the river, because great and strong
cities stand usually upon some river, waters being always of great use and of
great defense to any city; or else by the river must be meant the trenches
about the city, which in the best fortified cities are usually great, and full
of water.

Verse. 16. Now therefore send quickly, and tell David saying, Lodge not this
night in the plain, etc.] Though Absalom and the rest had preferred Hushai's
counsel before Ahithophels, yet Hushai like a prudent man, not knowing how
suddenly their minds might alter again and embrace Ahithophels counsel, which
now they had rejected, takes order to give David notice of that which had
passed, and to advise him to have away with all the speed he could, least they
should suddenly go forth, as Ahithophel had advised, and surprise him ere he
was aware of them.

Verse. 17. Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel, etc.] Which was in the
borders of Judah and Benjamin not far from Jerusalem: See Josh. 15.7. and
18.16. there they stayed because they might not be seen to come into the city,
to wit, because then they could not safely go forth thence to carry David
tidings of that which passed in the city, or because they were suspected; and
a wench was sent to tell them this counsel of Hushai who might go to Enrogel
(which signifies, the fullers fountain,) under a pretense of going to fetch
water, or to wash there: and so the intelligence was carried to David.

Verse. 18. Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told Absalom.] These sons of the
priests Jonathan and Ahimaaz, being missing at Jerusalem, were it seems
generally known to be of David's party; and therefore a lad spying them, soon
carried word of it to Absalom, who as speedily sent out his servants to
surprise them.

But they went both of them away quickly, and came to a man's house in Bahurim,
which had a well etc.] Hearing or perceiving by some thing or other, that this
lad had taken notice of them, and meant to discover them, they got them
presently away, and in a well did hide themselves.

Verse. 19. And the woman took and spread a covering over the wels mouth, and
spread ground corn thereon.] That is meal corn ground in a mill.

Verse. 21. Pass quickly over the water.] That is, over Jordan.

Verse. 22. By the morning light there lacked not one of them, etc.] Having
traveled all night, by the morning the whole army were got over Jordan.

Verse. 23. And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he sadled
his ass, etc.] And so went home and hanged himself: to wit, first, because his
proud heart was not able to brook the undervaluing of his counsel, which had
been always hitherto so highly esteemed; it went against his ambitious humor
to think, that if Absalom should prevail, Hushai should have the glory of it
and not he: and secondly and especially, because he was confidently persuaded,
and did indeed rightly foresee, that this counsel of Hushai would be the cause
of their ruin; that David by this advantage of time, gained through Absaloms
delay, would so strengthen himself, that he would put his son to the worse,
when they came to fight it out in the field; and then he knew that David would
be revenged on him for his treachery; and even so Judas having betrayed Christ,
despairing of mercy, hanged himself.

Verse. 24. Then David came to Mahanaim.] A place of strength beyond Jordan in
the tribe of Gad, where Ishbosheth sought to strengthen himself, when he stood
for the kingdom, chap. 2.8. Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host,
took Ishbosheth Saul's son, and brought him to Mahanaim.

And Absalom passed over Jordan he and all the men of Israel with him.] Not
immediately after David was passed over, for Absalom stayed till he had
gathered a mighty army of the people to him, as Hushai had counseled, verse 11.
(and to intimate this, it is here said, that he went over, he and all the men
of Israel with him,) and so by this means David had time too, to gather a great
army together of those that were faithful to him, and to his crown.

Verse. 25. Which Amasa was a man's son whose name was Ithra, an Israelite,
that went in to Abigail, etc.] Here we are told who were the parents of Amasa,
that was now the General of Absaloms army: to wit, that Ithra was his father,
and Abigail the sister of Zeruiah his mother. In the ^. Chron. 2.17. this Ithra
is called Jether the Ishmaelite, And Abigail bare Amasa, and the father of
Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite: it seems therefore, that he was either an
Ishmaelite by birth, but an Israelite by profession and habitation, and that
because he became a proselite, and so joined himself to the people of God; or
else rather, he was an Israelite by descent, and was only called Ithra, or
Jether the Ishmaelite, because he had lived among the Ishmaelites, as several
others upon the same ground were called Hittites and Gittites, etc. nor can
there indeed be any probable reason conceived, why this should be so
particularly expressed here, that he was an Israelite, but only this that it
was to intimate, that however he was indeed generally called Ithra, or Jether
the Ishmaelite, yet he was indeed of the stock of Israel as others were; as for
his mother Abigail (of whom Ithra begat this Amasa, but not in lawful
marriage, for so much the words seem to import, that he went in to Abigail,) it
is said here, that she was the daughter of Nahash sister to Zeruiah Joabs
mother: now because it is evident, 1. Chron, 2.16 17. that both this Abigail
the mother of Amasa, and Zeruiah the mother of Joab, were the daughters of
Jesse, and sisters of David: (so that Joab and Amasa were cousin-germans, and
David was uncle to them both.) either Jesse the father of David, Zeruiah, and
Abigail, was also called Nahash; or rather, this Nahash was the wife of Jesse,
the mother of Abigail.

Verse. 27. And it came to pass when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the
son of Nahash of Rabbah, etc.] Three chief men are here recorded that brought
in store of provision to David, when he was in the wilderness: the first is
Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah: the most general and probable opinion is
that this Shobi was a second brother to Hanun the son of Nahash. chap. 10.2.
whom David for his fathers sake established in the kingdom after Hanuns
overthrow; in thankful remembrance whereof, he relieved David now in this his
extremity: the second is, Machir the son of Ammiel of Lo-debar: now
considering that he was guardian to Mephibosheth, and had secretly kept him in
his house when David came to the crown, chap. 9.4. not knowing then how David
might deal with him, because he was of the house of Saul, it may well be, that
when he came to see afterward, that contrary to what he had feared, David did
so much good to Mephibosheth the grandchild of his deadly enemy, this made
Machir highly to esteem of David for ever after, and so consequently, the
readier to commiserate him now in this time of his troubles, and to bring him
relief: the third was, Barzillai the Gileadite, of whom much more is spoken
afterward, in the nineteenth chapter.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 2. ANd the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you my
self also.] Thus David would intimate to the people, that he was willing to
hazard himself in the battle together with them: but yet we may well think,
that one main thing that made him so earnestly to resolve that he would go in
person amongst them to the battle was, that he hoped by his presence to help
forward the saving of Absaloms life.

Verse. 3. But now thou art worth ten thousand of us, etc.] Their meaning is,
that the commonwealth would receive more damage, and the enemy more advantage
in their designs by his death, then if ten thousand of them were slain, and
therefore they add, Therefore now it is better that thou succor us out of the
city, that is, Mahanaim, to wit, first, by praying for them: secondly, by
sending forth to them provision and new supplies, as occasion served: and
thirdly, by receiving them into the city, if they should be put to flight.

Verse. 5. Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom.] That
is, though he has deserved to have no favor showed him, yet deal favorably
with him for my sake: David's forces were fewer then Absaloms, and yet trusting
in the justness of his cause, but especially, in the mercy and faithfulness
of God, we see with what confidence David speaks of the success of the battle,
as not doubting of victory, he only gives order to his soldiers to deal
gently with Absalom: nor is it any wonder that David should be thus tender over
him, that sought to deprive him of his kingdom and life; for first, he was a
loving, yea and over indulgent father: secondly, it could not but be grievous
to him, to think that he should die in his sin: thirdly, his own conscience
gave him, that he was raised up as an instrument to punish his sin in the
matter of Uriah, and so his severity against himself might render him the more
gentle toward him: and fourthly, he considered the folly and rashness of
youth, and that when he came to more years, he might see his folly; and this
therefore he intimates to his captains, that he might move them to pity, for
he says not, deal gently with my son Absalom, but deal gently with the young
man, even with Absalom.

Verse. 6. And the battle was in the wood of Ephraim.] That is, it was near unto
the wood; the battle was certainly fought in the tribe of Manasseh without
Jordan; whereas Ephraims portion was within Jordan: but the place was called
the wood of Ephraim, either because it was close by Jordan, right against the
portion of Ephraim, on the other side of the river; or else because this was
the place where Jephthah slew the Ephraimites, Judge. 12.5, 6. And the
Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites, and it was so,
that when those Ephraimites which were escaped, said, Let me go over; that the
men of Gilead said unto him. Art thou an Ephraimite? if he said, Nay: then said
they unto him, Say now Shibboleth and he said, Sibboleth: for he could not
frame to pronounce it right, then they to^k her and slew him at the passages of
Jordan: whence it seems it was afterward called the wood of Ephraim.

Verse. 8. And the wood devoured more people that day, then the sword devoured.]
That is, when they fled into the wood, there perished more there by the sword
of those that pursued them, and by the country people that sound them there
straggling, and fell upon them, then did in the battle by the valor of the
servants of David, that fought there against them; for as I conceive, even
those that were slain in the wood by the soldiers of David pursuing them, are
here included in the number of those whom the wood devoured, and are opposed to
those only that were slain by the sword in the battle: others understand it of
such as perished there by wild beasts, by being hanged in the trees, by
tumbling into ditches, and pits, and caves unknown. But the first Exposition I
think most probable; for it can hardly be conceived how more should perish by
such casualties, then by the sword in general.

Verse. 9. And his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the
heaven and the earth, etc.] The words seem to imply, that his head was catched
in a crotch, or forked branch of the oak, and so his mule running away from
under him, there he hung by the neck: but the most common opinion of
Expositours is, that it was his long and thick hair that was entangled, and
wound about the thick boughs of the oak, by which he hung when his mule was
gone from him; and thus, say they, God testified against his pride in his hair,
making those goodly curled locks of his as a halter to hang him, whereof he had
always been so proud, that he would only cut them but once a year, and that
too because they grew too heavy for him.

Verse. 11. And why did thou not smite him there to the ground, and I would
have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle?] As great a friend as Joab
had formerly been to Absalom, yet now that he had rebelled against his father,
and endangered the ruin of the land by a civil war, he resolved to take
away his life; only still he had rather it should have been by another, then
by him or his command, and therefore he tells the soldier what a reward he
would have given him, if he had slain him; thereby also intimating, that he
would give him the reward if he would go and do it, I would have given thee,
says he, ten shekels of silver and a girdle, that is, a soldiers girdle,
which was a sign of strength and valor, and an ornament and ensign of honor.

Verse. 13. Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life.]
This phrase is somewhat difficult; that he means he should wittingly have
exposed himself to the danger of loosing his life, by disobeying the kings
command in killing Absalom, is very evident; but why does he call this working
falsehood against his own life? I answer, either first in relation to the
secrecy of the fact, as if he had said, That though no body had seen him do
it, and he had endeavored to have concealed it with lies and falsehood, yet it
would at last have brought a shameful death upon him; or else with reference
to the vanity of his hopes, if he had done it in hope that it would not prove
any way perilous to him, but rather would be rewarded, as if he had said,
whatever vain encouragements had emboldened me to do it, they would have proved
false and deceitful, I should have wrought fal^hood against mine own life; for
as when men fail of effecting what they hoped and desired, they are said in the
Scripture phrase, to bring forth falsehood: Psalm. 7.14. He has conceived
mischief, and brought forth falsehood: so when men effect any thing, but fail of
their hopes therein, they may be said to work falsehood: and thirdly, because of
the care which every man is naturally bound to have of his own life; in regard
whereof, he that wittingly does any thing to the prejudice of his life, may be
truly said to work falsehood against his own life.

Verse. 14. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the
heart of Absalom.] Joab knew well enough that as long as Absalom lived, there
would be great danger least his party should again make head and maintain their
former act in making him king; and knowing withal David's indulgence toward
him, and what strict charge he had given for the sparing of him at this very
time, he had just cause to fear that David would not do justice to him, if they
should carry him away alive; and therefore preferring the peace and welfare of
the king and commonwealth, before the kings command, he thrust these darts into
him, and so slew him; yet withal perhaps he was also a little moved with a
particular spleen against Absalom, to wit, because he had lately disposed of
his place of Captain of the host, to Amasa his cousin german, chap. 17.25.

Verse. 17. And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wood,
and laid a very great heap of stones upon him.] See the note Josh. 7.26.

Verse. 18. Now Absalom in his life time had taken and reared up for himself a
pillar, which is in the kings dale.] The same which is called the valley of
Saveh, where the king of Sodom met Abraham, when he returned with victory
having discomfited those four kings that had pillaged Sodom, and had carried
Lot away captive; Genesis 14.17, And the king of Sodom went out to meet him (after
his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with
him, at the valley of Saueh, which is the kings dale. Where this vale was, or
why it was so called, we find no where expressed, only many conjectures we
find in expositours; as that it was the same which was called the valley of
Jehoshaphat, Joel 3.2. and consequently the kings dale: or that it was so
called from the exceeding pleasantness and fruitfulness of it, as a place fit
for the delight of kings; or because the king of Sodom and Melchizedek king of
Salem, did there meet Abraham; and indeed if it were called the kings dale,
because of any king of Judah or Israel, then that clause, Genesis 14.17. was not
written by Moses but inserted afterward by some other. As for the pillar which
Absalom here reared up, that the memory of his name might thereby be preserved
unto posterity, it is very probably conceived by some Expositours, that it was
some monument, such as were the Egyptian pyramids, which he intended to be the
place of his burial, and that upon the relation of his ignoble burial in the
foregoing verse, to wit, that he was cast into a pit, and had a heap of stones
thrown upon him, this is presently inserted concerning the goodly sepulchral
monument which he had provided for himself, (to show how he was crossed in his
expectation.)

For he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance.) Hereby it
appears, that God had before this time deprived him of his three sons,
mentioned chap. 14.27. not judging him worthy of sons, that would not stoop
to honor his own father, and that had murdered his own brother: and withal,
hereby God provided for the more peaceable advancing of Solomon to the throne,
after David's decease.

Verse. 22. Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever,
let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi.] He pressed again for liberty to go
after Cushi, as hoping to outrun him, and having be-thought himself that he
might acquaint David with the good tidings of the victory, though he suppressed
that particular concerning the death of Absalom.

Verse. 23. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi.]
Whereas Cushi ran the nearest way which was hilly and mountainous, Ahimaaz
chose to go a further way, by the way of the plain, and so by the advantage of
the way, he out-ran Cushi, and came first to David.

Verse. 24. And David sat between the two gates, etc.] That is, at the entering
in of the city Mahanaim, waiting to hear tidings from the army that was gone
forth against Absalom. It seems that the gates of cities were in those times
built (as they are now) with high towers, and so stronger and thicker then
other parts of the wall, and therefore had two gates, one inward toward the
city, and another outward toward the suburbs, and between these two gates it
was that David now sat.

Verse. 25. And the king said, If he be alone there is tidings in his mouth.]
That is, if there were many coming together, we might well fear they fled from
the face of the enemy; but if there be but one alone, doubtless it is a
messenger that is sent with some tidings.

Verse. 27. And the king said He is a good man, and comes with good tidings.]
David inferres, that if it were Ahimaaz that was coming he doubtless brought
good tidings, because he was a good man; whereof there may be two reasons
conceived: First, that being a good man, he was not likely to be the first in
flying away; and therefore it was not likely he fled from the enemy, but rather
he came with tid^ngs: and secondly, that being a good man, he was the more
likely to be desirous to bring good tidings to the king, or had used to bring
him good tidings.

Verse. 33. And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate.] See the note above, verse. 5. partly as apprehending the misery of
Absaloms dying in his sin, and partly as remembering that his sin in the
matter of Uriah, was now punished in the death of this his ungracious son, he
felt his passions breaking out so violently, that not being able to go home to
his own house, and being withal doubtless ashamed that his passion should be
seen, he was glad to run up to the chamber over the gate, where he was sitting
when he heard the tidings, there in secret to pour out his sorrow; nor was he
able to suppress his passions ^o long* but as he went up, as it follows in the
next words, he brake out into a bitter lamentation, O my son Absalom, my
son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, etc. Because he feared
his everlasting perdition, he wished that he had died rather then Absalom.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 3. ANd the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people
being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.] That is, in stead of
entering the city in a triumphant manner, as soldiers are wont to do, that
return with victory from the battle, they scattered themselves asunder, and
stole secretly into the city, as if they had fled in the battle, and as
ashamed of their cowardice, were now loath that any body should see them.

Verse. 4. But the king covered his face, etc.] See the note, chap. 15.30.

Verse. 5, And Joab came into the house to the king, and said, Thou have shamed
this day the faces of all thy servants, etc.] Joab saw that there was some
danger, lest the hearts of David's friends and servants, should be alienated
from him, by his carrying of himself so disrespectfully to those that had
hazarded their lives for him; and he perceived too that his passions were so
violent, that there was no way to win him to withstand them, unless he spoke
that which might startle him and scare him, and hence it was that he spoke so
roughly and sharply to David, more roughly indeed then otherwise it had been
fit for a subject to speak to his sovereigne.

Verse. 7. Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy
servants, etc.] This Joab advised David to do, that he might prevent the
alienating of his servants affections from him, and perhaps too because the
addressing of himself to the affairs of his kingdom, would be the best means
to allay his passions, and indeed after that he came forth and sat in the gate,
we hear no more of his violent weeping and wailing.

Verse. 9. And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel
etc.] That is, throughout all the ten tribes of the Israelites, the people
began to blame one another, for siding with Absalom in his insurrrection
against his father, and to call upon their Elders and Officers to go and submit
themselves to him, and to fetch him back again into the land of Israel, to the
city of Jerusalem, that he might be reestablished in the throne, to reign
over them again, as he had done.

Verse. 10. And Absalom whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle, etc.] This
is another argument wherewith the Israelites persuaded one another to submit
themselves again to David, and it is as if they had said, we see that God was
against us in that attempt of ours to make Absalom king, and why do we then
still stand it out, and not go in and seek reconciliation with our king whom we
have wronged?

Verse. 11. And king David sent to Zadok, and to Abiathar the priests, saying,
Speak unto the Elders of Judah, etc.] The men of Judah had been the first, and
chief in siding with Absalom, and had delivered up to him the city of
Jerusalem, and the strong fort of Sion, and being therefore conscious to
themselves of much ingratitude against their sovereigne, and fearing withal
his just displeasure against them, they durst not think of going forth to meet
him; David therefore by the priests who had stayed all this while in Jerusalem,
sends them word how ready he was to pardon and forget all that was past, Why
are you the last to bring the king back to his house? and assures them that his
affection to them was singular, as being his brethren of the same tribe with
himself, Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones, and my flesh, and acquainting
them what he had heard concerning the resolution of the other tribes, warns
them to take heed that they were not the last in fetching home their king that
had cause to be the first: and thus was David a notable type of Christ, who
does also fetch in rebels to God, by proclaiming the tidings of mercy to them,
the terrors of the Law may scare sinners, and make them desire if it were
possible, to run away from God, but it is the tender of grace in the Gospel,
that makes them come in and submit themselves.

Verse. 13. And say ye to Amasa, Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh, etc.]
David doubting that Amasa, despairing of the pardon of his offense, might draw
from him a great part of the strength of Israel, now under his command, he sent
particularly to him, both to assure him that he was ready to receive him into
his favor again, and to give him the respect of a near kinsman (for he was
indeed his sisters son, 1. Chron. 2.16, 17.) and also to proffer him the
place of captain of the host, (the place which Absalom had given him, and which
Joab now enjoyed, and had long since purchased by his valor, 1. Chron. 11.6.)
God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before me
continually, in the room of Joab: and thus did David seek both to satisfy
Amasa, and win him to come in, and withal to weaken the excessive power of
Joab, who had always carried himself too too insolently toward him, and had
now lately much provoked him, both by slaying Absalom, against his express
command, and speaking so roughly and rudely to him, when he was in heaviness
lamenting his death.

Verse. 14. And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of
one man, etc.] Some understand this of Amasa, that upon this promise made to
him, by David, he presently inclined the hearts of all the men of Judah to
David, so that unanimously they sent to the king, their desire, that he should
return to Jerusalem again, and the tender of their fealty and allegiance to
him, as in former times; but I rather think with others, that this is spoken of
David, and that it is mentioned as the happy effect of this his wise, and
gentle carriage of himself, both toward the men of Judah in general, and
Amasa in particular; namely, that herewith he bowed the heart of all the men of
Judah, to desire unanimously to settle him again in the throne; it might have
cost a great deal of blood to have subdued them by force; but by these tenders
of grace, he bowed their hearts to him, even according to his own desire.

Verse. 17. And they went over Jordan before the king.] That is, before the king
came over, to wit, to meet him there on the other side, and to fetch him over.

Verse. 20. I am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph, to go down
to meet my Lord the king.] It may be justly questioned why Shimei, who was of
the tribe of Benjamin, chap. 16.5. should here say, I am come the first this
day of all the house of Joseph; but to this two answers may be given, which
have good evidence of reason in them (to omit others that are not so
satisfactory as these are) to wit, first, that hereby is meant, that he was the
first of all the tribes of Israel that came to the king, as considered apart
from the tribe of Judah: the Scripture is wont ordinarily to divide the tribes
into Judah and Israel, and the tribes of Israel so reckoned a part from Judah,
are usually called Ephraim (because that was the chief of those tribes) as Esa.
7.2. Syria is confederate with Ephraim; and the house of Joseph, Psalm. 80.1.
Give ear O shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock: and
Zach. 10.6. I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of
Joseph: and so here in the same regard all the tribes of Israel, as
distinguished from Judah, are comprehended under these words, the house of
Joseph: or secondly, that hereby is meant that he was come before any of the
house of Joseph, I am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph: that
is, I am come before any of the tribes of Israel, and because indeed where
Judah and Israel, or the house of Judah, are distinguished in the Scriptures,
Benjamin is usually reckoned with Judah, therefore many Expositours do rather
approve of this last resolution of this doubt.

Verse. 22. And David said, What have I to do with you ye sons of Zeruiah,
that ye should this day be adversaries unto me?] That is, that you should
advise me to that which may prove so exceeding prejudicial to me; my
adversaries could not wish me more hurt, then this which you advise may bring
upon me.

For do not I know, that I am this day king over Israel?] That is, am I not
this day reestablished again in my kingdom, which I had in a manner lost? and
would it be convenient to damp the joy of this day with shedding blood? or
would it be safe to beat off them that begin now to submit themselves, and to
endanger my yet unsettled estate, by showing such severitie to him that first
stooped, and acknowledged his fault? and should not Gods mercy in restoring me
to my kingdom, induce me to show mercy to others?

Verse. 23. Therefore the king said unto Shimei, Thou shall not die, and the
king swear unto him.] Yet at his death, he gave Solomon charge to put him to
death, 1. kings 2.9. his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blood, as
persuading himself happily, that therein he should not break his oath: first,
because he swear only for himself, that he would not put him to death, I swear
to him by the Lord, saying, I will not put thee to death: secondly, because he
did not (as it may seem) absolutely enjoin his son to put him to death for
this fact, but to take some other occasion to do it, for so much those words
seem to imply, which there he uses: thou art a wise man, and know what thou
ought to do unto him, namely, that if he watched and observed him well, his
malice and wickedness would break forth, and give occasion enough, in somewhat
or other, to proceed against him in a way of justice, and so then he might
punish him for all together.

Verse. 26. And he answered, My Lord O king, my servant deceived me, for thy
servant said, I will sadle me an ass, etc.] To wit, in that when Mephibosheth
had told him that he would have an ass sadled, that he might ride to the king,
he took away the asses, and went secretly to David, leaving him behind, a poor
lame man, no way able to help himself.

Verse. 28. For all of my fathers house were but dead men before my Lord the
king, etc.] That is, we were in thy power, thou might have put us all to
death, and enough thou had been provoked by our family especially by the
attempt which Ishbosheth made, and therefore, says he, what right have I yet
to cry any more unto the king? that is, what cause have I therefore to
complain, though that which was given me, when there was so little cause for
it, be now taken away.

Verse. 29. And the king said unto him Why speak thou any more of thy
matters? I have said, Thou and Z^ba divide the land.] Some understand this
thus, as if he had said, thou need say no more, I believe and approve thy
excuse, the latter sentence given upon Ziba's slander to wit, that he should
have thy land. I recall, and do reestablish my former, which was, that thou and
Ziba divide the land that is, that Ziba shall occupy the land to halves for thy
use, for this they conceive was the order which David appointed at first chap.
9.10. to wit that Ziba should till the land, etc. and then he should have ^alf
the increase for his cost and labor and the other half Mephibosheth should
have, and that this David did now again establish, and that therefore David
uses these words, I have said, as having respect to his first order. But most
Expositours do far otherwise understand this sentence, and I think rightly,
to wit, that David as still scarce fully satisfied concerning Mephibosheth, and
not willing to give any discontent to Ziba, especially at this time, pretended
haste, that he had not leisure to examine the business any further, and
therefore at all adventures resolved to go a middle way, and so to determine it
thus, that they should divide the land betwixt them; I have said, that is, this
I decree, and it shall not be altered, thou and Ziba divide the land: and
indeed, if this were not the meaning of his words, why should Mephibosheth have
answered David to show himself contented, verse. 30. Yea, let him take all,
forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace, etc. It is indeed very
strange, that David so good and just a king, should pass such an unjust
sentence, especially against Mephibosheth, the son of his beloved Jonathan,
with whom he had made a solemn covenant, that he would show kindness to him,
and to his seed after him: for first, the tale that Mephibosheth told was in it
self very fair and probable: secondly, even the poor plight wherein he was (for
he had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes,
since the king went from Jerusalem) made his report of the business the more
credible, there being no appearance in this of one that affected to be king of
Israel, as Ziba had slandered him: and thirdly, Ziba's being present and not
answering a word to what Mephibosheth said, made the truth of this charge
unquestionable: but it seems David was loath to displease Ziba by taking back
from him all that he had given him, especially at this time, when he was so
desirous to endear himself to every body as much as he might, and therefore he
hoped to salve all by appointing them to divide the land between them.

Verse. 33. And the king said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I will
feed thee with me in Jerusalem.] Thus David was careful to requite those that
had showed him kindness in his affliction; and so will Christ remember their
love, and requite their kindness abundantly that afford any help or relief, to
him or to his poor members, Matt. 25.34, 35. Come ye blessed of my father,
inherit the kingdom: For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty
and ye gave me drink, etc.

Verse. 40. And all the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the
people of Israel.] That is, those of Israel that had stuck to the king in the
war, and fell not from him, and such as were since come and were reconciled
to him, as that thousand of Benjamin, verse. 17. yet the precise half is not to
be understood, but only a part, to wit, that they were not so wholly there, as
the men of Judah were.

Verse. 43. And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said* We have
ten parts in the king, etc.] To wit, as being ten of the twelve tribes, for the
men of Benjamin were with Judah.

And the words of the men of Judah, were fiercer then the words of the men of
Israel etc.] To wit, when they answered this objection of the men of Israel,
they did not seek to appease the Israelites of the ten tribes, but when they
came to reply upon them, their language was fiercer and rougher then the others
had been.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. ANd there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was Sheba,
etc.] As bones new set are easily put out again, so a people that have broken
out into sedition and newly quieted, if they be not very charily handled, are
apt upon every light occasion to make a new insurrection, and so it was now
with the Israelites; for by occasion of the quarrel between them and the men
of Judah, mentioned in the latter end of the foregoing chapter, Sheba the son
of Bichria man of Belial, as he is here termed (concerning which see the note*
Deuteronomy. 13.13.) persuaded the Israelites presently to cast of David's government;
and the motion he made, they as readily embraced, We have (says he) no part in
David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: in which words,
though it may seem he alluded to some phrase of speech usual amongst the
Israelites when they disclaimed their interest in any thing, and therefore we
see the ten tribes used the same form of speech, when they revolted from
Rehoboam, 1. Kings 12.16. The people answered the king, saying, What portion
have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse, etc. Yet
withal, he intimates the reason, why they should no longer be David's subjects:
namely, because they were slighted, as if they had no part in the king, and
therefore says he, what is the son of Jesse to us, let the men of Judah
enjoy him wholly to themselves, and let us choose a king of our own; his
scornful speaking of David shows, that as a Benjamite he still grudged at the
removing of the kingdom from their tribe in the house of Saul.

Verse. 3. And the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to
keep his house, and put them in ward, etc.] This David did, first, because they
had yielded to the incestuous lust of Absalom; (for they should rather have
dyed then condescended to him) and secondly, because he judged it not fit to go
in unto them, that had been defiled by his own son, or to leave them to be
defiled by others.

Verse. 4. Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah, etc.] And
thus as he had promised, chap. 19.13. David employed Amasa as the general of
his forces in Joabs room.

Verse. 5. But he tarried longer then the set time which he had appointed him.]
To wit, either because the people that had been formerly commanded by Joab,
were not willing to change their General and to submit to Amasa, or because
Amasa did not cordially follow the business for David, or because indeed, the
time prescribed by David for raising the trained bands of Judah was too little
to do it in, for out of a desire that David had presently to crush this
insurrection of the ten tribes, he had allowed Amasa but three days for that
service, as is expressed in the former verse.

Verse. 6. And David said to Abishai, Now shall Sheba the son of Bichri do us
more harm, etc.] David was much troubled at Amasa's delay, but yet Joab he
would not employ, both because he was still discontented against him for his
killing Absalom, and because he knew well that Joab was also discontented for
the loss of his place, and should he be now employed again, would be ready
enough to press into that place again, from which he had deposed him; and
therefore he called Abishai and sent out him, and enjoined him to take his
Lords servants, that is, David's the kings guard, and with them to pursue Sheba.

Verse. 7. And there went out after him Joabs men, and the Cherethites and the
Pelethites, etc.] Those are called Joabs men, that had been under his command,
as for the Cherechites and Pelethites, see the note, chap. 8.18.

Verse. 8. And Joabs garment that he had put on, was g^rded unto him, and upon
it, a girdle with a sword, etc.] Hereby it is manifest that Joab did of his own
accord go along with his brother Abishai, as intending to murder Amasa; to
which end also it was, that he had girt his garment close about him, that by
hanging loose it might not encumber him: and secondly, he had girt his sword on
the outside of his garment (which perhaps was not his usual custom) and had
it withal so loose in the scabbard, that as he stepped forth to Amasa to bow
down, and salute him, it fell out of it self, which was no doubt purposely
done, that under a pretense of taking up the sword, he might without any
suspicion in Amasa do what he intended (having formerly imbrued his hands in
the blood of Abner, and not punished for it) though his cousin german, as is
noted before, chap. 17.25. because David had conferred his office upon him.

Verse. 10. But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joabs hand etc.]
That is, he never thought of any danger that was in that, he took that to be
occasioned, by the casual and unexpected falling of his sword out of his
scabbard as he came to salute him, and therefore hearing him speak so smoothly,
and seeing him embrace him so lovingly, he never suspected any danger in his
sword; and thus was Amasa punished by the just hand of Gods providence for his
unnatural rebellion against his uncle David his Lord and Sovereign; though
David had pardoned him, God would not suffer him to go unpunished.

Verse. 11. And one of Joabs men stood by him, and said, He that favors Joab,
and he that is for David, let him go after Joab, etc.] Least the sight of their
slain General should beat off the soldiers from going any further, one of
Joabs men stood by him, no doubt by Joabs appointment, as it were to justify
the fact, and to advise them if they were friends to Joab, and the king, to go
on after him, who would now be their leader in this enterprise, which David had
neither justly nor safely committed to Amasa's trust.

Verse. 12. And Amasa wallowed in blood.] To wit, by reason of the pangs of
death that were upon him.

And when the man saw that all the people stood still, etc.] That is, when the
man mentioned in the foregoing verse, that had encouraged the soldiers to
march on after Joab, saw that for all this, they stood still as astonished at
that which was done, he removed Amasa's dead body out of the high way.

Verse. 14. And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to
Bethmaachah, etc.] That is, Sheba having gone through all the tribes to stir
them up against David, came at length to Abel, and to the places adjoining,
where Joab found him.

Verse. 18. They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They shall surely ask
counsel at Abel, and so they ended the matter.] According to the translation
that is set in the margin, the meaning of the place must needs be this, that in
the beginning the citizens of Abel persuaded themselves, that surely Joab would
before he proceeded to force them, propound his demands to them, and so they
should make an end of the difference: but as the words are rendered in the text,
they may have a double sense: for first, some expound it much after the same
manner, to wit, that in old time they were wont to say according to the
express law of God, Deuteronomy. 20.10. that when they came against a city, they
were first to make their demands and to propound conditions of peace, and so
they ended the matter, as if she had said, surely had this enterprise been
undertaken in former times, they would not have done as thou have, they would
have said, Surely we will first ask at Abel, and see whether they will consent
to do what we shall require of them: secondly, some conceive it to be an
allegation of an old proverb, They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They
shall surely ask counsel at Abel: to wit, because it seems there were in times
past in this city, men eminent: for wisdom and ability to give counsel,
especially concerning the laws, insomuch that they used to come up from all
parts of the kingdom to take advice there, and so they ended the matter; that
is, many a controversy was thus peaceably dec^ded, and that this she puts
Joab in mind, either as an inducement to win him to mercy, not to go about to
destroy so famous a city, or else, as by way of giving him a hint not to
despise her counsel, yea, though she were a woman, since counsel given out of
Abel, had wont to be held in high esteem, but the first exposition is best, and
most generally received.

Verse. 19. I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel.] Here
this wise woman of Abel does further dissuade Joab from proceeding with such
severity against this City by three several Arguments; first, by pleading
their innocence, I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel:
for this she speaks not of her self in particular, there being no reason that
the whole city should be spared, because she was peaceable, but she speaks in
the name and person of the whole city; to wit, that their city Abel was
peaceable and faithful; and indeed it may well be, that either the city knew
nothing of Sheba's guilt, and did shut their gates not to defend Sheba but
only because they heard of an Army that was coming against them: or at least
that though there might be a faction in the city, that were abettors of Sheba,
yet for the generality of the people they were otherwise minded; and this she
alleges to justify the city, and to stay the rage of Joab: secondly, by
pleading the damage that would redound to the Israel of God by the ruin of
this city, Thou seek to destroy a city, and a mother in Israel, that is,
the chief city of a Province, a mother city. The chief cities of a Country
are called in the Scripture, mothers, partly in regard of the multitude of the
Inhabitants which are there bred and brought up as it were in the lap and
bosom of a mother, and are by her defended and sheltred from the violence of
those that would hurt them, and liberally provided for, and sent forth perhaps
into other parts of the land with a large portion of outward things, but
principally in regard of the towns and villages about them, either because the
cities had the command over them, or at least because the towns and villages
had much dependence upon them, as children upon their mother, for counsel and
direction in their weightiest affairs, for defense against invading enemy, and
for a supply of thing, convenient for them; and so this woman terms her city
a mother in Israel, to show what a mischief he should do to the land of Israel,
in ruinating such a city; and thirdly by pleading the wrong that therein would
be done unto the Lord, in that the people were the people of God that were like
to be destroyed in it, and the city a part of the inheritance wherein God had
placed his people, Why will thou says she, swallow up the inheritance of the
Lord? where also the expression she uses of swallowing up the inheritance of
the Lord, is very observable, for thereby she covertly blames him for his
violent and furious proceedings against them, and intimates that if he would
not do all in a passion, but would a little deliberate of these his
proceedings, he would be soon of another mind.

Verse. 21. But a man of mount Ephraim (Sheba the son of Bichri by name) has
lift up his hand against the King.] He was of the Tribe of Benjamin, but dwelt
it seems in mount Ephraim, and therefore Joab calls him a man of mount
Ephraim.

And the woman said unto Joab, behold his head shall be thrown to thee over the
wall.] This she promises with such confidence, either because she knew already
the minds of those that were able to do it, or because she was assured they
would be won to it, and not hazard the city to shelter a Traitor; and
indeed that the inhabitants were by her persuaded to yield to this, the words
in the following verse seem clearly to imply, Then the woman went unto all the
people in her wisdom, etc. that is, by her wisdom in pleading with them, and
the strong reasons she alleged, she persuaded the Citizens to cut off his
head, etc.

Verse. 23. Now Joab was over all the host of Israel.] As before when David was
first settled in the kingdom the names of his chief Officers were expressed
chap. 8.16. So here again, first to let us see that Joab recovered his place,
David perhaps not knowing how to oppose it; and secondly to she how fully David
was reetablished in the kingdom, all things being settled again in the former
order.

Verse. 24. And Adoram was over the tribute.] This office was not mentioned
before, chap. 8. for since that, David had enlarged his Dominions, and made
many nations tributary to him, and thereupon this office was committed to
Adoram.

Verse. 25. And Sheva was scribe.] Or Seraiah, chap. 8, 17.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. THen there was a famine in the days of David, three years, year
after year, and David enquired of the Lord.] Though this story of the three
years famine, be here related after that of Absaloms rebellion, and Sheba's
insurrection against David, yet it is generally held that both this and the
following story, chap. 24. happened long before, and indeed if Absaloms
rebellion was in the the fourtieth year of his fathers reign, who reigned in
all but forty years, chap. 5.4. as many gather from chap. 15.7. And it came to
pass that after forty years, Absalom said unto the King, etc. this
consequently must needs be before that, only because all these forementioned
troubles that befell David, befell him for his sin with Bathsheba, therefore
are they there inserted immediately after that, and these that concerned other
matters are afterward related by themselves; the Scripture rather respecting
the coherence of the matter and argument, then the consequence of the time, and
so much methinks the very Text does imply, giving no other note of the time,
but that it was in the days of David; though the sin was long since
committed, yet at length God began to punish the whole land for it by sending a
famine amongst them, caused as it seems, verse. 10. by want of rain; and how
ever at first David took it as a punishment laid upon them for the common
sins of the land, yet when he saw that it continued three years together, he
concluded there was some special thing wherewith God was offended, and for
which he would be satisfied, and therefore then he enquired of the Lord.

And the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he
slew the Gibeonites.] That is, many of the Gibeonites: in the following verse
it is indeed expressed, that he endeavored to root them all out of the land;
Saul sought to stay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah, to
wit, as pretending that it was neither profitable, nor honorable, nor safe for
Gods people to suffer any of those cursed nations to live amongst them, whom
God has commanded them utterly to destroy. Exodus 23.33. Deuteronomy. 7.2. but it
seems he did not openly profess this which he had purposed with himself: (for
this would have been too manifest an act of tryranny and injustice, and too
palpable a violation of the oath which Joshua and the Elders of Israel had
taken, that they should live peaceably amongst them, Josh. 9.15. and besides
had he gone this way to work, the poor Gibeonites could never have escaped his
fury) no, though his intentions were utterly to root them all out of the land,
yet the way he took to effect it was by picking quarrels severally against
them, some at one time, and some at another, that so he might cut them off by
degrees, and that under a pretense of Justice, either by charging them with
forged accusations, or by aggravating any smaller offense, and making it to
them capital, or some such other ways of heavy oppression; and thus
intending to proceed in this close politic way though he slew many of them as
is here expressed, yet it seems he was some way taken off before he could
accomplish what he had determined: however for this cruelty of Saul's against
the Gibeonites, it was as the Lord here tells David that the famine had been so
long upon the land. It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew
the Gibeonites: Indeed considering what an execrable act of cruelty that of
Saul's was, when he slew fourscore and five of the Priests, and utterly
destroyed their city with all that were therein, both men and women, children
and sucklings, etc. It is strange that Saul's posterity were not called to an
account for that cruelty of Saul's against the Priests of the Lord, as well as
for this against the Gibeonites: but for this two reasons may be probably
given; first that it was to let the Israelites see that God will be avenged for
shedding the blood of the meanest, such as the Gibeonites were, who were as
bondmen and slaves to the Israelites, as well as for shedding the blood of the
greatest: secondly, that it was to let the Jews see that those of other
Nations, if they were of the faith of Israel, and were once received to be his
people, were as acceptable to God, and as precious in his sight as the Jews
were; and thirdly, that it was to discover how the Lord abhorres all falsifying
of oaths and covenants, in that he proceeded with such severity against Saul's
posterity, because he had done the Gibeonites conrary to what Joshua and the
Israelites had covenanted and sworn many hundred years ago; so hateful to God
all persidiousnesse is, whatsoever pretenses are put upon it.

Verse. 2. The Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant
of the Amorites, etc.] The Gibeonites were Hivites, Josh. 9.7. And the men of
Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell among us, etc. But both
Hivites, and generally all the inhabitants of Canaan, are usually in the
Scripture called Amorites, Genesis 15.16. For the iniquity of the Amorites is not
yet full. Ezekiel. 16.3. Thy Father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite.

Verse. 3. Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you?]
etc. It seems by this, that when David enquired of the Lord, he did not only
tell him wherefore this famine was sent, but also enjoined him to satisfy the
Gibeonites for the wrong which had been done them: for why else should he allow
them to prescribe what should be done?

And wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance
of the Lord?] That is, that ye may pray for the people of God, and the land
which God has given them for their inheritance: because the Lord had pleaded
the cause of the Gibeonites by sending a famine upon the whole land of Israel,
David looked upon them as men highly favored of God, and therefore was the
more desirous that they should pray for them.

Verse. 4. We will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house, neither
for us shall thou kill any man in Israel.] That is, save only of his family
that did oppress us.

Verse. 6. Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang
them up unto the Lord, etc.] That is, to satisfy his justice, and appease his
wrath, and that others by this example may learn to keep covenant, and not to
oppress the stranger that is taken under Gods protection: See the note Numb.
25.4.

Verse. 8. But the King took the two sons of Rizpah, etc. and the five sons
of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel, etc.] It is
certain that not Michal but Merab her elder sister, was married to this Adriel
the son of Barzillai, called the Meholathite, because he was of Abel-meholah in
the Tribe of Benjamin, Judge. 7.22. and to distinguish him from Barzillai the
Gileadite, chap. 19.31. 1. Sam. 18.19. When Merab Saul's daughter should have
been given to David, she was given to Adriel the Meholathite to wife; and that
Michal had no children to her dying day, 2. Sam. 6.22. Therefore Michal the
daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death; and therefore
doubtless these five sons of Adriel were the children of Merab Michals
sister, and were only brought up by Michal as her own (she having no children)
and therefore called her sons, but are said to be brought up for Adriel her
sisters husband.

Verse. 9. And they hanged them in the hill before the Lord.] That is, in a hill
in Gibeah of Saul, verse. 6. that they might be a spectacle of Gods indignation
against Saul for that sin of his in slaying the Gibeonites, and thus did the
Lord, punish that cruelty of Saul toward the Gibeonites, and withal did
provide for the settling of the Kingdom upon David and his seed, by cutting off
the posterity of Saul, lest they should be still plotting and practicing
against them.

Verse. 10. And Rizpah the daughter of Ajah took sackcloth and spread it for her
upon the rock, etc.] Rizpah Saul's concubine the mother of two of those that
were hanged, knowing it seems that the bodies of her sons were to hang up
till God should testify that he was appeased by giving them rain again
(wherein doubtless David had special direction from the Lord, for otherwise
it had been against the express letter of the Law, Deuteronomy. 21.23. His body shall
not all night remain upon the tree, but thou shall bury him that day.) That she
might defend their bodies both from birds and beasts, she resolved to watch
them, and to that end she took sackcloth and spread it for her upon the rock;
that is, she spread therewith a Tent in the rock next adjoining, the better to
defend her from the heat, and withal perhaps to testify her sad and mournful
condition, in regard of this shameful death of her children, and so continued
watching them, until water dropped upon them out of Heaven; till God sent rain
upon the land as was desired; she that had been Saul's concubine it is likely
had servants to have done this; but such was the strength of her affection,
that she could not be satisfied, unless she did it, or saw it done her self.

Verse. 12. And David went, and took the bones of Saul, etc] Hearing as it is
said in the foregoing verse, what affection Rizaph had shown to her sons that
were hanged, and how careful she had been to keep their dead bodies from being
torn and mangled, that they might be decently interred, partly as being stirred
up by the example of Rizpah, to show the like respect to the dead bodies of
Saul and his family, and partly that this honorable burial of her sons,
might be some comfort to that poor sad woman, he went himself and fetched the
bones of Saul and Jonathan, and buried them together with the bones of those,
that were lately hanged in the Sepulcher of Kish the father of Saul.

Verse. 13. And they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.] That is,
after their bodies had been buried for some time; or else we must say, that the
bodies hanged so long ere rain came, that the greatest part, at least of the
flesh, was consumed.

Verse. 15. And David waxed faint.] To wit, as being then grown old, and
therefore not so well able to hold out in the fight, as formerly he had been.

Verse. 17. Thou shall go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not
the light of Israel.] That is, for fear thou should be slain, in whom
consists the conduct, joy, and life of thy people: kings are called in the
Scripture the light of their people, 1. Kings 15.4. The Lord his God gave him a
lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him: Psalm. 132.17. I have ordained
a lamp for mine anointed: partly, because by their wisdom the people are
governed, partly because they are to shine as lights by good example; but
principally, because they are the means of so much joy and comfort to a people,
and thence it is that the people here tell David, that by his death the light
of Israel would be quenched.

Verse. 18. And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle with
the Philistines at Gob.] This Gob it seems was near unto Gezer, and therefore,
1. Chron. 20 4. it is said that the battle was in Gezer.

Then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph.] Or Sippai, 1. Chron. 20.4. This
Sibbechai was one of David's worthies, as was also Elhanan, mentioned in the
following verse see 1. Chron. 11.26.^9.

Verse. 22. These four were born to the giant in Gath, and fell by the hand of
David, And by the hand of his servants.] Though David did not kill them
himself, yet their death is ascr^bed to David as well as to his captains, and
that be^^ (...) they fought in his quarrel; and under his command.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. ANd David spoke unto the Lord the words of this song, in the day that
the Lord had delivered him, etc.] In expressing the time, and the occasion of
David's composing this following Psalm, to wit, that it was when the Lord had
delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul;
his deliverance from Saul is particularly mentioned, not because that was the
last of his deliverances, but because that was the greatest; the fury and rage
of Saul against him, was greatest and of longest continuance, and brought him
often into the greatest dangers, and therefore he mentions this particularly:
when David had gotten some breathing-time from his troubles, he gave not
himself to idleness and worldly pleasures, but calling to mind his many former
deliverances, he composed Psalms of thanksgiving, that God might have the
glory of all that he had done for him.

Verse. 2. And he said, The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer,
etc.] This very song we have again in the book of the Psalms, and it is there
the 18. Psalm, only there are some clauses here, that are expressed there in
other words, and in some places a clause is now and then added also in one of
them, which is not in the other, as here in the very beginning of the Psalm we
have not those words, I will love thee, O Lord, my strength, which are there
prefixed, the reason whereof may be, as some Expositours conceive, because here
we have it, as it was at first composed by David; but there as it was
afterward revised, and upon second thoughts, in some expressions, altered and
changed, when he delivered it to the Levites to be sung in the Temple: the
reason why he uses here in the entrance of the Psalm, such variety of
expressions to set forth the praise of God, calling him his rock, his
fortress, his deliverer, his shield, the horn of his salvation, his high
tower, his refuge, his savior, is partly, because his heart was so full of
thankfulness upon the consideration of his many deliverances, that this made
him so abundantly to power out his soul in the high praises of God, he thought
he could never sufficiently express them; and partly, because he desired
hereby to set forth, what an alsufficient defense the Lord was unto him, that
God was all in all for his preservation, and that there was no security to be
thought on, but he had found it in God.

Verse. 3. The God of my rock, in him will I trust, etc.] Psalm. 18. verse. 2.
this is expressed thus, my God, my strength, in whom I will trust; and the last
clause of this verse. my refuge, my Savior, thou savest me from violence, is
not in the 18. Psalm: as for the next words here, he is my shield, and the
horn of my salvation: a horn signifies in the Scripture, power, and glory,
Psalm. 92.10. My horn shall thou exalt, like the horn of an unicorn, Amos 6.13.
Have we not taken to us horns, by our own strength: Hab. 3.4. He had horns
coming out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power: horns therefore
are used to signify kings, Dan. 8.21. The great horn that is between his eyes,
is the first king: Rev. 17.12. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten
kings, etc. in which regard Christ is called an horn of salvation, Luke 1.69.
God therefore is here called by David the horn of his salvation, to imply, that
by him he had been advanced and enabled, both to defend himself, and to push
down his enemies before him.

Verse 5 When the waves of death compassed me: the floods of ungodly men made me
afraid.] To express the condition he was in, by reason of his enemies, David
compares them here to waves, and floods of waters: first, to set forth the
multitude of his enemies, they came in amain to Saul from all parts of the
kingdom, to take part against David, as in a flood the waves come tumbling,
and rolling one in the neck of another: secondly, to signify the violent rage
of his enemies who were in this regard like floods of water that come rolling
down from hills, and mountains, and carry all before them: and thirdly, to
intimate that yet like land floods, that continued not long, their roaring rage
made him afraid, but that fear did drive him to God (as it follows in the next
verse,) and then their rage was soon stilled, and so his former fears made him
now the more thankful.

Verse. 6. The sorrows of hell compassed me about, the snares of death prevented
me.] That is, deadly sorrows and dangers had so hemmed me in, that there seemed
to be no possibility of escaping them, no more then there is of a sick man's
escape, that has pangs of death already upon him, I was brought to the very
brink of hell, or of the grave, there was but a step betwixt me and death, 1.
Sam. 20.3. and to the same purpose tends the next clause, the snares of death
prevented me, that is, my enemies had so cunningly contrived their plots for my
death, that like hidden snares they were ready to take hold on me suddenly, ere
I was aware of them, in so much, that all hope of help seemed to be prevented;
if help should come, it would come too late.

Verse. 7. I called upon the Lord, and cried to my God, and he did then hear my
voice out of his Temple.] That is, he heard me out of heaven, which is here
called the Temple of God, because the Temple was a type of heaven: first, as
being the place of Gods special presence (fot though God be every where
present, yet in heaven he manifests his presence in a more eminent manner then
elsewhere:) secondly, in regard of the exceeding glory of heaven, which to
shadow forth, the Temple was built so exceeding glorious: and thirdly, in
regard of the transcendent holiness of heaven, whither no unclean thing shall
ever enter, where God is continually served by his Angels, and glorified
Saints, and there is not the least mixture of pollution in their service.

Verse. 8. Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundation of heaven moved,
etc.] In these and the following words David shows how the Lord in his hot
displeasure, fought from heaven against his enemies, and poured forth his
vengeance upon them, and that under the similitude of a sore tempestuous storm,
when the earth quakes, the air is covered with thick, black, and dark mists,
and sends forth winds, rain, thunder, and lightning, etc. first, to imply that
the Lords power and terrible wrath, was as evidently to be seen, and as much to
be admired in the destruction of his enemies, as in a horrid and terrible
storm, wherein every one is forced to acknowledge his hand: and secondly, to
imply how suddenly God rescued him and destroyed them; things were changed on a
sudden, as when a storm unexpectly arises in the air: and thirdly, to allude
to the punishment of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, when God rescued his people
thence, for the Scriptures do usually allude to that redemption of Israel out
of Egypt, that being as it were the archtype, or chief pattern, wherein God
meant to let his people see, how in all succeeding ages, be would deliver them,
and destroy their enemies; in Psalm. 18.7. this first clause is expressed thus,
the foundations of the hills moved, and the meaning is, that the hills were
shaken even from their very foundations, or bottomes; but here these hills are
called the foundations of heaven, as elsewhere also, to wit, Job. 26.11. the
pillars of heaven, because the tops of high mountains seems to touch the
clouds, and the heavens seem to lean upon them; and because the earth is in the
center of the world, about the which, the heavens do continually turn.

Verse. 10. He bowed the heavens also, and came down, etc.] For in rainy and
tempestuous weather, not only the tops of hills seem covered with clouds, but
every where the lower region of the air is filled with mists, and cloudy
darkness; but withal some conceive, that this following expression, and
darkness was under his feet, is used to imply Gods coming invisibly to the
help of David.

Verse. 11. And he rode upon a Cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the
wings of the wind.] In Psalm 18.10. it is, And he did fly upon the wings of
the wind: David here speaks of strong and violent winds, which the Lord also
uses as his instruments in the execution of his judgments; he says, that he
rode upon a Cherub: to wit, because the Lord governs the winds at his command,
by the ministry of the Angels, they raise them, and they still them: and they
order them as God has appointed, and he uses the word Cherub, rather then
that of Angel, because the Angels were represented in the mercy seat and
tabernacle, under the figure of golden-winged Cherubims, and he desired so to
express the power of God here, as withal, he might put them in mind, that it
was that God who did all these things, that had entered into a special covenant
with Israel that he would be their God, and they should be his people, and so
dwelt among them in his tabernacle.

Verse. 12. And he made darkness pavilions round about him.] To wit as a king
that being angry, should withdraw himself from his subjects, and not suffer
them to see him.

Verse. 13. Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled, etc.]
This is somewhat varied, Psalm. 18.12, 13. At the brightness that was before
him his thick clouds passed, hailstones and coals of fire. The Lord also
thundered in the heavens, and the highest gave his voice, hailstones and coals
of fire.

Verse. 15. And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning and
discomfited them.] By Gods arrows here, are meant thunderbolts or hailstones,
etc. as the hailstones that fell upon the Canaanites, are called arrows, Hab.
3.11. and therefore also, Psalm 18.14. the last clause is expressed thus, He
shot out lightning, and discomfited them.

Verse. 16. And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the world
were discovered, etc.] This is meant of the raging of the seas in tempestuous
weather, when the waves will rise in such an admirable manner, as if in the
gulfs and breaches of the waves made thereby, the very channel and bottom of
those seas would be discovered and laid bare; yet withal, there may be in
these words, an allusion to the drying up of the red sea and Jordan before
Israel.

Verse. 17. He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.] This
expression David uses, to imply how strange and miraculous his deliverance
was, as if a hand from heaven had been reached forth to snatch him up when he
was ready to sink.

Verse. 18. He delivered me from my strong enemy, etc.] This seems to be meant
of Saul in particular, but may be also understood indefinitely of all his
strong enemies: the like may be said of that clause, verse. 49. Thou have
delivered me from the violent man.

Verse. 20, He brought me forth also into a large place, etc.] That is, he freed
me out of all the straits I was in, and this he did, not for any merit in me,
but of his own free grace and favor, He delivered me because he delighted in
me.

Verse. 21. The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness, etc.] That is,
according to mine innocence, in regard of mine enemies. David's enemies charged
him with ambition, rebellion against Saul, and many other grievous crimes; but
they charged him unjustly, and therefore God that knew his integrity, took his
part against his enemies: nor need we startle at it, that David calls the good
which God had done for him, a reward and a recompense; for though the obedience
of Gods servants is a due debt which they owe to God, and it is God that
enables them to do what they do; yet God of his own free grace may reward them
that serve him, though their works be far short of that which they should be.

Verse. 22. For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God.] That is, I have not cast off that care and endeavor to
walk in Gods ways, which God requires in all his servants; because every man
by the law of nature is bound to obey the law of his Creator, therefore when
men do not herein keep close to God, they do in a manner forsake him, there
sin is in a degree a defection from God: but yet because Gods righteous
servants do sincerely desire and endeavor to keep his laws, even then when
they break them; therefore indeed their slips are not an absolute defection
from God, and to distinguish David's failings from such a desperate apostasy,
speaking here of his integrity, he expresses it thus, that he not had wickedly
departed from his God.

Verse. 25. Therefore the Lord has recompensed me according to my
righteousness, according to my cleanness in his eye sight.] Or, The
cleanness of my hands, as it is expressed, Psalm 18.24.

Verse. 27. And with the froward thou will show thy self unsavourie.] That is,
as they walk cross and contrary to thee, so thou will walk contrary to them,
opposing and crossing them in all they do; according to that, Levit. 26.27 28.
And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me,
then I will walk contrary unto you also, in fury. etc.

Verse. 28. And the afflicted people thou will save, but thine eyes are upon the
haughty, that thou may bring them down.] This is added, to clear that which
went before, though God seem not always to deal with men as they deserve, yet
the issue shows he does: for though the righteous be afflicted for a time, yet
they at length shall be saved, and though the wicked prosper a while, yet at
length in their pride they shall be be brought down, Thine eyes are upon the
haughty, or, Thou will bring down high looks, Psalm 18.27. when he spares
such for a time, he does but watch for an opportunity to pour out his wrath
among them: his eyes are upon them all the time to watch for a fit season to
ruin them.

Verse. 29. For thou art my lamp, O Lord: and the Lord will lighten my
darkness.] Or as it is expressed, Psalm 18.28. For thou will light my candle,
the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness: the meaning is, either that God
would turn his affliction and grief into prosperity and comfort, according to
that, Esther 8.19. The Jews had light and gladness, and joy and honor: or
else, that God would direct him and comfort him in his afflictions, as God
makes the wicked grope even at noon, so he causes a light to shine upon his
righteous servants, even in their greatest darkness, by directing them what to
do, when of themselves, they know not which way to turn themselves, and as a
candle is a great comfort in the dark, though it does not make day where it
comes, as the sun does, so it is a great mercy, when God does cheer up, and
enlighten the spirits of his people in affliction, though he does not take the
affliction away.

Verse. 30. By my God have I leaped over a wall.] That is, I have not only
scaled their walls, and so have taken their cities, forts, and castles, but I
have done it speedily; but it may also be meant of his overcoming all
difficulties that were in his way.

Verse. 31. The word of the Lord is tried.] That is, it has been proved to be
true, by unquestionable proof and experience.

Verse. 33. God is my strength and power.] Or it is God that girdeth me with
strength, Psalm 18.22.

And he makes my way perfect.] That is, by him I fully accomplish all my
attempts, by his providence all impediments being removed, I fail not to
perfect what I go about.

Verse. 34. He makes my feet like hinds feet, etc.] This may be meant of
agility, and nimblenesse, a great help in martial affairs, 1. Chron. 12.8. and
were as swift: as Roes upon the mountains: but I conceive, it is rather meant
of his sudden and speedy success, in taking the strong forts of his enemies,
that as hinds do suddenly run up to the top of inaccessible rocks, so he did
suddenly take into his power the strong towers and forts of his enemies.

Verse. 35. A bow of steel is broken by mine arms.] It seems they had in those
times some bows made of steel, because that is more flexible, and stronger then
iron; whence is that, Job. 20.24, He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the
bow of steel shall strike him through.

Verse. 36. And thy gentleness has made me great.] In Psalm. 18.35. it is, And
thy right hand has holden me up, and thy gentleness has made me great.

Verse. 37. Thou have enlarged my steps under me, etc.] Thou have removed all
impediments out of my way, that might hinder me in the enterprises which I
undertook; and by that means I went on freely without any rub: the contrary we
see is affirmed of the wicked, Job 18.7. The steps of his strength shall be
straightened, and his own counsel shall cast him down: when a man goes in a deep
troublesome way, he can hardly stir his feet, but passes on slowly; but in a
plain way, he may take large steps, and make what speed he will, hence is this
expression.

Verse. 39. And I have consumed them, etc.] Psalm. 18.38. I have wounded them
that they were not able to rise, they are fallen under my feet.

Verse. 42. They looked but there was none to save them: even unto the Lord, but
he answered them not.] Or, they cried, and there was none to save them, as is
expressed. Psalm. 18.41. for even wicked men, and idolatours, may in their
extremity call upon the Lord; though doing it without faith and repentance
their prayers are not accepted of the Lord, and the very light of nature
teaches men when they pray to look up unto God.

Verse. 43. Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did stamp
them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.] In Psalm. 18.42. it
is, Then did I beat them as small as the dust before the wind, I did cast them
out as the dirt in the streets: having said before, that they looked to God,
and he regarded them not, then he adds, then did I beat them, etc. when God
once withdraws his protection and help from a people, it is an easy matter to
tread them down, and beat them in pieces.

Verse. 44. Thou also have delivered me from the strivings of my people, thou
have kept me to be the head of the heathen, etc.] That is, thou have not only
delivered me from mine own people, over whom thou were pleased to anoint me
king, when they rose up against me (as we know they did in the wars that Saul
made against him, in the rebellion of Absalom, the insurrection of Sheba, and)
but have also brought many nations of the heathens to be in subjection under
me, and to acknowledge me, to be their Lord and head: now herein was David also
a type of Christ; for first, the Jews that were Gods own peculiar people, and
that pretended to trust in the promised Messiah, were the cruellest enemies to
Christ that ever he had, and so it has been since too, amongst those that have
professed themselves Christians; never did Turks and infidels more for the ruin
of Christ's kingdom, then they have done; only still the strivings of his
people against his Scepter and government, have been in vain: and secondly,
when the Gentiles were converted to the faith of Christ, he became then more
truly then ever David was, the head of the heathen.

Verse. 45. Strangers shall submit themselves unto me, etc.] This is still
intended both of David and of Christ, of whom David was a type; of David, in
regard of the many neighboring nations, that should become tributaries to him;
of Christ, in regard of the conversion of the Gentiles, who were aliens and
strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, and did yet come in and submit
themselves to Christ the son of David. In the margin these words are rendered
thus, Strangers shall yield fained obedience unto me: and indeed, as it was no
doubt true of many of the heathens that were subdued by David, that they
submitted themselves to him, because they durst do no other: either for fear of
being destroyed, or because the greatest number yielded, and then it was in
vain for them to stand out (for this is the lot of conquerours, their yoke is
received, but they have not the hearts of them that stoop to it) so is it
usually with those that become Christians, they yield Christ only fained
obedience, they call him Lord, but his yoke is burdensome to them, and they
are far from being such indeed, as they profess themselves to be.

As soon as they hear, they shall be obedient unto me.] That is, speedily, as
soon as they hear of any coming against them, without any more ado; so
terrible the very name of David should be unto them: but especially is this
verified in Christ, of whom David in this was a type; for the hearing of the
word of Christ preached, is that whereby they are brought to stoop to his
Scepter, Romans 10.17. So then faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God: Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye also trusted after you heared the word of truth.

Verse. 46. Strangers shall fade away, etc.] The meaning of this is, either that
the glory and strength of the heathens should by little and little decay and
waste away, until they came to submit themselves unto him; or else rather,
that their hearts should die, and fade; and faint away within them for fear;
and therefore it follows, and they shall be afraid out of their close places,
though they be in places of never such impregnable strength; even from these
close places, these fortified cities, towers and castles, they shall be no
less afraid, then if they were in some poor unwalled villages: and this also
may be not unfitly applied to Christ, for it must be the fear of Gods wrath,
the spirit of bondage, that must bring men in to submit to Christ's scepter: as
long as a man does hope that his own righteousness will shelter him, and can
trust in his prayers, his alms, etc. in these close places he will abide, and
despise Christ: but if once he is afraid in his close places, he sees the
weakness and vanity of these things, then he will come out of them, and
disclaim all hope in them, and submit himself to Christ.

Verse. 52. Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the heathen,
etc.] The meaning is, that he would labor to spread the knowledge of God, and
so to praise his name among the heathen nations that God had brought in
subjection under him: but especially by a prophetical spirit, the prophet
speaks this, with reference to Christ's calling in of the Gentiles to be with
the Jews one people, and therefore the Apostle, to prove that God intended to
call in the Gentiles, cites this very place, Romans 15.8, 9. Jesus Christ was a
minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made
unto the fathers: And that the Gentiles might qlorifie God for his mercy, as it
is written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles.

Verse. 51. He is the tower of salvation for his king: and shows mercy unto
his anointed, unto David and to his seed for evermore.] That is Christ, Who was
made of the seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. Acts 13.23. Of this
man's seed, has God according to his promise, raised unto Israel a Savior,
Jesus: and so consequently, to the faithful members of Christ, who are by
faith the seed of Christ, Isaiah 53.10. He shall see his seed, etc. and
therefore it is, Isai. 8.18. applied to Christ, Heb. 2.13. Behold, I and the
children which God has given me.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. NOw these be the last words of David.] That is, the last that he
wrote by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, for the use of the Church.

David the son of Jesse said, and the man who was raised up on high, etc.] He
mentions here of what house he came, and how God exalted him, that hereby the
grace and mercy of God to him, might be the more magnified, in raising him from
so mean an estate, to that height of honor wherein he lived.

Verse. 4. And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises,
even a morning without clouds, etc.] That is, who so rules as is before said,
he shall reign prosperously, and still increase in glory; his glory shall be
like the morning light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, as the
tender grass springing out of the earth, by clear shining after rain, that is,
the glory of his kingdom shall be great, and shall daily increase like the
grass, that has seasonably the moistening rain, and warming sun to make it
sprout up and grow.

Verse. 5. Although my house be not so with God: yet he has made with me an
everlasting covenant.] This clause has reference both to that which is said
concerning Gods command, verse. 3. He that rules over men, must he just, ruling
in the fear of God: and also to that, verse. 4. concerning the prosperity and
glory of his kingdom, who so rules his people, as is said, justly, and in the
fear of God; and the meaning is this, though I have not been so exactly just,
as God requires in the ruling of his people, and though my posterity fail
exceedingly of what God requires of them, and so be guilty as it were, of
breaking covenant with God, and though therefore my house or kingdom has not
yet attained that height of glory, though that promise concerning the
prosperity of my house be not yet accomplished; nevertheless, seeing he has
made with me an everlasting covenant, to wit, that my house, kingdom, and
throne shall be established for ever, chap. 7.16. namely in the Messiah that
shall come out of my loins, and this covenant is ordered in all things, and
sure, that is, ordered, and established in every thing, by him who is faithful
and sure to perform what he covenants with his children, though they come far
short of that which they should do, I know that this which he has promised he
will perform.

For this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to
grow.] That is, this which God has promised concerning the everlasting
kingdom of the Messiah springing out of my house, this is that whereon my
salvation depends, this is that which I only desire, although he make it not
to grow, that is though the glory of my temporal kingdom do not grow and
increase, as was before promised, verse. 4. so this be performed, I shall have
my desire.

Verse. 6. But the sons of Belial, shall be all of them as thorns thrust away,
etc.] That is, all profane, graceless, and stubborn wretches, that will not
stoop to Gods government, (and why these are called sons of Belial, we may
see in the note, Deuteronomy. 13.13.) because they cannot be taken with hands, that
is, they are intractable and incorrigible, there is no dealing with them in a
gentle way, they will scratch and tear those that offer to touch them, God will
cut them up, and cast them out, delivering them up to the instruments of his
wrath, and so as thorns, they shall be utterly burnt with fire, in the same
place, that is, in the very place where they grew, or the place whither they
are thrust away: and so the meaning may be, either that they shall be utterly
destroyed and consumed here in this world, or that they shall be made the
fuel of hell fire hereafter.

Verse. 8. These be the names of the mighty men whom David had.] His chief
Colonels and Captains under Joab the General of all his forces, men renowned
for their valor and admirable exploits, and such as were great supporters to
David in all his troubles, as it is expressed, 1. Chron. 11.10. These also are
the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who strengthened themselves with
him in his kingdom, and with all Israel to make him king: It seems that thirty
of them, were Captains of thousands, over whom there were six Colonels, though
the first three had some pre-eminence of place and honor above the second
three: happily three of them were Colonels, and the other three were
Lieutenant Colonels.

The Tachmonite that sat in the seat chief among the captains, (the same was
Adino the Eznite) he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at
one time.] In the 1. Chron. 11.11. this is expressed thus, Jashobeam an
Hachmonite, the chief of the captains, he lift up his spear against three
hundred, slain by him at one time: so that by comparing these two places
together we may probably at least conclude concerning this man, who was the
first of David's worthies: first, that his proper name was Adino, as is here
expressed: secondly, that he was called the Eznite from the country where he
was born, or bred; the Tachmonite, or Hachmonite, from his parentage, being the
son of one Tachmoni, or Hachmoni; and Jahobeam from his place of honor,
because he sat in the seat, as is here said, to wit, as president of the
counsel of war among the captains, for Jashobeam or as it is in the margent
of our bibles, Josheb-bassebet, does indeed signify, he that sits in the
chair: and seems therefore to be a name given in allusion to his place of
dignity, as being the first of the first three colonels, the chief under Joab
amongst the captains: and thirdly, whereas it is said here, that there were
eight hundred whom he slew at one time; but in 1. Chron. 11.11. there is
mention but of three hundred slain by him at one time: for the reconciling of
this seeming difference, it must be held, either that there were eight hundred
slain by him at one time, and three hundred at another; or else rather, (if
both places relate one and the same fight) that he discomfited and put to
flight eight hundred, whereof only three hundred were slain outright by him,
the rest by others, which yet are here said to be slain by him, because it was
by means of his routing them, and beating them down before them, that they were
slain.

Verse. 9. And after him was Eleazer the son of Dodo the Ahohite, etc.] That
is, one of the posterity of Ahoah a Benjamite, 1. Chron. 8.4. this was also one
of the three mighty men with David, that is, one of David's three mighty men, to
wit, the second of the first three, one of them that defied the Philistines,
vanquished and smote them when the men of Israel were gone away; that is, when
they fled from before the Philistines; for so it is expressed, 1. Chron. 11.13,
14. where also some circumstances of this exploit, are more particularly
related, to wit, that it was at Pasdammim, and in a parcel of ground, full of
barley, which he defended against the Philistines, the rest of the people being
sled away, and slow them there, so that at last the people returned to the
spoil of the enemy, as it follows here in the next verse.

Verse. 10. And his hand clave unto the sword.] That is, when he had done
slaying the Philistines he was not able to let go his sword, or take his hand
away from it; whether because his hand was as it were glued with blood to the
hilt of his sword, or because the nerves and sinews of his hand were so
benumbed with grasping it so hard, and holding it so long, that he could not
take it off.

Verse. 11. And after him was Shammah.] This was the third worthy of the first
three: in the 1. Chron. 11. this Shammah is not mentioned, but as is above
noted, the very same exploit is there ascribed to Eleazar, which is here
ascribed to Shammah, to wit, that he alone defended a field of corn against a
troop of Philistines, and rooted, and slew them, when his men run away from
him, only this is said to have been done in a piece of ground full of
lentiles; that by Eleazar in a parcel of ground full of barley: it is therefore
probably conceived by Interpretours, that this exploit against the Philistines,
was jointly performed by both these captains at one and the same time, and
therefore it is said, 1. Chron. 11.14. that they set themselves in the midst of
that parcel of ground, and delivered it, and slew the Philistines, and that
there being both barley and lentiles in the same field, Eleazar kept the
Philistines from the barley field, and Shammah from that part that had the
lentiles.

Verse. 13. And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in the
harvest time, etc.] There is nothing in the text whereby we can certainly
conclude, who these three worthies were that fetched water from the well of
Bethlehem for David: some think that they were three of those thirty named in
the latter part of this chapter; others, that they were the three colonells in
the second rank, or Lieuetenant colonells: but the most general opinion of
Expositours is, that they were the first three immediately before mentioned, to
wit, Adino the Tachmonite, Eleazer, and Shammah, which seems the more probable,
because the 1. Chron. 11, 19. this passage is shut up with this clause: these
things did these three mightiest. Before we are told what they did severally,
here an exploit is added which they did all jointly together, and if it be so,
then these first words, and the three of the thirty chief went down, etc. must
be thus understood, that the three chief of the thirty, or colonells and
commanders of the thirty, that is over the thirty, went down and came to David,
etc.

Verse 15. Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the well of
Bethlehem, etc.] Though David were happily at present distressed for want of
water, yet he spoke not these words, as desiring to stir up any of his
soldiers to fetch it for him, but occasionally to show how precious a draught
of that water would be in that his distress, as if he should have said, what
would one give now for a draught of the water of the well of Bethlehem.

Verse. 16. And the three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines,
etc.] Though they knew there was at that time a garrison of the Philistines in
Bethlehem, as is before noted, verse. 14. and that there was a band of the
Philistines that lay in the valley of Rephaim, verse. 13. in the way as they
were to go to Bethlehem: yet no sooner did David seem to wish for a draught of
the water of the well of Bethlehem, but those three resolved to satisfy his
desire, and so breaking through the host of the Philistines, to wit, which lay
in the valley of Rephaim, they came to Bethlehem, and in despite of the garrison
there, drew of that water, and brought it unto David.

Nevertheless he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the Lord.]
That is, as out of respect to God, and to testify how far he was from
desiring to to expose so rashly the lives of his Captains, for satisfying of
his desire to drink of this water, he poured it out upon the ground, though it
seems at that time they wanted water, and therefore that might be thought an
act of folly, to cast away water procured with so much danger; it is said, he
did it unto the Lord, that is, out of a religious respect, to make known how
far he was from desiring to hazard their lives to please his appetite.

Verse. 18. And Abishai the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief
among three.] That is, among the second three.

And he lift up his spear against three hundred, and slew them, etc.] Other
valiant acts he did besides, as that when he went with David into the midst of
Saul's camp, 1. Sam. 26.6. Who will go down with me to Saul, to the camp, and
Abishai said, I will go down with thee: 2. Sam. 21.16, 17. And Ishbi-benob,
which was of the sons of the giant, (the weight of whose spear weighed three
hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought
to have slain David. But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succored him, and smote
the Philistine, and killed him: but here that only is recorded, which was not
mentioned before.

Verse. 20. And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of
Kabzeel, etc.] A city in Judahs tribe, Josh. 15.21. this was the second of the
second three.

He went down also, and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.] His
valor in slaying the lion, is here amplified by two circumstances: first, that
it was in the midst of a pit, where the room was strait, and where he knew
beforehand he must either kill or be killed: and secondly, that it was in the
snow-time, when lions are most fierce by reason, then they want there prey, the
sheep and cattle being usually shut up in such hard weather.

Verse. 21. And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man: and the Egyptian had a spear
in his hand, etc.] 1. Chron. 11.23. it is expressed that he was a man of great
stature, five cubits high, and that his spear was like a weavers beam.

Verse. 22. These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name
among the three mighty men.] That is, among the second three; who was the third
of the second three, is not here expressed, some reckon one of those worthies
mentioned, chap, 21.18. etc. Sibbechai, Elhanan, and Jonathan: others Asahel
the brother of Joab, verse. 24. and that especially, because there are thirty
mentioned besides him, in the following verses, which seems to me most
probable, yet nothing can be certainly concluded upon such uncertain grounds.

Thirty and seven in all.] There are here in this catalogue, only thirty one
named, to which if we join the five worthies, or colonells mentioned in the
former part of the chapter, that makes but thirty six; and therefore to make up
this number of thirty seven; either Joab must be comprehended, as being
general of all the kings forces; or else the third of the second three
worthies, not being here expressed by name.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. ANd again the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, etc.]
These words (and again) have reference to that which was before related, chap.
21. concerning the famine which the Lord in his displeasure sent amongst the
Israelites, immediately after that it seems the Lord was again angry with the
Israelites for their wickedness, and so he moved David against them, that is,
for their hurt, to say, Go number the people of Israel and Judah, and the
meaning of this, that the Lord did this by letting Satan loose upon him, and
leaving David to himself that he might be foiled by Satan, and therefore it is
said, 1. Chron. 21.1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to
number Israel: and the like we have, 1. Sam. 26.19. If the Lord have stirred
thee up against me, let him accept an offering: 1. Kings 22.22. I will go
forth, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets.

Verse. 2. For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which was with
him, etc.] That is, he spoke to Joab, who had the command in chief over the
host, which were at that time in their course attending upon David. In 1.
Chron. 27.1. etc. it is expressly said, that for every several month there
were several bands, of four and twenty thousand, that did in their courses
attend upon the king, and hence is this expression, captain of the host which
was with him: and the rather happily is this clause added, because the host
which now attended in Jerusalem upon the king, was to go out with Joab to
attend him in this service of numbering the people.

Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, and
number ye the people, etc.] He enjoynes them to number the people, that is, all
that were fit for war, verse. 9. and there were in Israel eight hundred
thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five
hundred thousand men: and gives no other reason but this, that I may know the
number of the people: and herein the sin of David is intimated, to wit, that he
did it causelessely, merely out of curiosity and pride, and carnal confidence
in the multitude and strength of his people.

Verse. 3. But why does my Lord the king delight in this thing?] That is, why
should this be done, there being no other cause for it, only to satisfy thy
curiosity, and to delight thy self therein? In 1. Chron. 21.3. there are other
reasons added, which Joab used also to dissuade the king from this his purpose,
of numbering the people, as, are they not all my lords servants? why then does
my lord require this thing? why will he be a cause of trespass to Israel?
concerning which, see the note there.

Verse. 4. Notwithstanding, the kings word prevailed against Joab, and against
the captains of the host, etc.] Though not Joab only, but the captains also
with him, did what they could to dissuade David; yet David resolved it should
be so, and so it was done, though he could not overbalance them with reasons,
yet his word prevailed, he had said it should be so, and therefore it must be:
it is indeed a very disputeable question, whether Joab and the other captains
did well in yielding to David for the numbering of the people. Some hold that
they did well therein, and that because when Princes enjoin that which is not
in it self sinful (as doubtless it was not evil in it self to number the
people) the subject then is bound to obey: others hold that Joab did sin in
obeying the kings command herein: first, because Joab perceived plainly, that
David commanded this causelessely, and only to satisfy his vain glorious
humor; and so as the commanding of this with such an intention made it sinful
in David, so the obeying of this command in Joab, when he knew the kings
intention was evil, could not be warrantable: and secondly, because it appears
that Joab did it against conscience (for so it is said, 1. Chron. 21.6. the
kings word was abominable to Joab) yea, and when he did it, his mind gave him
it seems, that there would come some judgment upon the kingdom for it: why
does my lord, says he, require this thing: and indeed in these regards, this
last opinion seems to be the most probable. Joabs conscience was against this
unnecessary numbering of the people, the rather happily, because it was like to
be some way chargeable, and burdensome to the people: but he had once angered
David before, by going against his command in the death of Absalom, and he was
loath to hazard his displeasure again.

Verse. 5. And they passed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, etc.] A city of
the Gadites, Numb. 32.34. which lay in the midst of the river Arnon, Deuteronomy.
2.36. called here the river of Gad; but that which is most observable, is the
phrase here used, that they pitched in Aroer, which is a military word, with
bands and troops of soldiers; for of this I know no reason that can be given,
but that it was to over aw the people, lest they disliking what was done,
should refuse to submit to the kings command, and that it may be because there
was always some tribute, or pollmoney paid at the numbering of the people; at
least some Officers had their sees, which was a great burden to the subject,
being done, especially with out any just cause and this might well be one chief
reason, why the business was, as is noted before so abominable to Joab.

Verse. 6. And they came to Dan-jaan.] Which is usually called Dan without any
other addition, as we may see, Josh. 19.47.

Verse. 7. And came to the strong hold of Tire, and to all the cities of the
Hivites, and of the Canaanites.] That is, all the cities formerly possessed by
those nations, or where some remainders of those nations, did still live mixed
among the Israelites.

Verse. 9. And there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew
the sword.] Hereby it is evident, that only those men were numbered, that were
of years and of ability of body to bear arms, the reason whereof is given, 1.
Chron. 27.23. But David took not the number from twenty years old and under,
because the Lord had said, he would increase Israel like the stars in the
heavens; and besides, the intention of David, was chiefly, to know the strength
of his kingdom; for that was it wherein his heart was exalted; he desired to
know how many armed men fit for war, he was able, if need required, to bring
into the field; besides, though it be said in general, that in Israel, that
is, in the tribes of Israel considered apart from Judah, there were eight
hundred thousand valiant men; yet we must know that the tribes of Levi and
Benjamin were not included in this number; for so it is expressed, 1. Chron.
21.6. But Levi and Benjamin counted he not amongst them: for the kings word was
abominable to Joab, concerning which, see the note in that place; but why is it
said, 1. Chron. 21.5. that there were found in Israel, eleven hundred thousand,
and here it is said that there were found of them, but eight hundred thousand?
I answer, that in the Chronicles it is likely that the ordinary companies of
the trained bands are included, which in their turns did every month attend in
Jerusalem: which are here omitted, because their names were always kept
enrolled, and therefore there was no need now to take the account of them: but
was there then three hundred thousand of them? I answer, there were two hundred
eighty and eight thousand of them, (for there were four and twenty thousand
which served every month; and twelve times four and twenty thousand, make two
hundred eighty and eight thousand) to which if you add their captains over
thousands and hundreds, and other officers of the bands, they might well make
up three hundred thousand; I know that many Expositours do in another manner
reconcile these two places, and that not improbably, to wit, that in the
Chronicles we have the number of all that were numbered by Joab and the
captains, which were eleven hundred thousand, but that here we have the number
that Joab gave up to David, which was but eight hundred thousand, and that
because whilst he was making up the account out of there several papers,
which he was to give in to the king, the plague was begun in Jerusalem, and
that hereupon he brake off in discontent, and so three hundred thousand were
left out in the account which was by Joab carried in to David, and hence they
say is that, 1. Chron. 27.24. Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but he
finished it not, because there fell wrath against Israel for it, neither was
the number put in the account of the Chronicles of king David; but because it
is expressly said, 1. Chr. 21.5. that Joab gave up to David the sum of
eleven hundred thousand of Israel; and the series of the history seems plainly
to imply, that Joab gave up the sum of the people before the plague begun,
therefore I conceive the first answer is far the most probable. As for that
place, 1. Chr. 27.24. see the note there

And the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.] Both in regard of the
dignity of this tribe, and the multitudes of their people; the number of this
tribe was given in apart by it self. In 1. Chron. 25.5. it is said there were
of Judah four hundred and seventy thousand, here it is said there were of Judah
five hundred thousand; so that here are reckoned of Judah thirty thousand more
then are reckoned there, to which there are two solutions given by Expositours;
the first is, that the thirty companies under the command of the thirty
worthies mentioned in the latter end of the former chapter (which might be all
of Judah) are reckoned here, but left out in the Chronicles: the other is, that
here is set down the total number of the men of Judah which was taken before
the plague, but in the Chronicles thirty thousand of these are left out,
because so many of them were dead of the plague, but for the reason mentioned
in the former note, I rather approve of the first of these.

Verse. 10. And David's heart smote him after he had numbered the people.]
Expositours do generally hold, that this was done the very night before the
Prophet Gad was sent unto him, verse. 11. God wakening his conscience by the
immediate motion of his spirit; for though in the Chronicles Gods punishing the
people is mentioned before David's repentance, yet it is evident, that first
David's heart smote him, and then afterward when he had chosen three days
pestilence, the pestilence was sent amongst them: and this was the plague
wherewith God smote Israel, because of David's sin, but yet according to our
translation, wherein the following verse is rendered, not as it is ordinarily in
other translations: And when David was up in the morning, etc. but, for when
David was up in the morning, the word of the Lord came unto the Prophet Gad,
etc. methinks it cannot be otherwise taken, but that when David was up the next
morning after the number of the people was given unto him by Joab; the Prophet
Gad was sent unto him by the Lord to make known his sin, and how he intended
to punish him for it, and that hereupon David's heart smote him, and he
confessed his sin to the Lord, and begged pardon of him: as is here said, for
to what else can that particle ( for) have reference, but to make known how
David's heart came to be touched with remorse for his numbering of the people, to
wit, that the Prophet Gad was sent unto him with the following message, and
that thereupon his heart smote him, and he humbled himself before God, as is
here expressed; but however, evident it is, that all the while that Joab and
the captains were numbering the people, which was verse. 8. Nine months, and
twenty days, David continued in his sin without any effectual check of
conscience for it; which is indeed very observable.

Verse. 12. Thus says the Lord, I offer thee three things, choose thee one of
them, etc.] Though the Lord knew better then David, which was the least
grievous of the three punishments, he meant to propound to him, and accordingly
had determined to send the pestilence amongst them; yet did he think fit to
tender him war, and famine, and pestilence, willing him to choose with which
of them he would be scourged; first, because when the pestilence was sent
amongst them the very scourge which he had chosen, hereby David might plainly
see, that it was sent of God, and that for the punishment of his sin:
secondly, because this was useful to humble David the more by letting him see
the heinousness of his sin, in the sharp punishments which God might justly
have laid upon him, as a father that brings forth three or four rods, some
greater then other, though he means to use but one of them, and happily the
least, does thereby the more scare his child, and humble him with the fear of
his anger, so did the Lord deal herein with David: thirdly, because hereby he
meant to discover his kindness, and mercy to David, who though he might have
inflicted what punishment he pleased himself, not only of these three, but of
a thousand more, yet such was his gentleness and goodness to David, that of
these three he would let him choose which he had rather suffer: and fourthly,
because he would hereby make it more manifest, that the determination of our
wills by Gods decree, does no way deprive us of the freedom of our wills, as
we see in David, who was left freely to choose either of these punishments
propounded, and yet chose (and indeed could not but choose) that which God had
decreed on.

Verse. 13. Shall seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land?] Three years
of famine are only spoken of, in 1. Chron. 21.11, 12. Thus says the Lord,
Choose thee, Either three years famine, or, etc. therefore we must understand,
that here those years of famine mentioned, chap. 21. are also included, because
of this plague, would have been much aggravated by this, that having had lately
three years of famine, they should now in the fourth year be doomed to three
years famine more: as if the Prophet had said, three years of famine the land
has already endured, because of Saul's sin against the Gibeonites, and this
is now the fourth year wherein the Lord has manifested that his wrath is
appeased by sending seasonable showers of rain, but being now again offended by
this thy sin he propounds unto thee three years famine more, shall the famine
you are scarce yet rid of begin a new, and continue to the end of seven years;
and these are those three years of famine mentioned, 1. Chron, 21.12.

Or that there be three days pestilence in thy land?] In 1. Chron. 21.12. or
three days the sword of the Lord, even the pestilence in the land, and the
Angel of the Lord destroying throughout all the coasts of Israel. It was not
therefore an ordinary pestilence caused by the distemper of the air, and other
natural causes which was now propounded to David, but a pestilence by the
immediate stroke of an Angel which is also evident indeed by this, that in
three days space it went throughout all the coasts of Israel, and having
continued three days did then presently cease.

Verse. 14. I am in a great strait: let us fall now into the hand of the Lord,
etc.] The famine was to continue several years, the sword to destroy several
months, and the pestilence to last only three days, yet David was in a
strait which he should choose, and that because they were all sore judgments,
and David knew well that the pestilence might destroy as many in three days,
as the sword in three months, or the famine in three years: but at last he
chose the pestilence, and that because he would rather fall into the hands of
God then men, Let us fall, says he, now into the hand of the Lord; for though
the sword and famine are sent by God, yet in them he uses other instruments
besides, as men in war, and other devouring creatures in famine, and besides,
in the pestilence we depend more immediately upon the Lord for help, whereas in
war and famine our help depends very much upon the mercies of men; and again,
usually when the Lord punishes by men, he suffers them to deal more severely
and cruelly, then himself is wont to deal with them when he takes them into his
own hand, and this was the main cause why David chose the pestilence; yet
withal his charity also was herein remarkable, that he chose such a calamity
as would spare the Prince no more then the people; whereas in war he might
have got into some strong fort, and in famine might have stored up provision
for himself, and so have hoped to be free.

Verse. 15. So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel, from the morning even to
the time appointed,] That is, from the morning when Gad came to David, unto the
third day, verse. 11. For when David was up in the morning, the word of the Lord
came unto the Prophet Gad, etc. and Gad came and told it David, etc. all which
day the plague should have continued, even the full term of three days, but
then the Lord repented, and stayed the hand of the destroying Angel.

And there died of the people from Dan to Beersheba, seventy thousand men.] To
wit, besides women and children; or else, under this word men, women are also
included, as in other places, however, thus was David punished in that wherein
he had sinned, his mind was lifted up because of the number of his people, and
now their numbers are diminished and empaired.

Verse. 16. And when the Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy
it, the Lord repented him etc.] That is, on the third day, when after the
slaughter of many thousands in the other parts of the kingdom, the plague was
begun in Jerusalem too; the Lord repented him of the evil which he had
threatened, and so before the plague had continued full three days, the Lord
commanded the Angel to stay his hand: evident indeed it is, that the charge
given to the Angel to stay his hand, was not till David and the Elders had
humbled themselves, upon their seeing the Angel with a drawn sword, and had
offered up a sacrifice, as God had enjoined, for so it is said, verse. 17. that
when David prayed, he saw the Angel that smote the people, and verse. 25. David
built there an altar unto the Lord. etc. So the Lord was entreated for the
land, and the plague was stayed; only first herein general this is prefixed,
that the Lord repented him, and commanded the Angel to stay his hand, and then
afterward it is expressed how the Lord was won to do this, to wit, by the
prayers and sacrifices which David offered unto him.

Verse. 17. And David spoke unto the Lord, when he saw the Angel that smote the
people. etc.] To wit, with a drawn sword in his hand and that not in a vision,
but in a visible shape; for not only David, but the Elders also that were with
him, and Ornan, and his sons are said to have seen him, (for Araunah here, is
there called Ornan) 1. Chron. 21.16. David saw the Angel of the Lord stand
between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand: verse. 20.
And Ornan turned back and saw the Angel, and his four sons with him, and they
went and hid themselves.

Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they
done? etc.] To wit, in that act of numbering the people, for which David had
been told, that the pestilence was sent amongst them, for so it is expressed in
1. Chron. 11.17. David knew well enough that there was too much sin amongst
the people, to provoke God to destroy them, but he knew withal, that the
present plague was sent amongst them for his sin in numbering the people, and
that it was that did chiefly rend the bowels of David, that by his sin he had
caused such a slaughter to be made amongst the people, which made him plead so
earnestly their innocence, in regard of this sin, and to step in as it were
betwixt the sword of the Angel, and the poor people, Let thine hand I pray thee
be against me, and against my fathers house; which may be meant either of his
tendering himself alone, to be slain in stead of the people (for the whole house
of his father would have suffered greatly in his death) or else as an
expression of his real desire, that he and his whole family should be cut off,
rather then that the people should suffer as they did.

Verse. 18. And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear an
altar unto the Lord, in the threshing-floore of Araunah the Jebusite.] That God
by his Angel did send the Prophet Gad with this message to David, is evident,
verse. 19. And David, according to the saying of Gad, went up as the Lord
commanded, and 1. Chron. 21.18, Then the Angel of the Lord commanded Gad to say
to David, that David should go up and set up an altar, etc. though David and
the Elders of Israel had humbled themselves in sackcloth, and prayed unto the
Lord, 1. Chron. 21.16, 17, 18. Yet for the staying of the plague, the Lord
would have besides an altar reared, and sacrifices offered thereon, which was
doubtless, to teach them that there was no way to obtain the pardon of their
sin, and the removal of their present judgment, but by faith in that
propitiatory sacrifice which their promised Messiah was to offer up for them:
but why was this altar appointed to be reared in the threshing floor of
Araunah the Jebusite? I answer, first, to intimate the end of this sacrifice,
to wit, that it was to stay the plague, that it might go no further, there it
was that the Angel appeared in a visible shape, with a drawn sword, 1. Chron.
21.15. The Angel of the Lord stood by the threshing floor of Ornan the
Jebusite, thither therefore David was sent to rear up an altar, and to offer
sacrifices: secondly* because of David's fear, the Lord having a gracious
respect herein to the sad condition of his poor servant, which we find
expressed. 1. Chron. 21.29.30. The tabernacle of the Lord which Moses made in
the wilderness, and the altar of tht burnt offerings, were at that season in
the high places at Gibeon. But David could not go before it to enquire of God;
for he was afraid, because of the sword of the Angel of the Lord, that is, he
durst not give over interceding there, to go unto Gibeon, for fear of the
slaughter that might be made in the interim, by the sword of the Angel amongst
the inhabitants of Jerusalem; or else he was so weakened with the terror of
seeing the Angel with a drawn sword, that he was not able to go thither; and
when he could not go to Gibeon, what place was then sitter to rear an altar
in, then that where the Angel appeared with a drawn sword? thirdly, to signify
the calling of the Gentiles; for Araunah being of the stock of the Jebusites,
though doubtless at present a proselite, that is, one that was converted to
the faith of Israel, the Lords appointing David to rear an altar in his
threshing^floore, did notably shadow forth, that the day should come when God
would dwell amongst the Gentiles, and be worshipped by them: and fourthly,
because God had determined in this very place to have the Temple built, as is
evident, 2. Chron. 3.1. Then Solomon began to build the house of the Lord in
Jerusalem, in mount Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David his father, in
the place that David had prepared, in the threshing floor of Ornan the
Jebusite: and so the Lord would have this place consecrated as it were, and
endeared to the people, by the sacrifice that procured so great a blessing for
them, as was the staying of this raging pestilence.

Verse. 22. Behold, here be oxen for burnt sacrifices, and threshing
instruments, and other instruments of the oxen for wood.] In 1. Chron. 21.23.
there is added, that he offered him also his wheat for a meat offering: Lo, I
will give thee the oxen also for burnt-offerings, and the threshing instruments
for wood, and the wheat for the meat offering, I give it all; partly because of
the terror he was stricken into, by seeing the Angel with the drawn sword (for
as it is noted before, from 1. Chron. 21.20, both he and his sons had seen
the Angel, and hid themselves) and partly, because he was told that the altar
and sacrifices intended, were for the removing of that heavy judgment that lay
now upon the people; in stead of selling, he proffered to give unto David, not
the threshing floor only, but the oxen also, the threshing instruments, wheat
and all, not caring how much he gave for so good a use.

Verse. 23. All these things did Araunah, as a king, give unto the king.] The
most Expositours do hereupon infer, that this Araunah had been king of the
Jebusites, and embracing the faith of Israel, was content to live as a private
man, and to let David reign as king in Jerusalem, and indeed in the Hebrew it
is, All these things did Araunah a king, give unto the king; but this ground
methinks is not sufficient to warrant this conceit, rather I conceive this
expression is used by way of extolling the bounty of Araunah, that he did
herein as it were, match David the king in bounty, and carried himself more
like a king then a private subject, in this his princely bounty.

Verse. 24. And the king said unto Araunah, Nay, but I will surely buy it of
thee at a price, etc.] Some conceive that David would needs give the full price
for these things, because he would not take away that which was another, to
give unto God; as knowing well that sometimes a kings request, is in effect a
command, and that subjects do often give what they would not part with, but
that they dare not but give it: but because David might well see that Araunah
offered these thing freely, it is better said by others, that this was from the
ingenuity of David, because he was not willing to serve God cost-free.

So David bought the threshing-floore, and the oxen, for fifty shekels of
silver.] 1. Chron. 11.25. It is said, that David gave to Ornan for the place,
six hundred shekels of gold by weight, which seeming difference is thus
reconciled, to wit, that he bought the thresning-floore, and the oxen, as here,
for fifty shekels of silver, but for the whole place, and the ground, with the
houses, where afterward the Temple was built, he gave six hundred shekels of
gold.

Verse. 25. So the Lord was entreated for the land, and the plague was stayed
from Israel.] And this the Lord testified by sending fire from heaven to
consume the sacrifices, as is expressed, 1. Chron. 21.26 and he answered him
from heaven by fire upon the altar which must be meant only of burning the
burnt offerings; for the sacrifices of peace offerings were not burnt upon the
altar, but were to be eaten as a holy feast, so that it seems the
burnt-offerings were first offered on the altar, which were miraculously
consumed by fire from heaven, and then afterward the peace offerings were
offered upon the same altar.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the first book of KINGS, Otherwise called, The third book of
the KINGS.
CHAP. I.
NOw king David was old, and stricken in years, and they covered him, etc.] The
scope of these two following books, is to declare the history of the
Commonwealth of Israel, when it was divided into two several kingdoms, under
the command of the several kings of Judah and Israel; and therefore it is that
they are called, The books of the Kings. The history of Saul and David were
related in the two foregoing books of Samuel, because they reigned over the
whole people of Israel united in one body; Only Solomon's reign is here
described (and the death of David, as making way thereto) because in his reign
we are to see the first cause of that following schism, and rending of the
kingdom of Israel into two several kingdoms, to wit, that of Judah, and that
of Samaria. By whom these books were written we cannot say; that they were
written by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, is clear not only by the
testimony of the Church of the Jews, who did always acknowledge them as a part
of the sacred Canon of the Old Testament; but also by the testimony of the
Apostle Paul, who in his Epistle to the Romans cites a passage from hence, to
wit, that in the 1. Kings 19.14. as a part of the holy Scripture, as we may see
Romans 11.2, 3, etc. Wot ye not, says he, what the Scripture says of Elias? how
he makes intercession to God against Israel, saying, Lord, they have killed
thy Prophets, etc. But now who were the holy Ghosts penmen in writing these
books, we cannot determine; only that which some hold, seems the most
probable, namely, that they were written piece-meals by several Prophets
successively in their several ages, and then afterward collected and compacted
into one continued history, by some holy man of God, who was guided therein by
the spirit of God; and that First, because it is manifest that many passages in
these books were formerly recorded by Nathan, Ahijah, and Iddo, 2. Chron. 9.29.
Secondly, because it is also evident that the greatest part of the 18, 19, and
20. chapters of the second book of the Kings, was taken out of the prophecy of
Isaiah, as we may see Isa. 36.1. etc. And thirdly, because the story of
Zedekiah, which we have in the latter end of the second book of the kings,
seems to have been taken almost word for word out of the latter end of the
prophecy of Jeremiah. As for the dependence of this history upon that which
went before in the end of the second book of Samuel, though the last thing
there recorded be the staying of the pestilence, sent for David's sin in
numbering the people, by his rearing of an altar in the threshing floor of
Araunah, and offering sacrifices thereon as God had commanded; yet we must know
that Adonijahs insurrection, which is the next thing here recorded, did not
follow immediately upon that, but many other things intervened between, which
are recorded in the eight last chapters of the first book of Chronicles; for
after the Lord had at that time it seems revealed to him that the Temple should
be built by his son Solomon, in that very place where now he had reared an
altar in the threshing floor of Araunah, 1. He made great preparations of all
materials requisite for that work, and set workmen at work about them, to make
them ready for the building. 2. He set in order the courses of the Priests and
Levites for their attendance upon their several services in the Temple. 3. He
made known in a public assembly of the Princes and Rulers of the people, what
the Lords pleasure was, for Solomon's succeeding him in the throne, and
encouraged Solomon to build the Temple, and persuaded the Princes and people to
assist him therein, giving Solomon withal a pattern in writing, how all things
were to be made, according as God had revealed it to him. And 4. in another
assembly he persuaded the people to contribute willingly to the building of the
Temple, which accordingly they did. It is evident, I say, that all these things
recorded in the eight last chapters of the first of Chronicles were done
whilst David was able to go abroad (for it is said, 1. Chron. 28.2. that he
stood up upon his feet in the assembly of the Princes and Rulers, and spoke
unto them) and therefore they were done before this usurpation of Adonijah,
when David lay bedrid, and not able to stir, as it is said here, and that to
show that hereupon Adonijah took the advantage of making himself king; King
David was old, and stricken in years; yea, so weak he was, that lying bedrid
they covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat, and so thereupon verse. 5,
Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will be king. It is
much indeed that David should be so far spent with age before his death; for
though this were a little before his death, he lived in all but threescore and
ten years. 2. Sam. 5.4. David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned forty years; and we see in these days that many at these years are
far from this weakness; but yet considering his many labors, wars,
troubles, sicknesses and sorrows, which do usually much empair the strength of
man, A broken spirit, says Solomon, dries the bones, Prove. 17.22. it is no
wonder though David in his old age sunk apace, and was sooner decrepite and
bedridden then other men.

Verse. 2. Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let there be sought for my Lord
the king a young virgin, etc.] David had at this time many wives and
concubines, but these were all it seems well in years, and therefore his
servants the Physicians advised that some well-complexioned young virgin should
be sought out for him, to stand before him, to cherish him, and to lie in his
bosom, as judging the heat of youth fittest to cause heat in his cold body,
especially where it had not been empaired by breeding and bearing of children,
which made them advise that she should not only be young, but a virgin too.
Now though there be no mention here made of David's taking such an one to be his
wife or concubine, but only of his taking her to lie in his bosom in a
medicinal way, yet that this was supposed and intended, several reasons may
induce us to think. 1. Because it is no way probable that David would have
yielded to such a way of curing the coldness of his body, had she not been
taken under the name of a wife or concubine, which was generally esteemed
lawful in those days; the other way would have been so ridiculous and
scandalous, that it cannot be thought that David would ever have given his
consent to it. 2. Because it is noted ver. 4. as an evidence of the great decay
of his body, that though she lay in his bosom, yet he knew her not: which does
clearly enough imply that she was taken in such a conjugall way, that he might
lawfully have known her, had he not been disabled by that extreme weakness
which lay now upon him: and thirdly, because, had not Abishag been taken as
David's wife or concubine, Solomon would never have suspected as he did, chap.
2.22, that Adonijah in seeking to take Abishag to wife after his fathers death,
had a plot thereby to get away the kingdom from him: to have married the wife
of the deceased king, might have advanced his purpose some way amongst the
people, but had Abishag been taken only to attend on the king in his
weakness, or to lie in his bosom only in a physical way, there would have
been no color to think, that when he should again lay claim to the crown, his
marriage with such an one would have added the least strength to his title; and
therefore it was surely the meaning of David's Physicians, that a young wife or
concubine should be provided for the king to lie in his bosom; which may be
one reason too why they advised she should be a virgin, as having respect
therein to the honor of the king: as for that which is also said of her
attendance upon him, And let her stand before the king, and let her cherish
him, this I conceive the Physians added, partly because they would show that
besides the principal end they aimed at in this counsel they gave, such a
young wife might be a great comfort and help to him in his weakness, by
waiting on him, and ministering unto him such things as he had need of; and
partly because the performance of these services might mediately conduce to the
end principally intended, in as much as they might gain upon the affections of
David, and so his heart cleaving to her, he might take the more delight in her
lying in his bosom, the means appointed for the cherishing of his cold body.

Verse. 3. So they sought for a fair damosel throughout all the coasts of
Israel, and found Abishag a Shunammite.] That is, of Shunem, a city in the
tribe of Issachar, Josh. 19.18. where afterward dwelt that honorable matron,
that made so much of the prophet Elisha, 2. Kings 4.8.

Verse. 4. But the king knew her not.] This is expressly noted: first, as a
clear evidence of the kings continuing weakness: and secondly, to show the
reason why Adonijah did after his fathers death desire to have this Abishag to
wife, to wit, because his father had never known her, which made him think that
he might lawfully marry her, though she had been his fathers wife, or concubine.

Verse. 5. Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will be
king.] It was now doubtless generally known in the court, that David by Gods
appointment, had given order that his son Solomon should succeed him in the
throne of Israel; for we see, 1. Chron. 28.5, etc. before he was bedrid, in a
solemn assembly of all the princes and captains of Israel, he did openly make
known both Gods command and his purpose in this particular: now Adonijah, being
the eldest of David's sons then living, grudging at this, resolved to prevent
it, and to make himself king before his fathers death; for besides that Solomon
was young and born of a mother formerly attainted with adultery, his father was
now bedrid and near his end, which would be a great advantage, because he would
not be able to stir to make head against him, and a fair pretense, because
his father could not live long, and in that weakness he could not do the work
of a king; and then besides, Joab that invincible and feared captain, who was
the chief cause of Absaloms overthrow, was now discontented, and was easily
drawn unto his party; in all which respects, however Absalom had sped ill in
the like attempt, he made no question but he should carry the matter without
resistance, and therefore he exalted himself, saying, I will be king, that is,
though he had no just title neither from God nor man, yet he resolved that he
would be king, and to that end he presently made a conspiracy to effect what
he had resolved; making no conscience of crushing his fathers heart with
sorrow, even then when he lay already in such a sad and weak condition; but
thus still God made good that, 2. Sam. 12.11. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I
will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy
wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie
with thy wives in the sight of this sun.

And he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.]
As Absalom his brother had formerly done; concerning which, see the note, 2.
Sam. 15.1.

Verse. 6. And his father had not displeased him at any time, in saying, Why
have thou done so?] This is noted; first, because this was a great
encouragement to Adonijah; he presumed upon his fathers indulgence; this it was
that had marred him formerly, and this it was that did now embolden him to do
what he did: and secondly, because this circumstance did render this fact of
his far the more odious, that he could deal so lewdly with a father that had
loved him so dearly, and had been so tender over him as David had been.

And he also was a very goodly man.] It is questionable what this word ( also)
has relation to; some conceive that it has reference only to that which went
before, concerning David's fondness over Adonijah, to wit, that as that did
embolden him to do what he did, so did this also, that he was a man of a goodly
personage, and therefore, as himself judged, the fitter to sway the scepter,
and the more likely to find favor amongst the people; and indeed that the
goodlinesse of his person is here mentioned as another advantage that was in
probability likely to promote his design, I make no question: but yet this
word ( also) I conceive, has reference to Absalom too; for though there be no
express mention of Absalom in the foregoing words, yet there was an intimation
of him in the fifth verse, where the very same words are used concerning
Adonijahs pomp, that were formerly used concerning Absaloms, He prepared
chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him, which was as much in
effect, as if it had been said, as Absalom when he intended to get the kingdom
from his father, put himself upon an extraordinary excessive way of pomp, and
state, and princely attendance, thereby to get himself the name of a gallant
prince, and so to ingratiate himself amongst the common people, so did Adonijah
too: and so in relation to this it follows here, And he also was a very goodly
man, that is, as Absalom was a proper handsome goodly man, 2. Sam. 14.25. and
this was one of the main things that raised his ambitious thoughts to look
after the crown, so it was with Adonijah too, He also was a very goodly man;
and this likewise had some influence into this attempt of his to make himself
king; first, because this puffed him up with an high conceit of himself, as
thinking that God had made him to be above others, and fitted him to sit in the
throne and to sway the scepter of Israel: secondly, because this was one of
those things that had made his father so extremely fond of him, and now he
hoped it would prevail with him too: and thirdly, because for this, he expected
to find the more favor amongst the people; see the note, 2. Sam. 14.25.

And his mother bare him after Absalom.] That is, the next son that David had
after Absalom was this Adonijah, by his wife Haggith; and so Absalom being
dead, he was David's eldest son, and to him therefore as the next heir, the
kingdom, he thought did of right belong.

Verse. 8. And the mighty men which belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.]
That is, the Cherethites and Pelethites, and others that were of David's guard,
and in their courses attended upon him.

Verse. 11. Wherefore Nathan spoke unto Bathsheba, the mother of Solomon,
saying.] By Nathan the Lord had made known to David his will concerning
Solomon's succeeding him in the throne, 1. Chr. 22.8, 9. 2. Sam. 7.13. and
therefore Nathan knowing this which Adonijah had done to be against the will
and purpose of the Lord, and against that which David had appointed, was the
forwarder to stir and oppose himself against it; and to that end he went
presently to Bathsheba, (before she, though the mother of Solomon, had heard
any thing of that which Adonijah had done) and acquainting her with what he had
heard, and that by way of enquiry (to startle her the more) Have thou not heard
that Adonijah the son of Haggith does reign? he sets her on work to go to
the king about it, as knowing that in regard of her affection to her son,
none would be more zealous in the business then she; and that in regard of
David's great affection to her, none was more like to prevail with him; only
for her encouragement he adds those words, And David our Lord knows it not,
thereby intimating that she need not fear, but David when he came to know what
was done, would soon take a course to suppress Adonijah.

Verse. 12. Let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou may save thine
own life, etc.] To make Bathsheba the more willing to hearken to him, Nathan
here tells her how deeply the business concerned her, and that because if
Adonijah prevailed, she might be sure that he would never let Solomon her son
live, that was his rival for the crown; nor her neither, whose hatred he would
always fear, because of the wrong he had done her.

Verse. 18. Adonijah reigns; and now my Lord the king, thou know it not.]
This last clause Bathsheba adds, to let the king know that she did not tell
him of Adonijahs reigning, as blaming him for breaking his promise (for she was
fully assured that he knew nothing of it) but only to make known the
insufferable insolency of Adonijah, who durst attempt such a thing without his
privity, and that David might in time take some course to suppress him.

Verse. 20, And thou, my Lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee,
etc.] That David might not fear, lest he should not be able to oppose the
faction of Adonijah; Bathsheba seeks to assure him, that the people were
generally inclined to yield to that which he should determine herein, and did
wait to see which of his sons he would appoint to sit in the throne after
him, or rather that he should appear for Solomon, and make good what he had
formerly declared concerning him, in a public assembly of the Princes and
Elders of the people.

Verse. 21. I and my son Solomon shall be counted offenders.] That is, I and
my ^onne shall be charged for endeavoring to have gotten the kingdom from
Adonijah, to whom of right it did belong, and so for that shall suffer as
offenders.

Verse. 22. While she yet talked with the king, Nathan the Prophet also came
in.] And so Bathsheba went out; for though that be not expressed here, yet it
is evidently employed, verse. 28. where it is said, that when Nathan had spoken
his mind, David commanded that Bathsheba should be called in again.

Verse. 24. My Lord, O king, have thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me?
etc.] This he demands only to intimate, that he verily believed, that what
Adonijah had done, he had done without his allowance: first, because David was
not wont to resolve any thing in such weighty affairs, without consulting with
him: and secondly, because he himself had brought that message to him from God,
concerning Solomon's succeeding him in the throne.

Verse. 26, And thy servant Solomon, has he not called.] Thus she calls her
son, by way of endearing him to David, to wit, by intimating that he was
willing to obey his father in all things, and sought not to wrest the kingdom
away, before he was dead, as Adonijah did.

Verse. 28. And she came into the kings presence, and stood before the king.]
And so Nathan went out again, as is also clearly employed, verse. 32. where it is
said, that when David had spoken what he had to say to Bathsheba, he gave order
that Nathan should be called in again.

Verse. 29. As the Lord lives, that has redeemed my soul out of all distress,
etc.] In renewing his oath to Bathsheba, David mentions the Lords delivering
him out of all distress, as an engagement whereby he was bound to be careful
of doing what in Gods presence he had sworn he would do.

Verse. 31. Let my lord king David live for ever.] This may be meant thus, Long
may thou live here, and for ever in the world to come; but because this was
an ordinary form of speech which they used to Princes in those times, not only
amongst the Israelites, but also amongst other nations, as we may see Neh. 2.3.
where Nehemiah spoke thus to Artaxerxes, Let the king live for ever; and Dan.
2.4. Then spoke the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live for ever,
and so in many other places of that Prophecy, therefore many hold with good
probability, that the meaning of this phrase of speech, was only to imply,
that they desired the long life of their king, and could be glad, if it might
be so, that they might never loose him: and this too Bathsheba might at present
say, the rather, to imply, that she desired not her son Solomon should be
presently king, but rather that king David might live to enjoy it himself,
many, and many years, but only that after his decease her son might then
succeed him in the throne.

Verse. 33. Take with you the servants of your lord.] That is, my lifeguard, to
wit, the Cherethites and Pelethites, verse. 38. and this David appointed, partly
for their better safeguard, and partly by way of honoring Solomon, as their
new anointed king.

And cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring him down to
Gihon.] A river on the west or southwest of Jerusalem, which Hezekiah brought
straight down to the west side of the city of David, 2. Chron. 32.30. and it
is thought to be the same that is elsewhere called Siloe. Thither David would
have Solomon go to be anointed, either because thence he might afterward enter
the city with the more pomp and solemnity; or else, because it was not far
from En-rogel where Adonijah and his confederates were met, and so it served
the better for their astonishment, when they should hear the noise made at
Solomon's anointing; or else, that all men might perceive, that David had now
before his death appointed him to be anointed king, in opposition to Adonijah,
who had exalted himself to be king over Israel.

Verse. 38. And the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, etc.] See the note, 2. Sam.
8.18.

Verse. 39. And Zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and
anointed Solomon.] Concerning this ceremony of anointing kings, see the notes,
1. Sam. 10.1. and 16.13. Doubtless the tabernacle here spoken of, from whence
Zadok took an horn of oil for the anointing of Solomon, was not the tabernacle
of Moses, which was yet in Gibeon, 1. Chron. 16.39. but that which David had
set up for the ark, 2. Sam. 6.17. and much less can we say, that it was of
that holy oil which was at first provided for the anointing of the priests, for
it is expressly said that no other use was to be made of that oil, Exodus
30.32. Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured; or that the horn of oil
wherewith David was at first anointed, was for ever after kept in the
tabernacle, that so the succeeding kings might be anointed therewith, as some
conceive, for there is no just ground for this conjecture; all that can be said
is this, that there being oil kept in the tabernacle for several holy uses,
Zadok the priest took an horn of this oil to anoint the king; the rather
happily, because the office of the Magistrate is indeed holy, and accordingly
we see the seat of Justice is called the holy place, Eccles. 8.10.

Verse. 40. And the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, etc.]
This exceeding great joy of the people at the inauguration of Solomon was,
first, because the people hoped, that by settling him in the throne to whom by
Gods own appointment it did belong, and that whilst David was yet living to
maintain what was done, those civil wars would be prevented, which by the
faction that Adonijah had made amongst the great ones, were like to have been
kindled in the land: secondly, to testify their willing and cheerful
submission to his government: but then thirdly, it was surely intended by the
providence of God to shadow forth the great joy that should accrue to Gods
people by the kingdom of Christ, of whom Solomon was a notable type, when men
should come in willingly, and submit to his government; whence is that of the
Prophet, Zach. 9.9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout O daughter of
Jerusalem; behold, thy king comes unto thee, etc.

Verse. 42. And while he yet spoke, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the
priest came, etc.] This Jonathan was one of those that lurked nigh to Jerusalem
as spies, when Absalom rebelled against his father, that they might bring David
word, upon every occasion, of what was useful for him to know, 2. Sam. 16.36.
but now it seems his father siding with Adonijah, he also took part with him,
and so perhaps lay now as a spy at Jerusalem, to bring Adonijah word of David's
proceedings. As for those words of Adonijah to him, Thou art a valiant man, and
bring good tidings; see 2. Sam. 18.27.

Verse. 43. And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Verily our Lord king
David has made Solomon king.] As if he should have said, the tidings I bring
are far from good tidings, for surely David has made Solomon king: whether
these be good tidings, or no, judge ye.

Verse. 47. The kings servants came to bless our Lord king David, etc,] That
is, to congratulate with him the happy accomplishment of that which God had
appointed, and David greatly desired, to wit, the settling of Solomon in the
throne, with the general approbation and applause of the people; and by way of
thankfulness for the care he had taken hereby to settle the peace of the land;
to desire the Lord to give him much comfort, and the land much benefit, by this
son of his, whom God had appointed to succeed him in the throne.

And the king bowed himself upon the bed.] By way of adoration and worshipping
of God: see the like, Genesis 47.31.

Verse. 50. And caught hold on the horns of the altar.] Either that which David
had built, or that in Gibeon, where the tabernacle now was, 1. Chron. 21.29.
and this he did to secure himself from being put to death; for though we read
of no express Law that God ever gave to his people, that those that fled to
his altar should thereby be secured; yet that it was of old a custom for
malefactors to fly to the altar for shelter, is evident Exodus 21.14. But if a
man come presumptuously upon his neighbor to slay him with guile, thou shall
take him from mine altar, that he may die, to wit, either because it was held a
kind of impiety to shed the blood of a man in that holy place, whither none
might enter that had touched any dead thing; or to draw them by violence, as it
were from God, that were fled to him for succor: or else, because the altar
being the place where God did show forth the riches of his grace in accepting
an atonement for sin, this hanging upon the altar was a kind of pleading that
mercy should be shown to them even for Gods sake, who had shown such mercy to
man in the pardon of his sins; and hence it was that Adonijah caught hold now
on the horns of the altar: he that perhaps despised Gods altar formerly, was
glad now to fly thither to save his life.

Verse. 52. And Solomon said, If he will show himself a worthy man, there shall
not an hair of him fall to the earth, etc.] That is, if for the time to come he
will carry himself faithfully and fairly, as a subject ought to do, not the
least hurt shall be done him; but if wickedness shall be found in him, that
is, if he be found any way false and treacherous for the time to come, then he
shall certainly, without any mercy, be put to death.

Verse. 53. And Solomon said unto him, Go to thine house.] That is, withdraw thy
self to thine house, and live there a private life, only taking care of thine
own domestic businesses and affairs; and take heed that you meddle no more
with the matters of the kingdom.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 2. BE thou strong therefore, and show thy self a man.] That is, though
thou art young and of tender years (at least in respect of so great a charge as
thou art now to take upon thee) yet let thy carriage be man-like, and such as
may manifest a prince-like spirit; and this he speaks of spiritual fortitude
and magnanimity; for indeed nothing more argues a truly valiant and courageous
spirit, then when a man, a Prince especially, can constantly proceed in the
ways of holiness and righteousness, and not be drawn aside either by
flattery or fear. As for Solomon's age when he was anointed king: see the note,
chap. 3.7.

Verse. 5. Thou know also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, and what
he did to the two captains, etc.] It is hard to say what this is which David
here intends that Joab did him; some think it is meant of his killing Absalom,
when he had given a charge to the contrary; others understand it of some other
action of disloyalty toward David, which is not expressed in the Scripture:
but more probable it is, either that it is meant of Joabs insolency toward him
in general, of which he often complained, as 2. Sam. 3.39. And I am this day
weak though anointed king, and these men the sons of Zeruiah be too hard for
me; or else of that which here follows, his treacherous killing Abner and
Amasa, wherein David professes himself to have been much wronged; first,
because good Princes look upon the injuries done to their subjects, as done to
themselves (and so does Christ, Acts 9.9. And he fell to the earth, and heard a
voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?) secondly, because
David had engaged his faith, both to Abner and Amasa, that they should be safe,
so that it redounded much to his dishonor, when they were afterward so
treacherously slain; it was enough to make the people think that he had
secretly a hand in it: however, these things he alleges here against Joab,
both to show how justly Solomon might put him to death, though he had spared
him, as also to imply how dangerous it was for Solomon to let him live: how
il-affected he was toward him, was evident by his conspiracy with Adonijah;
and what mischief might not be feared from him, that had his hands already so
foully embrued in blood? now to aggravate his murdering of these two captains,
he says, first that he shed the blood of war in peace, that is, when there
was peace made with them he slew them, as if they had been in open hostility
against David, and secondly, that he put the blood of war upon his girdle
that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his feet, to wit, when
embracing them he stabbed them with the sword that hung at his girdle, and so
they fell down dead at his feet; and this expression I conceive is used in
describing these his impious facts, either to set forth the base perfidious
manner of his murdering them, to wit, that stabbing them, when he pretended to
embrace them, their blood by that means gushed out upon his girdle, and ran
down upon his shoes; or else his boldness and impudency, in that he was not
ashamed thus treacherously to slain himself with the blood of these men, but
did rather glory in it, going up and down with their blood upon his girdle, or
upon his sword hanging at his girdle, which he had put up all bloody into the
scabbard, and so also on the shoes he wore stained with their blood.

Verse. 6. Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go
down to the grave in peace.] As if he should have said, be sure to cut him off,
and let the blood of Abner and Amasa be returned into his own bosom; for the
time and occasion of doing this, that must be left to thine own wisdom,
wherein do as thou feast cause; a man he is of a turbulent spirit, and will
soon, some way or other give the occasion enough to take away his life, and
therefore observe him wisely, and take the occasion as it shall be offered to
thee, only be sure it be done some time or other: let not his hoar head go
down to the grave in peace; where also he mentions his hoar head, to intimate
that he would not have him spared for his old age; lest Solomon should think,
alas he has not long to live by the ordinary course of nature; let him alone,
and within a while he will die of himself, and then the world will be rid of
him; to prevent this David expresses his charge thus, that his hoar head must
not go down to the grave in peace: but why did not David cut off Joab himself,
but put it now upon his son Solomon? I answer, first, because Joab had
always been faithful to David, whereas he had already shown his ill will to
Solomon, by siding with Adonijah against him, and therefore it was now more
dangerous to let him live: secondly, David could never so well do it, as now
Solomon might; in his younger years Joab had more power and esteem amongst the
soldiery of the kingdom, whose general he was, then he had now in his old
age, especially since he had lost his credit so much amongst them, by
conspiring with Adonijah against his bedrid father; and besides, David being
continually encumbred with wars, was thereby constrained to comply with Joab
in regard of his great authority and power amongst the soldiers, which
Solomon in regard of the peaceablenesse of his reign, of which God had assured
David, would have no need to do; and therefore though David durst not proceed
against him, the sons of Zeruiah, says he, be too hard for me, 2 Samuel 3.39.
yet Solomon might safely enough do it: and thirdly, though David failed in
sparing Ioab, yet now at his death he repented him of it, and so enjoined his
son to do that which he had neglected to do.

Verse. 7. For so they came to me when I fled because of Absalom thy Brother.]
This word [ so] has reference to that he said before, let them be of those
that eat at thy table; it is as if he had said, they showed me the very same
kindness which I desire thou should show to them; they brought for me and
my followers when I was in distress, and therefore it is no less then just,
that thou should always bid them welcome to thy table.

Verse. 8. Thou have with thee Shimei the son of Gera a Benjamite of Bahurim,
which cursed me with a grievous curse, etc.] David calls the reviling and the
reproachful speeches of Shimei against him, a grievous curse; first, because he
called him a bloody man, and did in effect say that he had been the cause of
the death of Saul and all his sons; and to him that knew what a grievous
sin bloodshed was, and that was deeply at that time wounded for shedding the
blood of Uriah and others, though he were innocent in regard of that he charged
him with concerning Saul and his sons, it must needs be very grievous to have
such an aspersion cast upon him: secondly, because he called him a man of
Belial, an ungracious wretch, that had no fear of God in him; and to a man of
so tender a conscience as David was, how bitter must this needs be? and
thirdly, because he upbraided him with the rebellion of his son Absalom, as
the just curse and vengeance of God upon him, for the wrong he had done to Saul
his father-in-law, then which, nothing could possibly wound his heart more
deeply, 2. Sam. 16.7, 8. Come out, come out, then bloody man, thou man of
Belial, the Lord has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul,
etc. Now however afterward this Shimei came and fauned upon David, yet
considering how bitterly he had vented his spleen against David in the time of
his distress, he was exceeding jealous, lest encouraged by the youth of his
son, he should attempt any thing against him after his decease, and therefore
gave astrict charge to Solomon to watch over him narrowly, and to take some
occasion to cut him off.

Verse. 9. But his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blood.] How this
order which he gave to Solomon to bring down his hoar head with blood to the
grave, agrees with that oath of his to Shimei, 2, Sam. 19.23. see there.

Verse. 10. So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
David.] In 1, Chron. 29.28. it is said, that he died in a good old age, full of
days, riches and honor; here the place of his burial is named, to wit, that
it was in the city of David, that is, in that part of Jerusalem where he dwelt
and kept his court, and which he had first taken out of the hands of the
Jebusites, which was thence called the city of David: even the place of his
burial was an honor to him, and it seems his sepulcher was strangely
preserved, notwithstanding Jerusalem was so often sacked and burnt, for it
continued unto the Apostles times, as the Apostle Peter noted, Acts 2.29. Men
and Brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the Patriach David, that he is
both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is with us unto this day.

Verse. 13. And she said, Come thou peaceably?] She might easily suspect that
Adonijah did even swell with envy against Solomon, and against her too, because
by her means his conspiracy was defeated, and therefore when she saw him come
in to her, she was jealous presently of some plot he had against her, and her
son, and thence enquired whether he came peaceably or no.

Verse. 15. And he said, Thou know that the kingdom was mine, and that all
Israel set their faces upon me, etc.] That is, in regard that I was king, and
in a fair way to have had the kingdom settled upon me, by the favor of the
people, who looked upon me as my fathers eldest son, though I be now but a
private subject (and content to be so, since it was of God that my brother
Solomon should reign) I hope you will be willing to afford me what honor a
subject may be capable of, and will not deny me any reasonable request that I
shall make to you: how far Adonijah was from being really convinced that it
was of God that Solomon was king, or from a quiet submission to the good
providence of God therein, is evident by the plot he had now in hand to get
Abishag to wife, that so he might wrest the kingdom from Solomon; only to
hide his drift in desiring Abishag to wife, he would seem to be fully
satisfied, concerning Solomon's being king, the kingdom is turned about, and is
become my brothers, for it was his from the Lord, and only to desire, that by
considering what great hopes he was fallen from, she would compassionate his
condition, and be the readier to gratify him in any thing a subject might
lawfully desire.

Verse. 17. Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king, etc.] The only reason
alleged here by Adonijah, why he made choice of Bathsheba to get Solomon's
consent for his marrying Abishag, is the great interest she had in the king her
son ( for, says he, he will not say thee nay) but yet considering that there
were many others that were of power enough to have obtained any reasonable
request of the king for him, we may well think that there was another thing
that induced him to set her a work in this business; namely, the hope of
winning her to undertake his petition, and indeed accordingly it came to pass:
though Bathsheba were so wise a woman, that her counsel to her son is
recorded by the spirit of God in the holy Scripture, Prove. 31.1. yet she could
not discern his drift, but being gulled with his fair words, and her melting
thoughts of compassion toward him, she undertook that suit of his, whereby he
thought to undermine her son, and at last to shoulder him out of the throne.

Verse. 21. And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy
brother to wife.] Thus she intimates that because he was his brother,
forgetting what was past, he should do well to gratify him in any reasonable
request.

Verse. 22. Ask for him the kingdom also (for he is mine elder brother) even
for him, and for Abiathar etc.] There is nothing in the text whence we can
certainly conclude, whether Adonijah had a purpose again to wrest the kingdom
from Solomon, and had for that cause by the advice of his confederates,
Abiathar and Joab, sought to obtain Abishag to wife; yet it may seem probable:
first, by the strangeness of the suite, that he should desire her to wife, who
had lain either as his wife or concubine, in the bosom of his own father:
secondly, by Solomon's severe proceeding against him; for though by an ordinary
way of providence he might have suspected that Adonijah had some plot in this
suit of his; yet because he did so certainly conclude of it* that presently
without any more ado he adjudged him to death, this m^kes it most probable that
the drift of Adonijah was discovered to Solomon by a special instinct of the
spirit of God: and thirdly, by Joabs flying to the altar upon this, and not
before, verse. 28. however it is evident that Solomon took it so to wit, that by
the friends Abishag had gotten whilst she lay in his fathers bosom, he hoped
to increase his faction; and happily also, by marrying a wife of the deceased
king to strengthen his crakt title, and that because it was still the
successors right to have the deceased kings concubines, 2. Sam. 12.8. And I
gave thee thy masters house, and thy masters wives into thy bosom, etc. Ask
for him (says he) the kingdom also, as if he should have said, this is it
which he looks after, and with him Joab and Abiathar too; having already the
plea of being the elder brother, and Abiathar the high priest, and Joab the
General on his side, if he could strengthen himself also by this marriage,
then he would not fear to show himself, and to obtain his desire.

Verse. 23. Then king Solomon swear by the Lord.] That his mother might not
interpose any further in the business.

Verse. 24. As the Lord lives, which has established me and set me on the
throne, etc.] That is, as surely as the Lord lives, who has done this for me,
so surely shall Adonijah be put to death, and that this day; there must be no
delay in a matter of such danger: though Solomon had beforehand promised his
mother to grant her request, yet his intention was therein only, to grant her
any reasonable request, and therefore not thinking that any tie to entangle him
for the granting of that which might prove the ruin both of himself and her, in
stead of satisfiing her desire, he took on oath that Adonijah should presently
be put to death; he had formerly pardoned him only upon condition of his
loyalty for the time to come, chap, 1.52. which having now forfeited by this
second attempt, even for his former conspiracy it was fit he should die. As
for the mention that he makes in his oath of Gods establishing him in the
throne, that was because his assurance that God had placed him in the throne,
was that which encouraged him to proceed thus against Adonijah; he that had set
him in the throne, he knew, would stand by him, and defend him herein; but
however, here we see still that verified, which Nathan had threatened against
David, 2. Sam. 12.10. The sword shall never depart from thine house.

Verse. 26. And unto Abiathar the priest said the king, Get thee to Anathoth,
etc.] He banished him from the court, and confined him to his own house in
Anathoth (which was a city of the priests, Josh, 21.18.) that he might not
hereafter attempt any thing against him.

Verse. 27. So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the Lord: that
he might fulfill the word of the Lord, which he spoke concerning the house of
Eli in Ehiloh.] For by this means, according as God had threatened Eli above
fourscore years since, 1. Sam. 2.31.35. the high priesthood was transferred
from the posterity of Eli, who was of the stock of Ithamar, to Zadok who was
descended of Eleazar. And so also that promise made to Phineas the son of
Eleazar, was fulfilled Numb. 25.13. And he shall have it, and his seed after
him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood, because he was zealous for
his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel.

Verse. 28. Then tidings came to Joab.] To wit, that Adonijah was slain, and
Abiathar put from his place.

For Joab had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom.] This
clause is inserted; first, to show the cause of his fear and danger, his siding
with Adonijah: and secondly, to intimate the hand of God in this business; for
how came it to pass that he that had stuck so faithfully to David in the case
of Absalom, should now take part with Adonijah in his usurpation? surely it
was, that the blood of Abner and Amasa might fall upon him.

Verse. 30. And he said, Nay, but I will die here.] This Joab spoke doubtless,
as hoping that by hanging on the altar, he should save his life, and that they
would not there put him to death; indeed it is strange that he should so think,
considering the Law of God was so express, Exodus 21.15. that he that had slain
a man wilfully should be taken from the altar, and be put to death; but for
this we must know that Joab dreamed not now of being put to death, for his
murdering of Abner and Amasa; but only of his conspiracy with Adonijah, in
which case he hoped the altar might be a refuge to him.

Verse. 31. And the king said unto him, Do as he has said, etc.] This Solomon
enjoined, as conceiving that the Lord, who allowed not that the altar should be
a shelter to wilful murderers, would not be displeased that Joab should be
slain there, if he could not be drawn thence; yet perhaps Benaiah had before
bidden Joab come forth voluntarily out of the tabernacle, and so Solomon gave
him here a charge only to draw him thence by force, and then to slay him; for
indeed, the words of the Law are, Exodus 21.14. that he should be taken from the
altar and slain; and the same course we see was taken with Athaliah, 2. Kings
11.15. have her forth without the ranges; and him that follows, kill with the
sword: for the priest had said, Let her not be slain in the house of the Lord.

Verse. 32. And the Lord shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell upon
two men more righteous, and better then he, etc.] This Solomon spoke, as
judging that their open insurrections were not so bad as his treacherours
shedding innocent blood: as for that clause which he adds, and slew them with
the sword, my father David not knowing of it; very observable it is, how
careful he was to insert this for the honor of his father.

Verse. 36. Build thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth
thence any whither.] Shimei was not suffered to return to Bahurim, to his own
country, but was confined to Jerusalem, both to prevent all seditious
practices he might otherwise have run into, and also that he might be in
Solomon's eye, and in the eye of his servants, that if he went away it might be
discovered, and so an advantage might be taken against him, which he waited
for, as his father had advised him, v. 8.9.

Verse. 37. On the day thou go out, and passest over the brook Kidron, etc.]
It is evident in the former verse, that he was not to go any way out of
Jerusalem; yet here his going over the brook Kidron is particularly expressed,
because that was the way to Bahurim, where he formerly dwelt and where his
inheritance lay, 2. Sam. 16.5.

Verse. 38. And Shimei said unto the king, The saying is good, etc.] And withal
it seems he took an oath that he would do as Solomon had said, as we may see,
v. 42.43

Verse. 40. And Shimei arose, and sadled his ass, and went to Gath, etc.]
Whereby it appears that there was peace at this time betwixt the Israelites and
the Philistines. It may justly be wondered at, that Shimei should for the
recovery of his two runaway servants, venture to go out of Jerusalem, when he
knew that his life lay upon it; but for this we must consider, first, that
covetousness does ordinarily so besot men, that it makes them do that which is
most unreasonable: secondly, that perhaps he was so transported with passion
against his servants, that either he thought not of his danger, or else,
however could not forbear: thirdly, that he might flatter himself with vain
hopes, that doing this secretly, it would not be known; it was now three years
since this charge was given him, verse. 39. and by this time he might hope that
Solomon would not so heedfully mind, what he did at first so strictly command;
he had matters of state, of greater importance to intend, and therefore going
secretly, and returning speedily, there would be no notice taken of such an
outscape as this was: and fourthly, that there was doubtless an overruling
hand of Gods providence in it, that carried him on headlong upon his own ruin,
that so he might receive his just reward for his base reviling of David the
Lords anointed, in the time of his affliction.

Verse. 46. And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.] For the
execution of justice upon offenders does establish kingdoms; and besides the
faction that opposed Solomon was now destroyed.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. ANd Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took
Pharaohs daughter.] David had married Solomon to Naamah the Ammonitesse before
he died, as is evident, because Rehoboam the son of Solomon by this Naamah,
was born a full year before Solomon was king, for Solomon reigned in all but
forty years, chap. 11.42. and Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he
came to be king in the room of his father, chap. 14.21. so that if Solomon took
this daughter of Pharaoh to wife after Shimei's death, as it is here set down
in the story, who had lived three years in Jerusalem after Solomon was king,
chap. 2.39. this marriage, was many years after his marriage with Naamah, at
least in the fourth, or fifth year of his reign; whether Naamah were at that
time dead, or no, it is no where expressed; but however, that one chief aim in
this match, was to strengthen himself, by joining himself in affinity with
such a potent neighbor Prince, as the king of Egypt now was, is evident; for
therefore it is not said barely, that he took Pharaohs daughter to wife, but
that he made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took Pharoahs daughter,
etc. implying, that to join himself in affinity with the king of Egypt, was
the great plot of this match; it is not said whether she had embraced the
Religion of the Israelites, when he took her to wife; yet considering that he
is no where blamed for this marriage, nor any thing said, but that as yet he
continued to walk in Gods ways (the high places only excepted) it is most
like she forsook her idolatry; and however, that either before or after her
marriage, she became a proselyte, and worshipped the true God, we cannot well
question, because Solomon in this marriage, is made a type of Christ, who wooed
the Gentiles, and made them his spouse, calling them from their idolatries, to
serve the true and everlasting God, for hereto the Psalmist seems to allude,
Psalm. 45.10. Hearken (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear: forget
also thine own people, and thy fathers house.

And brought her into the city of David, until he had made an end of building
his own house.] That is, having taken the daughter of Pharaoh to wife, he
brought her into the city of David, but yet he did not dispose of her in his
own house there, but in some other part of the city, and that either because
his own house was not sufficient to entertain her, and all her retinue; or
because he was at that time in building, or at least had purposed to build a
fair palace for himself, with another adjoining thereto for his Queen, chap.
7.8. and so in that part of the city of David she continued, until he had
made an end of building his own house, etc. and the wall of Jerusalem round
about. Now this last clause concerning the wall of Jerusalem, is, I conceive,
added only by the way to give a hint how the glory of Solomon's kingdom, did
still flourish in every thing more and more; that Jerusalem was walled about
before this time, is evident. 2. Sam. 5.9. and 1. Chron. 11.8. but it seems
Solomon did either erect a new wall without the old; or else, repair, enlarge,
and fortify the old, building them with many stately towers and bulworks, and
so this city, which was the place of his residence, became far the more
glorious.

Verse. 2. Only the people sacrificed in high places, etc.] This I conceive
has reference to that which is said before, concerning the flourishing estate
of Solomon, in the last verse of the former chapter, and the beginning of this;
his royal glory was every way great, only this, says the text, was a blemish
which stained the glory of his kingdom, that as yet the people, yea and
Solomon too, did offer sacrifices in their high places, verse. 3. which was
directly against the Law, Deuteronomy. 12.13, 14. but of these high places, see the
note 1. Sam. 9.12.

Verse. 4. And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there for that was the great
high place.] That is, the largest and fairest, the most famous, and most
resorted to, and that happily because the tabernacle of Moses was there, and
therefore did Solomon go thither, and with him all the chief of the Princes and
Governors of the people, whom he had called together, 2. Chron. 1.2, 3.
concerning which, see the note there.

Verse. 6. And Solomon said, Thou have showed unto thy servant David my father
great mercy, etc.] This he said in his heart being asleep; for God understands
the langague of the heart, as well as that of the tongue, and as the Lord can
enable men to attend upon that which he says to them in their sleep, so he can
also give them power distinctly, and with the full and free use of their
reason, their sleep no way disturbing their fancy, to pour forth the desires
of their souls in prayer to him; and yet it may well be too that the intention
of his mind all the day before, upon the service of God, made him fitter for
the impression of such holy desires, and thoughts, when he was asleep; and
particularly to beg wisdom of God, which before, of all things he had most
desired.

And thou have kept for him this great kindness, that thou have given him a
son to sit on his throne, etc.] This was spoken in reference to Saul, though
God made Saul king over Israel as well as David; yet he did not give it to Saul
and his heirs, and successors, as he did to David; this was a peculiar favor
and honor which God reserved for David.

Verse. 7. And I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in.]
That is, young and unexperienced in state affairs, and in comparison of this
great burden, which must now lie upon me, a very child: so the Prophet Jeremy
also speaks of himself, Jer. 1.6. then said I, Ah Lord God, I cannot speak, for
I am a child: some writers would hence conclude, that Solomon was not above
twelve years old when he began to reign, if not younger, and so withal are
forced to maintain that at eleven years of age, he begat his son Rehoboam
(for it is manifest Rehoboam was born the year before he began his reign,
because he reigned in all but forty years, chap. 11.42. and Rehoboam was one
and forty years old when he succeeded him in the throne) but there is no cause
why we should entangle our selves with such difficulties because Solomon says
here I am but a little child: or because David said of him, 1. Chron. 22.5.
Solomon my son is young and tender: for on the other side before this, we see
how David spoke of him, chap. 2.9. thou art a wise man, and know what thou
ought to do unto him; for thus the Scripture usually speaks of young men;
Ishmael is called a child, when he was at least eighteen years old, Genesis 21.14,
15. and David a youth, and stripling, 1. Sam. 17.23. whereas before, 1. Sam.
16.18. he is called a mighty valiant man, and a man of war; and much more
might Solomon use this term of himself, when he speaks comparatively, with
respect to that great charge of governing Gods people, which now lay upon him,
though he were, as probably it is thought he was, at least twenty years old.

Verse. 12. There was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any
arise like unto thee.] To wit, for wisdom; some refer this only to the
kings of Israel, namely, that there was never any king in Israel, either before
Solomon, or after him, that equalled him in wisdom, and indeed in the
following verse, where he is promised riches and honor above all others, it is
expressly limited to kings, And I have also given thee that which thou have
not asked, both riches and honor, so that there shall not be any among the
kings like unto thee: but yet if we understand this of natural wisdom, and
not of supernatural wisdom, which was reserved as the special privilege of
Gods servants, in the days of the Gospel; I see not but that these words may
be taken as they are expressed, without any such limitation; namely, that there
was never mere man, since the fall of Adam, like unto Solomon for wisdom,
which seems the more probable, because in the next chapter, the comparison is
made betwixt him and others that were not kings, and of other nations too as
well as Israelites, verse. 30.31. Solomon's wisdom, excelled the wisdom of
all the children of the East country, and all the wisdom of Egypt, for he was
wiser than all men, then Ethan the Ezrahite, etc. and herein was Solomon a
notable type of Christ, Col. 2.3. in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge.

Verse. 13. So that there shall not be any among the kings like unto thee all
thy days.] That is, among the kings of Israel there shall be none like thee
for riches and honor: and in the Chronicles this is more generally expressed,
namely, that he should excel in riches and glory all before him, and all after
him, 2 Chronicles. 1.12.

Verse. 15. And Solomon awoke, and behold it was a dream etc.] That is, behold
he perceived that God had in a supernatural dream appeared unto him, and so
return^ng thereupon to Jerusalem with his Nobles, he there offered many
gratulatory sacrifices to God.

Verse. 16. Then came there two women that were harlots unto the King, etc.] The
Hebrew word here translated harlots, signifies either victuallers or harlots,
and therefore it may be thought that they were such as did openly profess
themselves Victuallers though they were more secretly harlots: for it is not so
likely that they durst thus have presented themselves before the King, if they
had been known to be such as lived so openly in so lewd a course of life: that
the people might the more reverence Solomon, the Lord was pleased by this
controversy that was brought before him, to let them see what a singular
measure of wisdom he had conferred upon him.

Verse. 18. And it came to pass the third day after I was delivered, that this
woman was delivered also, etc.] Hereby is shown in part, what it was that made
the case in question so difficult; namely, that both children were so near of
an age, the one being borne but three days after the other: and indeed if we
add to this, first, that the feature of the dead child would be so altered by
death, that it must needs be hard for those neighbors and friends that had
seen it alive, to say to which of the women it did belong; secondly, that no
body was by when this fact was done, that might bear witness on either side;
thirdly that the mother of the live child confessed she was asleep, and so did
not see when her child was taken away; and fourthly, that the parties
contending for the child were of equal repute, the one deserving no more
credit than the other, because they were both harlots, all these things jointly
considered, must needs make the case so difficult, that when it came to be
brought before the king, it may well be, it was thought the wit of man could
not determine it.

Verse. 20. And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, etc.]
But why should she be willing to keep another woman's child? I answer, women are
naturally ashamed of overlaying their children, to avoid this disgrace, in the
heat of her passion, she could have been content to nurse up another child in
stead of her own, rather than have it said, that by her slothfulness and
negligence, she had been the death of her own child.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 2. ANd these were the Princes which he had.] That is, these were his
chief Nobles and such as were in highest places about him whilst he sat in
the throne of Israel; especially, in the first beginning of his reign, for
though there are two here mentioned, to wit the son of Abinadab, verse. 11.
and Ahimaaz, verse, 15. that married the two daughters of Solomon, Taphah and
Bazmach, yet that may be because they did some years after marry them; for
when Solomon came to the crown, we read not of any child he had born, but only
Rehoboam, and much less could he have any daughter mariageable.

Azariah the son of Zadok the priest.] Azariah the son, that is, the grand
child of Zadok (for he was the son of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, 1 Chro. 6.8.9.)
is here said to have been the priest, that is, Solomon's priest, because it
seems he was continually employed for him (as our Princes household Chaplains
are for them) in those things that concerned the worship and service of God. Or
it may be meant of the son of some other Zadok; for the word here translated
Priest, may also be translated chief Officer, as is expressed in the margin of
our Bibles.

Verse. 3. Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, Scribes.] We read but of
one Scribe, or Secretary of State that David had, 2 Samuel 20.25. but Solomon had
two; which shows, that the dominion and royalty of Solomon's Kingdom was
greater than his fathers, and so therewith the state affairs must needs
increase.

Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud the Recorder.] He held therefore the same
place still which he had in David's time. 2 Samuel 20.24.

Verse. 4. And Zadok and Abiathar the Priests.] That is, they were the two
chief of the two families of the priests, (according to David's division, 1
Chro. 24.3, 4.) for Abiathar did not cease to be a priest, though he were
restrained from the execution of his office, and confined to his own house in
Anathoth. And besides, that he had been the chief among them, is sufficient to
make him be reckoned here amongst those that were in eminent place whether in
Church or Commonwealth, in the first years of Solomon's reign.

Verse. 5. And Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers, etc.] Some
conceive that these were the sons of Nathan the son of David, but the most
hold, that they were the sons of Nathan the prophet, preferred by Solomon,
partly out of a grateful respect which he bare to their father, partly because
he had had his education with them under the tutouridge of Nathan their father,
as the Hebrews hold.

Verse. 10. To him pertained Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher.] A tract of
land in the tribe of Judah, so called, from Hepher the son of Asher of the
posterity of Hezron, 1 Chronicles. 4.6.

Verse. 11. The son of Abinadab in all the region of Dor.] Which was Manasses
portion, Josh. 17.11. as was also Taanach and Bethshean and Megiddo, mentioned
verse. 12.

Verse. 12. Even unto the place that is beyond Jokneam.] Which was in the
borders of Zebulon: Josh. 19.11.

Verse. 19. Geber the son of Uri was in the country of Gilead, etc.] That is,
in all the rest of the country of Gilead, and in the country which belonged
to the kingdoms of Sihon and Og without Jordan: to wit, besides that before
mentioned, verse. 13. which was the charge of the son of Geber: and because it
was so great a circuit of land which was allotted to him, therefore it is said
in the close of this verse, and he was the only officer that was in the land,
that is, there was no other officer to gather up provision for the Kings
household in this land before mentioned, but he only.

Verse. 20. Judah and Israel were many, as the sand, etc.] And herein was
Solomon's kingdom a type of Christ's, whose people by the confluence of the
Gentiles, should become innumerable like the sand of the seashore; but
especially in that which follows, concerning the comfortable condition, wherein
the people lived under Solomon's reign, eating and drinking, and making merry:
for this did notably shadow forth the joyful estate of Christians, partly in
this world, but especially in heaven, the kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.7.
though they be often afflicted, yet they rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5.3. the
pardon of their sins, the light of Gods countenance, and the hope of an
incorruptible crown of glory, is sufficient to make them rejoice in affliction,
even with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; and much more then shall their
joy be great, when all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, and they shall sit
down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, Matt. 8.11.

Verse. 21. And Solomon reigned over all kingdoms, from the river unto the land
of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt.] That is, from the river
Euphrates (which because it lay northeast of the land of Canaan, is the only
limit here mentioned of Solomon's kingdom, on those two quarters) unto the land
of the Philistines (which was the western bounds, as lying all along by the
Mediterranean sea) and unto the border of Egypt, where was the river Sihor,
Josh. 13.3. which was the south bounds; and thus was that promise made to
Abraham fulfilled, Genesis 15.18. Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the
river of Egypt, unto the great river, the river Euphrates; and in this
exceeding glory of his kingdom, was Solomon also a type of Christ, concerning
whose royalty and kingdom, so many glorious things are spoken, as where it is
said, Ephesians. 1.21, 22. that he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own
right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality and power, and
might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but
also in that which is to come. And has put all things under his feet, and gave
him to be the head over all things to the Church: and Philip. 2 9, 10, 11,
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is
above every name. That at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow, of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. And that ev^ry
tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father: and again, Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee, the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

Verse. 24. And he had peace on all sides round about him.] And herein vas
Solomon also a type of Christ, the Prince of peace, Esa. 9.6. whence is that,
Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward
m^n: John 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the
word gives, give I unto you.

Verse. 25. And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine, and
under his figtree, etc.] That is, not only in the fenced cities, but also in
the open country, they lived without fear of enemies, following their
husbandry, and enjoying with much cheerfulness, choice, and plenty of Gods
good blessings.

Verse. 26. And Solomon had forty thousand stalles of horses for his chariots.]
In 2. Chron. 9.25. it is four thousand, but the word in the Original (here
translated stalles) does signify both stables, wherein many horses are kept
together, and also the stalles, or severed petitions, for each horse in those
stables, and so it is taken here: whereas in the 2. Chron. 9.25. by stalles is
meant stables containing at least ten stalles, or several partitions for
horses a piece, for so in four thousand stables, there might stand forty
thousand horses in their several stalles, as is here expressed: indeed a far
less number would have sufficed for fourteen hundred chariots, and we read of
no more that Solomon had, 2. Chron. 1.14. and Solomon gathered chariots and
horsemen, and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, etc. but first,
those horses that were fit for service in the chariots, might also be employed
in his carriages for the building of the temple, etc. and secondly, herein lay
his magnificence, that he had such choice and store of horses; and as herein it
seems he transgressed the commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 17.16. He shall not
multiply horses: himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end
that he should multiply horses: so it is likely that hereby he overburthened
his people, and gave too just an occasion to that complaint of the Israelites,
chap. 12.4. Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore make thou the
grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put on us, lighter,
and we will serve thee.

Verse. 29. And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding, exceeding much, and
largeness of heart, even as the sand, etc.] That is, the Lord gave him such a
vast capacity, an extraordinary measure of understanding, judgment, memory,
that the knowledge which he had, seemed even infinite, nor was there any thing
almost which he was not able to reach, and comprehend: see the note, chap. 3.12.

Verse. 3^. And Solomon's wisdom exclled the wisdom of all the children of the
east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.] By the children of the east, is
meant the Arabians, or Chaldeans, who were at this time famous for their
learning: especially for Philosophy, Astronomy, and other the liberal
sciences, as were also the Egyptians, whence is that concerning Moses, Acts
7.22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was
mighty in words and in deeds; and hereby it appears therefore that Solomon
excelled in this kind of learning

Verse. 31. For he was wiser then all men; then Ethan the Ezrahite, and Hen^n,
etc.] Who it seems were the famous men, for learning and wisdom, in these
tines amongst the Israelites; for these I conceive, are the same that are
mentioned amongst the posterity of Judah, the sons of Zerah, 1. Chron. 2.6.
and that therefore ^than is here called the Ezrahite: it seems by were famous
also, for their poetry, if these were that Ethan and Heman, mentioned in the
titles of the 88. and and 89. Psalms.

Verse. 32. And he spoke three thousand proverbs, etc.] So it is said in next
verses, that he spoke of trees, etc. and that he spoke also of beasts, and of
fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes, and that there came of all people
to hear the wisdom of Solomon, whereby it is evident, that though he were a
king of so great majesty and glory, yet he read lectures of natural and
moral Philosophy, and of Divinity too* for the instruction of those that
would come to hear him.

Verse. 34. And there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon from
all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.] That i^, from all the
kings, which were any thing near about him.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. ANd Hiram king of Tire sent his servants unto Solomon, etc.] This
Hiram king of Tire, was also king of Zidon, which was near unto Tire; and
therefore the Zidonians are called Hirams servants, verse 6. Unto thee will I
give hire for thy servants -- for thou know that there is not among us any
that can skill to hew timber, like unto the Sidonians; being therefore a
neighbor prince, when he heard of David's death, and his son Solomon's
succeeding him in the throne, he sent, as it seems, the custom of princes
then was, his Ambassadors to Solomon, to congratulate his succession; and that
the rather, because, as the Text says, he had been always a constant friend
to David, for Hiram was ever a lover of David. And hereby it is evident, that
the eighty third Psalm was not composed by David, because there, the
inhabitant^ of Tire, verse 7. are named amongst other enemies that were
confederate against the Israelites, which doubtless, was not in David's and
Hirams days.

Verse. 3. Thou know how that David my father could not build an house, etc.]
To wit, by common report. It is said also, that Solomon alleged the kindness
Hiram had shown to his father, in sending him Cedars to build himself an
house, (whereof we have heard before, 2 Samuel 5.11.) and desired him to afford
him the like favor for the building of a Temple for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 2.3.
And Solomon sent to Hiram the king of Tire, saying, As thou did deal with
David my father, and did send him Cedars tO build him an house to dwell
therein, even so deal with me.

Verse. 4. There is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.] That is, to hinder
the work of building the Temple.

Verse. 5. I purpose to build an house unto the name of the Lord, etc.] That is,
for the honor and worship of God, of which, see the note Deuteronomy. 12.2. and
herein was Solomon a Type of Christ, by whom the Church the spiritual temple
of God is built.

Verse. 6. Command thou, that they hew me Cedar trees out of Lebanon, etc.] Many
Expositours hold, that Libanus was a part of Solomon's land, and that he
required of Hiram only workmen to hew timber. But 1. because it is said, that
Hiram sent Cedars as a present to David, 2 Samuel 5.11. And Hiram king of Tire
sent messengers to David, and Cedar trees etc. And 2. because of the great
quantity of corn and oil which Solomon gave to Hiram year by year, in liew
of this which he required of him verse 11. And Solomon gave Hiram twenty
thousand measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of
pure oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year. I rather think that
Libanus was in the possession of the king of Tire, though it were the utmost
bounds northward of the land of Canaan, and that Solomon therefore had the
timber also from him: or else, it may be, that Libanus being a large tract of
mountains, was partly in Solomon's territories, though most in Hirams, and so
both may be true, that most of the materials he had from Hiram, and that such
timber as was cut in Solomon's territories, was hewed also by Hirams servants.
Here is only mention made of Cedar trees, as being the chief timber he used;
but he sent also for Fur trees, and Algume trees, and for a man cunning to
work in gold and silver, etc. 2 Chronicles. 2.7, 8. It is indeed said, that David
before his death prepared abundantly both workmen and Cedar trees, and all
other necessaries, 1 Chronicles. 22.2, 3, 4, 14.15. and 1 Chronicles. 29.2. But the
meaning of that is only, that he prepared exceeding much, not that he prepared
enough or more then enough, both for the house, and the holy utensiles thereof;
though he had provided exceeding abundantly, yet there was much more wanting,
which Solomon therefore now takes care to provide.

And unto thee will I give hire for thy servants, according to all that thou
shall appoint.] See the note, verse 11.

Verse. 7. He rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the Lord this day, etc.] In
2 Chronicles. 2.12. it is, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel that made heaven and
earth, etc. now hence, and because he calls the God of Israel Jehovah, some
Expositors conclude that he was a Proselyte; which others deny, and that
because his people the Tyrians and Sidonians were at this time idolaters, and
served Ashtaroth, who is therefore called the goddess of the Zidonians, Chap.
11.5. and indeed even the heathens had in these times a kind of reverent
opinion of the God of the Hebrews, and of the gods of other nations whom they
worshipped not, as we may see 1 Samuel 4.8. Woe unto us, who shall deliver us out
of the hand of these mighty Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians,
1 Kings 20.23. And the servants of the King of Syria said unto him, their gods
are gods of the hills, therefore they were stronger than we. Daniel 6, 16. Now
the king spoke and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he
will deliver thee: and Acts 17.23. For as I passed by, and beheld your
devotions, I found an Altar with this inscription, To the unknown God, So that
nothing can be hence certainly determined, but howsoever, in Hirams and the
Tyrians readiness, to confer their help to the building of the Temple, we
have a shadow of the calling of the Gentiles into the Church; of which the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.13, 14. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometime were
far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, For he is our peace, who has
made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us.

Verse. 8. And Hiram sent to Solomon, etc.] To wit, by writing a Letter, 2 Chronicles. 2.11.

Verse. 9. And I will convey them by sea in flotes, unto the place that thou
shall appoint me, etc.] It is said, that he proffered to convey them to Joppa,
2 Chr. 2, 16, It seems therefore, Hiram proffered to convey them to Joppa, or
any other place which Solomon should appoint.

And thou shall accomplish my desire, in giving food for my household.] This
Hiram requires of Solomon, in liew of what he had yielded to do for him, in
sending him timber of Cedar, etc, and that because Tire and Zidon though rich
with merchandise, were in a barren soil, and had indeed always most of their
store for corn and other provisions, out of the land of Israel; whence it is
said of the Jews that were returned out of Babylon, Ezra 3.7. that they gave
meat and drink and oil unto them of Zidon, and to them of Tire, to bring Cedar
trees from Lebanon to the sea of Joppa, for the rebuilding of the Temple; and
where all the rich commodities are reckoned up that were continually brought
into Tire, it is said, Ezekiel. 27.17. Judah and the land of Israel, they were thy
merchants, they traded in thy market, wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey,
and oil, and balm: and Acts 12.20. the reason that is given why the
inhabitaats of Tire and Zidon, were so eager to pacify Herod, when he was
displeased with them, is, because their country was nourished by the kings
country.

Verse. 11. And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to
his household, etc.] Solomon when first he sent to Hiram, proffered his
servants twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and as many of barley,
twenty thousand bathes of wine, and as many of oil, for their hire and
provision, as ye see it is plainly expressed, 2. Chron. 2.10. yea, it seems he
added, that if that should not like him he would give whatsoever hire himself
would appoint (as we see above, verse. 6.) now when Hiram answered Solomon by
writing, he accepted of that provision that was proffered for his servants, 2.
Chron. 2.15. but withal made it a request to him, as we see above, verse. 9.
that Solomon would grant him liberty to transport a certain quantity of
provision every year, for his own household, because his country was but
barren for such things; and this is that which here it is said Solomon gave
Hiram; for that provision of wheat, and barley, and wine, and oil, mentioned,
2. Chron. 2.10. was given to the subjects of the king of Tire, that were
employed about Solomon's work: see the note also, chap. 9.11.

Verse. 13. And king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel, and the levy was
thirty thousand men.] That is, of the Israelites that were skillful workmen,
whether carpenters or masons, throughout his kingdom; for though Solomon did
make no bondmen of the children of Israel, 1. Kings 9.22. but employed
strangers in the more servile employments, and harder labors, of bearing
burdens, and hewing in the mountains, 2. Chron. 2.17, 18. yet it is altogether
improbable, that either there were no artificers amongst the Israelites, though
inferior to the Tyrians, or that such as were able for the work, were wholly
neglected, and only strangers employed.

Verse. 15. And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, etc.]
And these were of the strangers that were in the land, as we find it expressed,
2. Chron. 2.17, 18.

Verse. 16. Besides the chief of Solomon's officers which were over the work,
three thousand and three hundred, etc.] But how can this agree with that place,
2. Chron. 2.18. where it is said, that there were three thousand six hundred
overseers, to set the people on work? I answer, some hold that there were but
three thousand three hundred as here, in ordinary service, and then three
hundred more were kept as a reserve for supply, if need were: but I think
rather, that those three thousand six hundred there mentioned, were of the
strangers there spoken of, as is very evident in that place, for verse. 17. the
total number of the strangers gathered together for this service, is said to
have been an hundred fifty three thousand six hundred, and then in the 18.
verse. it is particularly expressed, how all these were severally employed, to
wit, seventy thousand in bearing burdens, and eighty thousand in hewing in the
mountains, which makes one hundred and fifty thousand, and then the remaining
three thousand six hundred, were appointed to be overseers to set the people
awork; but now these three thousand three hundred, were such as had the command
of all that were employed in the work, both the Tyrians and Israelites, and
those strangers mentioned in that place of the Chronicles, and by whose command
and directions all things were ordered; and therefore are they here called the
chief of Solomon's officers, and such as did not only oversee the work, but
also ruled over the people that wrought in the work; it is hard also to
reconcile this place with that which is said, 1. Kings 9.23. These were the
chief of the officers that were over Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty
which bare rule over the people that wrought in the work: 2. Chron. 8.10. and
these were the chief of Solomon's officers even two hundred and fifty that bare
rule over the people: but for that see the note, chap. 9.23.

Verse. 17. And they brought great stones, costly stones.] To wit, marble,
Porphyries and such like.

Verse. 18. And Hirams builders did hew them, and the stone-squarers.] Or the
Giblites, as it is in the margin of our Bible, and it is thought that these
were a people belonging to Tire, amongst whom there were many excellent
workmen, called so of Gebal, or Gebula, the place of their dwelling; whence is
that, Ezekiel. 27.9. The ancients of Gebal, and the wise men thereof were in thee:
and that Psalm. 83.7. Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines with the
inhabitants of Tire.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass in the four hundred and fourscore year. etc.]
Here the time is noted when Solomon began to bind the Temple, to wit, in the
fourth year of his reign, in the second month, the month Zif, (which was
the April moon, and comprehended part of our April, and part of May: the
fittest time in the year to begin a building) and how long it was after the
Israelites came out of Egypt, which was the first beginning of the commonwealth
of Israel; namely four hundred and fourscore years, and how this sum agrees
with the several years of the government of such Judges and Kings, as had
since that time ruled over Israel, we may see in the notes upon Josh. 24.29.
three years and upward, had been spent in settling the affairs of the kingdom,
against the opposition of those that looked with a malignant eye upon Solomon's
advancement to the crown, and in taking order for making such further provision
as was necessary (besides what David had prepared) both for the Temple, and for
his own palace; and now in the fourth year the foundations of the Temple were
laid: in 2. Chron. 3.1. the place is also expressed where the Temple was built,
to wit, that it was at Jerusalem in mount Moriah (the very place in which
Abraham was commanded to sacrifice his son, Genesis 22.2.) where the Lord
appeared unto David his father, in the place that David had prepared in the
threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. Now both the place and the time when
the foundation of this house was first laid, are thus punctually expressed, not
only because it was indeed the most glorious and sumptuous building that ever
was in the world, but also especially because it was the house of the Lord, as
it is here called, the place which he chose for his settled habitation, amongst
the children of Israel, and so was a type or figure, first, of Christ, for in
him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. secondly, of
every true Christian and that because God dwells in them by his holy spirit,
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you? 1.
Cor. 6.19. and thirdly, of the Church of Christ: Ye also as living stones,
says Peter, are built up a spiritual house to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ 1. Pet. 2.5. but especially of the
Church triumphant in heaven, (for indeed as the tabernacle did principally
signify the Church in her militant condition, when she is in an unsettled
restless estate, traveling up and down in the world toward the heavenly
Canaan, so the Temple did chiefly signify the Church in her rest, when she
comes to be settled in heaven) whence it was also that the Temple was far
larger and far more magnificent then was the tabernacle, to signify that the
glory of the Church there, should wonderfully exceed that she has here, even
then when she is in her greatest glory.

Verse. 2. The length thereof was threescore cubits, etc.] Here the dimensions
of the Temple are set down, first, the length thereof threescore cubits, that
is, the length of the whole Temple containing both the holy, and the most holy
place, which is therefore called the length by cubits, after the first measure,
2. Chron. 3.3. for, first, they measured out sixty cubits of ground for the
whole house, and then afterward divided it, assigning twenty cubits to the
oracle, or the most holy place, and forty to the Temple before it, as verse.
17. so that the Temple therefore was double the length of Moses tabernacle; for
that was but thirty cubits long: see Exodus 26.18. secondly, the breadth thereof
twenty cubits, which was also double the breadth of the tabernacle, for that
was but ten cubits broad, Exodus 26.24. and thirdly, the height thereof thirty
cubits, that is, at least on the outside; for some gather from verse. 20. that
the most holy place was but twenty cubits high within, and it is most likely
that the roof of the whole house was of the same height; so that by this it
might appear, that the Temple was on the inside twice as high also as was the
tabernacle (for that was but ten cubits high, Exodus 26.16.) and on the outside
thrice as high, see the note verse. 20. and all this was thus ordered by Gods
direction, 2. Chr. 3.3. Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed
for the building of the house of God, etc.

Verse. 3. And the porch before the Temple of the house, twenty cubits was the
length thereof, etc.] This was joined to the house in the front thereof, 2.
Chron. 3.4. whence is that Joel 2.17. Let the priests, the ministers of the
Lord, weep between the porch and the altar; and let them say, Spare thy people,
O Lord, etc. there is mention of a porch called Solomon's porch, wherein Christ
and his Apostles, and the people, did so usually meet, Joh. 10.23, 24. and Acts
3.11. and 5.12. but that porch was neither built by Solomon (for Solomon's
Temple was burnt by the Chaldeans) nor was it in the same place; for this
joined to the Temple within the priests Court, whither none but the priests
might come; as for the dimensions of this porch, first, twenty cubits was the
length, according to the breadth of the house, that is, from north to south,
for though the length of the rest of the Temple is counted from east to west;
yet because this porch was larger from north to south, then from east to west;
therefore this is counted the length of it: secondly, ten cubits was the
breadth thereof before the house, the breadth therefore of this porch being
added to the length of the Temple, the whole house (porch and all) was
threescore and ten cubits long; how high this porch was, it is not here
expressed, but 2. Chron. 3.4. that is added, to wit, that it was one hundred
and twenty cubits high, so that it was as a tower to the rest of the house.

Verse. 4. And for the house, he made windows of narrow lights.] That is, broad
within, and narrow without; or else, as some conceit, broad both without and
within, but narrowed in the midst of the wall: some Expositours understand by
the house in this place, only the holy place, concluding, that the most holy
place had no windows: but there is no great weight in any of the reasons they
give to prove this; for considering first the thickness of the wall: secondly,
the fashion of the windows above described, purposely no doubt so made, both to
keep out birds, and the gazing in of any that should attempt to look in at
them: and thirdly, the place where these windows were made, which was toward
the roof of the house, at least above fifteen cubits high in the wall (for so
high the chambers were built, on the outside of the wall,) and there were three
stories of chambers one over the other, verse 8. and verse 10. and fourthly,
that the Tabernacle had no windows at all, neither in the holy, nor in the most
holy place, since it is expressly said, that in this house which Solomon built,
he made windows for the house, I see no reason why it should be restrained only
to the holy place.

Verse. 5. And against the wall of the house, he built Chambers round about,
etc.] That is, westward, northward, and southward, round about the house he
built Chambers, (for on the east side before the porch, where was the court of
the priests, there could be no chambers built) and because these chambers were
built up close to the house on the outside of the walls, so that the beams of
the upper floores of these Chambers were laid on that side toward the Temple,
upon the very wall of the Temple, therefore it may be well said, that these
Chambers were built against the wall of the house, that is, close adjoining
thereto, or, as it is in the margin, upon the wall of the house; there were of
these Chambers three stories or rows, each above the other, and each of them
five Cubits high, verse 10. and they were doubtless provided for the lodging
of the priests, for the laying up of the holy things of the Temple, and such
other uses, for of these partly is that spoken, 1 Chro. 28.11, 12. Then David
gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of the houses thereof,
and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper Chambers thereof, and of the
inner parlours thereof, and of the place of the mercy seat: And the pattern of
all that he had by the spirit, of the Courts of the house of the Lord, etc.

Verse. 6. For without in the wall of the house he made narrowed rests round
about, etc.] This is added to show, how it came to pass that the middle
Chambers were broader than the undermost, and the third loft, broader by a
Cubit than the middle ones; the reason was, because to the end that the beams
might not be fastened in the wall of the Temple, but might be only laid upon
the outlets of the wall, and so if occasion were, might be removed without any
damage to the wall, at every five Cubits high, (for that was the height of the
Chambers, verse 10.) he narrowed the Temple walls a cubit in breadth; as
suppose the wall was at the ground six cubits broad, (according to that Ezekiel.
41.5. He measured the wall of the house six cubits,) when they had built it
five cubits high, there they narrowed the wall a cubit in breadth, and built it
up five cubits broad, and on that outlet of the wall, was the beams of the
first floor laid, and by that means, the Chambers there were a cubit broader
than those beneath, and so likewise it was again at the third floor, there
they left a cubit space for the beams of the third floor to rest upon, and
built up the wall but four Cubits broad, and so those Chambers were seven
Cubits broad.

Verse. 7. There was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of Iron, heard in
the house while it was in building.] To wit, because all the stones and timber
were hewed and fitted for the building, before they were brought to the the
place where the Temple was built; and this was done, partly out of a reverent
respect, to the ends for which the house was built, and partly to signify,
first, that in the Church, the house of God, all should be carried on in a
peaceable way, without any of those jarres and tumults that are in the world:
secondly, to signify the everlasting peace of the Church in heaven, whereof
the Temple was especially a type; here the best are sometimes at variance, but
there they shall live in perfect peace, here they are hewed, and squared, and
fitted for the Temple of God in heaven, partly by the word, I have hewed them
by the Prophets, says the Lord, Hos. 6.5. and partly by afflictions, which is
for paring away their corruptions, but when they come to be joined to the
Church triumphant in heaven, there will be no need of any such thing.

Verse. 8. The door for the middle chamber was in the right side of the house,
etc.] That is, in the south side, for that in the Scripture is called the right
side of the world, as is evident, Psalm. 89.12, where that which is translated
the North and the South, thou have created them, is in the Original, the North
and the right side thou have created them; and the right side of the Temple, to
wit, as they came out of the Temple, with their faces eastward: It seems
therefore, that in the side of the Temples wall, either in the holy place, or
else rather in the porch, there was a door whereby they turned into the lowest
floor of the chambers, built on the outside of the house, from whence they
went up with winding stairs (which were happily in the thickness of the
Temples wall) into the middle chamber, that is, the middle story, which was
divided doubtless into several chambers, and so out of the middle into the
third: now if there were no other door with stairs to go up, but this on the
south, it must needs be yielded, that from hence they went to the furthest
chambers on the North side; and that by some void place, after the manner of a
cloister below, and galleries above, that went round about the house between
the chambers and the wall of the Temple: but indeed, the most that have written
concerning the fabric of the Temple, hold, that there was another door also,
with winding stairs, going up on the North side, though it be not here
expressed, which they would also prove by the description of the doors that
led to these chambers, Ezekiel. 41.11.

Verse. 9. So he built the house and finished it, etc.] To wit, the bulk and
body of the house, for it was not yet cieled and boarded, etc.

Verse. 10. And they rested on the house with timber of Cedar.] That is, the
side chambers. See the note above verse 6.

Verse. 12. Concerning this house which thou art in building, if thou will walk
in my Statutes, etc.] When Solomon had only yet set up the frame or body of the
house, the Lord spoke to him, either by some revelation, or by the ministry of
some Prophet, thereby to encourage him the better to go on in the work, and
assured him, that he would perform the word which he spoke unto David, to wit,
in making that house his settled dwelling place, and in settling him and his
posterity to sit on the throne of Israel, only withal he added this
condition, If thou will walk in my Statutes, and execute my judgments, and
keep all my commandments, thereby giving him to understand, that however
glorious the work was which he had in hand for the service of God, yet it would
be of no avail to him, except he were careful to live holily and righteously
in all other respects.

Verse. 15. And he built the walls of the house within, with boards of Cedar,
both the floor of the house, and the walls, etc.] That is, the whole wall,
from the floor to the cieling, as it is in the margin; or else the meaning is,
that both floor and roof and all, was on the outside cedar; for though it is
manifest that the holy place was cieled with boards of fur, 2. Chron. 3.5.
And the greater house he cieled with fur tree, etc. and floored with the
same, as it is in the last clause of this verse, he covered the floor of the
house with planks of fur; yet perhaps the fur was next the stones, and then
they were overlaid with cedar.

Verse. 16. And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the
floor, and the walls, etc.] That is, as he did to the holy place, so also in
those twenty cubits which were set out, he covered there also, both floor and
walls with cedar.

Verse. 20. And the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length and
twenty cubits in breath, and twenty cubits in the height thereof.] So that the
oracle or most holy place, was every way square: but how is it then said, verse.
2. of the whole house, containing in length threescore cubits, that the height
thereof was thirty cubits? I answer, some conceive that the oracle was thirty
cubits high, as was the rest of the Temple, but that it is said here to be but
twenty cubits high in the forepart of it, because the wall in the forepart of
it, whereby the holy place was divided from the most holy, was indeed but
twenty cubits high, and so there was a space of ten cubits above that wall,
left open (only the vail hung before it) at which the incense might enter into
the most holy place, and indeed, say they, why should it be thus expressed,
that the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in height, but to distinguish
the height of the wall on that side, from the height of the wall on the other
sides? but, first, because these words in the forepart, have clearly reference
to the length and breadth of the oracle, as well as to the height, And the
oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, etc. and secondly, because
the holy place might be said to be twenty cubits high, as well as the most
holy, in relation to the wall that divided the one from the other, therefore I
think it more probable which others say, for the resolving of this difficulty,
to wit, that where it is said, verse. 2. that the house was thirty cubits high,
the roof is also there included, which went up vault-wise, ten cubits higher
then the walls, which were but twenty cubits high, neither in the most holy,
nor in the holy place, and that these words are added not to make any
difference betwixt the height of the walls in the holy place, and the height of
the walls in the oracle (for they were all round about twenty cubits high) but
to show that the oracle in the forepart, that is, which was in the forepart of
the Temple, the furthest part westward (for that is here called the forepart of
the house) was every way square, twenty cubits long, and twenty cubits broad,
and twenty cubits high, which could not be said of the Temple or holy place;
yea and perhaps too, there went a floor over, from wall to wall in the oracle,
whereas the vault-covering of the Temple lay open, and there was no floor over
it.

And he overlaid it with pure gold, and so covered the altar which was of
cedar.] That is, as he covered the oracle it self with gold, to shadow forth
the majesty of God, and the exceeding glory of heaven, so also he covered the
altar with gold, which is therefore called the golden altar, chap. 7.48. being
otherwise made of cedar-wood, as that in the tabernacle was of Shittim wood,
Exodus 30.13. concerning which, see the note there.

Verse. 21. So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold.] The gold that
was spent in overlaying the most holy place, amounted to six hundred talents,
1. Chron. 3.8. and yet besides, it was garnished with precious stones, verse. 6.
And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty, and the gold was
gold of Parvaim.

And he made a partition, by the chains of gold before the oracle.] That is,
the chains whereon the vails hung, before this partition, betwixt the holy and
the most holy place, 2. Chron. 3.14. And he made the vail of blue, and purple,
and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubims thereon: that which was made
in stead of this, at the rebuilding of the Temple, was rent in twain at the
death of Christ, Matthew. 27.51. of the like vail, see Exodus 26.31.

Verse. 22. And the whole house he overlaid with gold.] That is, not only the
most holy place, but also the holy, and the upper chambers also; yea, and the
very nails wherewith the plates were fastened, had at least heads of gold, the
weight whereof was fifty shekels of gold, 2. Chron. 3.9. and the hinges of the
doors, chap. 7.50. Now all this was to signify the precious, and glorious
gifts and graces of the spirit of Christ, wherewith every member of Christ must
be adorned.

Also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid with gold.] That is,
that was by the entrance into the oracle, in the holy place, not the most holy;
so was the altar of incense placed in the tabernacle, Exodus 30.6. and so also
it was doubtless placed here in the Temple; for into the most holy place the
high priest entered only once a year, Heb. 9.6, 7. but the other priests used
to burn incense upon this altar, Luke 1.6. and that twice every day, Exodus
30.7, 8. see the notes concerning that altar of incense that was in Moses
tabernacle.

Verse. 23. And within the oracle he made two cherubims of olive tree, each ten
cubits high.] So that besides the two cherubims of beaten gold, at the ends of
the mercy-seat, made by Moses, Exodus 25.18. which were part of the propitiatory
wherewith the ark was covered, concerning which see the note there; there was
now for the most holy place in the Temple, two other cherubims made, by
Solomon's appointment, of far greater size, but not of beaten gold, as the
other were, but of olive wood, covered with plates of gold; and these it seems
were made after the shape of men (as appears by that description of them, 2.
Chro. 3.13. They stood upon their feet, and their faces were inward, that is,
eastward toward the holy place) and were to stand before the ark, to hide and
cover it from the eyes even of the high priest, and to represent the glorious
majesty of God and of Christ, in the continual attendance and ministry of the
Angels; and therefore it may well be, that the stature of these cherubims so
far surpassing the stature of men, ten cubits, that is five yards high, was
to represent of what mighty strength and excellency the Angels are.

Verse. 24. From the uttermost part of the one wing, unto the uttermost part of
the other, were ten cubits.] So that the wings of the one Cherub, took up ten
cubits, which was one half of the breadth of the most holy place, verse. 20. and
the other took up the other half: the outer wing of the one touching the South
wall, and the outer wing of the other, the North wall, and their inner wings
meeting in the midst of the house. Neither is there any space allowed for the
body of the Cherubs, because their wings did arise, as it were, out of the
midst of their backs.

Verse. 30. And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, within, and
without. That is, both in the Oracle, and without in the Temple.

Verse. 31. The lintell and side-posts were a fifth part of the wall.] The
partition wall was twenty cubits long, and twenty cubits high, and the door
therefore being a fifth part of it, was four cubits wide, and four cubits
high, narrower by a cubit then the door of the Temple, which was the fourth
part of the wall, verse. 33. Some read this clause thus, the lintell and
side-posts were five square, and then the meaning I conceive must be, that the
upper lintell was made of two pieces, which went up in the midst like the ridge
of a house; and so the door was five square.

Verse. 33. So also made he for the door of the Temple, posts of olive tree, a
fourth part of the wall.] It was therefore five cubits broad; for the partition
must needs be twenty cubits, the breadth of the Temple.

Verse. 36. And he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and a
row of Cedar beams.] This Court here mentioned was questionless that which is
called the court of the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. but here called the inner Court,
in respect to that greater Court of the people, which was without this; but
concerning these rows of Stone and Cedar, the opinion of Expositours is very
different; for some understand it of a low wall raised about this Court, not
above three cubits high (over which the people might look and see their
sacrifices offered by the priests on the altar of burnt offering, which was in
this Court) made of three rows of stone, perhaps of several kinds and
colors, and a row of Cedar beams on the top. Again, others understand it of
a fair building about this Court, wherein were four galleries, three of
stone, and one of Cedar; which may seem most probable, first, because this
phrase ( he built the inner Court) seems to imply more then the raising of a
low wall: and secondly, because in 1 Chronicles. 28.11.12. it seems apparent, that
there were chambers and treasuries about the Courts of the Temple. Then David
gave to Solomon his son, the pattern of the porch, and of the houses thereof,
and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper chambers thereof, and of the
inner parlours thereof, and of the place of the mercy-seat. And the pattern of
all that he had by the spirit, of the Courts of the house of the Lord, and of
all the Chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of God, and of the
treasuries of the dedicate things: and the like expression we have concerning
the Temple, Ezra 6.43.

Verse. 38. So was he seven years in building it.] From the second month of
the fourth year of Solomon's reign, when the foundation of this house was
laid, verse. 1. to the eight month of the eleventh year, when this house was
finished, is seven years, and six months, but the odd months (as usually in
other places) are not here expressed.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. BUt Solomon was building his own house thirteen years.] Almost
therefore twice as long was he in building his own house as in building the
Temple, for he was but seven years building that, Chap. 6.38. the reasons
whereof may be, first, that David had before his death provided a great part of
the materials for the Temple in a readiness: secondly, that neither Solomon,
nor his workmen were so forward and zealous for the hastening and finishing
these buildings, as for that of the Temple: and thirdly, that happily this was
a far greater building, as indeed we may the better think it was, if we reckon
the house of Lebanon and the Queens house as part of this royal palace, as
most interpreters upon very probable grounds conceive they were.

Verse. 2. He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon, etc.] Many
Expositours hold, that this house of the forest of Lebanon, was no part of
that house of Solomon's, mentioned in the foregoing verse, which was thirteen
years in building, but another house which he built in the forest of Lebanon,
after those twenty years were expired that were spent in building the house of
the Lord, and his own house, Chap, 9.10. to wit, when Solomon had taken Hamath,
2 Chronicles. 8.3. which was the royal city they say of Libanus: and for the
further confirmation of this, they allege that place, Chap. 9.19. where it is
said, that Solomon built all that he desired to build in Jerusalem, and in
Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominions; but yet the most of
Interpreters, and I think most probably, do hold the contrary, namely, that it
was a part of the Kings house which was thirteen years in building: and that
for these reasons; first, because there the golden Targets and Shields were
kept, which Solomon made, Chap. 10.17. the King put them in the house of the
forest of Lebanon; and were thence taken by Shishak, when he came up against
Jerusalem, Chap. 14.25.26. and doubtless, these were provided to be carried
before the King by his Guard, as were those of brass which Rehoboam made in
stead of the golden ones, which the King of Egypt had carried away. Chap.
14.28. and therefore could not be so far off as mount Lebanon was: secondly,
because it seems to have been the chief storehouse and magazine of Arms
which the kings of Judah had, whence is that Esaias 22.8. Thou did look in
that day to the armor of the house of the forest, and it is not likely, that
Solomon would have his chief Magazine of Arms in mount Lebanon, which was in
the very utmost parts of his kingdom: thirdly, because it is not probable,
that Hiram afforded not help, both of materials and builders for this house of
Lebanon, as well as for the rest of Solomon's buildings, and it is manifest,
Chap. 9.10.11. that Solomon gave Hiram his recompense, at the end of those
thirteen years spent in building his own house, when as it is said there, verse
1. Solomon had finished the building of the house of the Lord, and the Kings
house, and all Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do: fourthly, because
his throne of Judgment (which we may well think was in Jerusalem) was in a
part of this house, as we see in the seventh verse of this Chapter: and
fifthly, because his wives house, which is also here severally mentioned, was a
part of his own house, as appears, 1 Kings. 3.1. And Solomon made affinity
with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took Pharoahs daughter, and brought her into
the city of David, until he had made an end of of building his own house,
etc. under which, the Queens house must needs be comprehended, and why not then
the house of Lebanon also? and therefore it is thought to have been called the
house of the forest of Lebanon: first, because of the multitude of Cedar
pillars which were therein brought from Lebanon, it showed like a forest of
Cedar trees: secondly, because in regard of the pleasantness of it, having
many curious shadowy groves, and green closes about it, it did resemble the
forest of mount Lebanon: and thirdly, because it was made of Cedars brought
from Lebanon; as in the same regard also (according to the exposition of many
interpreters) the Temple is also called Lebanon, Zach. 11.1. Open thy doors O
Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy Cedars.

And the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of Cedar pillars, with
Cedar beams upon the pillars, etc.] It is very hard to conceive the fashion of
the building of this house, by this short description which we here have of it,
especially because here it is said, that it stood upon four rows of Cedar
pillars, with Cedar beams upon the pillars, and it follows in the next verse,
And it was covered with Cedar above upon the beams, that lay on forty five
pillars, fifteen in a row, for if there were four rows of pillars, as here it
is said, and fifteen in a row, as verse. 3. then should there be, may some say,
threescore pillars and not forty five, as it is expressly there said: but the
most probable conjectures that I find in Expositours, concerning the contriving
of this building, according to the description that is here given of it, are
these two; the first is, that it was built with three stories, in the first
whereof, which was next to the ground, there were four rows of Cedar pillars,
which are those here mentioned; and the Cedar beams upon the pillars, were
those which were laid for the floor of the second story; then in the second
story there was forty five pillars, fifteen in a row, so that there was not
in this story four rows of pillars, as there was in that next the ground, but
three rows, fifteen in a row, which makes forty five pillars; and over these,
there were also beams laid, which were for the floor of the third story,
which had no beams, but a roof of Cedar on the top, all which they say, is
comprehended in those words, verse 3. And it was covered with Cedar above upon
the beams, that lay on forty five pillars, fifteen in a row: the second is,
that this house was built with three galleries on each side, one over the
other, each one borne up with two rows of pillars, whereof one row joined to
the wall of the house on either side, and the other stood on the outside of the
Galleries on either side the house, and that these were the four rows of
pillars mentioned in this verse, where it is said, that the house stood upon
four rows of Cedar pillars, with Cedar beams upon the pillars, and that in the
next verse it is said, that it was covered with Cedar above upon the beams,
that lay on forty five pillars, fifteen in a row, because, there the outmost
pillars are only counted on one side of the house, whereof there were fifteen
in a row, in each of the three Galleries, one over the other, which makes in
all forty five pillars, each Gallery having beams of Cedar upon the pillars,
and those also covered with Cedar boards. However, that this house was provided
not only for storehouses, but also for public feasts, and for a summer house,
happily for the king to dwell in at times, we may gather from that place, chap.
10.21. All king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of
the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold, etc.

Verse. 4. And there were windows in three rows, and light was against light in
three ranks.] The meaning of this may be either, that the windows in each of
the three galleries on one side of the house, were right against the windows on
the other side; or else, that as the windows stood side ways in even rows, so
also perpendicularly they were one directly over the other.

Verse. 5. And all the doors and posts were square, with the windows.] That is,
both doors and posts, and windows were all square.

Verse. 6. And he made a porch of pillars, the length thereof was fifty cubits,
and the breadth thereof thirty cubits.] It was therefore in length answerable
to the breadth of the house, and the breadth of it thirty cubits, being added
to the length of the house, made the house (porch and all) one hundred and
thirty cubits long.

And the porch was before them, and the other pillars, and the thick beam were
before them.] That is, the porch beneath was before the doors, and posts of
the house mentioned verse. 5. the walls and pillars of the porch being every way
correspondent to those in the house; and then upon these pillars in the porch
were beams laid, which did support other pillars above, as it was in the house,
verse. 2.3. and so the beams, and upper pillars in the porch, were right against
the beams and upper pillars in the house; and thus also the height of the porch
is also employed to have been the same with the height of the house, which was
not before expressed.

Verse. 7. Then he made a porch for the throne, where he might judge, etc.] To
wit, for the throne of Ivory, which is largely described, chap. 10.18. the
joining of this we see here, with that which went before, makes it probable,
that this was built in the same place, though not just before the house of
Lebanon, but before that part where the king usually dwelt, only there was a
court between, to which the words in the following verse seem to have reference.

Verse. 8. And his house where he dwelt, had another court within the porch,
which was of the like work.] Hereby it appears, that the porch of judgment
spoken of in the verse before, was not just before the kings dwelling house, to
wit, as joining to it, for within that porch, was the court of the house of the
like work, that is, having porches and galleries about it, as that had; as also
that without that porch of judgment there was a great court, where the people
met, that came thither for matters of justice, for what court else should this
be referred to, where it is said, that the kings house had another court,
within the porch, which is therefore called the middle court, 2. Kings 20.4.
Isaiah was gone into the middle court.

Solomon made also an house for Pharaohs daughter, etc.] Concerning which, see
2. Chron. 8.11.

Verse. 9. All these were of costly stones, etc.] Hereby it is evident that the
walls of all these buildings before mentioned, were of stone, to wit, costly
stones, Marble, and Porphyrie, etc. though the pillars and galleries were of
cedar, as is before described, and the walls also within doubtless covered
with cedar; yea and though they were such costly stones, yet were they
according to the measure of hewed stones, as great, that is every way as great,
as other ordinary hewed stones, even from the foundation unto the coping, that
is, the top of the wall, whereon the beams were laid.

And so on the outside toward the great court.] That is, the court that did
compass about, or lay as a great courtyard before all these buildings.

Verse 12. And the great court round about was with three rows of hewed stones,
etc.] That is, the great court mentioned verse. 9. and whereas it is said, that
it was with three rows of hewed stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the
inner court of the house of the Lord, and for the porch of the house, the
meaning is, either that it was built about with three stories of stone
building, and one story of cedar, both outward toward the court of the house
of the Lord, and toward the porch of the kings house; or else, that as the
inner court of the Temple was built with three rows of hewed stones, and a row
of cedar beams (concerning which, see the note, chap. 6.36. so was also this
that lay before the porch of the kings palace.

Verse. 14. He was a widows son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a
man of Tire, etc.] This Hiram 2. Chron. 2.14. is said to have been the son of
a woman, of the daughters of Dan, yet here it is said, that he was a widows
son of the tribe of Naphtali, to wit, because his father was of that tribe
(though his mother was of the tribe of Dan, 2. Chron. 2.14. and withal it is
said, that his father was a man of Tire, either because some skillful Tyrian
that taught him his skill, adopted him for his son; or rather, because his
father had long inhabited that place: yet some rather conceive, that his mother
is here said to have been of the tribe of Naphtali, and that it was the error
of the king to say she was of the tribe of Dan, as we see he did, 2. Chron.
2.14. Now though here it is only said, that he was a worker in brass, yet he
was also skillful to work in gold and in silver, in iron, in stone, and in
timber, in purple, in blue, in fine linen, and in crimson: also to grave any
manner of graving, to find out every device, etc. as is expressed in that 2.
Chron. 2.14. so that Solomon out of the great respect he bore him, used to call
him his father, 2. Chron. 4.16. All their instruments did Hiram his father make
to king Solomon, for the house of the Lord, of bright brass.

Verse. 15. For he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high a piece.]
In 2. Chron. 3.15. it is said, that these pillars were thirty five cubits high,
which seeming difference is three several ways reconciled by Interpreters:
first, that here is set down the complete length of the pillars, even the basis
or pedestal of the pillars, being reckoned in, but according to the account of
the sacred cubit, or the cubit of the Sanctuary, which contained two common
cubits: but in the Chronicles the length of them is reckoned according to the
common cubit, only the basis is left out, and so they are said to be thirty
five cubits long, and so (should the base have been added) there had been
thirty six cubits, twice as many as in this place, where the length is taken
according to the sacred cubit: secondly, that here the length of one pillar is
set down, and in the Chronicles the length of both together; and whereas
against this it might be objected, that one pillar being eighteen cubits long,
the length of both must need be thirty six cubits, not thirty five, as it is in
the Chronicles; to this, two answers are given: first, that happily the pillars
were but seventeen cubits and a half high, a piece (which being put together,
make thirty five cubits) but are said here to be eighteen cubits high, because
it is usual in the Scripture, not to express such broken measures, but rather
to express it in a full number: and secondly, that happily each pillar was
eighteen cubits high, but half a cubit of each pillar being within the
chapiters that were put upon them, being so measured, they made together but
thirty five cubits: and thirdly, that the Scapus or body of each pillar was but
eighteen cubits high, but that the base, the chapiters, and all other the
additions and appurtenances of the pillars being measured in, they were indeed
thirty five cubits high, and indeed this last seems to me the plainest and most
probable answer, and least liable to exceptions; yet any of them are probable
enough, and sufficient to remove the seeming contradiction betwixt these two
places; in Jer. 52.21. it is also added, that these pillars were hollow and
four fingers thick.

Verse. 16. The height of the one chapter was five cubits.] In 2. Kings 25.17.
it is said, that the chapiters were but three cubits high; but there by the
chapiters, are meant only the pomels of the chapiters, as they are called, 2,
Chron. 4.12. which were indeed but three cubits high, but here the network
which either compassed those pomels and stood hollow from the pomels, or else
were as a freez above the pomels are also comprehended, and so these chapiters
were five cubits high; and four cubits in height they were with lillie-work,
verse. 19, yet some hold, it was the cornice on the top that was three cubits
high, 2. Kings 25.17.

Verse. 17. And nets of checker-work, and wreaths of chain-work, etc.] Some
understand this of certain borders, some of checker-work wrought after the
manner of nets, and others of chain-work, which were on the lower part of the
chapiters, or in the midst as a freez; but others conceive that the bowls of
each chapter were compassed within these nets of brass, and that these seven
wreaths of chain did in several places compass the net which was fastened to
these wreaths, for the better strengthening of them.

Verse. 18. And he made the pillars, and two rows round about upon the one
network to cover the chapiters that were upon the top with pomegranates.] Some
undestand this also, of two borders made with pomegranates an hundred in each
border, or row, which were above the borders of network, and wreaths of
chain-work; others rather think, that these two borders went round about on the
outside of the grates and chain-wreaths, from which the pomegranates did hang
down in the midst of the open spaces in the network.

Verse. 19. And the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars, were of
lilie-work in the porch four cubits.] That is, they were made in leaves after
the manner of lilies, four cubits high, and it was such lilie-work as was in
the porch, before which these pillars stood: see the note above, verse. 16. But
yet some refer this, in the porch, to pillars, not to lilie-work, as if it
had been thus expressed, And the chapiters that were upon the top of the
pillars in the porch were of lilie-work.

Verse. 20. And the chapiters upon the two pillars had pomegranates also above,
etc.] The meaning of this is, that in the upper part of the chapiters, which is
called the cornice, right over above the belly which was by the network, which
is above called the freez, there were also pomegranates; now whereas it follows
concerning the number of the pomegranates, and the pomegranates were two
hundred, etc. for this we must know, that there were two rows or borders, as is
noted before, verse. 18. above the network wreaths in each chapter, now there
being a hundred pomegranates hanging down from each of these rows or borders,
which are those mentioned, 2. Chron. 3.16. And he made an hundred pomegranates
and put them on the chains, there were consequently two hundred pomegranates
upon the freez of each chapter, as it is here said, and in the chapiters of
both pillars four hundred, as is noted, verse. 42. of this chapter, and again
2. Chron. 4.13. Indeed, Jer. 52.23. it is said, that there were but Ninety and
six pomegranates on a side, that is, on one of the rows; but then it seems
there were eight other pomegranates between checker and checker, which made up
the two rows of ninety six full two hundred, and thence it is, that even in
that place of Jeremy before cited, there is an intimation that all the
pomegranates in one row were an hundred, there were ninety and six on a side,
and all the pomegranates upon the network, were an hundred round about.

Verse. 21. And he set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin,
etc.] The two pillars the one called Jachin, that is, he shall establish: the
other called Boaz, that is, in it is strength: signified, first, the strength
and stabilitie of the temple, even that God would preserve and uphold it in
case the people would keep covenant with him: secondly, the invincible strength
and stabilitie of the church whereof the temple was a sign, and that her
strength should be merely of God: thirdly, the certain perseverance of every
true believer through Gods help and support, who will never suffer the gates of
hell utterly to prevail against them: and fourthly, that God would in all ages
raise up some in his church, Martyrs, Confessors, and others, that should as
far excel others in all eminency of grace as these pillars did excel the
rest of the building in curious workmanship; men that should be the glory of
the churches whereof they are members, and that by their courage, constancy
and patience, should notably strengthen and support others, whence it is, that
Saint John speaking of those that should continue constant in times of
persecution, as alluding to these two pillars, says of them, Him that
overcomes will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out, and I will write upon him the name of my God, etc.

Verse. 23. And he made a molten sea, etc.] At this the priests were to wash
their hands and feet, for so it is expressed, 2. Chron. 4.6. The sea was for
the priests to wash in, as formerly they had done at the laver in the
tabernacle, Exodus 30.19, 20, 21. (concerning which, see the note there,) and
hence we may gather, that it had pipes or cocks to let out the water; it was
called a sea, because it was such a huge vessel, ten cubits, that is, five
yards from the one brim to the other, and five cubits, that is two yards and a
half high; and this was to signify both the exceeding filthiness of sin,
that would require a sea for the cleansing of it; and also the infinite virtue
there had need to be in the blood, whereby the sin of all Gods elect people
must be washed away: the reason why not only the breadth of it is expressed,
but also the measure of the circumference of it round, a line of thirty cubits,
that is, fifteen yards did compass it round about, is to intimate, that it was
exactly round, for the diameter of a circumference is the third part of the
circumference and a little more, and so it was here, it was thirty cubits round
in compass, and so the diameter of it from brim to brim was ten cubits, and
perhaps a little more, which is not therefore expressed. In the Chronicles
there is also mention of the brazen altar which Hiram made, which is not here
set down, 2. Chron. 4.1. Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the
length thereof, etc.

Verse. 24. And under the brim of it round about, there were knops compassing
it, ten in a cubit, etc.] That is, under the lilie work of the brim there were
knops, ten in a cubit, to wit, three hundred knops, cast in two rows (for the
sea was thirty cubits in compass) and out of each of these knops there did
issue forth, as it were, the figure of an Oxe-head (out of which perhaps the
water did run) 2 Chronicles. 4.3.

Verse. 26. It contained two thousand baths.] That is, so much water was usually
put into it, but it held, if filled up to the brim, three thousand baths, 2
Chro. 4.5. And if a bath contained eight gallons or thereabout, as is usually
held, then four baths made a barrel, and consequently, there was usually put
into this sea five hundred barrels of water, and if filled up to the brim, it
could contain seven hundred and fifty barrels. If this answer does not
satisfy, we must yield that the measure of the bath differed, and that the
biggest held an ordinary bath and an half, whence is the seeming contradiction
of these two places.

Verse. 27. And he made ten bases of brass, etc.] Whereon the ten lavers stood,
ver. 38. and whereon they were drawn from place to place, as occasion served,
for the washing of the sacrifices, 2 Chronicles. 4.6.

Verse. 28. They had borders, and the borders were between the ledges, etc.]
That is, the base being made like a chest of four brazen tables, four cubits
long, and three cubits high, joined in the corners to four pillasters, in the
upper part of each side, which was above the wheels, there were ledge, ^ound
about, betwixt which there were borders like the panes of wainscot, whereon
were engraven lions, and oxen, and Cherubims.

Verse. 29. And upon the ledges, there was a base above.] That is, the cover or
lid of these bases, which was peculiarly called the base, because thereon the
l^ver stood: but others understand this of a neck of brass, that went up from
the cover like a funnell.

And beneath the lions and oxen were certain additions of thin work.] That is,
certain finishings or ornaments of thin work, which were not of the body of
the base, but hung down beneath the bottom of the base, betwixt the two wheels,
and therefore called additions, and happily they are said to have been beneath
the lions and the oxen, (not the Cherubims) because the Cherubims stood outmost
on each side, and so were over the wheels, and then the lions and the oxen
being in the midst of the side boards, beneath them the additions were.

Verse. 30. And every base had four brazen wheels, and plates of brass.]
Thorough which the ends of the axletrees went on each side, and whereon they
were born up,

And the four corners thereof had undersetters.] From each corner of this base
there rose up certain strong stays or undersetters, whereon the belly of the
laver did rest, that so, when the base was stirred, it might stand fast and
firm; and these undersetters are said to be at the side of every addition;
either with respect to those additions beneath mentioned, verse 29. that hung
down between the wheels, implying, that these undersetters were certain
pillasters, the lower part whereof was in the bottom of the base, by the side
of those additions, or else rather, with respect unto those additions that were
on the upper edge of the base, for as there were certain finishings, and
trimming ornaments on the lower edge of the base, hanging down between the
wheels, whereof there is mention, verse 29. so also it seems there were the
like, or other additions or ornaments, on the upper edge of the base, whereof
mention is made, verse 36. and at the side of these additions in each corner of
the base were these undersetters, whereon the laver resting, was kept steady.

Verse. 31. And the mouth of it within the chapter and above was a cubit, etc.]
For the understanding of this, we must know, that in the midst of the cover or
lid of these bases, there did rise up another lesser base, about half a cubit
high, which is here called the chapter, from the lid or cover of the great
base, it did ascend four square, and straight up half a cubit, and thence
afterward it did ascend with a round compass, still growing wider and wider,
like the mouth of a funnell, for half a cubit more (as is expressed, verse 35.
in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a cubit high) that so
in the mouth or hollow thereof, the lower part of the lavers might rest: now of
this it is here said, that the mouth of it within the chapter, that is, within
the lower part that went straight up, and above, that is, in that part which
went up with a round compass on the top, it was a cubit, that is, a cubit
high; the round compass in the top whereinto the Lavers were set, was half a
cubit high, verse 35. and the chapter or base beneath was also it seems half
a cubit high, and therefore both together were a cubit in height, and then for
the circumference, as it follows in the next words, the mouth thereof was
round, after the work of the base, a cubit and an half, that is, it was round
in compass a cubit and an half, and made after the work of the base with
borders, and ledges, and gravings, to wit, of Cherubims and lions, etc. in the
borders; which were as those in the base, four square, not round. Some
Expositours do indeed otherwise understand these words; namely, that the mouth
of this base was a cubit broad from one side to the other, in that part of it,
which was encompassed with a crown or cornice, called here the chapter; but
the first exposition is the best.

Verse. 33. And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel.]
That is, curiously wrought.

Verse. 34. And there were four undersetters to the four corners of one base,
etc.] See the notes, verse 30.

Verse. 35. And in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a
cubit high.] The whole mouth of the base was a cubit high, (as was expressed
before, verse 31.) but the upper part of it, where it began to rise with a
spreading compass, fitted to the bottom of the Laver that was to be set into
it, that was but half a cubit high; but yet some understand this of a round
hollow place on the top of the base, which was to receive the water that ran
out of the cocks.

And on the top of the base, the ledges thereof, and the borders thereof, were
of the same.] That is, the ledges of the cover or lid of the base.

Verse. 36. And Additions round about.] That is, certain finishings on the
uppermost edges of the base.

Verse. 38. One laver contained forty baths.] That is, ten barrels. See the
note above, verse. 26.

Verse. 39. And he put five bases on the right side of the house, etc.] That is,
on the south side of the priests court, as is expressed in the latter end of
the verse.

And he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward, over against the
south.] So that the sea was placed near to the entering in at the gate, which
was in the east side of the Court, that the Priests might presently wash so
soon as they entered to minister in the holy place, but yet withal on the
south side of the gate, which was counted the right side of the court.

Verse. 45. And the pots, and the shovels, and the basins, etc.] And so the
flesh-hooks also, 2 Chronicles, 4.16.

Verse. 48. And Solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house of
the Lord.] That is, Hiram made them by Solomon's direction, according to the
pattern which his father David had given him from the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 28.19.

The Altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the shewbread was.] In
the 2 Chronicles. 4.19. it is the tables, in the plural number, so that one is here
figuratively put for all, for he made also ten tables, and placed them in the
Temple, five on the right side, and five on the left, 2 Chronicles. 4.8. concerning
the altar here mentioned, see the note, chap. 8.20.

Verse. 49. And the Candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right side, and five
on the left, before the Oracle.] In the Tabernacle of Moses there was but one
candlestick, and one table of shewbread, (concerning which, see the notes
Exodus 25, 23. etc.) but now in the Temple there were ten candlesticks, and (as
is noted in the former verse) ten tables of shewbread, and this was (as many
Expositours conceive) to signify, that after the coming of Christ, of whom
Solomon was a type, the Church should have more plentiful means of grace, and
more abundant light from heaven than ever it had under Moses. As for the
allotting of a candlestick to every table to give light thereto, it might also
signify, that unless light from above goes along with every Ordinance,
appointed for the feeding of men's souls, it will be to them of no advantage.

With the flowers and the lamps, and the tongs of gold, etc.] Like those in the
Candlestick that Moses made for the tabernacle, Exodus 25.31. of which see the
note there.

Verse. 50. And the bowls, and the snuffers, and the basins.] 2. Chron. 4.8. It
is expressed that there were an hundred basins.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. THen Solomon assembled the Elders of Israel, etc.] To wit, to attend
upon the ark, when it was removed out of the City of David, which is Zion,
(where it had been ever since David brought it thither, 2 Samuel 6.12, of which,
see the note there) unto the Temple which Solomon had now built in mount
Moriah; for by this personal attendance both of Princes and people upon the
ark, they did acknowledge the Lord, of whose present the ark was a type, to be
the God and Lord of Israel, and themselves his servants. A great question,
indeed it is, how it can be said here, that the ark was carried out of Sion,
that it might be placed in the Temple, seeing ordinarily in the Scripture, Sion
is spoken of as the place where God dwelt in his Temple amongst his people, as
Psalm. 78.68.69. where it is said, that God chose the tribe of Judah, the mount
Zion which he loved, and he built his Sanctuary like high places, etc. and Esa.
8.18. where God is called the Lord of hosts, that dwells in mount Zion, and
so in many other places. But for this we must know that to speak properly and
in a strict sense, the Temple was not built in mount Sion but in mount Moriah,
2. Chron. 3.1. therefore it is said here, that the ark was carried out of the
city of David, which is Zion, into the Temple; but because the whole city of
Jerusalem is usually called Sion, and mount Sion, from that mount which was a
chief part of it, thence it is that the Temple Gods dwelling place, is so
usually said to have been in Sion.

Verse. 2. And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon at
the feast, etc.] That is, at the time when they were from all parts of the land
to assemble themselves together to keep the feast, in the month of Ethanim,
which is the seventh month. By the feast is meant (as is most probably held by
the most of Interpreters) the feast of tabernacles, which began the 15 day of
the seventh month, Levit. 23.34. and was indeed the chief feast of this
month, as being one of those three feasts whereto all the males of Israel were
bound to resort: yet it must needs be that the people assembled (at least the
heads of the tribes, and the chief of the fathers) seven or eight days before
the feast of tabernacles, for the feast of tabernacles was kept from the
fifteenth to the end of the two and twentieth day; and on the three and
twentieth day Solomon dismissed the people, 2. Chron. 7.10. And on the three
and twentieth day of this seventh month, he sent the people away unto their
tents, so that the seven days, which he kept for the dedication of the temple
(whereof mention is made verse. 65. of this chapter, and 2. Chron. 7.9.) were
before the feast of tabernacles: yet if they were the seven days immediately
foregoing the feast of tabernacles, which was on the fifteenth day of the
month, doubtless the tenth day was excepted, which was the day wherein they
afflicted their souls with fasting, Levit. 23.27. and therefore not likely to
have been one of the days of this festivitie of the Temples dedication: now
whereas it may be objected, that till the eight month the Temple was not
finished, chap. 6.38. And in the eleventh year, in the month Bull (which is
the eight month) was the house finished; to this I answer that the dedication
therefore was, doubtless in the seventh month of the following year, that
month being chosen for the peoples convenience, who were then to assemble
themselves to keep the feast of Tabernacles, and that in the interim there
might be time for the drying of the walls, and to make all things ready for the
dedication of it.

Verse. 3. And the priests took up the ark.] In 2. Chron. 5.4. it is, and the
Levites took up the ark: but that is only, because the priests also were of
the tribe of Levi.

Verse. 4. And they brought up the ark of the Lord, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, etc.] To wit, that which was made by Moses, which only was
called the tabernacle of the congregation, this had been hitherto in Gibeon, 2.
Chron. 1.3. but was now removed thence with all the holy vessels thereof, and
laid up in the treasuries of the Temple: not only because they had been
consecrated to God, but also to make sure that the Temple should now be the
only place of Gods worship.

Verse. 5. Sacrificing sheep and oxen that could not be told, nor numbered for
multitude.] To wit, when they were going in a solemn manner before the ark, to
remove it from the city of David into the Temple, and therefore perhaps in the
same manner too that was observed by David, when he removed the ark from the
house of Obed Edom, 2. Sam. 6.13. And it was so, that when they that bare the
ark of the Lord, had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

Verse. 8. And they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were seen
out in the holy place, etc.] Some conceive the meaning of this hard place is
this, to wit, that they drew out the staves quite out of the rings of the ark,
thereby to signify, that the ark was now to be removed no more, and so the
staves being laid upon the ground in the fore part of the Sanctuary, their
four ends, or heads, might be seen as one went out of the holy place, into the
most holy; but out of that place they were never seen, because the ark was
never removed; but it is hard to make this exposition agree with the words: the
most approved exposition therefore is this, when they had set the ark in his
place, behind the Cherubims, to wit, the two great Cherubims which Solomon had
made, neither the ark nor the staves could be seen; but then they drew out the
staves eastward, that so though the ark was not seen, yet the end of the staves
might be seen, to put them in mind of the ark which was behind the wings of the
Cherubims: for by this means the ends of the staves were seen out in the holy
place before the oracle, that is, in that part of the most holy place which was
before the ark (which was more especially called the oracle) and they were not
seen without, that is, they were not seen out of the ark: they that were before
the oracle in the most holy place, might discern by the ends of the staves,
that they were in the ark, as it is expressed, 2. Chron. 5.9. And they drew out
the staves of the ark, that the ends of the staves were seen from the ark
before the oracle: but the staves were never seen out of the ark, for that was
against Gods Law, Exodus 25.15. The staves shall be in the rings of the ark,
they shall not be taken from it; or else, they were not seen without, that is,
the staves were drawn out so little, that in the most holy place they might be
discerned; or happily, at the very door where they went out of the most holy
place into the Temple, but further out in the Temple they could not be
discerned.

Verse. 9. There was nothing in the ark, save the two tables of stone.] For
though the pot of Manna, Exodus 16.34. and Aarons rod, Numb. 17.10. and the book
of the Law, Deuteronomy. 31.26. were laid up before the ark; yet they were not put
into the ark, as were the two tables of stone; and accordingly we must
understand that place, Heb. 9.3, 4. And after the second vail, the tabernacle
which is called the holiest of all: Which had the golden censer, and the ark of
the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that
had Manna, and Aarons rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant.

Verse. 10. And it came to pass when the priests were come out of the holy
place, that the cloud filled the house of the Lord.] When the priests had set
the ark in his place, and were come out, immediately there were an hundred and
twenty priests with trumpets, and the Levite-singers standing at the east end
of the altar with their Cymballs, Psalteries and Harps, appointed to sound
forth the praises of God, and whilst they were thus employed, suddenly the
house of the Lord was filled with a cloud, so that the priests were not able to
minister, no not in the court where the brazen altar stood, for thus it is
expressed, 2. Chron. 5.11. etc.

Verse. 12. Then spoke Solomon, The Lord said that he would dwell in the thick
darkness.] Solomon standing where he saw how on a sudden the house was filled
with a cloud, (to wit, upon the brazen scaffold that was built for him in the
outward court, which was therefore it seems right before the door of the
priests court, through which he might look, 2 Chronicles. 6.13. For Solomon had made
a brazen scaffold, of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits
high, and had set it in the midst of the court, and upon it he stood, etc.)
apprehending rightly, that it was sent of God as a sign of his presence; in
that rapture of his joy, he brake forth into these following words, the Lord
said that he would dwell in the thick darkness, etc. that is, the Lord has
said, he would appear in a cloud, Levit. 16.2. I will appear in the cloud upon
the mercy seat: and by a cloud he has usually testified his presence amongst
his people; as in the leading of the Israelites by a cloud, Exodus, 13.21. in the
thick cloud that was upon mount Sinai at the giving of the law, Exodus 19, 16.
in the cloud that covered and filled the tabernacle, so soon as it was reared
up by Moses, Exodus 40.34. and therefore says Solomon, doubtless by this cloud
the Lord does show us, that he has favorably accepted our service in building
this house, and that he has taken it to be the settled place wherein he will
abide for ever.

Verse. 14. And the king turned his face about, and blessed all the congregation
of Israel.] For hitherto he had stood with his face toward the altar, observing
what was done at the carrying in of the ark.

Verse. 16. Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I
chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build an house, etc.] See this
more fully expressed, 2. Chron. 6.5, 6.

Verse. 18. Thou did well that it was in thine heart.] See the notes 2 Samuel
7.5, 6.

Verse. 22. And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord, etc.] That is,
having turned himself from the people, he stood upon the brazen scaffold, with
his face toward the altar, and then kneeling down upon his knees, as is
expressed, verse. 54. and 2. Chron. 6.13. he lift up his hands toward heaven,
and so prayed unto the Lord.

Verse. 25. Therefore now, Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my
father that thou promisedst him.] That is, seeing thou have kept with thy
servant David my father that thou promisedst him, in raising me his son up to
build a Temple for thee, therefore now also keep with thy servant David my
father that thou promisedst him, saying; There shall not fail thee a man in my
sight to sit upon the throne of Israel. etc.

Verse. 27. Behold, the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee.] See
the note Deuteronomy. 10.14.

Verse. 30. And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy
people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place.] Or, in this place, as
it is in the margin; even herein, as in other things, was this Temple a type of
Christ. As the prayers of Gods people, were the more accepted of God, when they
prayed in the Temple, or, but with their faces toward the Temple; so are now
the prayers of Gods righteous servants accepted of God, because they are put up
in Christ's name, with an eye of faith fixed upon him as their Mediator, Joh.
14.13, 14. Whatsoever ye ask in my name, that I will do, etc.

And when thou hear, forgive.] This clause is added, first, because pardon
of sin is the chief thing to be begged of God in all our prayers, for hereby a
way is made for the obtaining of other blessings, and besides, there is no true
comfort in obtaining any blessing, if our sins should still remain unforgiven:
and secondly, because the best are subject to so many failings in prayer, that
should not the Lord pardon the sin of their prayers, there would be no hope
that any prayer of theirs should do them good.

Verse. 31. If any man trespass against his neighbor, and an oath be laid upon
him, etc.] That is, if a man be charged that he has trespassed against his
neighbor, and be brought before the altar to clear himself by oath (as in case
where sufficient proof and witness was wanting, they used to do, Exodus
22.8.11. Numb. 5.12.19.) do thou accordingly deal with the man that takes the
oath, punishing him if he be faulty, and acquitting him if he be innocent.

Verse. 33. When thy people Israel be smitten, and shall turn again to thee, and
confess thy name, etc.] To wit, thy Justice, by laying all the blame upon
themselves, acknowledging that they have deservedly suffered; and thy mercy and
power, by seeking to thee for pardon and succor.

Verse, 34. And bring them again unto the land which thou gave unto their
fathers.] This may be meant either of those that were taken prisoners in
battle, to wit, that upon the prayers of their brethren in the Temple, or their
own prayers toward the Temple, the Lord would be pleased to bring them again
into the land: or else of those, that by the enemy should be driven out of
their dwelling places, yet not out of the land of Canaan: to wit, that God
would be pleased, when they prayed in, or toward the Temple, to hear their
prayers, and restore them again to the land of their inheritance.

Verse. 35. If they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from
their sin when thou afflictest them, etc.] As if he should have said, though
they did not repent and turn unto thee till thine hand was heavy on them, yet
let not that hinder the acceptance of their prayers if they do then sincerely
repent, and seek thy face and favor.

Verse. 36. Forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, that
thou teach them the good way, etc.] This is added, because first, there is no
hope of saving instruction till sin be pardoned; secondly, the removing of a
judgment yields little comfort, unless men become better then they were
before; and thirdly, no chastisement will ever instruct men unless God teach
them by his spirit.

Verse. 38. What prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all
thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart,
etc.] By the plague of the heart, here is meant both the sins for which they
are punished, which proceed all from the wickedness of the heart, and must be
acknowledged and bewailed, or else men will never seek seriously to God that
the punishment may be removed; and also, the punishment it self, because it is
inflicted for sin, which is rooted in the heart, and does always oppress
and wound, especially when we apprehend it to be an effect of Gods wrath.

Verse. 41. Moreover, concerning a stranger that is not of thy people Israel.]
Either this is meant of such strangers as were converted to the Jewish
Religion, called therefore Proselytes, such as was that Ethiopian Eunuch, Acts
8.27. who had been at Jerusalem to worship; or else, of such strangers as were
also unbelievers, (for whom the Jews say there was a court without, that, where
the people of Israel met together) Indeed there is no question, but strangers
of another religion, by the victories of the Jews, and other discoveries of
Gods special love to them, might be brought to have a reverent opinion of the
God of the Hebrews (for this was usual with the heathens as we may see in that
example of the Philistines, 1. Sam. 4.7, 8. and 6.2, 3.) and thereupon might
come with their gifts and prayers to the temple; but then doubtless Solomon
hoped not that their persons and prayers should be accepted with God for any
such devotion in them (for there was never any way of obtaining favor with
God, but only in and through the Messiah) but desired only that God would
make his power known by doing what they should so desire of him, that so his
name might be rendered the more glorious. Thus this place may be understood of
infidel strangers; yet I think it is rather meant of Proselytes.

Verse. 44. If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever
thou shall send them, etc.] Thus he implies, that even when they had a
commission from God to take up arms, yet they ought by prayer to seek Gods
assistance, and withal, that unless the war was just, it would be in vain
to seek to God for help.

Verse. 51. Thine inheritance, which thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, from
the midst of the furnace of iron.] Why the Israelites are called Gods
inheritance, see the note, Deuteronomy. 32.9. and why Egypt is called a furnace of
iron, see the note, Deuteronomy. 4.20. it implies the heaviness of their oppression
there, and that it was to purge them, and not to consume them.

Verse. 52. That thy eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant.]
That is, of me thy servant, as before, verse. 28.29, 30.

Verse. 54. And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying, etc.]
In 2 Chronicles. 6.41. some particulars are added which here are omitted, to wit,
that having ended his prayer, he added these words, Now therefore arise, O Lord
God, into thy resting place, thou and the ark of thy strength, etc. which is a
clause of the 132. Psalm verse. 8.9, 10. and therefore doubtless that Psalm
was made, either by his father David, at his removing of the ark, or else by
Solomon at this time; and that hereupon fire came down from heaven, and
consumed the burnt offerings, and the sacrifices, which the Priests had then
laid upon the altar, whereupon the people bowed themselves and worshipped the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7.1, 3. Now therefore when the Lord had thus testified his
presence and assent to Solomon's prayers, the King rose up and blessed the
people, as in the following words is expressed.

Verse. 59. That he maintain the cause of his servant.) That is, of me his
servant, or of the king of Israel indefinitely.

Verse. 64. The same day did the king hallow the middle of the court, etc.] That
is, the middle part of the pavement of the inner Court, to wit, either by
offering sacrifices thereon, or by building many and several altars there for
the present occasion, because one altar could not suffice for such a multitude
of sacrifices.

Verse. 65. Solomon held a feast seven days, even fourteen days.] That is,
seven days for the dedication of the Temple, which began with the beginning of
the seventh day of the seventh month, and ended with the end of the fourteenth
day, (if the tenth day be accepted, as being the day of their public fast, as
is above noted, verse. 2. and then seven days for the feast of Tabernacles,
which began with the beginning of the fifteenth day, and ended with the ending
of the one and twentieth day.

Verse. 66. On the eighth day he sent the people away, etc.] To wit, the day
following the last seven of the feast of Tabernacles, which was the two and
twentieth day of the month; for that eighth day was an holy day, added as it
were to the seven days of the feast of tabernacles, Levit. 23.36. at the end
of this day he dismissed the people; yet because they went not away till the
twenty third day of the month, therefore it is said, 2 Chronicles. 7.10. that, on
the three and twentieth day of the seventh month, he sent the people away unto
their tents, glad and merry in heart for the goodness that the Lord had showed
unto David, and to Solomon, and to Israel his people: where Solomon is also
mentioned, though it be not so here.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. WHen Solomon had finished the building of the house of the Lord, and
the kings house, etc.] Some would have these words ( and the kings house, and
all Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do) to be included in a
parenthesis, and that because they would have the meaning of this clause to be,
that when Solomon had finished the building of the house of the Lord, the Lord
appeared to Solomon, etc. before he had built his own house, and his other
buildings: but I see no necessity at all, why this second apparition of the
Lord to Solomon, might not be after all his buildings were finished, as the
words in our translation do plainly imply. Thirteen years indeed were spent in
building his own house, after the Temple was finished, and so long therefore it
seems it was after the finishing of the Temple, ere the Lord appeared the
second time to Solomon, and assured him that he had heard his prayer, which he
had made at the dedication of the Temple; for God would first settle him in the
full glory of his kingdom, and then he takes that opportunity to renew his
covenant with him in a second vision, assuring him, that in this glory his
kingdom should be continued to his posterity, in case both he and his children
would keep covenant with him; and withal threatening, that if they revolted
from him, he would leave both them and the Temple and all, and pour forth his
wrath and fury upon them.

Verse. 2. The Lord appeared to Solomon the second time, etc.] To wit, in a
dream by night chap. 3.5. and so it is partly expressed, 2. Chro. 7.12. And the
Lord appeared unto Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy
prayer, and chosen this place to my self, for a house of sacrifice: once since
that vision in Gibeon we read, that the word of the Lord came to Solomon,
chap. 6.11. But that it seems was by some messenger or Prophet sent to him, for
this was the second time the Lord appeared unto him in a vision, as is here
expressly noted.

Verse. 3. I have hallowed this house which thou have built, to put my name
there for ever, etc.] That is, until the coming of the Messiah without
interruption. As for that following clause, and my eyes, and mine heart shall
be there perpetually; thereby is promised, both the Lords careful preservation
of that house in succeeding times, and his readiness to hear the prayers that
were offered to him there, and likewise, that he would do this out of his
fatherly care over them, and love to them.

Verse. 7. This house which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast out of my
sight, etc.] That is, I will cast it out of my protection, as a filthy polluted
thing: concerning the following clause, and Israel shall be a proverb, etc. see
the note, Deuteronomy. 28.37.

Verse. 11. Now Hiram the king of Tire had furnished Solomon with cedar trees,
and fur trees, and with gold.] To wit, one hundred and twenty talents, as is
expressed, verse. 14.

Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.] By way of requiting
Hirams bounty, in supplying him with those thing, mentioned in the former
words, or by way of satisfying him for those things. It was questionless
unlawful for Solomon to give away any part of the land of Canaan to a strange
king, or people; for therein, first, there should have been wrong done to that
tribe in whose lot these cities were, who should hereby have been deprived of a
part of their inheritance which God had given them: and secondly, he should
have incroached upon Gods royalty, who still held the land as his, and only
allowed the Israelites to dwell in it as sojourners, by right derived unto them
from him; and to manifest this, had conveyed it to them, with this condition or
proviso, that it should not be lawful for any of them to alienate or sell a
way their estates for ever, no not to any of their brethren the Israelites,
Levit. 25.23. But how then could Solomon, who yet continued in his
uprightness, give away twenty cities in the land of Galilee, to Hiram king of
Tire? I answer, either Solomon gave him these cities only that he might
receive thence for certain years, till he was satisfied for that which was
owing him, the tribute or other profits which were thence yearly paid to
Solomon; or else rather, these cities were not a part of that land which God
had of old given for the inheritance of his people, but lay in a tract of
ground on the outside of the borders of Asher, Josh. 19.24. betwixt them and
mount Libanus, and being now reduced under Solomon's dominion, and either now,
or afterward, counted as a part of Galilee, to which they were joined, thence
Solomon gave unto Hiram twenty cities. And indeed this answer seems most
probable, because upon Hirams refusing these cities, they were repaired and
enlarged by Solomon, and certain colonies of the Israelites were planted
therein, 2 Chronicles. 8.1, 2. whereas before they were inhabited by the heathen,
which, some say, was the first occasion why Galilee was called Galilee of the
Gentiles, Esa. 9.1.

Verse. 12. And they pleased him not.] That is, he liked them not, because they
stood in an unfruitful and marish ground: or, because he thought it would be
long ere he should thence reap that satisfaction he expected from Solomon; and
as he misliked them, so it seems, he refused the profer, and chose rather to
receive satisfaction some other way: for at this very time, to wit, in the one
and twentieth year after the foundation of the Temple was laid, Solomon
repaired and fortified these places which Hiram refused, as was before noted
from 2 Chronicles. 8.1, 2.

Verse. 15. And this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised, for
to build the house of the Lord, etc.] That is, for the same reason, that he had
received this aid from Hiram, did he also raise a levy both of men and money
amongst the people, namely, for to build the house of the Lord, and his own
house, etc. of the levy of men, we read chap. 5.13. and of the levy of
money, that is understood (as some Expositours hold) which we read 2 Chronicles.
9.13, 14. And though the people yielded willingly to this levy for the Temple,
yet when it was still continued for these other buildings, it seems they
grudged at it, as we may gather from what they said to Rehoboam, Chap. 12.4.

And Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, etc.] Concerning
this Millo, see the note 2 Samuel 5.19. either it was now repaired and enlarged
by Solomon, or else a new one was built in another place. Hazor was in the
tribe of Napthali, Josh. 19.32, 36. the chief city aforetimes of the
Canaanites, Josh. 11.1, 10. and Megiddo belonged to Manasseh, Josh. 17.11.

Verse. 16. For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer.] This Gezer
was a city allotted to the Levites in Ephraims tribe, Josh. 21.20, 21. yet it
had been hitherto it seems in the Canaanites possession, till perhaps upon some
distaste given, Solomon being then busied in his magnificent buildings,
entreated Pharaoh his father in law, to rid him of these neighbors, which he
accordingly performed, and gave the city as a present for his daughter.

Verse. 17. And Solomon built Gezer, and Beth-horon the nether.] Yea, and
Beth-horon the upper also, 2 Chronicles. 8.5. one being here expressed for both:
this was also a city of the Levites, in the tribe of Ephraim, Josh. 21.21, 22.

Verse. 18. And Baalath and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land.] Baalath was
a city in the tribe of Dan, Josh. 19.40.44. as for that last clause of this
verse, ( in the land,) it may have relation to Tadmor alone, to imply, that it
was in the land of Israel, though in the utmost coasts thereof; or else, to all
the towns and cities before mentioned: and is added, to show, that besides what
Solomon built elsewhere, all these before mentioned he built or repaired in the
land of Canaan.

Verse. 19. And that which Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in
Lebanon.] To wit, in the place where the house of Lebanon stood, or else in the
mountain of Lebanon, which was on the north bounds of the land of Canaan, for
there he might build certain forts or towns, though the house of Lebanon were
built not far from Jerusalem, of which, see the note, chap. 7.2.

Verse. 21. Whom the children of Israel were not able utterly to destroy. See
the note, Josh. 15.63.

Upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bond-service unto this day.] That
is, not only of money but also of personal service, and that in more servile
employments then he would impose upon the Israelites, fitter for bondmen then
for free men, as we may see, 2 Chronicles. 2.18. and hence it was, that the
posterity of these strangers were called Solomon's servants, Ezra 2.55, 58. nor
is it necessary that we should think, that this was a transgression of that
law, Deuteronomy. 7.2. And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee, thou
shall smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shall make no covenant with
them, nor show mercy to them: since that may be meant only of the inhabitants
that were in the land at their entering first into it, not of their posterity,
especially if the Israelites had made peace with them, and much more, if they
had embraced the true religion.

Verse. 23. These were the chief of the officers that were over Solomon's work,
five hundred and fifty, etc.] In the fifth chapter of this book, and the
sixteenth verse, we read of a far greater number, to wit, of three thousand
and three hundred; but there the story speaks of those chief officers, which
were over the work in mount Lebanon, where the materials were prepared for the
building of the Temple, and here it speaks only of those chief officers that
had the oversight of those that were employed at home in building; the greater
difficulty is how to reconcile this place with that in the 2 Chronicles. 8.10.
where it is said, that the chief of King Solomon's officers were but two hundred
and fifty men: but to this, three answers may be given; first, that there the
number of Solomon's chief officers of state is expressed that bare rule over the
people, not as here, of those that were employed about his buildings: or
secondly, there only those officers were numbered, which were to take account of
the builders, and had the chief command over the work: but that here the master
builders that had the charge to oversee the rest, and give direction for the
building, which were three hundred, are also comprehended: or thirdly, though
there were five hundred chief officers, and fifty in a higher rank above them,
which were over the five hundred, (all which are here together numbered) yet
those five hundred did execute their places by turns, two hundred and fifty at
a time, and that therefore there are but two hundred and fifty mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 8.10.

Verse. 25. And three times in the year did Solomon offer burnt offerings,
etc.] That is, at the three great feasts, the feast of unleavened bread, the
feast of Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles: but under these by a
Synechdoche, all other parts of Gods worship required by the law are
comprehended, and therefore in 2 Chronicles. 8.13. there is mention made also of the
daily sacrifices, and of the sacrifices on the Sabbaths, and on the new moons.

So he finished the house, etc.] That is, having finished the building of the
house, he employed it in those services for which it was appointed, and
therefore, 2 Chronicles. 8.14. it is also added, that he appointed the priests and
Levites to their several charges, in their courses, according to the order
which David by direction from the Lord had ordained.

Verse. 26. And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-geber, etc.] Though
this be here first related, yet evident it is, that this navy was sent forth
before the Temple was built, because of the Almug-trees brought home by this
navy; And the king made of the Almug-trees pillars and terrises for the house
of the Lord, and harps and psalteries for singers, chap. 10.12. and 2 Chronicles.
9.10.11. How Jehoshaphat attempted to enrich himself by sending out a navy
after the same manner, as Solomon had done before him, and how he sped, we may
read, Chap. 22.48.

Verse. 27. And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, etc.] To wit, because the
Tyrians that were under Hirams government, were always held the most expert
seamen: neither did Hiram only afford him mariners, but was also at cost to
build certain ships in Ezion-geber, where Solomon's navy was built that should
go along in that voyage with the ships of Solomon, for that must needs be the
meaning of that place, 2 Chronicles. 8.18. And Hiram sent by the hands of his
servants, ships and servants that had knowledge of the sea, and they went with
the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and that because Hiram could not send ships
ready built from Tire, which was in the midland sea to Ezion-geber, which was
in the red sea, without fetching an infinite great compass by sea, which has
no appearance of likelihood in it.

Verse. 28. And they came to Ophir, and fet from thence gold, four hundred and
twenty talents, etc.] Ophir is thought to be in the east Indies, for thither
indeed they might most easily fail from Ezion-geber, which was in the red sea;
and whereas in 2 Chronicles. 8.18. we read of four hundred and fifty talents, it
seems, that thereof thirty talents, went in expense for the charges of the
fleet, and for the wages of the men, or it was the return of the adventure of
some private persons, and only four hundred and twenty, as here, came clear
to the king.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. THe Queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, concerning the name
of the Lord.] Sheba was a country that lay southward and far remote from
Jerusalem, Jer. 6.20. To what purpose comes there to me incense from Sheba,
and the sweet cane from a far country? and thence this Queen is called by
our Savior the Queen of the south, Matthew. 12.42. and is said to have come from
the utmost parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon: some conceive
it to have been in Ethiopia; others more probably in Arabia the happy; however
both her sex and dignity are noted to set forth the noble spirit of this
Queen, that could leave the pleasures of her court, and take such a tedious and
costly journey to come to Solomon, being only led thereto by hearing his fame
concerning the name of the Lord, that is, concerning Gods love and favor to
him, and the singular wisdom wherewith God had endowed him, especially in the
things of God, and concerning his zeal toward God, and the Temple which he had
built to his name, etc.

Verse. 5. And the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers
and their apparel.] Amongst the particulars here mentioned, which it seems the
Queen of Sheba did principally admire, even the sitting of his servants, and
the attendance of his ministers, is named for one; and it may be meant either
of the sitting of his council, when they met together to advise about the kings
and kingdoms affairs, and the attendance of his Nobles and Courtiers upon him;
or else of the sitting of his Courtiers at table to eat, and the attendance of
his ministers and servants upon them; to wit, either because there was such a
multitude of his Nobles and Courtiers; or because being so many, they were all
ordered with such admirable wisdom: they sat at the tables provided for them,
every one according to their place, and were served with admirable pomp and
state: and so also their apparel, is expressed, which is meant either of the
richness and costlinesse of his Courtiers and servants attire, or else of the
robes which his Nobles and Officers wore according to their places.

And his ascent, by which he went up unto the house of the Lord.] It seems
there was an ascent by stairs from the kings palace to the outer court of the
Temple; and so again afterward from one court to another, till they came to
the house of the Lord it self: and indeed because of all Solomon's buildings,
this is only particularly expressed, as the chief thing the Queen of Sheba
admired, we may conclude it was done with all possible art and cost: and was
one of the most magnificent and graceful things that belonged to the building;
even the pillars on each side the several stairs were made of precious wood,
as is afterward expressed, verse. 12.

There was no more spirit in her.] That is, she was in a manner astonished with
admiration.

Verse. 11. And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought
in from Ophir great plenty of almug-trees, etc.] Solomon sent ships of his own,
together with the ships of Hiram, chap. 9.26. but because his ships were built
after the Tyrian manner, and with Hirams timber, and especially because the
chief mariners in the whole navy, yea even in Solomon's ships, were the
servants of Hiram, chap. 9.27. therefore is the navy here called, the navy of
Hiram. As for the almug-trees, which were herein brought from Ophir, in 2.
Chron. 9.10. they are called algume trees; now algume trees Solomon also had
from Lebanon, 2. Chron. 2.8. Send me also cedar trees, fur trees, and algume
trees, etc. but those it seems were far inferior to these that were brought
from Ophir, as is expressed in the following verse.

Verse. 12. And the king made of the almug-trees pillars for the house of the
Lord, etc.] To wit, the pillars in the rails on each side of the stairs,
whereby they did ascend up to the house of the Lord, and therefore, 2. Chron.
9.11. it is said, that he made terrises to the house of the Lord, and to the
kings house, of the algume trees.

Verse. 14. Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year, was six
hundred threescore and six talents of gold.] To wit, by his ships that were
sent out to fetch in gold and other precious commodities (for it is not likely
that the kings tribute, or other yearly revenues, of which some understand
this place, was still paid in gold:) indeed the gold that was brought from
Ophir, was at the most but four hundred and fifty talents, 2. Chron. 8.18. as
was noted above, chap. 9.28. but besides, that there was gold brought from
Tharshish, as we find here, verse. 22. which, with that brought from Ophir,
might well make six hundred sixty six talents, as is here expressed: some say
too, that though at the first the return of gold from Ophir, was but four
hundred and fifty talents, yet afterward it came to be more.

Verse. 16. And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold, etc.] As
being made, not for service in the war, but only for pomp and state, to set
forth the majesty of his royal dignity; for these it is likely were by his
guard carried before him, as afterward the brazen shields, made in the room of
these, were carried before Rehoboam, chap. 14.27, 28. and indeed considering
how soon these golden targets and shields became a prey to the enemy, it is
likely there was an excess of pomp herein, that was not pleasing to God.

Verse. 17. And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold, three pound of
gold went to one shield.] Or three hundred shekels, for so the weight of these
shields is expressed, 2. Chron. 9.16. And three hundred shields made he of
beaten gold; three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield, and the king put
them into the house of the forest of Lebanon: whereby it appears, that the
shields were not above half so big as the targets, which weighed, each of them,
verse. 16. six hundred shekels.

Verse. 18. Moreover the king made a great throne of ivorie, and overlaid it
with the best gold.] That is, in several places; for had it been wholly
covered over with gold, to what end had the ivorie been? Now this throne stood,
doubtless, in the porch of judgment, chap. 7.7.

Verse. 19. The throne had six steps, etc.] And above the uppermost of these six
steps a footstool of gold, as is expressed, 2. Chron. 9.18. though that be not
mentioned here: and thus whilst the king sat aloft in his throne, above all
the people, he was put in mind thereby, how far he ought to excel others in
wisdom and all other spiritual gifts, and that there was an eminency of
goodness and grace required in him, answerable to the dignity whereto God had
advanced him.

And there were stays on either side on the place of the seat, and two Lions
stood by the stays, etc.] These portraitures of lions were not only by way of
ornament, on each side the throne by the stays whereon the king laid his
arms, and so also on each side the six steps, by which he went up to the
throne, as it follows in the next verse; but also to signify, first, the
power, the majesty, the undaunted boldness, courage and magnanimity, that
ought to be in princes, and so consequently, how dangerous it is to provoke
them to displeasure; whence it is, that princes are frequently in the
Scripture, compared to the lion, the king of beasts, as Prove. 19.12. The kings
wrath is as the roaring of a lion: secondly, the vigilance and watchfulness
that should be in princes, because of their great charge and many enemies, thy
had need to wake when others sleep; as it is said of lions, that they sleep
always with their eyes open: thirdly, that those that are appointed for the
guard of kings, had need be both valourous and vigilant, because their charge
is so precious, and in such continual danger by reason of open and secret
enemies: fourthly, that princes are so guarded by the special providence of
God over them, that it is as perilous to offer them any injury, as to rush
upon the mouths of many ramping lions: and fifthly, how dangerous it is to
incur the displeasure of Christ; that lion of the tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.5.
of whom Solomon was a type, and especially to seek the overthrow of his
kingdom; and that because his power is infinite, and his wrath insupportable;
they that will be so desperate as to put too their hands for the overturning of
his throne, shall find, that his throne is guarded with lions; they shall be
torn in pieces, and there shall be none to help them.

Verse. 21. None were of silver, it was nothing accounted of in the days of
Solomon.] That is, comparatively, silver was not esteemed for their drinking
vessels, in Solomon's days; even silver is mentioned in the next verse, amongst
those things that were brought over in the navy of Tharshish, which shows,
that it was of good esteem in the days of Solomon; but the meaning is, that
having such abundance of gold, most of their plate was made of gold; and
silver plate was little esteemed in those times.

Verse. 22. For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish, etc.] That is, a navy
bound for Tharshish, as the ships that go from us to the east Indies, are
usually called the India ships: where this Tharshish was, it is hard to say;
some Interpreters conceive, that by Tharshish is meant only the ocean sea, but
so it cannot be taken, here, for then there should be a manifest tautologie in
these words, as if we should read it, the king had at sea a navy of the sea:
and besides, Tharshish is mentioned as a place to which the ships went, 2 Chronicles. 9.21. for the kings ships went to Tharshish; and so again, the 2 Chronicles.
20.37. the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tharshish. Nor
need we trouble our selves, because we cannot conclude what particular place
this Tharshish was, since most probable it is, that as we call all countries
unknown, because so far remote from us, the Indies, so they called all far
remote Islands and countries, to which their ships made such long voyages,
Tharshish.

Verse. 26. And he had a thousand and four hundred chariots.] And what a
multitude of horses he had to serve by turns in these chariots, we find 2 Chronicles. 9.25. but especially, 1 King. 4.26. where see the notes on that place.

Verse. 28. And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn, etc.]
To show, whence Solomon should have such a multitude of horses, this is here
added, to wit, that Solomon's merchants did usually buy and transport horses and
linen yarn out of Egypt the linen yarn at such a price as was agreed upon
between the Egyptians, and them; and the horses at the rate mentioned, verse.
27. for their price is particularly expressed, to intimate the magnificence of
Solomon in regard of his horses: and probable it is, that by the special favor
of Pharaoh it was, whose daughter Solomon had married, that they did enjoy this
traffic: for horses and linen yarn were the choicest commodities of Egypt,
Cant. 1.9. Ezekiel. 27.7.

Verse. 29. And a chariot came up, and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels
of silver, etc.] That is, four horses for a chariot, one horse cost one
hundred and fifty shekels: and therefore four horses cost four times as much,
to wit, six hundred shekels of silver.

And so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, did they
bring them out by their means.] That is, they bought not only to serve their
own prince and country, but also for other bordering kings and kingdoms.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. BUt king Solomon loved many strange women, etc.] And thus Solomon
sinned, not only in that his wives and concubines were strange women; that is,
not Israelites, but of other idolatrous nations; but also in that he had so
many, which was against the law, concerning the kings of Israel, Deuteronomy. 17.17.
Neither shall he multiply wives to himself.

Verse. 3. And he had seven hundred wives, Princesses, and three hundred
concubines.] A far less number is reckoned, Cant. 6.8. There are threescore
Queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number. If therefore
there be an allusion there to Solomon's wives, and concubines; it seems he had
no more at the time when he wrote that song, though afterward they were
increased to the number here mentioned.

Verse. 4. For it came to pass when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away
his heart after other gods.] That is, they won him to give way to their
idolatry: for so the most, and best Expositours understand this, not that
Solomon did indeed esteem their idols, gods; or that he did himself worship
their idol-gods (for then it is like he would have brought them into the
Temple) but that he gave way to the open and public exercise of their
idolatrous worship; yea furthered it by building temples for them, etc. and
thus by suffering the wisest of men thus to fall, God was pleased to let us
see, how little trust there is in the wisdom of man. The time when he thus
fell off from his former integrity, is noted, to wit, that it was when Solomon
was old, and that either by way of aggravating his sin, both because his
lusting after, and slavish doting upon so many idolatrous wives and concubines,
was most unseemly in old age, and also because after so long communion with
God, and experience of Gods goodness, it was the more insufferable, that he
should now fall into so gross a sin; or else by way of intimating the
occasion of Solomon's defection at last; namely, that his wives and concubines
took the advantage of his weakness in his old age, and so won him to that
which formerly he would not have done.

Verse. 5. For Solomon went after Ashtoreth, etc.] See concerning Ashtoreth,
Judges 2.13. and of Milcom or Molech, verse. 7. See Levit. 18.21.

Verse. 7. Then did Solomon build a high place for Chemosh, etc.] That is, a
place of worship for this idol-god, either a Temple, or at least an image and
altars to sacrifice on; these were usually reared on mountains and hills
(though not always, Jer. 7.31. And they have built the high places of Tophet,
which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom) and therefore were called high
places; and so accordingly did Solomon build these high places, for his wives
idol-gods, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, that is, in mount Olivet, of
which mention is made, 2. Sam. 15.30. called afterward the mount of
corruption; where they continued till Josiahs days, 2. Kings 23.13. And the
high places that were before Jerusalem, on the right hand of the mount of
corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had builded, did the king defile:
probable it is, that Solomon did purposely build them out of the city, as
thinking it too much to defile the city which God had chosen for his dwelling
place, with such abominations: but yet being set up so nigh the Temple, they
might seem erected to outbrave or defy Gods Temple; and therefore even hereby
his sin was aggravated.

Verse. 8. And likewise did he for all his strange wives.] Though at first
happily he might only grant this favor to one or two of his wives, yet the
rest by degrees pleaded for the same liberty, and so at last he was brought to
build high places for all his wives idol-gods.

Verse. 9. His heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared
unto him twice.] That is, in an extraordinary way, as he used to appear to his
Prophets, by dreams and nightly visions, to wit, once at Gibeon, chap. 3.5. and
the second time at Jerusalem, chap. 9.2. which being a singular favor, is
therefore mentioned as a great aggravation of his sin.

Verse. 11. I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy
servant.] And thus God repayed him in his kind; for as he divided the honor
that was only due to God, leaving part of it to the Lord, and giving away part
of it to his wives idol-gods; so the Lord dealt with his posterity in regard of
the kingdom, leaving his son two tribes, and giving away ten of the twelve
tribes to Jeroboam his servant.

Verse. 12. Notwithstanding, in thy days I will not do it, for David thy
fathers sake.] That is, because of the promise made to him, 2. Sam. 7.12, 13,
14, 15.

Verse. 13. But will give one tribe to thy son, etc.) To wit, one of the
tribes of Israel, considered apart from the tribe of Judah: of the twelve
tribes there were but ten that followed Jeroboam, verse. 31. Rehoboam therefore
and his posterity had two tribes that revolted not to Jeroboam, to wit, Judah
and Benjamin, 2. Chron. 11.12. having Judah and Benjamin on his side: and why
then is it said here, that one tribe only should be given to Solomon's son? I
answer, because he speaks here of the tribes that belonged to the kingdom of
Israel. Judah in regard of her eminency, was still reckoned apart from the
rest of the tribes, 1. Sam. 11.8. And when he numbered them in Bezek, the
children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty
thousand: but especially after that division when Judah followed David, and the
other tribes followed the house of Saul, henceforth the kingdom of Judah and
the kingdom of Israel were still distinguished; yea, even after both were
jointly under David's command, 2. Sam. 5.5. In Hebron he reigned over Judah
seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years
over all Israel and Judah. Now the Lord therefore threatening the rending away
of the kingdom of Israel, from the house of David, he adds, Howbeit, I will
not rend away all the kingdom (that is, all the kingdom of Israel) but will
give one tribe to thy son; that is, one of the tribes that belonged to the
kingdom of Israel, namely Benjamin: see the notes verse. 3. and chap. 12.20.
and this the Lord promises to do for David his servants sake, and for
Jerusalems sake, which he had chosen, to wit, that in the city which God had
chosen, they might live under the government of David's seed, the true heirs of
the kingdom, from whom the Messiah was to descend.

Verse. 15. When David was in Edom, and Joab the captain of the host was gone up
to bury the slain, etc.] Of David's subduing the Edomites, we read 2. Sam.
8.14. And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and
they of Edom became David's servants, and at this time, it seems, whilst Joab
prosecuted his victory, slaying all the males where he came, Hadad was hid
being a little child, and afterward, whilst he went about to see that all the
dead that he had slain were buried, Hadad secretly escaped away. Yet some
conceive otherwise of this passage, to wit, that after the conquest of the
Edomites, 2. Sam. 8.14. the Edomites fell upon the garrisons which David left
behind him, and slew them: whereupon Joab went up to bury the dead, and to be
avenged on the Edomites, and so slaying all the males where he came, Hadad of
the seed-royall was conveyed away.

Verse. 18. And they took men with them out of Paran.] To honor him with their
attendance, when he should come into Egypt.

Verse. 21. Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let me depart, that I may go into mine own
country.] As conceiving hope of recovering the kingdom of Edom, now David and
Joab were dead, whom, it seems, he much feared; or at least of enjoying liberty
upon some honorable conditions, to live again in his native country: yet it
is manifest he attempted nothing against Solomon a long time after this; for he
left Egypt immediately after David's death, before Pharaoh had cause to be
jealous of him, because of his affinity with Solomon, and till Solomon's fall
in his old age, his enemies stirred not, chap. 5.4. But now the Lord my God
has given me rest on every side; so that it seems, he either lay hid along
time in Idumea, or made some covenant with Solomon, as becoming tributarie to
him for his kingdom; yea, when he did stir, he was not able to shake off the
yoke, for the Edomites continued tributaries to the kings of Judah till
Jehorams reign, 2. Chron. 21.10.

Verse. 23. Rezon the son of Eliadah, which fled from his Lord Hadadezar, king
of Zobah.] To wit, when David had gotten the better of his master in battle;
this it seems was when David got that great victory of the Syrians, mentioned,
2. Sam. 10.18.

Verse. 24. And they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in
Damascus.] David had put a garrison in Damascus, 2. Sam. 8.6. It seems
therefore, that Rezon with his band of men, set upon this garrison, and took the
place from Solomon, and so there reigned as king.

Verse. 25. And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon.] That
is, after his first rising against him: it is likely he was an adversary in
heart, ever since he fled in that battle wherein his lord Hadadezer was
vanquished, and that then he gathered this band of men here mentioned, perhaps
of his lords broken troops: yet because David put garrisons in Syria of
Damascus, 2. Sam. 8.1, 6. and it is not probable that Solomon lost any thing of
that which his father had gotten, till himself fell from God, chap. 5.4.
therefore it is thought, that this Rezon did elsewhere shelter himself, or
lived by secret robbing and pillaging, till Solomon's declining days; and that
then he brought Damascus to an open revolt, and became king thereof, and was an
enemy to Solomon on the north, as Hadad the Edomite was on the south.

Verse. 26. And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite, etc.] An Ephrathite:
that is, of the tribe of Ephraim, and so in this tribe all the kings of Israel,
that reigned over the ten tribes had their chief residence, and herein was that
prophecy fulfilled, that Ephraim should be greater then Manasseh, Genesis 48.19.
now of this man it is said, that he lift up his hand against the king, to wit,
by revolting from him, and becoming the head of the ten tribes, in rending the
kingdom from his son; for though perhaps after he had heard the prophecy of
Ahijah, he might entertain thoughts of disloyalty against his Sovereign; and
perhaps secretly sow some seeds of sedition among the people, for which he was
glad to fly into Egypt, verse. 40. yet we read of nothing he openly attempted
against Solomon, or against his house, till Solomon was dead.

Verse. 28. He made him ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph.] That
is, he made him receiver or treasurer for all the kings revenues in the two
tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh.

Verse. 29. When Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, etc.] To wit, to enter upon the
office and charge which Solomon had honored him with, the prophet Ahijah found
him in the way, who is called the Shilonite, because he was of Shilo, where the
Tabernacle was many years together: (he was one of them that wrote the Acts of
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 9.29.) and they two were alone in the field. If therefore
Jeroboam went attended out of Jerusalem, according to the honor of the charge
whereto Solomon had now advanced him, it seems the Prophet desired to have some
private conference with him, and then when they were alone delivered his
message to him.

Verse. 30. And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him.] That is, the new
garment wherewith the Prophet (who now represented Gods person the absolute
disposer of the kingdom, newly erected in the house of David) had clad himself.

Verse. 31. Behold I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will
give ten tribes to thee.] That is, all besides Judah and Benjamin: some
conceive that Simeon was the only tribe, which joined with that of Judah, as
having their lot within the lot of Judah, Josh. 19.2. but this cannot be;
because those of the tribe of Simeon that joined themselves with Asa, are
expressly said to be such as revolted from the kingdom of Israel, 2 Chronicles.
15.9. Neither need it seem strange, that the tribe of Simeon, having their
portion within that of Judah, should notwithstanding belong to the kingdom of
Israel; for it seems that the Simeonites in David's time, went forth with
Colonies, and planted themselves in other places, as is manifest 1 Chronicles. 4.31,
39. However by foretelling Jeroboam what should happen, the Lord took order
that he should know, that whatever should occasion that revolt of the ten
tribes from the house of David, yet it was by the providence of God, who had
now conferred the kingdom upon him. See the note also, verse. 13.

Verse. 33. Because that they have forsaken me, and have worshipped Ashtoreth,
etc.] This is the reason given for that he had said before, verse. 31. I will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, etc.] But why should Rehoboam
suffer in the loss of ten tribes for the peoples idolatry? I answer: first,
because Solomon's giving way to his wives idolatry, proved a snare to the
people, and occasioned their revolting from God: and secondly, even the people
suffered, as well as Rehoboam hereby: this rent in the kingdom proving the
occasion of continual war between them of Judah and them of Israel, which
brought in many miseries from foreign nations upon both kingdoms.

Verse. 36. And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may
have a light always before me, etc.] That is, unto one of his posterity,
sitting in the throne of David. See the note, 2 Samuel 21.17.

Verse. 39. And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.]
For at length Christ arose out of the tribe of Judah, to whom God gave the
throne of his father David, to reign over the whole house of David for ever,
Luke 1.32, 33.

Verse. 40. Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam, and Jeroboam arose, and
fled into Egypt, etc.] Hereby it appears, that Jeroboam had some way discovered
that which the Prophet had so secretly imparted to him, and perhaps began to
alienate the hearts of the people from the king: and so to escape Solomon's
fury, he fled to Shishak king of Egypt, and sheltered himself there till
Solomon was dead: and yet was this Shishak Solomon's brother in law, if he were
(as generally it is thought he was) the son of that Pharaoh king of Egypt,
whose daughter Solomon had married.

Verse. 41. All that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book
of the acts of Solomon?] The acts of Solomon were written by Nathan, Ahijah,
and Iddo, prophets that lived in Solomon's time, 2 Chronicles. 9.29. but this book
here mentioned, seems to have been some complete history (not now extant) of
the reign of Solomon gathered out of the several writings of these prophets,
and other records of those times, wherein many particulars of his life were
recorded, not expressed in the sacred story; and amongst other things
doubtless that of his repentance, for though it be not here expressed, yet
that he did repent before his death, may be evidently gathered from other
places of Scripture as 2 Chronicles. 11.17. So they strengthened the kingdom of
Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong three years, for three
years they walked in the way of David, and of his son Solomon: where Solomon
and David are jointly commended: and from that promise made concerning Solomon,
Psalm. 89.33. Nevertheless, I will not utterly take away my loving kindness
from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail: but especially from the book of
Ecclesiastes, which questionless was written as the public monument of his
repentance; and that which we read, 2. Pet. 1.20, 21. where all the penmen of
Scripture are said to have been holy men of God.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem to
make him king.] Though Solomon had seven hundred wives, and three hundred
concubines, chap. 11.3. yet we read but of three children that he had, two
daughters, Taphath, and Basmath, that were married to two of his own Princes,
chap. 4.11.15. and this his son Rehoboam, who was born to him of Naamah an
Ammonitesse, chap. 14.21. a year before Solomon was crowned king of Israel;
for Solomon reigned but forty years, chap. 11.42. and Rehoboam was one and
forty years old when Solomon died, 2. Chron. 12.13. Being therefore the
undoubted heir to the kingdom (for God had now settled the kingdom upon
Solomon and his heirs, 2. Sam. 7.12, 13.) and the consent of the people being
never required for the establishing of his father Solomon in the throne, why
should it be now necessary to make him king? or if the people must be called
together for this, why not to Jerusalem rather then to Shechem? Surely this
does very probably imply, that the ten tribes being already seditiously
inclined, did presently upon the death of Solomon revive the memory of that old
division of the kingdom, in the days of David and Ishbosheth the son of
Saul, 2. Sam. 2.8, 9, 10. and did openly make known that they would have him
receive the crown and kingdom of Israel apart by it self, as David did at
Hebron, 2. Sam. 5.3. and to that end called an assembly of the people at
Shechem; resolving to make themselves another king if Rehoboam gave them not
the better satisfaction, and that this was the cause of Rehoboams going thither.

Verse. 2. When Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was yet in Egypt, heard of it,
etc.] That is, when he heard of Solomon's death, and that the ten tribes began
to stir against Rehoboam, and to that end had appointed an assembly at
Shechem.

Verse. 3. They sent, and called him, etc.] That is, at the same time when the
people gave him notice of Solomon's death, etc. they desired him to come out of
Egypt to them; and this too discovered that they meant not well to Rehoboam,
whatever they pretended, that they send for Jeroboam, who fled away, as a
traitor, from Solomon his father into the land of Egypt.

Verse. 4. Thy father made our yoke grievous, etc.] To wit, by tributes and
taxes imposed upon them; for though he made not the Israelites bondmen, chap.
9.22. yet we read of provision that was gathered in all his land for his
household, chap. 4.7. and of levies made for his buildings, chap. 9.15. and
besides, in his latter days, when his thousand wives and concubines were to be
provided for, and Temples built for their idol-gods, and withal, Hadad of
Edom, and Rezon of Damascus began to make war against him, we may well think
he laid still greater and heavier impositions upon them; and of these they
desired now to be eased, in this petition they presented to Rehoboam; they had
cause enough indeed to complain of Solomon's government in his latter days,
because of the idolatry he had set up in the land; but of this they speak not
one word, but only complain of their taxes, Make thou the grievous service,
and the heavy yoke, whith thy father put upon us, lighter, and we will serve
thee.

Verse. 6. And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men that stood before
Solomon his father, etc.] How much more likely these men were to give him the
best counsel, then those whose counsel he afterward followed, is intimated in
these words* first, because they were old men, whose judgment is usually, by
long experience, better then the judgment of younger men, with the ancient is
wisdom, and in length of days is understanding, Job. 12.12. And secondly,
because they had stood before Solomon his father; that is, they had been of his
servants and counsel, and could not therefore but learn much wisdom of him,
who was the great oracle of wisdom in those days.

Verse. 7. If thou will be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve
them, etc.] In 2. Chron. 10.7. it is, If thou be kind to this people, and
please them, and speak good words to them, that is, if thou will answer them
gently (which was indeed the counsel of his father Solomon, Prove. 15.1. a soft
answer turns away wrath) and if thou will grant them their desire at present,
then they will always continue thy subjects and servants. Because Rehoboam
might think, that if he should yield to the people, when they came in such an
imperious insolent manner, hereby he should make himself a slave, and a servant
to those, which should be subjects and servants to him; therefore to answer
this, the old men express themselves thus, If thou will be a servant to this
people this day, etc. as if they should say, Be it so: better it is to be a
servant to them for a day, and to stoop to them beyond that which were
otherwise fitting, and so to work them to the obedience of subjects by degrees,
which afterward may be easily done, then by standing too much upon terms of
honor now to enrage them, and drive them off, to an open rebellion: and this
indeed was wise politic counsel: but yet observable it is, that as Princes
counselors are wont to do, that which they aimed at was not the benefit, and
ease of the people, but that he might appease them for the present; and so
having won them to submit to his sovereignty, might afterward use them as he
pleased himself, then they will be (say they) thy servants for ever.

Verse. 8. But he forsook the counsel of the old men, etc.] That is, he misliked
their counsel, to wit, because he thought it stood not with his honor so to
stoop to the people, and so thereupon he consulted with the young men that were
grown up with him, and stood before him, that is, the young gallants that
attended him in his court, the sons of the Nobles, that had been from their
childhood and youth brought up with him; and herein we have the reason
intimated, why he afterward preferred these men's counsels before the counsel
of his aged grave Senators, to wit, because his affection was more to these
then to the other, and so that made him the more inclinable to like that which
they said: but herein Rehoboam did notably discover his folly, and made good
what his father had written, Eccles. 2.18, 19. I hated all my labor which I
had taken under the sun, because I should leave it unto the man that shall be
after me: And who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he
have dominion over all my labors.

Verse. 10. My little finger shall be thicker then my fathers loins, etc.] These
were doubtless, proverbiall speeches, the meaning whereof was, that Rehoboam
would lay far heavier burdens upon the people, then ever his father had; and
that he would handle them more severely then ever his father had done: my
father has chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions;
that is, with whips that sting like scorpions: and some indeed think, that
there was a kind of whips used in those times, that for this cause were called
scorpions: now herein was the folly of Rehoboams young courtiers discovered,
that would teach their king to give such harsh language to a people that were
already in a mutinous temper: it was ill coming they might think into his
clutches, whose little finger was so heavy; nor could there be any hope of
fair usage from him, that when he came to treat with his people, could speak of
nothing but yokes, and whips, and scorpions.

Verse. 16. The people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David?
etc.] What have we to do with the posterity of David? we will have a king again
of our own tribes, as formerly: a seditious speech, much like that of Sheba, 2.
Sam. 20.1. We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son
of Jesse: and whereto happily they did allude: besides, by calling David, as it
were in scorn, the son of Jesse, they imply, that he having been formerly
raised by them from a mean condition, to be their king, it was not sufferable
that his grandchild should now tyrannize over them, as if they were scarce good
enough to be his slaves.

To your tents, O Israel.] That is, Let us return to our own dwellings, and not
stay here to make our selves slaves to such a tyrant, but amongst our own
tribes let us make us a king. Because of old they dwelt in tents, this phrase
had ever since continued in use amongst them.

Now see to thine house, David.] This also was spoken by way of derision and
scorn, as if they should have said, Let Rehoboam the son of David make much
of his own tribe (for beyond their bounds his kingdom is not like to extend)
we are resolved to take care of our selves, and to provide a king amongst our
own tribes.

Verse. 17. But as for the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of
Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.] Two several ways this may be understood*
to wit, either of the Israelites of the ten tribes, that such of them as left
their land in the days of Jeroboam, and came and dwelt in the cities of Judah,
did submit themselves to Rehoboam, as their brethren of Judah did; or else,
rather of the men of Judah, who are here called the children of Israel, which
dwelt in the cities of Judah; that though their brethren of Israel fell off
from Rehoboam, yet the continued constant to him.

Verse. 18. Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the tribute, etc.] It
is most probable, that this man was sent (yet too late) to pacify the people:
but being one of the taxers of the people, the very sight of him did more
enrage them, and thereupon they stoned him, and this too was a notable act of
folly in Rehoboam.

Verse. 19. So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.] The
defection of the ten tribes is here called rebellion, which shows plainly, that
it was a sin in them thus to cast off their lawful sovereigne: for though
the Prophet Ahijah had foretold and promised, that Jeroboam should be king of
the ten tribes, chap. 11.31. yet because the people had no command from God
herein, but did what they did merely of their own heads, and in a discontent
against Rehoboam, their ways were rebellious, however they did thereby
accomplish what God had determined.

Verse. 20. And it came to pass, that when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was
come again, etc.] It is manifest, that Jeroboam was amongst the resst, when at
first they demanded of Rehoboam a relaxation of their burdens, verse. 3. And
Jeroboam, and all the congregation of Israel came, and spoke unto Rehoboam: but
it seems that was then known only to some of the chief of the congregation,
which when it came to be generally known amongst the people, they presently
assembled themselves, sent for him, and made him their king; as here it is
said. Thus generally Expositours understand this place; yet it may be that
being here to relate how the Israelites made Jeroboam their king, their first
calling him to their assembly is only here again repeated.

There was none that followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah
only.] It is manifest, that there were but ten tribes that revolted to
Jeroboam, chap. 11.31. and therefore Rehoboam must needs have two tribes, which
were Judah and Benjamin; as is clearly expressed, 2 Chro. 11.2. but because
Benjamin was but a poor little tribe, and being joined with Judah, were still
comprehended under the name of the kingdom of Judah; therefore it is said
here, that none continued firm to Rehoboam, but the tribe of Judah only.

Verse. 24. Thus says the Lord, You shall not go up, nor sight against your
brethren the children of Israel, etc.] To wit, because God had decreed that the
ten tribes should rend themselves, as they had done, from the house of David;
for so it follows in the next words, return every man to his house, for this
thing is from me. There is indeed an intimation too, of another motive in these
first words, to wit, that the Isiraelites were their brethren: but this is not
mentioned as a sufficient cause apart by it self, but as a circumstance which
might render them the more willing to submit to what God had determined: we see
in the war which they made against Benjamin, with Gods approbation, Judge.
20.1. that it was not unlawful for Gods people, in any case, to fight against
their brethren: but that which made it now unlawful, was, because God did now
make known to them, that this which was done was of him; and then to make them
the more willing to submit to Gods decree herein, even this also might be laid
into the balance, that the war, which they intended, was against their
brethren.

They hearkened therefore to the word of the Lord, and returned, etc.] and so
all was stayed for the present. Nor do we ever read that Rehoboam, as bad as
he was, did ever after this, attempt to recover the kingdom of Israel out of
the hands of Jeroboam; but yet there was continual hostility betwixt these
two kings; and the borderers on both sides did continually make inrodes one
upon another, chap. 14.30.

Verse. 25. Then Jeroboam built Shechem, etc.] That is, he forrified these two
cities, Shechem and Pennel, the one within Jordan, and the other without; and
indeed we read that Shechem was utterly ruined by Abimelech, in the days of
the Judges Jud. 9.45.

Verse. 27. If this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem, etc.] Though God had promised Jeroboam by Ahijah the prophet, chap.
11.38. that if he would walk in his ways, he would be with him, and build him
a sure house, as he had done for David; yet having no confidence in this
promise of God, he concluded, that if the people should continue to go up to
Jerusalem to sacrifice, they would soon return to Rehoboam again; to wit,
first, because they would be forced for fear of being apprehended as traitors
when they came to Jerusalem, either to give over their offering of sacrifices
to God, or else to make their peace with Rehoboam: secondly, because the
priests and Levites (and their brethren of Judah too) would be pressing them
with the sin of their rebellion, against their lawful sovereign, and
showing them how unlike the Lord was to regard the sacrifices of those that
lived in so gross a sin: and thirdly, because the very sight of the Temple,
and the serious thoughts they must needs have of God, and of themselves, when
they came to offer up their sacrifices there, must needs strike them with an
apprehension of their guilt, in rejecting him, whom God had appointed to rule
over them: and so hereupon he resolved to set up some other way of worship for
them: and thus that very thing which God had appointed purposely, to keep them
in one uniform way of worship; namely, that there should be but one altar, and
one place of sacrificing, to wit, at the Temple in Jerusalem, to which they
should resort from all parts of the land; even that I say, proved the occasion
of setting up a new way of worship, to wit, that of worshipping the golden
calves.

Verse. 28. Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold, etc.]
In imitation (as of old) of the Egyptians idol-god, amongst whom Jeroboam had
lived of late, and with whom, it seems, he held a strict league and amity: God
had raised him from nothing to be king of Israel, and he turned this his God
into the image of a calf that eats hay. See the note, Exodus 32.4.

Verse. 29. And he set the one in Beth-el, and the other put he in Dan.] Beth-el
was in the tribe of Benjamin, but fell away it seems to Jeroboam and the ten
tribes, and so was in the very skirts of his kingdom southwards, close by the
portion of the tribe of Benjamin; and Dan was in the utmost part of the
kingdom northward.

Verse. 30. The people went to worship before the one, even-unto Dan.] The
meaning of this may be, that they went first to that in Dan; or else, that the
people did presently yield to worship these his idol-gods, and went at the
usual times to his golden calves, yea even to that which was furthest off,
even to Dan: nay perhaps, that even those that dwelt about Beth-el would go to
the idol at Dan, and those that dwelt about Dan would go to Beth-el; and what
was then eased of their traveling to Jerusalem?

Verse. 31. And made priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the
sons of Levi.] For the priests and Levites that dwelt in Israel, left their
suburbs and their possessions and went to Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11.14.
and that because Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from executing the
priests office unto the Lord: and hereby no doubt, Jeroboam greatly enriched
himself, as taking into his hands all those cities which had been given them by
Moses and Joshua: indeed the basest of the people were priests good enough for
his golden calves; but because he pretended the worship of the true God in
them, even this is charged upon him as a sin.

Verse. 32. And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth
day of the month, like unto the feast that is in Judah.] That is, like unto
the feast of Tabernacles: the meaning is this, whereas God appointed the
Israelites to keep the feast of Tabernacles, on the fifteenth day of the
seventh month, Levit. 23.34. he appointed his people to keep a feast like unto
this, by way of thankfulness for the fruits of the earth then gathered in; but
it must be on the eighth month, not the seventh, least the people taking it to
be the the same feast of Tabernacles, should at last begin to scruple that
their males were bound all to go to Jerusalem to keep this feast according to
the law, Deuteronomy. 16.16.

And he offered upon the altar, etc.] To grace the way of worship which he had
set up, even he himself did undertake to do the work of a priest upon the altar
that he had built: whence it is, that in the following chapter, verse. 4. it is
said, that he put forth his hand from the altar, for the apprehending the man
of God, that foretold the ruin of it.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. ANd behold, there came a man of God out of Judah, by the word of the
Lord, etc.] That is, by the command of the Lord. And thus the Lord did betimes
give Jeroboam warning, and called him to repentance, as he did also often
afterward by Ahijah, Chap. 14.7, 8. and by Iddo the prophet, 2 Chronicles. 9.29. In
the book of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in
the visions of Iddo the Seer, against Jeroboam the son of Nebat. Indeed the
most Expositours from Josephus hold, that Iddo was this man of God here spoken
of; but that cannot be, for this man of God was immediately after slain by a
lion, in the very beginning of Jeroboams reign, whereas Iddo lived to write
the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, 2 Chronicles. 12, 15. and 13.22.

Verse. 2. And he cried against the altar in the word of the Lord, etc.] That
is, in Gods name, or with the word or message which God had given him in
charge, to wit, that which follows in the next words, O altar, altar, thus
says the Lord, Behold, a child shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah
by name, etc. wherein he directed his speech to the altar, thereby covertly to
imply, that it was in vain to speak to Jeroboam, and repeated the word altar
twice, O altar, altar, to signify the observablenesse of what he had to say,
and the zeal and fervencie of his spirit, in the observablenesse of what rival
altar, set up, as it were, in defiance against the altar of God.

And upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places, and burn incense
upon thee, etc.] That is, the dead bones of the priests, that do now, and shall
hereafter burn incense upon thee: for so the accomplishment of this prophecy is
related in the story of Josiah, about three hundred years after it was foretold
by this man of God, 2 King. 23.16. and indeed therefore is the next clause
added here, by way of explaining this, and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee:
but howsoever this he calls an offering of the priests upon the altar: first,
as in scorn of their idolatrous altar, which should one day have such a goodly
sacrifice burnt upon it, even a sacrifice of dead men's bones: secondly, by way
of deriding their priests, that should one day be themselves burnt as a
sacrifice upon their altar, as they had turned their Creator into a beast, a
calf; so their bones, as the bones of so many beasts and calves, should be
burnt as an offering upon their altar: and thirdly, to intimate, that the
defiling and polluting of this their idolatrous altar, should be indeed as a
sacrifice most acceptable unto God.

Verse. 3. Behold, the altar shall be rent, etc.] And thereby was signified the
future demolishing of that altar; and rooting out that superstitious worship
which Jeroboam had now established, at the command of Josiah.

Verse. 4. He put forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him, etc.]
His stretching forth his hand, was as a sign of that which he spoke; namely,
that he would have had the people lay hold upon the Prophet: and so likewise
the Lords causing his hand to be so suddenly dried up, was not only to disable
him from hurting the Prophet, but also that all the people might be scared from
aiding their king in what he required.

Verse. 5. The altar also was rent, etc.] First Jeroboams hand was withered, and
then afterward his altar was rent; and thus the Lord was pleased to show how
tender he was of the safety of his servant, in that he would first revenge the
violence intended to him, ere he revenged the dishonor that was done to
himself in that their idolatrous altar.

Verse. 9. Eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by the same way that
thou came.] One reason why the Lord would not have the Prophet eat nor drink
in that place, might be, that the Prophet might not, by receiving any kindness
or courtesy there, seem to mind himself, or his own benefit: and so also the
reason why he was forbidden to return the way he came, might be, (as some
conceive) that he might not seem to come back, as afraid, or ashamed to do what
he was enjoined, according to that, 2. Kings 19.33. By the way that he came, by
the same shall he return. But indeed the chief ground of this whole charge, I
rather conceive was to signify how the Lord detested both the place and the
people, because of their idolatry, that he would not suffer his Prophet to eat
or drink amongst them, nor return the way he came, but go thence some other
way; as abhorring the very way that had brought him to the sight of such
abominations.

Verse. 11. Now there dwelt an old Prophet in Beth-el, etc.] There he dwelt at
present, having formerly removed from Samaria thither, whence it is that he is
called the Prophet that came out of Samaria, 2. Kings 23.18. It is very
questionable what this old Prophet was, the rather because it seems that his
sons were present at Jeroboams idolatrous worship, for here it is said, that
his sons came and told him all the works that the man of God had done that
day in Beth-el, and the words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told
also; to wit, those verse. 8, 9, 10. that if the king would give him half his
house he would neither eat nor drink in that place; and that because the Lord
had given him an express charge to the contrary: all which must needs imply,
that either they joined with the rest in that idolatrous worship, or were at
least faulty, in that they could please themselves with seeing the solemnity
of a service so dishonorable to the Lord; and indeed Gods displeasure against
them for this was discovered, in that their presence there proved the occasion
of such a grievous sin to their father; some Expositours conceive that this
old man was no Prophet of the Lords, but a false prophet, and an upholder of
the idolatry of Beth-el, and that fearing lest Jeroboam should henceforth
disregard him, and be scared by that which had happened from this their new
erected religion, he laid that plot which is here afterward related to deceive
the Prophet, hoping that (as it fell out) upon his disobeying Gods command,
some judgment would fall upon him, and that then both Jeroboam and the people
would slight his predictions, and be rather confirmed in their idolatrous
courses: again, others conceive that he was indeed a Prophet of the Lords, but
a vicious wicked man, and that because he framed so gross a lie, verse. 18. to
deceive the man of God that came from Judah: and others that he was both a true
Prophet, and a good man; and that only at this time, being left of God, he was
shamefully overcome by the devils temptations, and the corruptions of his own
heart: for hearing what had passed in the kings chapel at Beth-el, and
finding himself touched in that particular, that the Lord would not suffer the
Prophet to eat or drink in Beth-el, wherein he lived constantly with his
children and family; he had above all a desire to try him in this, whether God
had indeed given him such a charge or no: and so through the subtilty of
Satan, was drawn to pretend that God had appeared unto him, and appointed him
to fetch him back, verse. 18. and indeed this to me seems most probable; first,
because he is expressly called an old Prophet: secondly, because the Lord by
him, did afterward denounce the punishment that should fall upon the deceived
Prophet, verse. 21.22. thirdly, because of the great respect he afforded the
Prophet, both dead and living; and because he assured his sons, that what he
had prophesied against the altar at Beth-el, should surely come to pass, verse.
31.32.

Verse. 14. And found him sitting under an oak, and he said unto him, Art thou
the man of God? etc.] The Prophets sitting under an oak, was doubtless from
weariness and faintness; the rather, because he had been restrained from
eating and drinking in Beth-el: nor need it seem strange, that the old Prophet
having never before seen him, should so presently guess him to be the man he
looked after: for besides the description his sons might give of him, even by
some mantle or other attire, peculiar to the Prophets in those times, he might
know him to be a man of God.

Verse. 19. So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and drank
water, etc.] And thus by that he, which the old Prophet did tell him, he was
won to do, what no persuasions of the king could win him to do. Indeed he
should not have credited the uncertain report of a Prophet, so directly
contrary to that which he was sure God had already given him in charge; but,
first, the specious name of a Prophet deceived him: secondly, the thing which
the old Prophet desired of him, was like to be a charge and trouble to him, but
could be no way any advantage to him, and why (might he think) should an old
Prophet lie, when he could not hope to any thing by it: and thirdly, it was not
altogether improbable, but that God might have countermanded what he had
formerly enjoined him: to incline him to judge so, he might remember how the
Lord countermanded what he had formerly enjoined Abraham, concerning the
sacrificing of his son; and might think that now the Lord had proved him, and
found him faithful, he was willing to take off this charge, as pitying his
faintness for want of food; and that though God would not suffer him to eat of
the kings meat, yet he would permit him to refresh himself in a Prophets house.
These and other considerations, mighth move him to believe what the old Prophet
had said, the rather, because his desire of some refreshing, after such a time
of abstinence and travel, must needs make him the readier to hearken to him.

Verse. 20. The word of the Lord came unto the prophet that brought him back.]
To wit, by some intemall inspiration, or prophetic ecstasy, whereby he was, as
it were, constrained to denounce against his seduced guest, even whilst he
sat at his table, the judgment that should fall upon him for his eating and
drinking with him; and so consequently, to condemn himself for that gross lie
wherewith he had deceived him.

Verse. 22. Thy carcass shall not come unto the sepulcher of thy fathers.] And
herein was employed, that he should die in his return, before he gat home to his
own land; a gracious warning, that he might repent of his sin before his
death.

Verse. 23. He sadled for him the ass. That is, for the Prophet whom he had
brought back he sadled his own ass: for we read not, but that hitherto the man
of God that came from Judah had gone on foot; and doubtless the more officious
and kind he was, because he considered the mischief he had done him, and was
troubled for it; yet withal, observable it is, that he did not accompany him
homeward; which might well be for scare of being involved with him in the
judgment that was to come upon him.

Verse. 24. A lion met him by the way, and slew him.] And thus, first, the Lord
chastised his servant for his sin: secondly, he confirmed the certainty of
what this man of God had formerly spoken in his name: he told the king that God
had charged him not to eat in that place: so that, when such a hand of God was
upon him, for not persevering to obey this command, every one might hereby be
assured, that he was indeed a prophet of God: and that all the rest that he had
spoken concerning Jeroboams altar should in its season come to pass too, as
the old Prophet did afterward from hence conclude, verse. 32. and thirdly, he
showed how he abhorred that place, in that he slew his own Prophet for eating
and drinking amongst them.

And the ass stood by it, the lion also stood by the carcass.] That the ass
should not sly from the lion, and that the lion should neither prey upon the
living ass, not the Prophets dead body; but should rather stand as a guard to
preserve the dead body from being torn by other creatures, and as it were to
force the ass not to stir thence, but to stay there in a readiness to carry
back his masters body to be buried in Beth-el, I say both these are miraculous
passages; and were as signs to manifest unto all men, first, that it was not
hunger that had provoked the beast to this violence, but the overruling
command and providence of God: and secondly, that God loved his Prophet dead,
and would miraculously preserve him for burial, though he had testified his
displeasure against his sin, (for the example of others) even by taking away
his life.

Verse. 29. And the prophet took up the carcass of the man of God, etc.] Either
therefore the lion went away as soon as the old Prophet came, as having now
done what he stayed for; or else the Prophet was by the evident proofs he saw
of Gods overruling hand in this business, heartened against the fear of that
beast, and so took and carried away his body to be buried.

Verse. 30. And he laid his carcass in his own grave, etc.] And so that was
performed which God had said, verse. 22. Thy carcass shall not come to the
sepulcher of thy fathers. As for that which follows, and they mourned over
him, saying, Alas my brother: this was according to the usual manner of
bewailing their dead friends in those times, Jer. 22.18. Therefore thus says
the Lord, concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah: they shall
not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother, or Ah Sister, they shall not lament
for him, saying, Ah Lord, or Ah his glory.

Verse. 31. Bury me in the sepulcher wherein the man of God is buried, lay my
bones beside his bones.] To wit, that his bones might be suffered to lie at
rest, and might not be dug up and burnt by Josiah, to which end it seems
also, he took order to have a superscription engraven on the sepulcher, whereby
it might be known, who it was that was buried there, and indeed herein he had
his desire, 2 King. 23.17.18.

Verse. 32. The cities of Samaria.] That is, the cities of the kingdom of
Israel, which was afterward called the kingdom of Samaria, from a city so
called, built by Omrie, and which was in his days the chief city of that
Kingdom, Chap. 16.24.

Verse. 33. After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, etc.] That
is, though the Lord used such a singular means to reclaim him from his
idolatry, yet he still continued therein; one would have thought, that his hand
being so miraculously stricken dead, and then as miraculously healed again,
upon the prayers of the prophet, he should presently with that hand have pulled
down his Calves and his altars; but neither the withering nor the healing of
his hand, nor the cleaving of his altar asunder, nor this strange death that
befell the prophet, whereby the truth of what he had spoken was singularly
confirmed, could do any good to withdraw him from that idolatry, whereby he
sought to assure his kingdom to himself and his posterity: yea indeed, it is
like enough, that from this violent death that befell the prophet, he took
occasion to harden himself in his evil ways.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse. 1. AT that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.] That is, in the
time of Jeroboams wicked reign, whereof there is mention made in the two last
verses of the former chapter: for it is evident, that this is not meant of the
time when the man of God was slain, as is related in the former chapter, that
it seems, was in the very beginning of Jeroboams kingdom, this, rather toward
the latter end of his reign, when Ahijah the prophet, who first gave him
notice of being raised to the kingdom, was now blind with old age, verse. 4.
Jeroboam continued in his idolatry, and so Gods hand was again upon him in the
sickness of this, perhaps his eldest son; Rehoboam had a son also of the
same name who succeeded him both in his crown and in his vices, 2. Chron. 12,
16. But this Abijah the son of Jeroboam, in whom there was some goodness,
verse. 13. died of this sickness.

Verse. 2. And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thy
self, and.] Why he sends his wife, and that disguised, may be easily conceived:
to wit, because he was so loath it should be known amongst the people, that in
his extremity he was glad to sly to the true prophets of the Lord, that he
durst not trust any body with this secret, but the wife that lay in his bosom;
but especially because he was above all unwilling the prophet should know whose
child it was, concerning whom he was enquired of, (as fearing, that out of a
detestation of his idolatrous courses, he would either have refused to answer
them at all, or else have given them an answer, which they were not willing to
hear) and this could not be avoided by sending any but his wife only: she
might enquire concerning her own child, and yet (being disguised) not be known;
another messenger must have said whose child it was, concerning whose sickness
they desired to be satisfied, and that Jeroboam would not endure.

Verse. 3. And take with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, etc.] This poor
present was enjoined as agreeable to the attire she wore, that she might be
thought some poor countrymans wife, and not the wife of Jeroboam.

He shall tell thee what shall become of the child.] Hereby it is evident, that
Jeroboam sent to the prophet, only to know, what the issue of his sons
sickness would be; though the miraculous recovery of his withered hand had
taught him what wonders might be done by the prayers of a prophet, yet he sent,
not to desire the prophets prayers for his child, (his obstinacy in that false
worship he had erected might discourage him from hoping for such a favor,
either from God, or his prophet) but only to know whether his son must live
or dye.

Verse. 6. Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam, etc.] By naming her thus before she
came in to him, the prophet did, as it were, deride the folly both of her
husband and her, that could expect to know of him such a secret, as was the
event of their sons sickness; and yet at the same time by a disguise, think
to hide from him who she was, that came to enquire of him: and secondly, he
gave her to understand how certainly assured she might be of the truth of those
things, which he had now in charge to say to her.

Verse. 7. Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee
prince over my people Israel, etc.] It needs not seem strange that God calls the
Israelites his people, notwithstanding the idolatry that Jeroboam had set up
amongst them, if we consider: first, that they were not so bad when Jeroboam
was exalted to reign over them, and of these times the prophet now speaks: and
secondly, that even in these times, the Lord had a people amongst them, that
were not defiled with Jeroboams idolatry, as we may see by this prophet Ahijah,
who lived now in Shilo, in the kingdom of Israel, and with whom there were
many doubtless whose hearts still continued upright toward God.

Verse. 8. Thou have not been as my servant David, who kept my Commandments,
etc.] That is, not at all varying from the prescript rule of Gods law, as
concerning the public worship of God, (which was the sin now charged upon
Jeroboam) yea in all things sincerely desiring and endeavoring to do what God
of him.

Verse. 9. But have done evil above all that were before thee.] That is, Saul,
and Solomon, yea and perhaps Rehoboam, and Abijah kings of Judah may be
included too: for if this were in the latter end of Jeroboams reign, Rehoboam
and Abijah were dead, and Asa did then sit in the throne of Judah.

And have cast me behind thy back.] That is, thou have despised and disregarded
me; and indeed this might the better be said of Jeroboam, because he did not
only set up idolatry in his kingdom, but did also utterly cause them to
abandon the worship of the true God in the Temple at Jerusalem. The phrase is
much like that Nehem. 9.26. Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled
against thee, and cast thy law behind their backs.

Verse. 10. And will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall,
and him that is shut up and left in Israel.] Concerning these proverbiall
expressions, see the notes, 1. Sam. 25.22. Deuteronomy. 32.36.

And will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man takes away
dung, till it be all gone.] That is, the Lord will utterly destroy the
posterity of Jeroboam, because he loathes and abhorres them: for two things are
employed in this phrase: first, that dung is not more loathsome to men, then the
royal house of Jeroboam was to God: and secondly, that God would by his
judgments make as clean a riddance of them, as men usually do of dung when
they sweep it out of their houses, not willing to leave the least scrat of it
behind. So the like phrase, Esa. 14.23. I will sweep it with the besome of
destruction, says the Lord: and Ezekiel. 26.4. I will also scrape her dust from
her, and make her like the top of a rock: and the accomplishment of this we
have related, chap. 15.29. And it came to pass, when he reigned, that he smote
all the house of Jeroboam, he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he
had destroyed him, etc.

Verse. 12. When thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.] As if he
should have said, thou shall never see thy son more alive: as soon as ever
thou come to the city he shall die, and as this proves true, so be assured
of the truth of all the rest I have or shall say to thee. Some question how
this agrees with that verse. 17. And when she came to the threshold of the
door, (which they understand of the door of her own house) the child died;
and for the resolving of this doubt, they say, that the kings house, as being
the place of judgment, was in the gate of the city: but I rather conceive,
that the door mentioned verse. 17. was the door of the city; or, that here
only is foretold, that the child should die when she came to the city.

Verse. 14. The Lord shall raise him up a king over Israel, who shall cut off
the house of Jeroboam that day, etc.] To wit, Baasha; who made a conspiracy
against Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, and slew him in the second year of his
reign, and made himself king in his room, chap. 15.27, 28, 29. and presently
destroyed all the house of Jeroboam. As for the following clause, but what?
even now: the meaning thereof is this, but at what time, and when shall this
be? surely presently, out of hand: or, as if he should have said; why do I
speak of this, as of a thing that shall hereafter come to pass? since the time
is in a manner now already come, when it must be done: and indeed, if this were
foretold in the end of Jeroboams reign, (as is most probable) it was speedily
done: for Nadab who succeeded his father Jeroboam, had not sat in the throne
of Israel above two years, when he was slain by Baasha, and together with him,
all the house of Jeroboam was destroyed.

Verse. 15. For the Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water.]
That is, the Lord shall continually afflict this kingdom of the ten tribes,
both prince and people with uncessant troubles and wars, both intestine and
foreign, so that they shall never abide long in any settled condition; and so
indeed it came pass; even as the reeds that grow in the water are continually
shaken, sometimes with the blowing of the wind, always with the force of the
stream that glides along by them; so was the kingdom of the ten tribes
continually shaken, partly, by the frequent transferring of the crown from one
family to another, one still killing the other, and making himself king in his
room; and partly, by the frequent invasion of the men of Judah, or some other
of the neighboring nations.

And shall scatter them beyond the river.] That is, the river Euphrates, to
wit, into the land of Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Media, which lay beyond the
river, whither the ten tribes were indeed afterward carried captives; some of
them, first by Tiglath-pileser, in the days of Pekah king of Israel, 2. Kings
15.29. but the greatest part afterward by Salmanassar, in the days of Hoshea
king of Israel, 2. Kings 17.6. etc.

Verse. 17. And Jeroboams wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzath, etc.]
This Tirzah was an ancient and goodly city: for here one of the one and
thirty kings, whom Joshua conquered, did dwell, Josh. 12.24. and in Solomon's
time it was famous for the pleasantness of the situation, and stateliness of
the building; and therefore the Church is hereto compared, Cant. 6.4. Thou art
beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah: though therefore at first Shechem was the
royal city of Jeroboams kingdom, yet afterward, it seems, he built some
stately palace for himself in Tirzah, and so both he and the other kings of
Israel, that succeeded him, did usually keep their courts there; yea, till
Samaria was built, it seems to have been the chief of the royal cities of the
kingdom of Israel, chap. 15.33. In the third year of Asa king of Judah, began
Baasha the son of Abijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah: so also chap.
16.6.8, 23, 24.

Verse. 19. Behold, they are written in the book of the Chronicles of the kings
of Israel.] Many things are said to be written in the book of the Chronicles,
which we find not in the Scripture Chronicles; and therefore it is commonly
held, that this book of the Chronicles here, and elsewhere often mentioned, was
some other book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah and Israel, wherein all
the memorable acts and passages of those times were exactly recorded; and out
of which the penman of the Scripture Chronicles did afterward by the special
instinct and the guidance of the spirit of God cull forth such things as are
there related, and which the Lord thought requisite for the edification of the
Church in future ages.

Verse. 20. And the days which Jeroboam reigned, were two and twenty years.]
Jeroboam therefore outlived Rehoboam who reigned but seventeen years, verse.
21. and Abijam his son who reigned in Jerusalem but three years, chap. 15.1,
2. and died in the second year of Asa the son of Abijam, chap. 15.25. being
stricken by the immediate hand of God with some remarkable judgment, 2. Chron.
13.20. Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah: and
the Lord struck him, and he died: but before this death there was a mighty
battle between him and Abijam king of Judah, wherein he lost five hundred
thousand men; a blow which he never recovered.

Verse. 22. And Judah did evil in the sight of the Lord.] That is, the people of
Judah and Rehoboam their king. For, Three years they walked in the way of David
and Solomon; doing that which was right in the sight of the Lord, 2. Chron.
11.17. as being troubled with the loss of the ten tribes of Israel; in which
time Rehoboam fortified and victualled fifteen cities in Judah and Benjamin,
and many other strong holds, and the priests and Levites, and other Rehoboam;
whereby the kingdom of Judah was much strengthened, 2. Chron. 11.5.17.
whereupon he took eighteen wives, and sixty concubines, 2. Chron. 11.21. and
had many children, but then having thus strengthened his kingdom, and, as he
thought, assured his estate, he forsook the Law of the Lord, and all Israel
with him, 2. Chron. 12.1.

Verse. 25. Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem. etc.] Rehoboams
father married the king of Egypts daughter; yet the succeeding king of Egypt
(invited thereto perhaps by Jeroboam, who was a while in Egypt before he was
king, and now fearing the growing strength of Rehoboam, might lay before
Shishak the incountable riches of David and Solomon, which might easily be had
because ten of the twelve tribes were revolted from him) came up against Judah
with a mighty army, twelve hundred chariots, sixty thousand horsemen, and
footmen without number: some Egyptians, and some of other nations, as is
expressed, 2. Chron. 12.2, 3. and having taken many of their strong cities, at
length he went up against Jerusalem; but the king and princes humbling
themselves upon the Lords message to them by Shemaiah the Prophet, the Lord
would not suffer him to destroy them utterly only Judah henceforth became
tributarie to Egypt, and Shishak carried away, as a ransom of the city, all
the treasures of the Temple, and of the kings house, 2. Chron. 12.4, 9.

Verse. 27. And king Rehoboam made in their stead brazen shields, etc.] See the
note, chap. 10.16. hereby it appears how exceedingly the kingdom of Judah was
impoverished by this invasion of Shishak king of Egypt. The Israelites of the
ten tribes were far more grossly idolatrous then those of Judah, and yet the
Lord suffered them to live in peace; but these of Judah had scarce been fallen
away two years from the pure worship of God, when presently the Lord did with
great severitie afflict them: a clear evidence of Gods more tender care over
them for their welfare.

Verse. 29. Are they not written in the book of the Chronicles of the kings of
Judah.] In 2. Chron. 12.15. the other acts of Rehoboam first and last, are said
to have been written in the book of Shemaiah the Prophet, and of Iddo the Seer,
concerning genealogies.

Verse. 31. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.] Or Abijah, 2. Chron. 12.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 2. THree years reigned he in Jerusalem.] Abijam began his reign in the
eighteenth year of Jeroboam, verse. 1. and died in the twentieth year of his
reign, verse. 9. whereby it may seem that he reigned but two years: but to this
I answer, that when kings have reigned two complete years, they then begin to
write the third year of their reign; and so it was with Abijam, the
eighteenth year of Jeroboam was the first year of his reign, the nineteenth
year of Jeroboam was his second year, and the twentieth year was his third:
and though in that year he did, and Asa his son succeeded him, yet having
reigned two years complete, and somewhat more, it is said here, that he reigned
three years in Jerusalem.

And his mothers name was Maachah the daughter of Abishalom.] Rehoboam had
eighteen wives, and sixty concubines, by whom he had eight and twenty sons,
and sixty daughters; but amongst all his wives he loved this Maachah the mother
of Abijam best, and therefore allotted him to succeed him in the throne, 2.
Chron. 11.18, 23. elsewhere she is called Michaiah, the daughter of Uriel of
Gibeah, 2. Chron. 13.2. and Maachah the daughter of Absalom, 2. Chron. 11.20.
Some therefore conceive, that she was the daughter of Tamar, the only daughter
of Absalom, whose husband this Uriel of Gibeah was, and so she was the daughter
of Uriel, and withal the daughter, that is the grandchild of Absalom. And
this they judge the more probable, because the mother of Absalom was called
Maachah, 2. Sam. 3.3. but indeed the most Expositours hold, that it was not
Absalom, David's rebellious son, of whom she was descended, but another of
that name, called also Abishalom, as here we have it.

Verse. 3. And he walked in all the sins of his father, etc.] That is, of
Rehoboam; whereby it is evident, that though Rehoboam and his princes humbled
themselves before the Lord upon the preaching of Shemaiah to them, when the
king of Egypt made such a dangerous incursion into the land of Judah, 2. Chron.
12.6. yet when the king of Egypt was out of his land, he soon returned to his
former evil ways, and so his son after him trod in his steps.

Verse. 5. Because David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and
turned not aside, etc.] That is, he did not wittingly and presumptuously do any
thing wherein he did openly and scandalously turn aside from that which God had
commanded him, (especially in the point of his government) save only in the
matter of Uriah.

Verse. 6. And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of
his life.] In the story of the reign of Abijam this is inserted, concerning
the continual war which was betwixt his father Rehoboam and Jeroboam; to
intimate, that the cause of the war betwixt Abijam and Jeroboam, was the old
quarrel about the rending away of the ten tribes; this quarrel was not yet
appeased, there was for this continual wars betwixt Jeroboam and the house
of Solomon, first, in the days of Rehoboam the father; and afterward, in the
days of Abijam his son.

Verse. 7. Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, etc.] See the note, chap. 14.19.
Some of these acts we have also recorded in the sacred Chronicles, as his
marrying foureteen wives, by whom he had two and twenty sons, and sixteen
daughters, 2. Chron. 13.21. but especially, that famous battle, which he
fought with Jeroboam, wherein with four hundred thousand men, he encountered
and beat Jeroboam, that had in his army eight hundred thousand, and slew of
them five hundred thousand; and then being master of the field, recovered
Beth-el, Jeshanah, and Ephraim from him.

Verse. 10. And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem.] A long reign,
which was no doubt by the special providence of God, that he might have the
more time to reform a kingdom so exceedingly out of order, as his was when he
first came to the crown.

And his mothers name was Maachah, etc.] That is, his grand-mothers: see verse.
2.

Verse. 12. And he took away the Sodomites out of the land.] To wit, all that he
could discover: but some remained till his son Jehoshaphat came to the crown
and then he removed them, chap. 22.46.

Verse. 13. And also Maachah his mother, even her he remooved from being queen,
etc.] That is, from being queen regent; for how else she should be remooved
from being queen, I cannot conceive. Abijam the father of Asa sitting in the
throne not full three years complete, it is most probable that Asa was very
young when he came to the crown, and that hereupon Maachah his grandmother,
once the wife of Rehoboam (his mother happily being dead) was made queen
regent, during the kings minority: but then Asa coming to some ripeness of
years, and being well affected in matters of religion, an enemy to the
idolatry that was in the land, and desirous to promote the true worship of God:
(a thing the more wonderful, because he was trained up under such a guardian)
because his grandmother had set up some new abominable idol in a grove, (and
that perhaps contrary to his command, despising his youth, and exalting her
self because of her power as queen regent) he took courage, and assuming the
government into his own hands, deposed her from being queen regent any longer;
and withal he destroyed her idol, and burnt it by the brook Kidron, which is
expressed thus, 2. Chron. 15.16. Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and
burnt it at the brook Kidron.

Verse. 14. But the high places were not removed. That is, the high places
wherein the people served and worshipped the god of Israel: those high places
which were dedicated to the worship of strange gods he took away, 2. Chron.
14.3. but these wherein the true God was worshipped, he removed not; either for
fear of the people, or because he conceived there had been no great hurt in
them; since of old, yea, in the days of David, the people had been inured to
worship there: as for the high places which Solomon built in mount Olivet, see
the note upon the 2. King. 23.13.

Nevertheless, Asa his heart was perfect with the Lord all his days.] That
is, the whole bent of his heart was sincerely to do what God required, though
through ignorance, or the prevailing of his corruptions, he many times did that
which was not approveable, but evil in Gods sight; and though many of his
people sacrificed in the high places, yet it was altogether without his
approbation.

Verse. 15. And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, etc.]
To wit, silver, gold, and vessels, 2. Chron. 15.18. It may be probably
conceived, that great victory in the battle which he fought with Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 13.17. but not living to perform his vow, his son Asa did it for him,
adding somewhat more of his own free gift.

Verse. 16. And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their
days.] The first ten years of his reign he enjoyed peace, 2. Chron. 14.1. In
his days the land was quiet ten years, (the courage and the strength of the
ten tribes being much abated, by that great overthrow which Abijam his father
had given them) and in this time Asa reformed those things that were out of
order concerning matters of religion, and withal fortified many cities and
other places, providing for the troubles of war, in the leisure of peace; 2.
Chron. 14.2, 7. when those ten years of peace were expired, (in which time
Jeroboam died, and Nadab his son was slain by Baasha who reigned in his
stead) some enemy or other made war against him, but who it was is not
expressed; and then afterward about the fourteenth year of his reign (as is
noted upon the 2. Chron. 15.10.) Zerah, who then commanded all the Arabians
bordering Judea, invaded his kingdom with an host of a thousand thousand, and
three hundred chariots; but Asa encountered them with an army of five hundred
and eighty thousand men, levied out of Judah and Benjamin, and with them
overthrew this fearful multitude, and had the spoil both of their cities and
camps, 2. Chron. 14.9. etc. and in his return to Jerusalem, Azariah the Prophet
met him, and congratulated this victory, and encouraged him to go on in the
service of God; whereupon Asa put away the remainder of the idols which were
yet left in his kingdom; and gathering together Judah and Benjamin, and the
Israelites of Ephraim, Manasseth and Simeon, (which fell to him in abundance,
when they saw that the Lord his God was with him) in the third month of the
fifteenth year of his reign, he offered much of the spoil in sacrifices, and
made a solemn covenant with God, 2. Chron. 15.11, 12. etc. all this time the
Israelites attempted nothing against Judah that we read of. But now when Baasha
perceived how potent Asa began to be, and how fast the Israelites revolted to
him, and how they had entered into a covenant with them of Judah, he began to
arm against Asa; and because after this, his war with Asa never ceased all
his days, or because even before this, there was no peace betwixt them, but
both sides prepared for war, therefore it is here said, that there was war
betwixt Asa and Baasha all their days.

Verse. 17. And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah,
etc.] Having it seems gotten Ramah from the king of Judah (for Ramah was one of
Benjamins cities, Josh. 18.25.) fearing the greatness of Asa, and the revolt
of the Israelites to him, 2. Chro. 15.9. he endeavored to block him up, and to
keep his own people from flying away to him, by fortifying Ramah, and putting a
garrison in it, which lay in the way between Jerusalem toward Samaria; and
this was done about the thirteenth year of Baasha his reign, which was the
sixteenth year of the reign of Asa, and the six and thirtieth year of the
kingdom of Judah, to wit, since it was divided from that of Israel; for so
that place must be understood, 2. Chron. 16.1. as is there noted.

Verse. 18. Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the
treasures of the house of the Lord, etc.] To wit, since Shishak king of Egypt
carried away the treasures of the Temple, chap. 14.25, 16. and thus was
Solomon's Temple twice robbed of its treasures, within the compass of four and
thirty years or thereabout: we cannot say whether this Ben-hadad to whom Asa
sent these treasures, was the grand child of Rezon, who became a king of
Damascus in Solomon's days, chap. 11.23. (as some conceive; affirming Rezon to
be the same that is here called Hezion) or whether he were the son of Hadad
the Edomite, that became an adversary to Solomon, and at length became king of
Damascus, and was therefore called Ben-hadad, as others hold: But doubtless a
great sin this was in Asa, that he should rob the Temple of God, therewith to
hire an infidel to break the covenant that he had made with the Israelites
their brethren, and to make war with them; especially if we consider what a
wonderful victory God had lately given him over that innumerable host of the
Ethiopians and the Lubims; and indeed, after so great and memorable a proof of
Gods readiness to help him, he did so far distrust God, as to hire a heathen
perfidiously to invade the Israelites: the prophet Hanani was sent to him to
reprove him sharply, and to make known Gods displeasure against him, as is
largely related, 2. Chron. 16.7. etc.

Verse. 20. And smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-beth-maachah, and all Cinneroth.]
Abel-beth-maachah is called Abel-maim, 2. Chron. 16.4. and Cinneroth is that
which is called in the new Testament the land of Genesereth, Matthew. 14.34.

Verse. 21. He left off building of Ramah, etc.] To wit, to go and withstand
Benhadad; and so, when he had secured his land against him, then as it is said
in the next words, he dwelt in Tirzah, that is, there he abode quietly, without
seeking any revenge against Asa.

Verse. 22. And they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof,
etc.] That is, whilst Baasha was gone thence to defend his country against
Benhadad, the men of Judah and Benjamin came and took away both stones and
timber, and therewith built two cities of Benjamin, Geba and Mizpah. And this
Asa chose rather to do, then to seize upon Ramah, and fortify it for his own
use; either, because he feared lest Baasha should return again before the work
was finished; or, because he was loath there should be in that place any such
strong hold, knowing how prejudicial it would be to the kings of Judah, if the
kings of Israel should hereafter get it into their possession; or rather,
because he conceived these might be made more defensable places then Ramah
could be; for that he did fortify these two towns of Geba and Mizpah, for fear
of Baasha, is evident, Jerem. 41.9. where we read of a pit that Asa had in
Mizpah, that continued it seems unto the captivity, and was doubtless some
trench, or some place made for the receipt of water, in case it should be
besieged, the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies of the men (whom
he had slain, because of Gedaliah) was it, which Asa the king had made for
fear of Baasha, etc.

Verse. 23. Nevertheless, in the time of his old age he was diseased in his
feet, etc. To wit, in the three last years of his reign: for when Hanani the
Prophet had reproved him, for seeking help from the king of Syria; he not only
cast the Prophet into prison, but also at the same time oppressed some of the
people (such perhaps, as showed their dislike of these his courses,) wherefore
the Lord in the nine and thirtieth year of his reign, imprisoned him;
striking him with most grievous pains of the gout in his feet; and when in his
sickness he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, about two years
after he dyed, 2. Chron. 16.7, 13. having seen seven kings of Israel; to wit,
Jeroboam, Nadab, Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Omri, and Ahab.

Verse. 24. And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers,
etc.] And that with great magnificence, 2. Chron. 16.14. And they buried him in
his own sepulcher which he had made for himself in the city of David, and laid
him in the bed, which was filled with sweet odours and diverse kinds of spices
prepared by the Apothecaries art, and they made a very great burning for him.

Verse. 27, And Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which belongs to the
Philistines, etc.] This Gibbethon belonged to the tribe of Dan, Josh. 19.41.
and was in the days of David and Solomon in the Israelites possession: but now
it seems the Philistines had gotten it, and whilst Nadab laid siege against it
that he might recover it, he was treacherously slain by Baasha; and so the
siege it seems was raised: for twenty six years after, or thereabouts, the
son of Baasha did again lay siege to this city as we may see, chap. 16.15.

Verse. 30. Because of the sins of Jeroboam, etc.] So that the idolatry
wherewith Jeroboam thought to have continued the kingdom to him and his
posterity, was the very cause why his whole family was rooted out, and the
kingdom was transferred to another.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. THen the word of the Lord came to Jehu the son of Hanani, against
Baasha.] This Jehu was the same Prophet that afterward was sent to
Jehoshaphat, to reprove him for his league with Ahab, 2. Chron, 19.2. and that
wrote a book of the Chronicles of those times, 2 Chronicles. 20.34. and his father
Hanani was he that reproved Asa for seeking to Benhadad for aid against Baasha,
2. Chron. 16.7. so that the father and the son were both at the same time the
known Prophets of the Lord.

Verse. 7. And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani, came
the word of the Lord against Baasha, etc.] Some conceive that this has
reference to the judgment denounced against Jeroboam by Ahijah, chap. 14.6.
etc. as if it had been said, as the word of the Lord came by Ahijah against
Jeroboam; so also by Jehu against Baasha. But I rather think that the meaning
of this clause is only this; that before the death of Baasha, Jehu did his
message as God had commanded. The same words are here again repeated, which we
had before, verse. 1. but there they are to show what God gave in charge to the
Prophet, here their drift is to show, that accordingly the Prophet delivered
his message, as the Lord had enjoined him; and that for all the evil that he
did, etc. in being like to the house of Jeroboam, and because he killed him:
that is, his lord Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, as is expressed before, chap.
15.27. for though Baasha did herein what God had decreed, yet he had no command
from God for it, but did it only to get the kingdom; and therefore it was
treason now in him, as it was afterward also in Jehu, when he slew Ahabs
posterity; because he aimed only at himself therein, though he had a command
from God, Hos. 1.4. And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break
the bow of Israel, in the valley of Jezreel, and will avenge the blood of
Jezreel, upon the house of Jehu: And indeed, that the judgment which fell upon
Baasha, was partly for his murdering of Nadab, we may see by the Lords dealing
with him, just as he dealt with the house of Jeroboam; for as he slew the son
of Jeroboam, when he had yet sat in the throne of Israel not full two complete
years; and that whilst he was laying siege against Gibbethon, and then
immediately, destroyed all the rest of his family, chap. 15.27, 28, 29. so
Zimri slew the son of Baasha, when he had reigned not full two complete
years, as is said here verse. 8. and that too, whilst his army lay encamped
against Gibbethon, verse. 15. and then immediately cut off all the rest of his
family and friends, verse. 11.12.

Verse. 8. In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah, began Elah the
son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years.] But not fully
complete; for he began to reign in the six and twentieth year of Asa, and was
slain in the seven and twentieth year of Asa, verse. 15.

Verse. 9. And his servant Zimri (captain of half his chariots.) conspired
against him as he was in Tirzah, etc.] His forces lying then encamped against
Gibbethon, verse. 15. whereby he gave such an advantage against himself, as was
not by Zimri neglected.

Verse. 11. And it came to pass when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on
his throne, that he slew all the house of Baasha, etc.] That is, he slew all
his family, kinsfolks, and friends, that there might be none to avenge his
death, and that presently, that he might not be prevented; as indeed he had
been, if he had not done it speedily; for within few days he himself came to
an untimely end, verse. 18.

Verse. 13. In provoking the Lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities,
etc.] That is, with their idols; for so the idol-gods of all idolatours, are
usually called in the Scripture; partly, because they have nothing of a God in
them, their deity wholly consisting in the idolatrous vain opinion: We know
that an idol is nothing, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 8.4. and partly, because
they can do neither good nor evil, 1. Sam. 12.21. Turn ye not aside, for then
ye shall go after vain things that cannot profit; for they are vain.

Verse. 15. In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, did Zimri
reign seven days, etc.] Accounting, as is most likely to the time that Omri
was proclaimed king in the camp, as is related in the following verse.

Verse. 18. He went into the palace of the kings house, and burnt the kings
house over him with fire, etc.] That so, first, Omri might never enjoy that
stately palace of Tirzah: and secondly, that neither living nor dead, he might
fall into the hands of his insulting adversaries.

Verse. 19. For his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the
Lord, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, etc.] For though he reigned but seven
days, ere Omri was proclaimed by the soldiers, yet perhaps it was longer ere
he was forced to burn himself; and beside, within the space of those seven
days, he might by his edicts make known to the people his resolution to
continue the worship of Jeroboams calves.

Verse. 21. Half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him
king; and half followed Omri.] It seems the people (misliking that the
soldiers should take upon them to choose their king) chose this Tibni to be
their king; between whom and Omri, there was continual wars for three years,
and upward; each party striving to assure the crown to him whom they had
elected, till at length Omri prevailed.

Verse. 23. In the thirty and one year of Asa king of Judah, began Omri to
reign, etc.] That is, then he was fully and peaceably settled in the kingdom:
in the seven and twentieth year of Asa was he first chosen king by the army at
Gibbethon, verse. 15, 19. but for well nigh four years after, Tibni that was
chosen by the people, strove with him for the kingdom; so that till the one
and thirtieth year of Asa, he was not settled in the throne of Israel: yet
because he was first made king when he slew Zimri, therefore it is added, he
reigned twelve years: to wit, from his first election; for otherwise, if we
account his reign from the one and thirtieth year of Asa, when he was settled
in the throne, to the eight and thirtieth year of Asa when he dyed, and his
son Ahab succeeded him, verse. 29. it is manifest then, that he reigned
according to that account but eight years.

Verse. 24. And he bought the hill Samaria, etc.] This is given as the reason
why it is said in the foregoing verse, that he had reigned but six years in
Tirzah: it was because Zimri having burnt the royal palace in Tirzah, Omri
bought the hill which was called Samaria of Shemer the owner of it, and thereon
built the city Samaria, which he made his royal city, the metropolis of his
kingdom; and so the other six years of his reign he lived there.

Verse. 26. For he walked in all the way of Jereboam, etc.] If he only
continued in the sins of Jeroboam, how is this rendered as a reason of that
which is said before in the former verse, that he did worse then all that were
before him: surely, because having seen such fearful effects of Gods wrath
against the former kings of Israel for this their idolatry, he notwithstanding
continued obstinately therein, as it were purposely to provoke the Lord; yea
and happily did, with more violence, force and press the people to that
idolatry: whence we see there is mention made, Mich. 6.16. of the slatutes of
Omri; to wit, concerning that their idolatrous worship of the golden calves.

Verse. 31. He took to wife Jezabel the daughter of Ethbaal, king of the
Zidonians, and went and served Baal, etc.] This wife of Ahabs proved a most
wicked wretch, and a cruel scourge to the people of God: we see Jehu
complained of her witchcrafts and whoredoms, 2 Kings 9.22. and it is often
mentioned, that she was the great persecutour of Gods prophets, and the great
promoter of the idolatry of Baal in the land; and therefore it is that S. John
calls that false prophetess, that in his time in the Church of Thyatira, had
seduced many to uncleanness, and idolatry, Jezabel, Revel. 2.20. Baal it seems
was the god of the Zidonians; and so Ahab, marrying a wife from thence, did
soon set up his wives god in the land of Israel: Now this idolatry was far
worse then that of Jeroboams; for in that though they had idols, to wit, the
golden calves, yet in them they pretended the worship of the true God: but in
the other they worshipped Baal as their god; as is evident in that of Elijah to
the Israelites, chap. 18.21. If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then
follow him: and so again, verse. 27. Cry aloud, for he is a god, etc.

Verse. 34. In his days did Hiel the Beth-elite build Jericho, etc.] This is
here added to show, how many years after the curse which Joshua denounced, was
accomplished, Josh. 6.26. and that happily the rather, as an instance of the
horrible profaneness and contempt of God in these days of Ahab: for though
Jericho belonged to the tribe of Benjamin, yet it was at this time, it seems,
under the power of the king of the ten tribes. Hitherto Jericho had continued a
heap of rubbish, no man daring to hazard that curse, by rebuilding of it; but
now this bold wretch Hiel the Beth-elite: that is, that dwelt in Beth-el,
undertook the work, and paid dearly for it, as Joshua had threatened. See the
note, upon Josh. 6.26.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. ANd Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the Inhabitants of Gilead, said
unto Ahab, etc.] Of all the Prophets that God raised up in the kingdom of
Israel, we find not any, of whom so many strange passages are recorded, both
for his courage and miracles, as there are of Elijah; and therefore at the
transfiguration of Christ, Matthew. 17, 3. Elijah as chief of the prophets
appeared together with Moses talking with Christ; to signify, that both Moses
and the prophets had in their several seasons given testimony to Christ. The
people of Israel were never so corrupt as they were at this time; (for now the
worship of Baal was established in the land, and the worship of the true God
was quite disregarded, and the prophets and servants of God, that would not bow
to Baal, were persecuted and slain, as Elijah complains, chap. 19.10.) and yet
there were never more prophets sent unto them, then there was at that time, (we
see that Obadiah hid an hundred of them in caves, chap. 18.13.) nor never more
glorious prophets as we see amongst the rest in this Elijah, a man of
transcendent courage and zeal (as sitted for these corrupt times;) whence it is
said of the Baptist, who in his ministry was also fiery and fervent, Luke
1.17. And he shall go before him in the spirit, and in the power of Elias, etc.
Against Ahab and Jezabels zeal to promote Idolatry, the Lord raised up a
prophet that should be as zealous for the opposing of their idolatry and the
defense of Gods true worship; as we see in this his first encounter with Ahab,
As the Lord God of Israel lives, says he, before whom I stand; that is, whom
I continually serve, (according to that in Deuteronomy. 10.8. The Lord separated the
tribe of Levito bear the ark of the covenant of the Lord, to stand before the
Lord) or in whose presence I now am, who is therefore a witness of the truth
of that which I say, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but
according to my word, that is, there shall not be dew nor rain these ensuing
years, till I from the Lord shall say, that again it shall rain. Elijah moved
with the horrible wickedness of Ahab and Jezabel; and particularly perhaps
with their contempt and scorn of Gods prophets, did it seems by the instinct
of Gods spirit, pray that the Lord would shut up the heavens for some years,
and not suffer it to rain till he sought unto God that it might rain; that so
the wrath of God against the iniquity of those times might be discovered; and
the precious account he makes of his Prophets might be manifested; and being by
the same spirit of God assured, that his prayer was heard: he came to Ahab and
threatened him before hand (as is here expressed, that he might see it was of
God) with this approaching drought; and as he threatened, it came to pass; for
three years and six months it rained not, Jam. 5.17.

Verse. 3. Turn thee eastward, and hide thy self by the brook Cherith, etc. When
Elijah was gone from Ahab, or at least, when Ahab began to see there was no
rain indeed for a long time, as Elijah had said, he began to be nettled with
his words, and enraged against the Prophet and stirred up thereto, no doubt, by
Jezabel, sent presently out to take him, that he might be revenged on him: as
Obadiah afterward told him, chap. 18.10. As the Lord thy God lives, there is
no nation nor kingdom whither my lord has not sent to seek thee: but the Lord
foreseeing what would be* gave his Prophet warning of it, and appointed him to
withdraw and hide himself by the brook Cherith; there being doubtless in that
place, some woods or caves, where it was likely the Prophet might some good
time conceal himself.

Verse. 4. I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.] That is, I have
decreed and will take order that the ravens shall bring thee competent food
thither: and the reasons given by Expositours, why the Lord was pleased to make
use of ravens in this service, rather then any other creature, are these:
First, because ravens do naturally delight to live in such places as this was,
by the brook Cherith, where Elijah was appointed to hide himself, to wit, in
solitary places, where there are caves and vaults, especially in valleys, where
there are brooks of water, whence is that, Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh at
his father, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out: Secondly, because they
are a theevish kind of birds, watching all occasions to snatch up and carry
away pigeons, and chickens, or any other provision they can any where come at:
And thirdly, especially because the ravens being such a greedy and ravenous
bird, that as it is said, they usually disregard the feeding of their own young
ones, to feed themselves, it was the more miraculous that God should make them
caterers for Elijah, in such an orderly manner to bring him in his provision
both morning and evening; hereby the power of God was the more clearly
discovered, and a plain proof was given by what contrary means God can provide
for his servants in all their straits: God might have sent Elijah to his fellow
Prophets in Obadiahs caves, or to some other of those faithful Israelites,
that had not bowed their knees to Baal; but he chose rather by this unlikely
way to provide for him, that it might be seen that God has all creatures at
his command for the help of his servants: it was no less strange to feed him
by ravens, then if he had sustained him without any food at all; and yet this
God did, causing the ravens to bring him both morning and evening, bread and
flesh, to wit, roasted or sod; the Lord directing them where they should have it.

Verse. 7. And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up.] God
could easily have prevented this brook from drying up, notwithstanding the
drought; but the Lord was pleased rather now to find out another way for the
sustaining of Elijah, to wit, First, that he might for a while, by the drying
up of this brook, try the faith of the Prophet: Secondly, that the Israelites
in those parts might be the more straitened for want of water: Thirdly, that he
might the more abundantly manifest how many several ways he had to provide
for his servants in times of extremity: And fourthly, that he might together
with him, provide for the poor widow of Zarephath too. Some Expositours hold,
that there had been no rain for half a year when this brook dried up, and that
afterward Elijah lived with the widow of Zarephath three years (which is the
full time of the drought, Luke 4.25.) and that therefore it is said in the
beginning of the next chapter, that in the third year, Elijah was sent to Ahab
with a promise of rain.

Verse. 9. Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongs to Zidon, and dwell
there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.] There is
not the least intimation of any want of rain that was in the land of Judah; yet
was Elijah sent to a stranger rather then to the widows of Israel, both because
such an one might seem most unlikely to relieve him, and also herein to shadow
forth Gods future mercy to the Gentiles, the Jews being rejected; whence is
that of our Savior, Luke 4.25, 26. Many widows were in Israel in the days of
Elias, etc. But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta a city of
Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow: as for that phrase, I have commanded a
widow, see the note above, verse. 4.

Verse. 10. The widow woman was there gathering of sticks, and he called to her,
etc.] As knowing by the special instinct of Gods Spirit, that this was the
widow of whom God had spoken to him; or else, having received direction hereby
to discover the widow to whom he was sent, when he came to the city.

Verse. 12. As the Lord thy God lives, I have not a cake, etc.] This widow
living upon the borders of Israel, had learnt to know a Prophet of Israel by
his habit: yea, as it may seem, both to know and fear the God of Israel: and
yet to such a strait she was brought, being a poor woman, (though the drought
had been yet, as it is thought, but six months in the land) that had not God
come in to her help at this pinch, she was now ready to eat her last meal: I
have said she, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a
cruse, and behold I am gathering two sticks, that is a few sticks, as we use to
say, a stick or two, that I may go in, and dress it for me and my son, that
we may eat it, and die; however hereby it is evident, that the drought and
famine was in the country of Tire and Sidon, as well as amongst the
Israelites: and indeed, being it was sent upon the Israelites for that idolatry
of Baal, which Jezebel the daughter of the king of the Zidonians had brought in
amongst them, no marvel though the Zidonians were involved in the same
judgment together with them.

Verse. 13. Fear not, go, and do as thou have said, etc.] That is, Go in and
dress thy meal and thy oil for thee and thy son; but then withal she is
enjoined, first, to feed him with her last victuals, and then after to provide
for her self and her son: but make me thereof a little cake first, which was
doubtless for the trial of her faith, as concerning that promise which he
adds in the following verse.

Verse. 15. And she, and he, and her house did eat many days.] That is, a long
time together; and indeed it is the judgment of some Expositours, as was noted
before, that for three full years they all lived upon this poor remainder of
the widows meal and oil, which makes the miracle far the more wonderful;
but yet this may be spoken with relation to some part of this time, and happily
to the time of her sons falling sick, which is next related, verse. 17.

Verse. 17. And his sickness was so sore, that there was not breath left in
him.] This is mentioned because hereby the widow perceived that her son was
dead: for that he was indeed dead, and was not only fallen into a swoun, is
evident in many following passages, as verse. 18. and 20. where the widow and
the Prophet bemoan that God had slain her son; and verse. 21. where it is
said, that Eliah prayed, My God I pray thee let this child's soul come into him
again: and then again, ver. 22. And the soul of the child came into him again
and he revived; which may also be confirmed by that of the Apostle, Heb. 10.35.
which many think was written, partly with reference to this story, Women
received their dead raised to life again, this being the first we read of in
the Scriptures, that being dead, was restored again to life.

Verse. 18. And she said unto Elijah. What have I to do with thee, O thou man of
God, etc.] That is, wherein have I offended thee? or whence is it that thou a
holy Prophet of the Lord should come to me a mere stranger to thee, thus to
punish me for my sins? wherefore art thou come to me? art thou come to call
my sins to Gods remembrance, and so to move him to kill my son? to what end
were our lives saved when we were in danger to perish for want of food, if now
my son must die with sickness? when God punishes those for their sins,
whom a while he did forbear, he is said in the Scripture to remember their
sins, 1. Sam. 15.2. Now the conscience of this poor widow telling her, that
the death of her son was for her sins, and therefore apprehending that his
dwelling with her had been accidentally, through her not profiting by his
presence as she ought to have done, the occasion of her sons death; or
rather, that he had besought God thus to punish her, as by his prayer he had
brought the drought and famine upon the land; or that he was sent as the
minister of Gods wrath to take away her son from her; hence it was that she
break forth into this impatient bewailing her loss, and her sins that had
been the cause of it: the expression she uses, is much like that of Peter,
when the ship began to sink, Luke 5.8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man O
Lord.

Verse. 20. O Lord my God, have thou also brought evil upon the widow, with whom
I sojourn by slaying her son?] Herein the Prophet pleads, first, his own
interest in God. O Lord my God: secondly, the condition of the woman, a widow,
and that because women in that estate are least able to endure the loss of
those that should be a stay and support to them, and God is wont to be very
compassionately tender over them: and thirdly, the interest she had in him,
because he sojourned with her, as grieving that the woman that had harbored
him so long, and for whose preservation God had wrought so great a miracle,
should now have all her joy dashed with such a sad loss; or that it should be
said by any, that it had been well for her, if the Prophet had never come into
her house.

Verse. 21. And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto
the Lord, etc.] The meaning of this is, either that he stretched himself upon
the child, and so in that posture of body prayed, and then left off again,
doing this three several times; or else, rather, that he stretched himself
upon the child, and then went and prayed unto the Lord, and so did by turns
three several times: however, doubtless his stretching himself upon the
child, was partly, that feeling the coldness of the child's body, he might be
stirred up thereby to pray the more earnestly for him; and partly, that he
might perceive when heat and life begun to come into the child; and partly
also, thereby to express his exceeding grief for the death of the child, and
his earnest desire that God would be pleased to restore him to life; there
being an intimation in this gesture of his, that he could have been glad to
infuse of his own life into the child, and that to move the Lord, the rather,
to hear his prayer, and grant his request; the like we read of Elisha, 2.
Kings 4.34. and of Paul to Eutichus, Acts 20.10.

Verse. 24. And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know thou art a man of
God* etc.] That is, now her faith was strengthened concerning this; she had
called him a man of God, verse. 18. yet perhaps her faith was shaken with the
death of her child, and now with this miracle it was strengthened again.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. THe word of the Lord came to Elijah in the third year.] Elijah was
sent to Ahab, not long before the Lord sent rain again upon the earth; so that
from the first beginning of the drought unto this time, when the Prophet was
sent to Ahab, it was well nigh three years and six months complete; for so
long rain was withheld, Luke 4.25. either therefore, the third year here
spoken of must be the third year from his first hiding of himself, chap. 17.3.
or the third year since he went to sojourne with the widow of Zarephath,
chap. 17.6. or else the third complete year since the time they began to want
rain, the six odd months not being reckoned, as indeed it is usual in the
Scripture, in noting times to set down only the full complete years, and not
to mention the odd months or days.

Go show thy self unto Ahab, and I will send rain upon the earth.] Though the
Israelites continued in their idolatry still, yet the Lord determined to take
off that judgment of want of rain, that now for three years and a half had
been upon them: and this he did, partly for his righteous servants sake, that
were still in the land who could not but suffer much in this common calamity;
and partly, because the Lord intended by Elijah, to bring Baals prophets to be
slain by the people; and so thereupon, to remove the judgment he had brought
upon the kingdom: and so now Elijah was sent to give notice they should have
rain, and so that which he said to Ahab might be made good; to wit, that there
should be no rain but according to his word; yea, and withal doubtless, God
gave him now in charge, (though it be not here expressed) what he afterward did,
concerning the challenge he made to Baals prophets, as is evident by that which
he says, verse. 36. Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be known
this day, that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I
have done all these things at thy word.

Verse. 3. Obadiah feared the Lord greatly.] But how could this be, if he went
not up to Jerusalem to sacrifice? I answer, so long as he did sincerely fear
God, and yielded him that spiritual service, which was required of him, and
kept himself pure from the idolatry of the place and times wherein he lived,
and could not be suffered to go to Jerusalem, without the loss of his life,
God was pleased to dispense with the omission of that legal ceremonial
service: or at least to bear with his children that did truly fear him and
daily serve him in spirit and truth, though they did not hazard both liberty
and lives for the legal ceremonies: the like may be said of those other
faithful servants of God, that lived at this time in the kingdom of Israel,
chap. 19.18.

Verse. 4, Obadiah took an hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave,
and fed them with bread and water.] By this may be meant any necessary food;
but indeed in this time of famine, it was much to provide them even bread and
water.

Verse. 5. Peradventure we may find grass to save the horses, etc.] Hereby it
is evident; that their chiefest want was of pastures and water for their
cattle: some small pittance of food for themselves, the neighboring countries
might afford for money; but grass for the cattle could not be had but in
their own land.

Verse. 10. There is no nation or kingdom whither my lord has not sent to seek
thee, etc.] Some Expositours, by the several nations and kingdoms whither
Ahab had sent to search for Elijah, understand the several tribes of Israel,
that were under his government; of which, (say they) he speaks, as of diverse
kingdoms and nations, because of old, that land was the seat of diverse kings
and people: But rather, I conceive it to be an hyperbolicall speech, as when we
use to tell those whom with great diligence we have sought for in many several
places, that we have looked for them all the world over: and that the drift of
this expression was to imply, that Ahab had sought for him not only in the
land of Israel, but also in all the neighboring countries, and amongst all the
nations that were in league with him; for though it follows, that upon denial,
that they knew not where he was, he took an oath of the kingdom and nation,
that they found thee not: the meaning of that may be, that he pressed them so
far, that he rested not, till by an oath they confirmed it, that they knew
nothing of him: his own people he might constrain to swear, others that were
not his subjects he could not; yet by importuning them to deal truly with him,
he might draw them to it; and therefore speaking of both jointly together, he
uses the same phrase of both, he took an oath, etc. and indeed for the
neighboring nations where there was no rain, that might make them as earnest
against Elijah as Ahab was: how he could be concealed in Zarephath when so
strict a course was taken, we need not question; considering, that being
informed of his danger, the widow might use many ways to hide him.

Verse. 12. The spirit of the Lord shall carry thee whither I know not.] That
is, some Angel, or wind from the Lord shall take thee up and carry thee to some
other place, and then the king will slay me, either, because I did not
apprehend thee when I saw thee; or, because I shall seem to have deluded him,
by telling him that which he shall not find to be true: usually it seems in
those times Elijah was thus miraculously caught up, (and so perhaps other
prophets too) and carried from one place to an other; whence it was, that when
Elijah was at last taken up into heaven, the young prophets would needs send
out to seek him, 2. Kings 2.16. and the like we read also concerning Philip,
when he had baptized the Ethiopian Eunuch, Act. 8.39. Now this is still said to
have been done by the spirit of the Lord; either, because it was done by the
ministry of the Angels, or by some mighty extraordinary wind (as indeed
concerning Elijahs last rapture, it is said, 2. King. 2.11. That Elijah went up
by a whirlwind into heaven; or, rather, because what was done by any secret
supernatural working of God, they used to say it was done by the spirit of the
Lord.

Verse, 15. As the Lord of hosts lives, before whom I stand, etc.] See the note
chap. 17.1.

Verse. 17. Art thou he that troubles Israel?] This Ahab said to Elijah, partly,
because he had always opposed that way of religion and worship which he had
established in the land, and dissuaded the people from submitting to it; but
principally, because by his means he conceived the drought and famine was
sent, which had sorely distressed the land.

Verse. 19. Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel,
and the prophets of Baal, etc.] There is no likelihood that Elijah immediately
upon that reproof, in the former verse, enjoined Ahab to gather the prophets
of Baal together never acquainting him to what end and purpose they should be
assembled, and that the king without any more words did presently what Elijah
required: and therefore doubtless (though it be not here expressed, because it
may be easily gathered from the following relation of that which was afterward
done) after some vehement concertations betwixt the prophet and the king,
concerning the idolatry of Baal, the king defending what he had done; Elijah
did now propound to him that way of trial, to find out the truth which
afterward again he propounded to the people, verse. 22, 23, 24. which the king
approving, accepted the challenge; and assembled both the prophets of Baal, and
the people also: that is, the heads of the people, to see what was done, as
Elijah had required. The four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal here
mentioned were, it seems, such as were dispersed over the villages and towns of
Israel; the four hundred distinguished from the other by this title, the
prophets of the groves, were such as attended the court, and performed their
idolatrous service in the groves planted by Ahab, near Baals temple in Samaria,
chap. 16.32, 33. and are therefore said to have been such as did eat at
Jezebels table: why Carmel was chose to be the place where this great trial
was to be made, we cannot say; only it is like, he purposely declined Samaria,
that Jezebel might not hinder the work: for as for that conceit of the papists,
that in Carmel Elijah used to live a retired monastical life, whence an order
of their Friars are called Carmelites, it is a mere phancie and groundless
conceit.

Verse. 20. So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the
prophets together, etc.] We need not wonder that Ahab should herein do as
Elijah had required, if we consider, first, That doubtless Elijah had desired
that trial might be made, whether the sacrifice of the Baalites, or his
sacrifice, should be consumed with fire from heaven; to discover thereby
whether Baal were a god or no; and to see this tried by such a miraculous work,
the very natural desire that is in men to see strange things, might win him;
beside the confidence he had in Baal: and secondly, That being curbed with the
judgment of God, (the drought) that now lay upon the whole land, the hope of
being relieved herein, must needs make him the more flexible to yield to the
prophets desire; and besides, God might at this time powerfully overawe his
spirit: indeed we find not in the sequel of the story, that the prophets of
the groves were present, (whom Elijah had also desired him to call thither) but
only the four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal, verse. 22. I, even I, only
remain a prophet of the Lord, but Baals prophets are four hundred and fifty
men; and therefore many Expositours hold, that Jezebel would not suffer them to
be there.

Verse. 21. How long halt ye between two opinions?] They are said to halt in the
profession of their religion, that do not walk uprightly and exactly, according
to the rules of that religion, which they must needs do, that in some things
follow one religion, and in some things another; such men can be exact in
neither, and are therefore said to halt betwixt two opinions; sometimes
inclining to one, sometimes to another; as the body of him that halts does bend
sometimes to the right hand and sometimes to the left: and so it was now with
the Israelites, who would be still counted the people of God, and were
circumcised, and in the worship of the golden calves pretended the worship of
the true God; and so in some things lived according to the laws of Israel, and
yet at the same time worshipped Baal the god of the Zidonians, and are therefore
charged by Elijah to halt between two opinions.

And the people answered him not a word.] This might be either from guilt of
conscience or distraction of mind; fearing on the one side the wrath of God, if
they should provoke him to displeasure, and on the other side the wrath of the
king.

Verse. 22. I, even I only remain a prophet of the Lord.] The meaning of this
is, that there was not a Prophet of the Lords besides himself, that did openly
show himself for the true God and his worship against their idolatry; at least
that there was none but he present there at that time.

Verse. 25. Choose you one bullock for your selves, etc.] That they might not
afterward pretend that their God refused to answer them, because the God of
Elijah had been preferred before him, he gives them the privilege and
advantage (if any it were) both of offering first, to wit, the morning
sacrifice, and of choosing which of the bullocks they liked best.

Verse. 26. And they took the bullock which was given them, etc.] To wit, which
Ahab had given them, or which Elijah had given them liberty to choose, verse.
25.

And they leaped upon the altar which was made.] This may be also rendered as
it is in the margin of our Bibles, and they leapt up and down at the altar,
etc. so that the meaning may be, either that they danced and skipped about the
altar; which it seems they did customarily in the worship of Baal; as desiring
perhaps to make show of such prophetical ecstasies, as were usual with those
that were possessed with a divine spirit; or else, that in a kind of frantic
manner they leapt upon the altar, to express thereby their vehement desire,
that Baal would hear them; as if they would have clambered up to fetch down
fire from heaven, if it had been possible; or were ready even to sacrifice
themselves, that they might prevail in their suit: some indeed conceive that
this is spoken of Elijahs altar, upon which the Baalitish prophets leapt, as in
a kind of divine fury, to throw it down; but the first exposition does far
better agree with the order of the story.

Verse. 27. And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, etc.] to wit,
when the time limited for their sacrifice was fully ended, or well nigh at an
end: before this he would not do it, because it might first be apparent by
their lost labor so long together, that they deserved to be mocked, and
because they might not afterward say, that he had interrupted them.

Verse. 28. And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with
knives, etc.] As the heathens used to do in their sorrows, Deuteronomy. 14.1. And the
more to move their God to take compassion on them, and not to deny them, that
were content thus to torture themselves, and as it were to sacrifice their own
blood upon his altar, that they might obtain what would be for his glory as
well as theirs.

Verse. 29. And they prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening
sacrifice.] That is, they prayed and called upon Baal, and with many strange
gestures (as men inspired) sung the praises of their idol-god; so laboring by
all means to prevail with him to send fire to consume their sacrifices. See the
notes, 1. Sam. 10.5. and 18.10.

Verse. 30. And he repaired the altar of the Lord that was broken down.] Not the
altar whereon Baals priests laid their sacrifices, which afterward they brake
down, and that by leaping upon it, verse. 26. as some conceive: for it is not
probable that Elijah would make use of their altar: rather it may seem that
Elijah brake down their altar, and having purged the place, built another in
the room; or that this mount Carmel, having been one of the high places whereon
they used to sacrifice in former times, there was the ruins of an altar there,
which the idolatrous Israelites had broken down; according to that complaint of
Elijah, chap. 19.14. the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown
down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword: and that this the
Prophet did now repair: a real sign of his great design, which was, to
restore again the true worship of God in the land.

Verse. 31. And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the
tribes, etc.] Though the greatest part of ten of the twelve tribes were at this
time corrupted with the idolatry of Baal, yet Elijah would build his altar with
twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of Israel: First, thereby
to signify, that it was built for the worship of that God, whom the patriarchs
had formerly worshipped: Secondly, to put the people in mind, that they ought
all to be united in the worship of this God of their fathers; or else it would
be in vain to reckon themselves amongst Gods Israel: And thirdly, to put God in
mind as it were of the covenant which he had made formerly with their fathers.

Verse. 33. Fill four barrels with water, and pour it on the burnt sacrifice,
etc.] Mount Carmel stood close upon the sea; whence they might even in this
drought have water enough: Now the reason why the Prophet appointed so much
water to be poured upon the sacrifice, and the wood whereon it was laid, was
partly, to make it the more evident that there was no fraud used in hiding any
fire secretly under the wood; and partly, that the burning of the sacrifice
with fire from heaven, might be the more wonderful in the eyes of all that
beheld it: why there were three times four barrels of water poured upon the
altar, which was twelve barrels, we may judge by that which is said in the
foregoing notes, concerning the twelve stones where of the altar was built.

Verse. 37. Hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God, and
that thou have turned their heart back again.] That is, that by thy appointment
these things have been done, to the end their hearts might be turned from their
idols to thee.

Verse. 40. And Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them
there.] That is, he caused the people to bring them down, and to slay them
there: so wonderfully were the people affected at present, with seeing fire
come down from heaven to consume Elijahs sacrifice, and such a dread it brought
upon them, of the infinite power of that God, who by this miracle did testify
against their idolatry; that without any fear of the king, they were ready to
do what ever Elijah would advise them to: and therefore when he, apprehending
the opportunity of their present condition, appointed them to put all the
prophets to death; they yielded straight; and the carrying them away to the
brook Kishon, that execution might be done upon them there, was either to
testify, that it was because of their idolatry that the brooks and rivers were
in a great part even dried up, or that the place where they had sacrificed to
the Lord, might not be defiled with their blood.

Verse. 41. And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink, for there is
a sound of abundance of rain.] Because he had spent all that day fasting, in
an eager expectation of the event of this great business, and to show how
acceptable a sacrifice the slaying of Baals prophets was unto the Lord, he
advises him to eat and drink for the refreshing of himself, assuring him, that
they should now have rain: and to express how certain that was which he
foretold, he speaks as if already he heard the very sound of the thunder and
pouring rain that was now coming; for there is, says he, a sound of abundance
of rain.

Verse. 42. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel, etc. He went up to the top
of Carmel, that there he might pray for rain, and stand as it were upon a watch
tower, waiting and looking for the rising of those clouds, that should bring
those glad showers that he prayed for; and whereas it follows, that he cast
himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees, thereby is
meant, that he kneeled down upon the ground, and then bowed his face down to
his knees, by this humble posture, to express his awful respect to the
majesty of that God, whose aid he implored; and withal, so to hide his eyes
from all distracting objects, that he might the more wholly attend the work
which he went about; to wit, the opening of the heavens, by praying to the Lord
for rain, for though God had assured him there should be rain, verse. 1. I will
send rain upon the earth, and thereupon he did assure Ahab that it should be
so; yet he knew withal, that prayer must accomplish that which God had
promised.

Verse. 43. And said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea, etc.]
Elijah desired to have notice of the first rising of the clouds, that he might
presently go to the king and have him away, that so still it might be the more
manifest, that he had procured the rain from God; but because he would not
himself be taken off from his prayers, whilst he was praying, he sent his
servant to observe the rising of the cloud^, and appointed him to look toward
the sea, because thence the vapors do usually arise which breed clouds and
rain; and because there he might have the fairest prospect, to discover the
first rising of a cloud in the sky, and seven several times he did this,
purposely to teach us, that we must not be discouraged, but with patience must
be content to wait upon God, though we have not presently that which we pray
for.

Verse. 46. And the hand of the Lord was on Elijah, and he girded up his loins,
and ran before Ahab, etc.] The reasons, why Elijah did thus as a lacquey run
before Ahabs chariot, to the very entrance of Jezreel; may be, first, to
manifest the Prophets humility, and how far he was from being puffed up with
that wonderful work that he had done: Secondly, to show the king how ready
both God and his prophets would be to honor him, if he would proceed on to
remove idolatry out of the land, the work that was now so happily begun by the
slaughter made of the prophets of Baal: Thirdly, to signify hereby, that it
was he that brought them this rain, that did now begin to pour down from the
clouds upon them: Fourthly, to avow hereby, what he had done in the slaughter
of the Baalites; and, as it were, to triumph in the victory of their idolatrous
prophets, whom he had left dead behind him: Fifthly, that being in the eye of
the king all the way he returned home, this might make him the more seriously
to ponder in his mind, the great things the Prophet had done; that so they
might make the deeper impression upon him: It may seem strange indeed, that the
king should not take up the Prophet into his chariot; but therefore it is said,
that the hand of the Lord was upon Elijah, and he girded up his loins; that
is, he was extraordinarily moved of God, and enabled by God, thus to run before
the chariot of Ahab.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. ANd Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal, how he
had slain, etc.] That is, he told her the success of that conflict betwixt
Elijah and the prophets of Baal, and all the miraculous passages that Elijah
had done; and that to clear himself from being blamed by that his imperious
wife, for that unavoidable execution of the Baalites which followed hereupon;
yet withal he would have her know, that the putting of them to the sword, was
rather Elijahs fact, then his; he had slain all the prophets with the sword: as
fearing, that all which could be said, would hardly satisfy her: but that the
four hundred prophets of the groves are not included amongst those that were
slain by Elijah, we may the rather think; because, chap. 22.6. we read again
of four hundred prophets that were called together by Ahab.

Verse. 2. Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do
to me, etc.] Either she assured her self, that he who had always shown
himself so stout and bold, and might now be encouraged with the favor of the
people, would not fly; or else she was merely carried away with the impotencie
or her rage and passion, which God by his all-ruling providence did now make
use of, for the preservation of his Prophet; for else she would never have sent
him word what she meant to do; thereby giving him warning, as it were, to be
gone. Concerning this form of swearing, So let the gods do to me, and more
also, etc. See the note Ruth 1.17.

Verse. 3. And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to
Beersheba, etc.] That he might not be exalted in mind, because of those great
wonders that had been wrought by him, the Lord suffered him to be overborn
with fears, that he might see his own weakness, insomuch that he who erewhile
feared not Ahab and all his Baalites, did now at the threats of a woman, not
only fly into another kingdom, the kingdom of Judah, (where good
Jehoshaphat then reigned) yea to the uttermost parts of that kingdom, to
Beersheba, that was southward, in the farthest part of all that land, but also
from thence withdrew himself into the wilderness; not as suspecting any evil
from good Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah; but as fearing lest Ahab or Jezebel
should send some or other into Judah to dispatch him there; and happily the
rather because there was too great correspondence betwixt Jehoshaphat and them;
and therefore when he went from Beersheba, because he would not expose him to
the wants of the wilderness, and because being alone he might the better hide
himself, he left his servant there.

Verse. 4. And he requested for himself that he might die, etc.] The misery that
at present he underwent, made him now as desirous to be rid of his life, as
before he was solicitous by flight to preserve it; especially considering, that
dying here in an ordinary way, Jezebel and her Baalites could not triumph over
him: It is enough, says he, that is, I have lived long enough, I know I must
die, ( for I am no better then my fathers, that have all dyed before me,) and
therefore since my life is full of nothing but troubles and misery I desire to
end my days presently.

Verse. 6. And he looked, and behold, there was a cake, etc.] This word behold,
intimates how wonderful it was to him, he not knowing from whence it came.

Verse. 7. Arise and eat, because the journey is too great for thee, etc.]
Though Elijah happily had not pitched upon the place whither he meant to go,
yet the Lord gives him notice that so far and long he should still wander,
that it was fit he should well refresh himself with that provision, which by
his angels he had now sent to him.

Verse. 8. And he went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty
nights, unto Horeb the mount of God.] So called, because there the Lord
appeared to Moses in a burning bush, and there afterward he gave the law to
the Israelites. How the strength of this meat could sustain Elijah so long it
is needless to enquire, since it was done miraculously by the command of God;
as he was pleased to sustain Moses as long without food, so he was pleased by
the strength of one meal thus to sustain Elijah; thereby to show, with how
little he can uphold the life and strength of his servants, if they be brought
into straits. However, observable it is, that both Christ, Moses, and Elijah,
who appeared together when Christ was transfigured, did each of them fast in
their several times forty days and forty nights without any sustenance.

Verse. 9. What do thou here Elijah?] As if he should have said, why art thou
not amongst my people, executing the office of a prophet amongst them, to which
I have called thee?

Verse. 10. And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts,
etc.] That is, I have been zealous for thy glory and worship, and grieved in
thy behalf to see thy people forsake thee, and go a whoring after strange gods;
yea, and I have opposed, what in me lay, the horrible apostacy of the times;
and hereby I have incensed the adversaries against me, so that they seek to
slay me, as they have done the rest of the prophets; and this is the reason I
am here forced to hide my self: but howsoever, observable it is, that the
prophet makes not a direct answer to the question propounded, but chooses
rather to imply the cause of his fear and flight, then plainly to confess that
he fled thither, (which was his fault) for fear of Jezebel.

For the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine
altars, etc.] That is, the altars in the high places, whereon the people had
formerly sacrificed before the temple was built by Solomon: for though it was a
sin to offer sacrifice upon any altar, but that at the temple in Jerusalem
(and therefore those kings that pulled down these altars, and took away these
high places, are highly commended for it) yet the Israelites not doing it for
this reason, but only out of their zeal for Baal, that his worship might be
promoted, and that there might not be any memorial left of the true God in the
land of Israel, it is reckoned as a sin in them, and a manifest proof of
their bitter hatred of the true religion from which they were revolted. Thus
these words are usually understood by Expositours: yet there may be another
probable sense given of them, they have thrown down thine altars, that is, they
have destroyed thy worship; to wit, by restraining men from Gods altar at
Jerusalem.

I, even I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away.] That is,
there is none left but my self, that do openly plead thy cause against thine
enemies; all the rest being either slain, or hiding themselves, chap. 18.13.

Verse. 11. And behold, the Lord passed by, etc.] That is, the glory of the
Lord, wherewith he was pleased to manifest himself at present to his servant
Elijah. Thus, in the first words, the general sum of the whole vision is
expressed, and then in the following words we are told more particularly how
this was done: first, there was a great and strong wind that rent the
mountains, and brake the rocks in pieces before the lord, then after that there
was an earthquake, and after that a fire, but the Lord was in none of these;
that is, the Lord did not in these appear to Elijah, and speak and make known
his will to him as he did afterward (these were but glorious forerunners of
Gods presence) but then at last there came after the fire, a still small voice,
and then the Lord appeared to him, and instructed him what he should do. Now
the end of this vision or apparition, I conceive, was, first, to humble Elijah
with those terrible foregoing signs of Gods Majesty and power, that so he
might with the more awfulnesse, and sear, and readiness to obey, hearken unto
that which God should say to him, and withal acknowledge Gods mercy in that he
did not overwhelm him with his terrors and judgments, notwithstanding his
cowardice in withdrawing himself from the work of his calling; but was content
to deal with him in such a gentle and gracious manner, as at present he did.
Secondly, to strengthen his faith in Gods protection, by letting him see, that
God, who had all the creatures at his command, was able, if he saw cause, to
destroy and consume all his enemies even in a moment. And thirdly, to instruct
him how he was purposed to deal with his enemies, thereby to appease the grief
and discontent of his spirit, concerning them, (and then a chief part of the
significancie of this apparition must consist in this, that God was not in the
wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, as is noted, verse. 11.12.) namely
that though the Lord were of infinite power to destroy all his wicked
adversaries, and could by diverse terrible and unresistable judgments punish
Ahab and Jezebel, and other his proud persecutours; yet he would rather still
deal with them (according to his wonted long suffering and patience) by the
still and gentle voice of the ministry of his prophets: or happily, that
though he could sweep them away instantly with his judgments, yet rather he
would effect their ruin in his good time, in a more secret, hidden, and tacit
way: Yea and fourthly, it is not improbable which some also add, that hereby
likewise was signified, that Gods saving manifestation of himself is not to be
expected in the terrors of the law, but in the still and gracious voice of the
Gospel.

Verse. 13. He wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the
entering in of the cave.] The Lord did before enjoin Elijah to come up out of
the cave, and to stand upon the mount before him, verse. 11. and no doubt, he
went immediately up, at least to the mouth of the cave (else could he not have
seen the fire that passed before the Lord) but yet it seems there he stayed,
and kept himself somewhat inward, till knowing that with that still small voice
the Lord would appear to him, he then went out to the very entering in of the
cave, only withal casting his mantle about his face, which he did out of an
awful fear of Gods majesty; as Moses did, Exodus 3.6. concerning which, see the
notes there.

There came a voice to him, and said, What do thou hear, Elijah?] The very
same question that God had propounded to him before, he now propounded again;
either thereby to let him know, that it was he that now spoke again to him; or
that his former reply was no sufficient excuse for his deserting those
prophetical employments to which God had called him; or else, that Elijah
returning the same answer that he had formerly given him, the Lord might thence
take occasion to give him that further satisfaction concerning his fears, and
directions what he should do, which now he intended him.

Verse. 15. Anoint Hazael to be king over Syria, etc.] We read that Elisha
foretold Hazael that he should be king of Syria, 2. Kings 8.13. and that a
young Prophet by Elishaes directions, did long after this anoint Jehu king of
Israel, 2. Kings 9.1, 6. and here in the following words is expressed, that
Elisha was called to be a Prophet, by the casting of Elijahs mantle upon him,
verse. 19, 20, 21. but that Hazael or Elisha were ever anointed, we read not;
nor that Jehu was anointed by Elijah, and hence the most Interpreters do hold,
that by anointing, here is meant only the designing of them to their offices,
and that this Elijah did to Hazael and Jehu, by appointing Elisha to do it when
he was gone, and to Elisha by casting his mantle upon him, whereupon he had
presently the gift of prophecy, that unction of Gods spirit, whereof the
outward anointing was a sign. But rather I think, we may say, that Elijah did
what now he was enjoined, that is, that he did indeed anoint Hazael, Jehu, an
Elisha, though it be not expressed; and indeed to what end was Elijah now
presently to go to Damascus if it were not to anoint Hazael?

Verse. 17. Him that escapes the sword of Hazael, shall Jehu slay.] Though
Israel suffered most of Hazaels cruelty in the latter days of Jehu, 2. Kings
10.32. In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short, and Hazael smote them
in all the coasts of Israel; and in the days of Jehoahaz his son, 2. Kings
13.1, 3. yet in the days of Joram the son of Ahab (before Jehu) did Hazael
begin to afflict Israel, as is evident by the battle which Joram fought with
Hazael, 2. Kings 8.28. Now with respect to this it is said here, that him that
escapes Hazaels sword, shall Jehu slay.

And him that escapes from the sword of Jehu, shall Elisha slay.] That is (say
the most Expositours) by threatening them, and adjudging them by a prophetical
spirit to those calamities, and to that destruction which afterward fell upon
them; and indeed we find the like expressions, which upon this ground the Lord
elsewhere uses concerning his Prophets, as Jer. 1.10. See I have this day set
thee over the nations, and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down,
and to destroy, and to throw down, to build and to plant: and Hos. 6.5.
Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets, I have slain them by the words of
my mouth. Some Expositours add further, that these words are particularly
intended concerning those children of Beth-el, that were torn by two she bears
immediately upon Elishaes cursing them in the name of the Lord, 2. Kings 2.24.
and concerning those that died of the famine that was in Samaria, which it
seems indeed Elisha had beforehand threatened should come upon them, because
the king was so enraged against the Prophet for it, God, says he, do so, and
more also to me, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him
this day: But because these things were done before the days of Jehu, and
these words seem plainly to speak of something to be done after Jehu had begun
to execute Gods wrath upon them, him that escapes from the sword of Jehu shall
Elisha slay; I rather think that this is meant of some other judgments (not
expressed in the story) which upon the prophesying or prayers of Elisha did
after that fall upon the idolatrous Israelites; yea perhaps the people might be
won by Elisha to do some execution upon the Baalites, as they were formerly
by Elijah, 1. Kings 18.40.

Verse. 18. Yet have I left me seven thousand in Israel, etc.] That is, many
thousands that have not worshipped Baal, and this is added to comfort Elijah
concerning that complaint of his, I, even I only am left, verse. 14. because
they used not only to bow and kneel before their idols, but also to kiss
them, according to that Hos. 13.2. Let the men that sacrifice kiss the calves;
or if they could not come so near their idol-gods, then to kiss their hands as
they bowed before them (whence is that of Job chap. 31.26, 27. If I beheld the
sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness, and my heart has
been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand) therefore to imply men
that had not in the least kind polluted themselves with the idolatry of Baal,
the Lord uses this expression here; all the knees which have not bowed unto
Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him: and by this, as by a
book-case, does the Apostle Paul prove that God had not cast off all the
Israelites in his time, Romans 11.2, 3, 4:

Verse. 19. And found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was plowing with twelve
yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth.] That is, he had twelve
plowes going in the field with twelve yoke of oxen, and the rest having
several servants attending them, and holding them, he himself was with the
twelfth.

And Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him.] The prophets wore a
rough mantle peculiar to them, whereby they were known; 2. Kings 1.8. And they
answered him: He was an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his
loins, and he said, it is Elijah the Tishbite: Zach. 13.4. The prophets shall
be ashamed, every one of his vision when he has prophesied, neither shall they
wear a rough garment to deceive: so that by the throwing of his mantle upon him
was signified, that God had called him to the office, and would give him the
gifts and spirit of a Prophet, and that he should succeed him in his room; yea,
and afterward perhaps he did also anoint him, as Gods command above verse. 16.
seems to imply.

Verse. 20. And he said unto him, Go back again, for what have I done to thee?]
This Elijah spoke to imply, that it must needs be from a supernatural work of
Gods Spirit upon him, and not from his throwing of his mantle upon him, that
Elisha should thus tender himself to abandon all and to follow him; and that
therefore he had need to be careful that he did not neglect the call of God;
and thus though he gave him liberty to return back to take his leave of his
father and mother, yet withal he gives him a caveat to take heed of making any
delay in doing what God had moved him to do; he might go whither he list for
any thing that he had done to him, but God had made such an impression upon his
spirit, that he could not without peril withstand, or disregard, this
powerful and commanding motion of Gods Spirit within him.

Verse. 21. And he returned back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew
them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments, etc.] To make therewith a
farewell feast for his friends, and to express thereby his joy (worthy a
feast) and his bidding adue to his former employments.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. ANd Ben-hadad, the king of Syria, gathered all his host together,
etc.] Some thirty years before this, Asa had called in Ben-hadad, the father of
this Ben-hadad, verse. 34. to his aid against Baasha king of Israel, chap.
15.17, 18, etc. at which time Ben-hadad took some of the Israelites towns, and
such sweetness it seems he had found in the soil of Israel, that now he came
again unsent for, and nothing now would serve him but Samaria it self; and thus
withal too God punished the idolatry, and other gross sins that were
amongst the Israelites.

Verse. 2. And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, etc.]
That is, upon a parley desired on one side, Ben-hadad, by his messengers sent
into the city, made known what he required ere he would raise the siege of
Samaria; namely, that Ahab should yield up all he had to him, thy silver and
thy gold is mine, thy wives also and thy children are mine: insolent
conditions; and such as manifested that Ben-hadad, in the confidence of his own
strength, did exceedingly despise the king of Israel.

Verse. 4. And the king of Israel answered and said, My Lord O king, etc.] Two
several grounds of Ahabs yielding thus to Ben-hadads motion, are conceived by
Expositours: the one is, that Ahab thought Ben-hadad had desired only that he
should deliver up the wealth of his own palace, and his own wives and children,
and not the pillage of the whole city, and that this, out of a desire to save
his subjects from damage, he was content to yield to: the other is, that Ahab
understood the message of Ben-hadad, as if he had only required the
sovereignty over all that they had; namely, that both he and his people should
acknowledge themselves his vassals, and so by the payment of a yearly tribute,
should testify that they held all they had, of him; and that this to rid
himself of the siege, he yielded to; according to thy saying, I am thine, and
all that I have: so granting him the dominion with reservation of his own
subordinate interest; and this last exposition I conceive is the best, because
it seems not probable, that he should so readily yield to deliver up his wives
and his children, into the hands of a heathen king.

Verse. 5. Although I have sent unto thee, saying, Thou shall deliver me thy
silver, etc.] These were the second conditions which Ben-hadad sent to Ahab;
whereby it appears, that either Ahab mistook his former motion, and so this was
now sent to explain that; or else, that Ben-hadad being puffed up with Ahabs
submissive answer, did now propound harder conditions then he did before; and
(according to that which is before noted upon the foregoing verse) two several
ways this may be understood; namely, that either whereas before it was thought
he required only the kings wives and children, silver, and gold; now he
required liberty to take in the whole c^ty whatsoever he pleased: or else,
that whereas before it was thought he required only that they should
acknowledge his sovereignty, and hold all that they had of him as his vassals
and tributaries; now he demanded, that they should absolutely yield up the
pillage of the city to his soldiers and servants; suffering them to enter the
city, and take from thence whatsoever they pleased: Although, says he, I have
sent unto thee, saying, Thou shall deliver me thy silver and thy gold, etc.
That is, though I have sent unto thee challenging that thy riches, thy wives,
and thy children were mine; yet it was no part of my meaning, that thou
should only acknowledge the dominion of them to belong to me, and should
still hold them in thine own possession; no, I require that they be out of hand
delivered to me; nor will I be satisfied with words, or a bare title, to morrow
about this time, I will send my servants; who shall not out of thy house only,
but also out of thy servants houses, take what they please; and only upon this
condition will I raise the seige.

Verse. 7. Mark I pray you, and see how this man seeks mischief.] That is, by
this second message he has sent, if you well observe it, you may plainly see,
that though he pretends a treaty, and would seem upon conditions willing to
raise this siege; yet in truth he intends nothing but mischief and ruin to us,
or else he would never propound such conditions to us: either we must yield up
the whole city to be pillaged by his soldiers, and our selves our wives and
children to be their slaves, or else nothing will content him.

Verse. 9. Tell my lord the king, All that thou did send for to thy servant at
the first, I will do; but this thing I may not do.] Thus, though Ahab refused
to submit to what Benhadad had the second time required of him, yet his denial
came from him so poorly, that it plainly discovered how fearful he was and
loath to provoke Benhadad. For first, he still calls Benhadad his lord, and
himself his servant: Secondly, whilst he denies the second motion, he is
careful to let him know, that he was still willing to yield to the first: And
thirdly, it was not, This thing I will not do, but, this thing I may not do: It
was easy to discern, that it was the peremptory indignation of the people that
had made him reject the propositions of Benhadad, rather then any courage that
was in himself.

Verse. 10. The gods do so unto me and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall
suffice for handfuls, etc.] In a bragging manner he threatens the utter
ruinating of their city: and withal (to terrify Ahab and the people the more)
vaunts, that such was the multitude of his soldiers, that the dust of Samaria
should not suffice for handfuls for them: so speaking of Samaria,
notwithstanding the strength of her walls and bulwarks, as if it were but a
heap of dust, which should be levelled to the ground, with as much ease, as if
every soldier were to carry away but a handful: or rather, after an
hyperbolicall manner, menacing them, that they would make nothing to carry away
the very ground whereon the city stood, or at least, the bulwarks of the city,
though each of his followers took but a handful: the like expression we see, 2 Samuel 17.13.

Verse. 12. He said unto his servants, Set your selves in array, etc.] This may
be translated also, as it is in the margin of our bibles, place the engines; to
wit, for the battering of the city: it seems that during the parley, or treaty,
there was a cessation of arms on both sides; and therefore when Benhadad saw
that Ahab would not yield to what he had propounded, he commanded his captains
again to prepare for an assault upon the city.

Verse. 13. And behold there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel, etc.] God
foretells what he means to do by a prophet, that the victory might not be
ascribed to chance; and withal, to discover the exceeding riches of his grace,
in affording so much mercy to this vile wretch, even by one of those prophets
whom he sought to destroy.

Verse. 14. Even by the young men, of the princes of the provinces.] That is,
not by thy experienced captains, or old trained soldiers, shall thou prevail
over the Syrians: but by the young men, that wait and attend upon the princes
of the provinces.

Then he said, Who shall order the battle?] This question propounded by Ahab to
the prophet, may be understood two several ways: to wit, either that he
required who should go out with his forces, as Commander in chief, to order the
battle as he should see cause; or else, that he desired to know, whether he
should stay till the king of Syria came out and set themselves in battle array
against them, or whether he should go out first, and set the battle in array
against the Syrians.

And he answered, Thou.] That is, Ahab himself; to wit, that the young men
might the more readily undertake the service.

Verse. 15. Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces, and
they were two hundred and thirty two, etc.] And these, it seems, were to be
captains and leaders to the seven thousand afterward mentioned; and, or else
rather, these were to go before as a forlorn hope, to set first on the enemy,
and then the body of the army was to follow, and second them; and so much
indeed the following words, verse. 17. seem to imply, And the young men of the
princes of the provinces went out first, etc.]

Verse. 18. Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive; or whether they
be come out for war, take them alive.] That is, though they should now come
out to sue for conditions of peace, yet take them prisoners, and bring them to
me, which was against the law of arms; as thinking scorn to fight with them, he
commands his men to take them alive: and as presumptuously puffed up with his
great strength, he thinks enough to say, Take them alive; as if the Israelites
had not courage enough to lift up a hand against them.

Verse. 22. Go strengthen thy self, and mark, and see what thou do.] That is,
take heed, that through security, or any other way, thou do not give any
advantage to these Syrians, when they shall again invade the land the next
year: and herein doubtless the prophet did intend to imply, not only that he
should prepare all outward means for the withstanding of the Syrians; but also
that he should be careful by faith, and repentance, and prayer, to make his
peace with God, lest God should be provoked at last to deliver him up into the
hands of his enemies; and if this were the same prophet that foretold the
former victory, (as the words seem here to import, And the prophet came to the
king of Israel) the king had the more reason now to give credit to what he said.

Verse. 23. Their gods are gods of the hills, therefore they were stronger then
we.] This speech of the servants of the king of Syria, was grounded on that
sottish conceit of the heathen, that their gods bare rule some in one place and
some in another: and because the former battle was fought in a hilly country,
therefore they concluded, that the gods of the Israelites were gods of the
hills: the rather also inclining to this conceit (say some Expositours) partly,
because the land of Israel was in a great part of it full of mountains and
hills; and partly, because they had heard, that the Israelites used constantly
to offer up their sacrifices in hills and high places. But however, observable
it is; how herein also they flattered both their king, and themselves too;
there is not a word spoken of their own cowardice, or the sensuality and
security of their king, who was drinking himself drunk, when the Israelites
came upon them; but all their loss is ascribed to this, that their gods were
gods of the valleys; and the gods of the Israelites, gods of the hills.

Verse. 24. Take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put captains in
their rooms.] This they add as implying, that their former loss might be by
their means, rather then the cowardice of his own people; to wit, by their
unfaithfulness or want of skill in martial affairs; or by their delicacy, and
the evil example they had given, in being feasting and drinking, when they
should have been preparing for the battle.

Verse. 26. Ben-hadad numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to fight
against Israel.] Which was in the tribe of Asher, Josh. 19.30, 31. and here
Ben-hadad now chose to fight with Israel, not only because it was a plain
country, verse. 23. Let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall
be stronger then they: but also, because this was one of those cities which his
father had formerly taken from the Israelites, verse. 34. and so hither they
might retire to shelter themselves, if the battle should go against them; as
we see they did, verse. 30. But the rest fled to Aphek into the city.

Verse. 27. And the children of Israel pitched before them, like two little
flocks of kids.] hereby it appears, that the Israelites had divided their
forces into two bodies, and were but weakly provided for war in comparison of
the Syrians.

Verse. 28. Thus says the Lord, Because the Syrians have said, The Lord is God
of the hills, but he is not God of the valleys, etc.] As if he should have said,
however you deserve not the least help from heaven, because of your
wickedness, and the little good done amongst you, by the former victory I gave
you; yet to confute this blasphemy of the Syrians, even in the valleys I will
again deliver all this great multitude into thine hand.

Verse. 30. And there was a wall fell upon twenty and five thousand of the men
that were left.] Either by some warlike stratagem of the Israelites when they
were battering the walls of the city; or, rather by some earthquake, or other
immediate hand of God, overturning the walls upon them, perhaps when they were
busied to raise them higher, or to make them stronger, that under the covert
thereof they might the better shelter themselves against the Israelites, or
whilst they were standing behind the wall to defend the city against the
Israelites that sought to storm it.

Verse. 31. We have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful
kings.] It seems their merciful dealing with those they overcame in battle,
had got the kings of Israel this report amongst other nations.

Verse. 34. And Ben-hadad said unto him, The cities which my father took from
thy father, I will restore.] This may be meant of those cities which Ben-hadad
his father took from Baasha king of Israel, chap. 15.20. who is here called the
father of Ahab only, because Ahab succeeded him in the throne: yet rather I
believe that as now, so formerly in the days of Om^i the father of Ahab, the
Syrians had made some inrodes into the land of Israel, (though it be not
expressed in the sacred story,) and taken some cities in that invasion, which
now he promises to restore: but how he kept this his promise, we may see in
the war which Ahab afterward made against him, for the recovery of Ramoth
Gilead, chapter 22.3.

And thou shall make streets for thee in Damascus, as my father made in
Samaria.] That is, thou shall appoint thee in Damascus places of free trading
for thy people, as I had in Samaria for the Syrians; or else, the streets here
mentioned, are meant of places of trading for the Syrians, out of which the
tribute now yielded to Ahab should be raised yearly.

So he made a covenant with him, and sent him away.] Thus slightly did Ahab
pass over the great damage the people of God had undergone, by his invading
the land of Israel two years together, and that horrible blasphemy of him and
his Syrians; in saying, that the Lord was God in the hills, and not in the
valleys: but in the mean season, he that was thus ready to pity Ben-hadad,
could persecute the poor prophets of God, and not show them the least mercy at
all.

Verse. 35. And a certain man of the sons of the prophets, said unto his
neighbor in the word of the Lord, Smite me, I pray thee.] That is, one of
those young prophets that were trained up in the Schools or Colleges of the
prophets, under their aged fathers; did in the name of the Lord, require one of
his fellow prophets to smite him; to wit, with a sword, so as to wound him; as
appears, verse. 37. and this he required; First, that being wounded he might
the better resemble a soldier that had been in the battle, to whose custody
a prisoner was committed, verse 39. And secondly, that being wounded and bloody
he might the better in that his condition show Ahab what he was to expect from
the revenging hand of God; to wit, that the Lord should smite him, and that his
blood, and life too, should be required for sparing Ben-hadad: for thus it was
usual with the prophets, to foreshew in themselves a shadow of that calamity
which they foretold should come upon others, Esaias 20.2, 3, 4, Jerem. 27.2. and
Acts 21.10, 11. see also Ezekiel. 12.3.12.

Verse. 36. Because thou have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, behold, as soon
as thou art departed from me, a lion shall slay thee.] It is most probable,
that this his neighbor that refused to strike him, was one of his
fellow-prophets, and so was conscious to himself, that what the Prophet
required, was indeed of God, and yet preferred his own reason before Gods
command, and was therefore for his disobedience slain by a lion. However herein
the Lord, as in a figure, discovered the justice of his punishing Ahab, who
under a show, and pretense of clemency spared Ben-hadad, whom God had
appointed to utter destruction.

Verse. 41. And the king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.]
It seems he was one that was known to the king; and so when the blood and ashes
were wiped from his face, he discerned who he was; or else, he might know him
by his attire, which when he addressed himself to speak to the king, having
wiped his face, the king then observed, and not before.

Verse. 42. Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to
utter destruction.] Happily Ahab had been expressly charged not to spare
Benhadad, but however the Prophet had expressly told him, verse. 28. that
because he and his Syrians had blasphemed the Lord, saying, The Lord is God of
the hills, but not of the valleys; therefore the Lord would deliver them into
his hands: neither could he therefore spare that blasphemous wretch without
contempt of Gods known will, who had delivered him, as it were, into his power,
that he might by him be slain for his blasphemy.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 3. THe Lord forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my
fathers unto thee.] Thus he rejected Ahabs motion with detestation; to wit,
because the Lord had forbidden in his law the perpetual sale of any man's
inheritance, Levit. 25.23. The land shall not be sold for ever: and though
therefore such a motion made by a prince in another kingdom could not have
been rejected by any subject, without gross disregard of that Majesty which
God has put upon princes; yet Naboth was bound in conscience to do it, and no
doubt (though it be not here expressed) as he refused to satisfy the desire of
his Sovereign herein, so also he humbly presented him with the reasons why he
durst not do it; and made it appear, that it was not so much the parting with
his vineyard, as his sinning against God in parting with it, that he stumbled
at; whereby it appears also, that this Naboth was a pious man, and zealous of
observing Gods law, even in these idolatrous times, which made his blood cry
the louder for vengeance against Ahab and Jezebel.

Verse. 4. And he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his face. etc:] As
one that was discontented, and therefore would have no body to speak to him,
that cared not to see any body, nor to have any body see him.

Verse. 7. I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.] This is
spoken in a vaunting way; and it may have reference either to Naboths refusing
to give Ahab his vineyard; as if she had said, Though he will not give thee his
vineyard, I will; thou shall not need to purchase it, nor to stand to his
courtesy, whether he will yield it up to thee or no, I will give it thee; or
else; to those foregoing words of Jezebel, Do thou now govern the kingdom
of Israel; as if she had said, One would think a king should not whine for a
subjects denial of such a thing, having so much power to satisfy himself; but
since thou know not how to improve thy power, I that am but a woman will do
it for thee, I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.

Verse. 8. So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, etc.] To wit, Ahab not knowing,
nor caring to know, what course she took for the accomplishing of that promise
she had made of getting Naboths vineyard for him.

Verse. 9. Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.] Some
understand this thus, that Naboth should be set, as in regard of his dignity he
used to be, in some eminent place amongst the chief men of the city, as if
there had been no evil at all plotted against him; and then on a sudden the
witnesses should out, and accuse him of blaspheming God and the king. But I
rather think, that malefactors when they came to be tried before the
Magistrate were usually set upon some scaffold where they might be in the sight
of the people, and thence it was that Jezebel wrote in her letters, And set
Naboth on high amongst the people. As for the fast to be proclaimed, that was
enjoined to make a show, as if indeed such a horrible wickedness had been
committed by Naboth, as might bring Gods wrath upon all the nation, and for the
diverting whereof, therefore it was fit the people should in a solemn manner
humble themselves, and cry unto God for mercy.

Verse. 10. And then carry him out, and stone him, that he may die.] For so the
Law of God had appointed him to be punished that should blaspheme the name of
the Lord, Levit. 24.15, 16. Whosoever curses his God shall bear his sin, and
he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death: and
him also that should curse his father, Exodus 21.17. And he that curses his
father or his mother shall surely be put to death: the Prince therefore being
the father of the people (pater patriae) it seems the cursing of him (which is
also a sin forbidden by the Law, Exodus 22.28, Thou shall not revile the gods,
nor curse the ruler of thy people) was usually likewise punished after the same
manner.

Verse. 11. The Elders, and the Nobles, who were the inhabitants in his city.
did as Jezebel had sent unto them, etc.] It may well seem strange that the
letters of Ahab, enjoining such a gross and horrible act of injustice, should
without any scruple be so readily obeyed by the Elders and Nobles of Jezreel:
but for this we must consider, First, that Israel was now become idolatrous,
and in all other respects exceedingly corrupt; and it is no wonder that a
people that have changed their Religion at the will of a supreme Magistrate,
should do any thing else that he will command them: Secondly, that the
imperious severitie and cruelty of Jezebel had doubtless brought this people
into a miserable bondage and thraldom: Thirdly, that Naboth being a man
strictly conscionable, amongst a lawless degenerate people, it is likely they
were glad of an opportunity to wreak their teen upon him: Fourthly, that
Jezebel might inform them that Naboth had done this, she charged him with some
private discourse betwixt the king and him, only the king had no witnesses of
his peremptory and blasphemous speeches, and so that she desired was only
this, that some witnesses might be found, that (upon the credit of the kings
word) would charge him with this, which could not otherwise be legally proved,
and that thereupon he might be condemned for blasphemy, and put to death.

Verse. 13. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with
stones, that he dyed.] And with him his sons were also put to death, (as it
seems, 2. Kings 9.26. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the
blood of his sons, said the Lord, and I will requite thee, etc.) which was
directly against the law of God, Deuteronomy. 24.16. The fathers shall not be put to
death for the children, nor the children for the fathers: their aim herein was
doubtless, that Ahab might without opposition enjoy Naboths vineyard: But with
what pretense of justice they did it, it is uncertain; perhaps as some think
they might allege, that in punishing so execrable a wickedness, Gods severity
against Achan was a president fit to be followed, whose sons and daughters
were stoned together with him, Josh. 7.24.

Verse. 14. Then they sent to Jezebel, etc.] To show how ready they had been to
do what she had enjoined; for though the letters they had received were written
to them in the kings name, yet they knew well enough, that the affairs of the
kingdom were chiefly swayed by her, and that she did all, and carried all in a
manner as she pleased, and therefore their care was chiefly to ingratiate
themselves with her.

Verse. 15. Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of
Naboth, etc.] Some conceive that Naboth was of the blood royal, and that Ahab
was now the next heir; which they judge the more probable, because Naboths
vineyard lay so close upon Ahabs palace; others, that it was a custom or
statute at this time amongst the Israelites, that the goods and lands of them
that were put to death for any capital offense against the king, were
escheated to the crown; or at least, that in this particular the judges had so
determined: and indeed, why might they not in this disregard the direction of
Gods law, as well as in putting his sons to death? however, if they would
enter upon the vineyard, who durst now oppose it? which might be the only
ground why with such confidence she appoints her husband to go and take
possession of Naboths vineyard.

Verse. 18. Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria,
etc.] That is, who reigns in Samaria (for in the next words it is said, that
he was now in Naboths vineyard, which was in Jezreel, verse. 1.) or secondly,
though indeed he was at present in Naboths vineyard, when God spoke to Elijah,
yet he might be appointed to meet him in Samaria, because he was presently to
return thither; or rather thirdly, this clause which is in Samaria, has
reference to the word, Israel; because the subjects of the kings of Judah were
also Israelites; therefore by way of distinction, Ahab is called king of Israel
which is in Samaria, that is, in the kingdom of Samaria.

Veas. 19. Thus says the Lord, Have thou killed, and also taken possession?]
Much evil is charged upon Ahab in these few words, namely; First, his unjust
seizing upon the goods of his subjects: Secondly, his desperate accomplishing
his desires herein, by the bloodshed and murder of the owner: And thirdly,
that after he had taken away his life, he was so far from relenting for what
he had done, that as rejoicing in the success of his project, he had gone and
taken possession of the vineyard of Naboth: nor need it seem strange, that what
was plotted and acted by Jezebel, should be laid to Ahabs charge: First,
because the original of all was from his coveting of the vineyard: And
secondly, because where the wife does any evil with the allowance or connivance
of her husband, the husband is there guilty as well as the wife.

In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood,
even thine.] This was partly accomplished, in that as in the high way, in
Jezreel, where Naboth was stoned, the dogs licked Naboths blood: so also the
dogs licked Ahabs blood in the poole of Samaria, Chap. 22.38. And one washed
his chariot in the poole of Samaria, and the dogs licked up his blood, etc.]
And indeed the words seem principally to intend, the licking of Ahabs blood in
particular, thine even thine: But secondly, it was partly also accomplished in
the dogs licking of the blood of Joram, Ahabs son; whose dead body was cast
out in that very plat of ground where Naboth was stoned, and that to fulfill
this prophecy, 2. Kings 9.25, 26. Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take
up, and cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite: for
remember, how that when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the
Lord laid this burden upon him. Surely I have seen the blood of Naboth, and the
blood of his sons, said the Lord, and I will requite thee in this pla^^:
where also we may see that Elijah did openly deliver this message to Ahab,
which now God gave him in charge, his servants and courtiers being about him.

Verse. 20. And Ahab said to Elijah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy?] The
last time Elijah had been with Ahab, he ran before Ahabs chariot, and all
seemed then to be peace betwixt them; but now hearing Elijah threaten him so,
he brake out, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? that is, can I never be quiet
for thee, but thou must audaciously hunt me out? It was a wonder that I have
been so long rid of thy threatenings; but thy hatred of me will not suffer
thee to let me be in peace long; for now again thou art come, after the old
manner, denouncing judgments against me.

Thou have sold thy self to work evil in the sight of the Lord.] That is, thou
have wholly yielded up thy self to the devil, to do only that which is evil in
his sight, notwithstanding thou can not but know that all thou do is done
in the sight of the Lord: for as bondslaves that sell themselves, do
voluntarily give up themselves to be wholly in the power of their masters that
buy them, so those that yield themselves to be slaves to sin, and under the
bondage of the devil, all their counsel, words, and endeavors, are voluntarily
still for sin, neither can they rid themselves of this slavery, though
sometimes they feel the inconvenience of it; and indeed herein lies the chief
difference between the bondage of the righteous under sin, and the bondage of
the wicked: the righteous are sold under sin, as Paul says of them, Romans
7.14. I am sold under sin, they are tyrannically overruled. by sin, though
they strive against it: but now wicked men do sell themselves to do evil; and
this doubtless is the principal thing for which Ahab is here said to be sold
to work evil, as the like phrase is in the same sense used, concerning the
Israelites, 2. kings 17.17. to wit, that they sold themselves to work evil in
the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger: but yet withal it may be meant
of the slavery he was kept in by his wife Jezebel, that to enjoy her love and
favor, and to keep her in peace with him, he had given up himself as a servant
to be at her command, not daring to refuse the doing of any evil, which she
would have done; and therefore these two are joined together, verse. 25. Ahab
did sell himself to work wickedness, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up.

Verse. 21. And will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, etc.]
See chap. 14.10.

Verse. 27. He rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted,
and lay in sackcloth, and went foftly.] That is, slowly, and heavily, as
sorrowful men and mourners use to do; and thus wicked Ahab humbled himself,
but it was merely for fear of the vengeance threatened, not because he truly
repented of the sins he had committed; whence it was also that this
humiliation of his was not available for the pardon of his sin; but only
procured a proroging of the chief evils threatened to the days of his son
Joram, verse. 29. a temporary reward of a temporary penitence; and that chiefly,
to let us see how assuredly true penitents may expect much more from God, since
the slavish humiliation of Ahab was thus far regarded.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 2. JEhoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.] Since
the first revolt of the ten tribes under Jeroboam from the kingdom of Judah,
there had been continual wars betwixt the kings of Judah and Israel: but
when Jehoshaphat came to the crown of Judah, and had a while continued the wars
against Ahab, with good success, 2. Chron. 17.1, 2, 3. And Jehoshaphat his
son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel. And he
placed force^ in all the fenced cities of Judah, etc. And the Lord was with
Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David; fearing,
it seems, lest their divisions might expose them both to the prevailing power
of the Syrians, who began in in these times to encroach upon them, he judged it
the best policy to put an end to these wars betwixt them and the kings of
Israel, and so made a firm league with Ahab, and made also a match betwixt his
son Joram, and Athaliah the daughter of Ahab, 2. Chron. 18.1. and 21.6. and
hereupon it was that Jehoshaphat went down to visit Ahab; who with great cost
and state entertained and feasted both him and his followers, 2. Chron. 18.2.
Ahab killed sheep and oxen in abundance for Jehoshapat, and for the people that
were with him.

Verse. 3. ( And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that Ramoth
in Gilead is ours? etc.] One article in the league, which three years since
Ahab had made with Ben-hadad was, that he should restore all the cities of
Israel which were in his possession, chap. 20.34. And Ben-hadad said unto him,
The cities which my father took from thy father, I will restore. But Ramoth
Gilead, it seems, he was loath to part with, and therefore now Ahab enters into
consultation to recover it by forte, since he would not by fair means yield it
up to him. It was a goodly city, and besides it belonged to the Levites, and
was a city of refuge, Josh. 21.38. and therefore no wonder though he were
unwilling that it should be any longer in the hands of the Syrians.

Verse. 6. Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together about four
hundred men, etc.] To wit, his Baalitish false prophets, who were the great
supporters of that linsey woolsey religion, that was now in fashion amongst the
Israelites, pretending themselves the prophets of the Lord Jehovah, the God of
Israel, and yet withal the priests of Baal: as by the number we may guess,
perhaps they were those four hundred prophets of the groves, which were
reserved from appearing to Elijahs challenge, chap. 18.19, 20. however they were
doubtless of Baals false prophets; for such Jehoshaphat knew them to be, and
therefore could not rest in their predictions, verse. 7. and Jehoshaphat said,
is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides, that we might enquire of him.

Verse. 8. And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man
etc.] To wit, in Samaria, whom I could presently send for: this word yet may
have reference either to those prophets that had prophesied good success to
Ahab; to wit, that besides those, there was one man, a prophet of the Lords; or
else, to the true prophets of the Lord; to wit, that though they were all in a
manner slain or fled, there was yet one man left; namely, Micaiah the son of
Imlah, etc.

And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.] As if he should have said, we
must not say, we hate the prophets of the Lord, because they speak that which
pleases us not; if he be a faithful prophet of the Lords, he must speak the
truth what ever it be; and God forbid the king should say, that for that he
hates him.

Verse. 11. And Zedekiah the son of Chenaaenah made him horns of Iron, etc.]
whereby was signified the power of these two kings that were now to go against
the Syrians for the recovery of Ramoth Gilead.

Verse. 13. Let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, etc.]
This the messenger that came for Micaiah might say: first, out of a kind of
carnal courtesy, as wishing well to the prophet: and secondly, out of some
special desire he had that the war should go forward.

Verse. 15. And he answered him, Go, and prosper; etc.] This Micaiah spoke
ironically, not to deceive Ahab, (for we see, he spoke these words after such a
manner that Ahab himself perceived he meant not what he said) but by way of
deriding the false prophets, who had all returned this pleasing answer to Ahab,
and to intimate, that he knew well enough that the king would not be pleased
unless he said the same that they did; and therefore Micaiah said not, Thus
says the Lord, Go, and prosper, etc. but in a tone of derision, Go and
prosper, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king; as if he
should have said, you had best go as your prophets advise you, they all tell
you, that your expedition against Ramoth Gilead shall be prosperous, and that
the Lord shall deliver it into your hands, and can you question the truth of
such oracles? Indeed I know well that I^ shall not be so, but if I tell you the
truth, I know you will not believe me, and therefore since you desire to be
deceived, be deceived; Go and prosper, etc. this was that which Micaiah
intended, and the like ironicall expressions we have in other places, as that
Genesis 3.22. concerning our first parents, when they by sin were fallen from
that blessed estate wherein God had created them: Behold the man is become like
one of us, to know good and evil: and that of Elijah to Baals priests, 1. Kings
18.27. Cry aloud, for he is a God, either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or
he is in a journey* or peradventure he sleeps, and must be awaked: and that
of Solomon, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and
in the sight of thine eyes.

Verse. 17. And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills as sheep that
have not a shepherd. etc.] Hereby was intimated, that Ahab should be slain, and
his army routed; this expression of being scattered upon the hills, is used,
because in that country, when they sought to escape the enemy that pursued
them, they used to fly to the hills and mountains, there to hide themselves;
whence is that, Matthew. 24.16. Then let them which be in Judea flee into the
mountains.

Verse. 18. Did I not tell thee, that he would prophecy no good concerning me,
but evil.] By these words Ahab sought to intimate to Jehoshaphat, that he
should not be troubled with these words of Micaiah, but conceive of them as
spoken (as he had beforehand said he would do) out of hatred and malice against
him. And indeed happily hereby it was that Jehoshaphat was deceived, and so
went with Ahab, though Micaiah had foretold the death of Ahab, and dispersion
of his army.

Verse. 19. And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the Lord.] This word
therefore has relation to that which Ahab said to Jehoshaphat: Did I not tell
thee, that he would prophecy no good concerning me, but evil, as if the
Prophet had said; seeing thou art displeased at what I have said, and wilt not
believe, but that I have spoken it out of ill will, I will now largely show you
the whole vision that I saw.

I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by
him on his right hand and on his left.] That is, the Angels who are the
ministers of the God of heaven, at whose command they are continually employed,
and if in this host the evil spirits are also included, they are called the
host of heaven: only because they also are under the overruling power of God,
and are ministers to execute his vengeance on the wicked, and were happily such
as stood now on his left hand.

Verse. 20. And one said on this manner, and another said on that manner.] This
is added only to imply, that God has diverse ways and means whereby he can
accomplish that which he has purposed in himself.

Verse. 25. Thou shall see in that day, when thou shall go into an inner chamber
to hide thy self.] To wit, lest he should be slain, for encouraging the king to
go against Ramoth Gilead by his false prophecy.

Verse. 26. Take Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the
city, and to Joash the kings son.] This Joash was, it seems, either the son
of Ahab, or rather the son of Omri the father of Ahab, and called usually
amongst the people the kings son, and being in some place of authority in the
city, the Prophet was sent to him, together with Amon the governor of the
city. As for these words of Ahabs, Take Micaiah and carry him back; from hence
it may be probably gathered, that when at first they fetched Michaiah, they
fetched him out of prison, whither he is now sent back again; and because of
this many Expositours incline to think, that this Micaiah was that Prophet that
formerly threatened, that his life should go for the life of Ben-hadad, whom he
had sent away in peace, chap. 20.42. and that for this he had been ever since
kept in prison.

Verse. 27. Put this fellow in prison, and feed him with bread of affliction.
etc.] That is, with a diet course and scanty, a poor pittance, enough to hold
life and soul together, such as is usually allowed to poor captives and
slaves, and will only serve to prolong their affliction and misery. See Deuteronomy.
16.3*

Verse. 29. So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to
Ramoth Gilead.] It was much that good Jehoshaphat should cause Micaiah to be
sent for, and then suffer a proud Baalitish priest to smite him on the cheek
before his face, and hear the king with such a severe charge send him back to
prison, and never open his mouth to speak a word for the poor Prophet: but
that he should go up to Ramoth Gilead with Ahab, after the Prophet had foretold
the dangerous event of this expedition is far more strange, and indeed all
that can be said herein is this, that either he was so far overborn with the
confidence of those four hundred Prophets that promised victory, that he began
to think (however at first he suspected them) that their words might prove true
rather then Micaiahs, the rather, because he knew that they should fight in a
just cause, which God usually favors; or else, that having engaged his word
already to Ahab, with whom he had lately joined himself in affinity, he was
loath to shrink now upon the words of Micaiah, but chose rather to hazard the
success, and to make trial what the event would be.

Verse. 30. And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise my
self, etc.] Great personages are usually most laid at in battles; and besides,
the prophecy of Micaiah had scared Ahab doubtless, though he seemed to slight
it; yea perhaps he might also hear of the king of Syrias charge to his
soldiers concerning him; to avoid therefore this danger, and so if it might
be, to elude Micaiahs threat, he resolves to disguise himself, and to enter the
battle in the habit of an ordinary captain. But yet happily Ahab pretended that
he did this, only that the Syrians might not know there were two kings in the
battle, lest they should thereby be rendered the more cautelous and wary in
their fight. And thus he might indeed upon a fair ground wish Jehoshaphat to go
on in his robes, because he would not put upon him the disguising of himself in
the attire of a common soldier or captain.

Verse. 31. Fight neither with small nor great, save only against the king of
Israel.] This the king of Syria commanded his two and thirty captains, 1. Kings
22.31. first, because he might well hope that the death or taking of the king
would be the readiest means to rout the whole army; or secondly, because he
desired to wipe off the dishonor that fell upon him in the last battle, by
bringing Ahab under his mercy, as he was then exposed to the mercy of Ahab. So
well does he repay the mercy which the king of Israel had then shown him, and
that no doubt by the special hand of Gods providence, to convince him of his
folly in sparing him, whom God would have had destroyed.

Verse. 32. Jehoshaphat cried out.] That is, he cried out for help, to wit, both
by calling upon Ahab to help him (whereby it may be the Syrian captains
perceived that he was not the king of Israel) and by calling upon God for
succor, who thereupon helped him (as it is said, 2. Chron. 18.31.) and moved
the Syrians to depart from him; only, the Lord was pleased by bringing him
into this danger, to let him see his folly in going out with Ahab,
notwithstanding the Prophet Micaiah had given him so fair a warning.

Verse. 34. Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host, for I am wounded.]
That is, out of the battle; for he left not the camp, lest his soldiers should
fly, but was stayed up in his chariot until the evening, verse. 35. and thus at
last the vengeance of God fell upon him for his idolatry, and for his
persecuting Gods prophets, but especially for the death of Naboth.

Verse. 38. And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria, and the dogs
licked up his blood, etc.] See the note, chap. 21.19, 41.

Verse. 42. Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem.] Seeing therefore he began
his reign in the fourth year of Ahab, as it is said in the foregoing verse,
who reigned two and twenty years in Samaria, it must needs follow, that whilst
Jehoshaphat sat in the throne of Judah Ahab reigned in Israel about seventeen
or eighteen years; Ahaziah the son of Joram two years, and Jehoram his
brother, the second son of Ahab about four years, and then Jehoshaphat dyed,
and Jehoram his son reigned in his stead: indeed some Expositours hold, that
Jehoshaphat was designed and made king by his father Asa ten years, or
thereabouts, before his father dyed, and that of this it must be understood
which is said here, that he was thirty and five years old when he began to
reign; namely, when he was designed king in his fathers life time, and
consequently, that he was five and forty years old when he began to reign
alone by himself; and this I conceive to be most probable: nor can I well see
how we can reconcile that seeming contradiction, betwixt the words of the
sacred Scripture, in 2 Kings 8.26. and 2 Chronicles. 22.2. unless this be taken for
granted. Besides, sure we are that Jehoshaphat himself did thus; namely, that
he made his son Jehoram king in his life time, to wit, about the seventeenth
year of his reign, happily when he went with Ahab to Ramoth Gilead, as may be
gathered from the 2. Kings 1.17. and that having reassumed the government to
himself at his return home, afterward about the twenty first or twenty second
of his reign, he again put the government into his son Jehorams hands, some
two years before he dyed.

Verse. 43. Nevertheless, the high places were not taken away.] In 2 Chronicles.
17.6. it is said, that he did take away the high places: But the like objection
concerning Asa is answered before, Chap. 15.14.

Verse. 45. Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, etc.] Many of these are
also recorded in the Scripture-Chronicles; as first, how in the third year of
his reign he sent teachers into all the places of his land where they wanted
instruction, 2 Chronicles. 17.7. secondly, how he recovered the tribute due unto him
by the Arabians and Philistines; from the one he had silver, from the other he
had sheep and goats to the number of fifteen thousand and four hundred: 2 Chronicles. 17.10, 11. thirdly, how he joined himself in affinity with Ahab, giving
his son Joram in marriage to Athaliah Ahabs daughter, 2 Chronicles. 18.1.
fourthly, how being reproved by Jehu the prophet at his return from Ramoth
Gilead for helping Ahab, he again visited his kingdoms, and reformed what he
found out of order both in matters of religion and justice, 2 Chronicles. 19.1, 11.
and fifthly, how the Aramites or Damascens, with the Moabites Ammonites and
Idumeans invading the land of Israel with a mighty army, Jehoshaphat proclaimed
a fast, and sought the Lord; whereupon the prophet Jehaziel foretold the
victory which should be obtained without any bloodshed on his part, which
accordingly came to pass; for the next day these nations disagreeing for some
causes amongst themselves, those of Ammon and Moab set upon the Idumeans and
brake them utterly; which done, they also slew each other, in which broil
Jehoshaphat arriving, took the spoil of them all without any loss on his part,
2 Chronicles. 20.1 -- 30.

Verse. 47, There was then no king in Edom: a deputy was king.] To wit, they had
a deputy se^ over them by the kings of Judah, and so it had been ever since the
days of David, 2 Samuel 8.14. and this is here inserted, either to intimate,
that this it was that gave him the advantage of building a fleet at
Ezion-Geber, which was in Edoms territories; of which in the following verse:
or else to note, how to this time God continued this nation in subjection to
the kings of Judah, though presently after in the days of his wicked son
they rebelled against him: indeed we read that some of the Idumeans were in
the field with the Moabites and Ammonites against Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20.10,
22, 23. but first these might be some voluntary mercenaries, not sent out by
the state: secondly, even these it seems were not so firm as was expected
against Judah in that expedition, and therefore were slain by them of Moab and
Ammon, 2. Chron. 20.23. The children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the
inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and thirdly, most
clear it is, that the Idumeans did not declare themselves, and openly revolt
from the crown of Judah, and make themselves a king, till the days of Jehoram,
2. Chron. 21.8. In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of
Judah, and made themselves a king.

Verse. 48. Jehoshaphat made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold, etc.]
Or ships to go to Tharshish, or Tarshish, 2. Chron. 20.36. Concerning which,
see the note, 1. Kings 10.22. Here it is said in the following verse, that
Ahaziah desired to join with Jehoshaphat in that voyage, and that he would not
consent thereto; but in the 2. Chron. 20.36, 37. it is said, that he did join
with Ahaziah in this work, and that hereupon the Prophet Eliezer came to him,
and reproved him, and foretold that his ships should be broken, which
accordingly came to pass in the very port of Ezion-geber; it seems therefore
that at first when Ahaziah desired this, Jehoshaphat would not, but at last
overcome with the king of Isreal's importunity he yielded; or else, that when a
second time Ahaziah desired again to join with Jehoshaphat in a navy,
Jehoshaphat did then deny him, as it is here said, verse. 49. as having had
sufficient warning by the loss of his former ships.

Verse. 51. Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the
seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, etc.] But may some say, if
Jehoshaphat began to reign in the fourth year of Ahab, as is noted above
verse. 4. then the seventeenth of Jehoshaphat must needs be but the twentieth or
the one and twentieth of Ahab: now since Ahab reigned two and twenty years, how
is it said here, that Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign in the
seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat? I answer, doubtless Ahaziah was made king by
his father Ahab, about a year or two before Ahab died, and then reigned two
years after his fathers death; so that he began to reign, to wit, his father
yet living, In the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat, and after his fathers
death he reigned also two years complete.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the second book of the KINGS, Commonly called, The fourth
book of the KINGS.
CHAP. I.
THen Moab rebelled against Israel, after the death of Ahab.] By David the
Moabites were subdued, and made tributaries to the Israelites, 2. Sam. 8.2. but
when that great breach was made in the kingdom of Israel, ten of the tribes
revolting from the house of David, and making Jeroboam king, the Moabites it
seems revolted also from the house of David, and rather chose to give
themselves for vassalls to the kings of Israel, upon whose kingdom their land
bordered, and so they continued unto the days of Ahab; and now upon some
advantage espied, to wit, the late overthrow of the Israelites by the Syrians,
and the death of Ahab; or perhaps the feeble spirit and weak condition of
Ahaziah, because of his fall, Mesha the present king of Moab rebelled, and
refused any longer to pay the tributes of an hundred thousand lambs, and an
hundred thousand rams with their wool which hitherto he had paid yearly to
the kings of Israel, chap. 3.4, 5.

Verse. 2. And Ahaziah fell down through a lattesse in his upper chamber, etc.]
Walking in his palace of Samaria, some grate in the floor of his chamber
(whereby perhaps light was conveyed to the lower room) did suddenly break, and
so he fell through, and was mortally bruised with the fall: and thus God began
already to cut off the accursed posterity of wicked Ahab. Indeed it may well
seem somewhat improbable, that there should be lattesses in the upper chambers
of a kings palace to let in light to the chambers beneath them; and therefore
some understand by the word here translated the upper chamber, the flat roof of
his house, and by the lattesse the battlements that used to be about the roofs
of their houses, Deuteronomy. 22.8. and indeed for the reason before alleged, I make
little question but that it was either the battlements on the house top, or
some rails with lattesses, or cross bars, in some gallery adjoining to his
upper chamber (not unlike to our belconies) whereon the king leaning they
brake, and so he fell through, and was mortally bruised.

And he sent messengers, and said unto them, Go, enquire of Baal-zebub, etc.]
That is, the God of flies: why he was so called it is uncertain, whether
because it was said, that this God appeared to his priests in the likeness of
a fly, and so buzzed his oracles into their ears, or because of the swarms of
flies that were continually in his Temple, by reason of the multitude of
sacrifices that were there daily slain; or rather, because they supposed this
their idol-god, called here the god of Ekron, had power over the flies,
wherewith in those hot countries they were much annoyed, especially in Ekron,
which stood in a moist wet country near the sea; or perhaps, in remembrance of
some grievous judgment of flies, from which they conceited this their God had
delivered them; but howsoever, certain it is, that this idol in time grew very
famous, and thence the Jews afterward used to call the prince of Devils
Beelzebub, Matthew. 12.24.

Verse. 5. And when the messengers turned back, etc.] Some Expositours conceive,
that so soon as Elijah had delivered that message, which God had given him in
charge, to Ahaziahs messengers, on a sudden he was taken away out of their
sight, (for so they understand the last words of the foregoing verse, and
Elijah departed; that is, he immediately vanished away) and that this it was
that so affrighted the messengers, that they durst not go on in their journey:
but I rather think with others, that Elijahs telling them the secret message
which they were sent about, and his foretelling the kings death, made them
incline to think he was a prophet, and thereupon to return presently to the
king that sent them.

Verse. 8. And they answered him, He was an hairy man, etc.] This may be meant
either that Elijah had much hair on his head or face; or else, that he had a
hairy mantle about him: and such indeed it seems was the usual habit of the
prophets in these times, suitable to the chief subject of their preaching, to
wit, repentance: Zachary 13.4. Neither shall they wear a rough garment to
deceive: and therefore it was that the Baptist (that he might be known to be a
prophet, and that second Elijah, that was foretold should be sent amongst them,
Mal. 4.5.) was clad after the same manner as Elijah was, Matthew. 3.4. And the
same John had his raiment of Camels hair, and a leathern girdle about his
loins, and his meat was locusts and wild honey.

Verse. 9. Then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty, etc.]
To wit, to apprehend him, as resolving doubtless to take away his life, to
which it is probable, his mother Jezebel did vehemently provoke him: howsoever,
herein was the madness of his rage notably discovered: had he not thought
Elijah armed with a power above that of man, what needed he have sent a troop
of soldiers to apprehend one poor unarmed man: and if he did think so, what a
desperate folly was it to fight against the Almighty?

And he spoke unto him, Thou man of God, the king has said, Come down.] This
he spoke by was of derision and scorn; as if he should have said, you that
boast your self to be a man of God, and under that pretense take liberty to
send what bold messages you please to your king; know, that the king by me
commands you to come down, and if you obey not his command, here I have those
that will fetch you down.

Verse. 10. If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from heaven, etc.] If
I be indeed a man of God, as you only term me in scorn and derision, let it be
manifest in the coming of that to pass, which I now foretell; even, that fire
may come down from heaven and consume thee and thy fifty: this he denounced
against them, out of a singular zeal for Gods glory, and by a special instinct
of Gods spirit: and therefore when the disciples of Christ, out of a carnal
desire of revenge, would have imitated this act of Elijah; they were reproved
by our Savior; the rather, because they, in regard of the Gospel, that were
called to preach were more especially to show all meekness and gentleness to
men, and to desire rather to save then to destroy, Luke 9.54, 55. And when his
disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, will thou that we command
fire to come down from heaven, and consume them even as Elias did: But he
turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are
of, etc.

Verse. 11. O man of God, thus has the king said, Come down quickly.] To
express his bold resolution, and that he feared not to execute the kings
command, because of that terrible end which befell the former captain and his
fifty; he not only injoyns the prophet to come down, but presses him also to
do it speedily, as implying that he would not be delayed, but would dragge him
down by force, if he would not yield instantly.

Verse. 13. And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his
knees before Elijah etc.] Though he had not so much faith, and courage, and
goodness in him, as to dissuade the king from sending again, or to refuse to
obey his command, yet out of the fear of that vengeance that fell upon those
that were sent before, he humbled himself before the prophet, and sued to him
to spare their lives.

Verse. 16. Thou shall not come down off that bed, on which thou art gone up,
etc.] We read not of any violence that the king offered to the prophet when he
was come to him, though thus boldly he seconded by word of mouth that message
which he had formerly sent him by his servants; so mightily did God over-aw
him, that erewhile was so resolute to be revenged on the prophet; and happily,
the unexpected confidence of the prophet, in delivering this message, made him
fear that he came armed with power from God, to execute some judgment on him,
and so that might over-aw him.

Verse. 17. And Jehoram reigned in his stead, in the second year of Jehoram the
son of Jehoshaphat, etc.] Ahaziah dying without children, his brother Jehoram
a second son of Ahab, chap. 3.1. reigned in his stead. But may some say,
Ahaziah his brother began to reign in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat, 1
Kings 22.51. Jehoram therefore (though we should assign to Ahaziahs reign two
complete years, as is there said) must needs succeed in the nineteenth year
of Jehoshaphat, who reigned in all twenty five years, 1 Kings 22.42. and how
is it then said, that he began his reign in the second year of Jehoram the
son of Jehoshaphat: I answer, that Jehoshaphat in the seventeenth year of
his reign, when he went with Ahab to recover Ramoth Gilead from the Syrians,
designed as king his son Jehoram, and though when he returned, he reassumed
the government into his own hands; yet the eighteenth year of his reign
(wherein Jehoram the son of Ahab entered upon the crown of Israel, chap. 3.1.)
is here called the second year of Jehoram his son, as counting from his
first designement to the crown in the life of his father.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 2. ANd Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry here, etc.] God had revealed to
Elijah that he should be taken up to heaven; as is manifest, verse. 9. and
withal had enjoined him; first, to visit those schools of the prophets which
were at Beth-el and Jericho, that he might both by his counsel and prayers
leave a blessing amongst them before his departure; and perhaps, that he might
put into their hands that prophecy against Jehoram the king of Judah; which
some years after was to be delivered to him, whereof mention is made, 2.
Chron. 21.12. And there came a writing to him from Elijah the Prophet, etc.
Elijah therefore addressing himself to this journey, immediately after which he
was to be taken up into heaven, either because he knew not what witnesses God
would allow to be present at that miraculous act, and affected not the
spreading of his fame thereby; or because he desired to be alone, that he might
the better prepare himself for this his strange passage to heaven; or because
he desired to try the constancy of Elishaes love, or whether the Lord had
revealed any thing to him concerning his rapture; or lastly, to make him the
more desirous to go along with him: when he was going from Gilgal he advised
Elisha to stay there.

Verse. 3. Know thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head to
day?] This phrase of taking away Elijah from the head of Elisha, is either used
to imply that he should be taken upward to heaven; or else rather, in relation
to the manner of their sitting in the schools of the Prophets; where Elijah, as
the father and teacher of the Prophets, used to sit in a higher place, as it
were above their heads, and Elisha and the rest at a lower place, as it were at
his feet: as it is said of the Apostle Paul, Acts 22.3. that he was brought up
at the feet of Gamaliel.

And he said, Yea, I know it, hold you your peace. The Lord had revealed to
Elisha, that his master should be that day taken up into heaven; yea, as it
seems, he had enjoined him to attend diligently his going away, and had perhaps
promised him, that if he saw him when he was taken up from him, he should have
a double portion of Elijahs spirit, as Elijah afterward told him, verse. 10. So
eagerly therefore did he intend the expectation of this miraculous rapture of
his master, that he was loath to entertain the least discourse with the
Prophets, lest his master should on a sudden be taken away, and he not see it;
and therefore he answers them so shortly, Yea, I know it; and enjoins them
presently to hold their peace.

Verse. 7. And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood to view
afar off.] To wit, to see the assumption of Elijah into heaven; and thus by
Gods providence there were many eyewitnesses of this miracle; and so likewise
had Christ many eyewitnesses of his resurrection and ascension, 1. Cor. 15.5,
6. etc. and Acts 1.9.

Verse. 9. Elijah said unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be
taken away from thee.] Thus it was also with Christ, John 16.23. Whatsoever you
shall ask the father in my name, I will give it you: Ephesians. 4.8. When he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.

And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me.]
That is, say some, the gift of prophecy to foretell future things, and the
gift of working miracles; and others conceive that he asked twice as much of
the gift of the spirit as Elijah had, out of a zealous unsatisfied desire to
promote Gods glory, and to do good to his people; and accordingly, say they,
whereas Elijah wrought eight miracles, Elisha wrought sixteen; but I rather
conceive, that hereby is meant only a great and eminent measure of the gifts
of the spirit; double in regard of the other Prophets, as alluding to the
privileges of the firstborn, Deuteronomy. 21.17. he was to succeed in the room of
Elijah, 1. Kings 19.16. He was to be a father to the schools of the Prophets,
and to be chiefly employed in opposing the corruptions of the times, and
therefore he craves a double portion of his spirit, that he might be furnished
according to the eminency of the place, and work he was to undertake.

Verse. 10. And he said, Thou have asked a hard thing, etc.] That is, that which
God does very rarely afford to any man, no not to his servants the Prophets, so
that to obtain this for thee from God, thou may well think it is no easy
thing, Nevertheless, says Elijah, if thou see me when I am taken from thee,
it shall be so unto thee: and this Elijah prescribed, as the condition of his
obtaining his desire, because though the seeing of Elijah when he was taken
away could no way be an advantage in it self to draw down a double portion of
his spirit upon Elisha, yet this would be both a trial of his faith, which,
where it is in truth, makes men with much vigilancie and intention of mind,
wait for the accomplishment of Gods promises, and that in the use of the means
which he has appointed, how unlikely soever they seem to be for the procuring
of the promised blessing in the eye of our reason; and might also inform him
how vehement his desire ought to be in seeking to obtain that great blessing
from God which he now desired, and as a sign whereby he should know whether
God would grant him his desire, or no.

Verse. 11. There appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire.] And thus this
zealous fiery spirited Prophet, after he had long and happily fought a good
fight of faith, and contended for God against all the errors and corruptions
of his times, was at last carried triumphantly in a chariot of fire into
heaven, that is, by the holy Angels appearing in the likeness of a chariot of
fire, and horses of fire, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.4. Who
makes his Angels spirits, his ministers a flaming fire; and so by this means
the Lord did exceedingly honor his faithful servant; and withal, as before
the Law, by the taking up of Enoch into heaven, so now under the Law, by this
rapture of Elijah; and then in the days of the Gospel, by the ascension of
Christ, God was pleased to give evident and sensible proofs, that he has
prepared the heavens for the perpetual abode of his Saints, and that though
our bodies be laid for a time in the grave, yet they shall at last be taken up
into heaven, there to live with God in everlasting glory; only they must be
changed, and of natural weak corruptible bodies, they must be made spiritual
glorious incorruptible bodies; and such a change no doubt there was now made in
the body of Elijah, that it might be fitted for heaven.

Verse. 12. And he cried, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof.] That is the strength and defense both of the Church and
commonwealth of Israel, who by his doctrine and prayers, did more for the
defense of the Israelites; then all their forces of chariots and horsemen could
do: and this Elisha spoke, either as bewailing the loss of Elijah in this
regard; or else, to express his thoughts concerning this manner of Elijahs
rapture; namely that because he had been, as the chariot of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof, for their defense and safety; therefore he was now taken up
with a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and so carried triumphantly into
heaven.

Verse. 13. He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him.] When
Elijah was caught up into heaven, his mantle fell from him, first, to show that
he was gone where he should no more have any need of his garments or any such
thing: and secondly, that it might be left to Elisha, as a token that God had
designed him to succeed in Elijah place: out of grief for the loss of his
master, he had torn his own garments, and now to comfort him again, that very
mantle is as it were given him from heaven, wherewith at his first calling he
was assured that he should succeed him in his prophetical office.

Verse. 14. And said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah; etc.] These were no words
of distrust and doubting, but of invocation and faith, as if he had said, I
shall now see whether the spirit of Elijah rests upon me or no, by attempting
to work the same miracle; or, O Lord who by thy servant Elijah did divide
these waters, make it now manifest by the same miracle that thou have given me
the spirit of Elijah.

Verse. 15. And they came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before
him.] As to the father of the Prophets.

Verse. 16. Lest peradventure the spirit of the Lord has taken him up, and cast
him upon some mountain, etc.] See the note upon the 1 Kings 18.12.

Verse. 17. They sent therefore fifty men, and they sought three days but found
him not.] Thus through their mistake, the rapture of Elijah to heaven was
confirmed.

Verse. 19. But the water is naught, and the ground barren.] The land of Canaan
was a most fruitful land, and had the waters of Jericho been always naught
and the ground barren, it is not likely they would have built a city there; or
that Hiel the Beth-elite would so lately have reedified it in the days of
Ahab, if it had been then so annoyed; but we see what the Psalmist says, Psalm.
107.33, 34. He turns rivers into a wilderness, and the watersprings into dry
ground: A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein. The sins of the inhabitants (and perhaps the reedifying of
Jericho) had brought this curse upon the place: which now therefore they
commend to Elishaes consideration, as expecting that the Lord would now by
miracles confirm the calling of this new father of the Prophets.

Verse. 20. Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein, etc.] Salt was more
likely to make the waters brackish, then any way to heal them, and the more was
Gods power magnified, who could work this alteration in the waters by such
contrary means; as for his appointing the salt to be brought in a new cruse,
that might be enjoined, either, first, to make sure that it should not be any
way legally unclean; or secondly, to signify the new change that should be
made in the waters; or rather, thirdly, that it might not be supposed that the
salt had virtue to cure the waters from the cruse by reason of any thing that
had formerly been put into it but that it was merely of God that it was
effectual for this end, according to the words of Elisha in the following
verse, when he cast the salt into the spring Thus says the Lord, I have healed
these waters. And indeed, it is probable, that for this very reason the Prophet
did appoint the men of the city to fetch a new cruse of salt; namely, that
they might be assured that there was no underhand dealing in working this
miracle.

Verse. 23. And he went up from thence unto Beth-el.] Having visited the
college of the Prophets at Jericho, he went thence to that also at Beth-el,
both to inform them of Elijahs rapture, and the Lords designing him to succeed
in his place, and to confirm them in the truth, both by his counsel and prayers.

And as he was going up by the way, there came forth little children out of the
city, and mocked him, etc.] Beth-el was the chief place where Jeroboams
idolatry was practiced, 1 Kings 12.28, 29. though therefore the prophets had
seated themselves there, because there was most need of their presence, where
was the springhead of that corruption: yet it seems, the inhabitants were most
of Jeroboams religion, and no marvel then, though the little children had
learnt of their idolatrous parents to scoff at Gods prophets, as here they did
Elisha, crying after him as he went along, Go up thou bald-head, go up thou
bald-head, wherein they did not only revile him with the name of bald-head,
but also scoffed at that report, which, no doubt, was soon spread abroad of
Elijahs rapture into heaven; as if they should have said, you that report your
master is gone up into heaven, why do not you go up after him? for indeed why
they should by way of derision call upon him to go up the hill, as commonly it
is thought these words were spoken, I cannot conceive.

Verse. 24. And he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the name
of the Lord, etc.] That is, by authority from God, he pronounced them accursed
of God; and indeed therefore it is expressed, that he looked on them before he
cursed them; to intimate, that he did not do it in a sudden passion, to
revenge himself, but by the special instinct of God, and that to punish the
wickedness of the parents in the death of these their misnurtured children;
and to let the Israelites see, that if God would so severely revenge the
reproaching of his prophets in the mouths of little children; much less would
he endure it in those that were of rip^r years. It is strange indeed, that the
prophet after durst go to Beth-el; but he went under Gods protection, who was
able to defend him, as he had done his master Elijah against the fury of king
Ahaziah; when he had fetched fire from heaven upon his captains and their
soldiers.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. NOw Jehoram the son of Ah^^ began to reign over Israel in Samaria,
the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat, etc.] Chap. 1.17. it is said, that he
succeeded his brother Ahaziah, and began his reign in the second year of
Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat; but that was only, because Jehoshaphat when
he went with Ahab against Ramoth Gi^ead, did design his son Jehoram to be
king in his room, and to govern the kingdom in his absence: howbeit at his
return he resumed the government of the kingdom to himself, as we see in this
place; and indeed there was good cause: for the trouble that Jehoshaphat was
put to, to reform things at his return, 2. Chron. 19.4. argues no small
distemper of the whole country, through the misgovernment of that his ungodly
son in his absence: see the note, chap. 1.17.

Verse. 2. He put away the image of Baal that his father had made.] That is, he
suppressed the worship of Baal which his father had set up, though he continued
still the idolatry of Jeroboam in his golden calves: it was much indeed that
this wicked king should reform so much; especially, his mother Jezebel being
yet living, by whose means the worship of Baal was first brought in: but it may
well be, that his conscience was a little startled with the death, first of his
father, and then of his brother Ahaziah, occasioned by the strange fall that he
got, and with the late revolt of the Moabites from them; and besides, perhaps
he knew that the Prophets of God attributed these things to the idolatry of the
Israelites; and therefore intending an expedition against the Moabites, he
resolved first to suppress the idolatry of Baal, that so his war against
Moab might speed the better.

Verse. 7. The king of Moab has rebelled against me: will thou go with me
against Moab to battle?] He rebelled in the days of Ahaziah, immediately after
the death of Ahab their father, chap. 1.1. but Ahaziah was king little above a
year, and the most of that time perhaps bedrid with his fall, and so could not
undertake the reducing of Moab to their former obedience, and so now Jehoram
his brother undertakes it so soon as ever he came to the crown.

And he said, I will go up, etc.] Whether it were out of a desire that
Jehoshaphat had to be avenged on the Moabites for their defection from the
kings of Judah to Israel (for being formerly tributaries to David and Solomon,
they had left the kings of Judah, and given themselves for vassals unto this
time to Jeroboam and his successors) or for that they had lately with other
nations made war upon him, and invaded his land, 2. Chron. 20.1. or whether
it were because Joram king of Israel had put down the worship of Baal in his
kingdom, and so in this regard he thought he might the more safely join with
him in this war against Moab, though he had been formerly reproved by Gods
Prophets, first, for aiding Ahab when he went against Ramoth Gilead, 2. Chron.
19.2. and, secondly, for joining himself with Amaziah to make ships to go to
Tarshish, 2. Chron. 20.37. Yet now again he joined himself with Jehoram the
son of Ahab, and brother of Amaziah in this his war against the Moabites.

Verse. 8. And he said Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way
through the wilderness of Edom.] That is, Jehoram asked Jehoshaphat which way
they should go; and Jehoshaphat advised them to go the way through the
wilderness of Edom, to wit, either that they might come upon the Moabites by a
way they looked not for them; or that they might take the king of Edom and his
forces along with him; or else, the better to assure that nation of the
Edomites by the way, of whom they had the more cause to be jealous, because
some of them had lately been in the field at Engaddi against Jehoshaphat,
together with the Moabites and the Ammonites, 2. Chron 20.22. The Lord set
ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were
come against Judah, and they were smitten: though at this time they were
tributaries to Jehoshaphat, and so continued till his sons reign, 2 Chronicles.
21.8.

Verse. 9. So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of
Edom.] That is, the Viceroy of Edom, whom Jehoshaphat had set over them; for as
yet they had no king of their own, 2. Chron. 21.8.

Verse. 11. Here is Elisha the son of Shaphat, which poured water on the hands
of Elijah.] That is, Here is Elisha the servant or minister of Elijah: whether
in this particular Elijah made use of Elishaes service, we need not enquire,
because this was the ordinary employment of servants that attended upon their
masters; therefore with this proverbiall kind of speech this courtier speaks of
him as Elijahs attendant, Here is Elishah that poured water on the hands of
Elijah: and no doubt it was by the special instinct of Gods spirit, that
Elisha was come along with the army into these deserts of Edom.

Verse. 12. And Jehoshaphat said, The word of the Lord is with him.] So he
judged, both because he was the disciple of so great a prophet, and perhaps his
fame was already spread abroad; as also, because he conceived there was
something in it, that he should be now come with the army.

So the king of Israel, and Jehoshaphat, and the king of Edom went down to
him.] It was very much that three kings should go down to the prophet, and that
they did not rather send for Elisha to come to them, as at other times the
kings of Israel and Judah were wont to do: but first, the great extremity they
were now in, might make them desirous to ingratiate themselves to Elisha by all
possible means: secondly, it is like enough, that Jehoshaphat might advise him
hereto; and that because knowing how much the prophets of God were despised and
slighted in those days, he thought it requisite, by this great honor done to
Elisha, to let the people see how highly they ought to esteem them*

Verse. 13. And Elisha said unto the king of Israel, What have I to do with
thee? get thee to the prophets of thy father, etc.] Though the king of Israel
had suppressed the idolatry of Baal in his kingdom, yet because he continued
still in the idol-worship of his golden calves, therefore Elisha professes to
him with great boldness, as became him upon whom the spirit of Elijah did
rest; that there was no reason that a worshiper of idols should come to the
prophet of the true God, in the time of his extremity, but ironically wills
him, to go to the prophets of his father, and the prophets of his mother, to
see if they could now yield him any comfort.

Nay: for the Lord has called these three kings together, to deliver them into
the hand of Moab.] As if he should have said; Nay Elisha, do not now charge
these things upon me, for as it is the Lord that has brought us into these
straits, so it is he only I know, that can halp us out, and not these
idol-gods; which those false prophets worship thou speak of: yea if succor
come not speedily we are like to be undone: you see we are like to fall into
the hands of the Moabites, if they should come upon us; not I only, but even
these kings that are with me, whom I know thou do highly esteem: it is no
time therefore now to chide, but to help; wherefore enquire I pray of the Lord
for us, and call upon him that we may be delivered.

Verse. 14. As the Lord of hosts lives, before whom I stand.] See the note, 1.
Kings 17.1.

Verse. 15. But now bring me a minstrell,] This he called for, either to compose
his affection and to quiet his mind, that was somewhat moved against Jehoram;
or rather, that by singing some holy psalm or hymn, both himself, and those
that were with him present, might have their hearts raised to such holy and
heavenly meditations, as might render him the fitter to ask and receive
prophetical inspirations, and them the fitter to hear what God would say unto
them.

The hand of the Lord came upon him.] That is, the spirit of prophecy.

Verse. 19. And ye shall smite every fenced city, and every choice city, and
shall fell every good tree.] Thus God by this special direction of the prophet
gave allowance to the Israelites, to do that for the punishing of the Moabites,
as devoted to utter destruction, which by the general rule of the law they
might not have done, Deuteronomy. 20.19. When thou shall besiege a city a long time,
in making war against it to take it, thou shall not destroy the trees thereof
by forcing an ax against them: or else, that law was meant only of the wars
they were to make against the cities in the land of Canaan.

Verse. 20. And it came to pass in the morning when the meat offering was
offered, that behold, there came water, etc.] This time God was pleased to
choose wherein to send them water, thereby to honor that service which was
done him then by his people, and to teach them that all blessings come to us by
Christ (who was the sum of all those sacrifices) and are to be obtained by
the prayers of his people: for the time of the morning sacrifice was also the
time of public prayer, Acts 3.1. Now Peter and John went up together into the
temple, at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.

Verse. 23. And they said, This is blood, etc.] The glistering of the
sunne-beams upon the waters made them think the place where the Israelites were
to be covered over with blood; which conceit, was doubtless the more readily
entertained: First, because they never dreamed of any water in those deserts of
Edom, where the Israelites lay now encamped: Secondly, because not long before
the like had befallen their people, when they went with the Ammonites and
Edomites against Jehoshaphat; dissension arising among them, they fell upon,
and slew one another, 2 Chronicles. 20.22, 23. and why might not the same now happen
amongst these kings that had combined together against them? And thus the
Moabites were by a misconceit drawn forth from their borders, which were
happily strong, and through which the Israelites could not so easily have
broken; being so confident of what they supposed, that they sent not forth
scouts to see whether it were so as they conceived, or no.

Verse. 25. And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land cast
every man his stone, etc.] That is, wherever they came in the land of Moab,
they did what they could utterly to spoil their country, razing their cities,
casting stones upon their lands, stopping their wells, and felling their trees.

Only in Kir-haraseth left they the stones thereof, etc.] That is, only the
city of Kir-haraseth stood in her strength and was not razed: to wit, because
thither the king of Moab fled with his soldiers, and so manned it, and
defended it against the Israelites: Kir-haraseth was indeed the chief and best
fortified city in the land of Moab, as we may see, Esaias 16.7. and therefore no
marvel it is, though that endured a siege when the other were presently taken;
the king being also retired thither for shelter with all his forces.

Howbeit the slingers went about it, and smote it. etc.] That is, though they
could not presently take this city, yet they besieged it; the slingers seeking
to beat the defendants from the walls, that they might scale them, or batter
them with engines, or dig them down with mattocks, and so take the city; yet
some by slingers here understand engineers, which with their engines did force
stones against the walls, to batter them with violence, as now gunners shoot
bullets.

Verse. 26. And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for him,
etc.] That is, when he saw that his enemies were too strong for him, and were
like to prevail and take the city, he sallied forth with seven hundred men upon
that quarter where the king of Edom lay, hoping to break through, and so to
escape: neither was it perhaps without cause that he chose to make his salley
upon Edoms quarter, for it might be, either, because that quarter was weakest;
or, because his rage was most against those their neighbors for helping the
Israelites; especially, considering that a while before the Edomites and they
had joined together against Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20.22. or, because he might
hope to find them no sure friends to this enterprise of the Israelites against
him.

Verse. 27. Then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead,
etc.] This may be meant of the king of Edoms eldest son; and so it is evident
by the contents of this chapter; our translatours understood it; to wit, that
the king of Moab having the king of Edoms eldest son in his power, whether
left with him as an hostage formerly, or now taken lately in that salley which
he had made upon the king of Edoms quarters; he took him and sacrificed him
upon the walls of the city: whereupon the Edomites being enraged against the
king of Israel, because by his pressing the continuance of this siege, so
lamentable a mischief was fallen upon their king and his son, they brake up,
and went in a fury away from the camp, and so the siege was raised. But I
rather conceive it was the king of Moabs own son whom he sacrificed: First,
because the king of Edom was but a viceroy, chosen, and set over them by
Jehoshaphat (for in his time they had no king of their own, 2. Chron. 21.8.)
and therefore he could not have a son that should have succeeded him in his
throne: Secondly, because this barbarous fact would rather have enraged both
the king of Edom himself and the other kings to have pressed the siege the more
vehemently, that they might come to be revenged on him: better therefore do
most of Expositours understand this of the king of Moabs son; to wit, first,
that finding himself in extremity of distress, he fled to this last refuge, of
sacrificing his own son and heir to his idol-gods, that with so precious a
sacrifice he might prevail with them for help: and secondly, that this he did
on the wall, both to let his enemies see how resolved he was still to hold out,
and that they might be afraid of the event of such a sacrifice: and thirdly,
that the great indignation against Israel here spoken of, was either that the
Edomites moved with this lamentable spectacle, were offended with the
Israelites for it, and so broke up their quarters and went away; or rather,
that after this prodigious act of blind devotion, both the king of Moab, and
the inhabitants of the city, were more bitterly enraged against the Israelites
then ever, and were resolved to fight it out to the last man; which the
Israelites perceiving, and withal perhaps moved with some compassion, upon
that lamentable spectacle, they raised the siege and went away home: As for
that place, whereby some would prove it was the king of Edoms son that was
slain, Amos 2.1. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Moab and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because he burnt the bones
of the king of Edom into lime: that speaks of burning the king of Edom not the
kings son; how ever it may be meant of any other salvage act of cruelty in
the Moabites against the king of Edom.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 1. THy servant my husband is dead, and thou know that thy servant did
fear the Lord.] This she adds, first, to clear her husband from the suspicion
of wasting what he had by any evil courses: secondly, to move him the rather
to pity her, because her husband was one, as Elisha knew well, that did truly
and unfainedly fear the Lord; and indeed observable it is, how respectively
she speaks of her husband, though he had left her in so great poverty and
distress.

And the creditour is come to take unto him my two sons to be bondmen.] See
the notes, Exodus: 21.2. and Levit. 25.39.

Verse. 2. Tell me, what have thou in thine house.] As if Elisha should have
said, come let me see what thou have of any value in thy house, that may go
toward the payment of thy debts: and thus whilst the prophet made show, as if
he desired to know how far she was able to discharge her husbands debts, that
so he might try if he could compose the difference betwixt her and the
creditour; he brought her to speak of the pot of oil she had, (to wit, that
being the only thing of any value she had; for we cannot think she was so
poor, that she had nothing at all else left in her house) intending to take
that occasion to give order for that whereby she was to be miraculously
supplied.

Verse. 4. Thou shall shut the door upon thee, etc.] This was enjoined; first,
as an act or sign, approving or testifying her faith, that being left to her
self hopeless of all help and succor from man, she did yet expect from the
Lord that miraculous help which the prophet had promised her: secondly, as a
circumstance, implying, that it was fit they should pray unto God when they
undertook this work, whereto privacy was required: thirdly, that they might not
be disturbed by others, when they were employed in this business they had in
hand: but fourthly, and principally, for the clearer manifestation of the
intended miracle, that there might be no suspicion, that the oil was by any
body secretly conveyed into the house to them.

Verse. 6. She said unto her son, Bring me yet a vessel.] That is, to one of
her sons, for that she had two sons is evident, verse. 1.

Verse. 8. Elisha passed to Shunem.] A city in the tribe of Issachar, not far
from mount Carmel, Josh. 19.17, 18. the very same, from whence Abishag was
fetched to David, 1 Kings 1.3.

Verse. 9. I perceive that this is an holy man of God.] Not only a prophet, but
a man of eminent holiness.

Verse. 10. Let us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall.] Not that
she had not room in her house to lodge him, but because she considered that the
tumult of a large family might be some disturbance to the devotions, study, and
meditations of a prophet, and therefore thought it convenient to provide a
place for him where he might be more retired.

Verse. 12. Call this Shunamite, And when he had called her, she stood before
him.] Verse. 15. it is again said, that Elisha bad Gehazi call her; so that
though it be here expressed, that she came and stood before Elisha, yet that
which follows must be conceived to have been done before her coming: the order
of the carriage of the business it seems, was this: Elisha sent Gehazi to call
her to him, and withal willed him to acquaint her with the business; namely,
that in recompense of her kindness, if she had any suit to the king or captain
of the host, he would be her mediator; she answering Gehazi, that she dwelt
among her own people; and Gehazi carrying back this answer to his master, he
consulted with Gehazi what then might be done for her: and Gehazi putting him
in mind that she had no child, Elisha bade him again call her.

Verse. 13. And he said unto him, Say now unto her, Behold now thou have been
careful for us, etc.] This was the message which Elisha bade Gehazi carry her,
when he was first sent to call her, wherein he makes a thankful
acknowledgement of her great care of them; and then tenders to speak for her,
if she had any occasion either to the king or the captain of the host; whereby
it appears also, that the succor which Elisha had afforded the kings in their
distress, chap. 3.16. etc. had brought him into great credit at court.

And she answered, I dwell among my own people.] In this answer is employed,
that she needed not his help in this kind, as intimating, First, that she lived
contentedly, and was not ambitious of any better condition, then that she
enjoyed in a private quiet life amongst her own neighbors: Secondly, that she
lived peaceably, not having occasion to complain or seek relief from higher
powers, not amongst enemies, but neighbors and friends in a mean condition;
nor so high as to be envied, nor so low as to be trodden on: Thirdly, that if
she should have occasion to seek help, she could not want friends, that would
do what one man may do for another: yet afterward it was well she found a
friend in court, chap. 8.3, 4. to wit, when Gehazi obtained that her land
should be restored to her.

Verse. 14. And he said, What then is to be done for her?] That is, when Gehazi
brought back to Elisha this answer of the Shunamites, he asked Gehazi what else
then there was, wherein they might gratify her; wherein also it is well worth
the noting, that though Elisha were so great a prophet, yet he would vouchsafe
thus to consult and advise with his servant.

Verse. 15. And when he had called her she stood in the door.] To wit, as out
of modesty; she would not presently rush into the prophets chamber, though it
were in her own house, but stood at the door, till either he should come out
to her, or call for her in.

Verse. 16. And he said, About this season, according to the time of life, thou
shall embrace a son.] This phrase, thou shall embrace a son, employed, not
only the birth of the child, but also the safety of the child and mother; the
time is expressed much in the same words, as in the promise that was made to
Abraham, concerning the birth of Isaac, Genesis 18.10. of which, see the note
there.

Nay my lord, thou man of God, do not lie unto thine handmaid.] As if she had
said, O that God would grant that it might be so! but my lord, thou man of God,
do not deceive thy handmaid with vain hopes; she knew well that the holiness
of the prophet could not stand with wilful lying; yet perhaps she might fear
it was spoken for trial only: and therefore as being divided betwixt hope and
fear, she desires to be satisfied, whether she might assure her self of what
he had promised, for so it is expressed, verse. 28. Then she said, did I desire
a son of my lord? did I not say, Do not deceive me?

Verse. 21. And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, etc.]
All this she did, either as hoping the child might be restored to life, by
being laid upon the prophets bed, or rather thereby to hide this occasion of
grief from her husband and family, lest they should hinder her in her intended
design of going to the prophet, as confidently hoping by the prayers of that
prophet, on whose bed she had laid her dead child, to receive him restored to
life again: and perhaps the rather, because she had heard how Elijah had
restored to life a widows dead child, 1. Kings 17.21.

Verse. 23. And he said, Wherefore will thou go to him to day? it is neither new
moon, nor sabbath, etc.] This he says, because on those days they did usually
go to the prophets to be instructed, and seldom at other times; which made him
wonder why she should desire to go now: and hereupon she answered, It shall be
well; as if she had said, do not trouble your self, my journey doubtless shall
be for good, and therefore I pray give way to it.

Verse. 26. Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with
thee?] Because she came in such haste at an unusual time, he feared something
was amiss with her.

Is it well with the child? and she answered, It is well.] This she spoke, as
it were, to cut off her speech with Gehazi, and as hastening to speak with
Elisha himself, and withal happily as persuading her self that this which God
had done would be for good.

Verse. 27. And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught him by
the feet.] Transported with the vehemence of her passion, she fell down upon
the ground, and cast her arms about his legs, thereby expressing, both, first,
the reverent respect she bare to him; as the disciples did, when they cast
their arms about Christ's feet, Matthew. 28.9. secondly, the unsupportablenesse of
her sorrow; and thirdly, the vehemence of her desire to obtain help by his
means in whom all her refuge and hope was; and that she was resolved not to
leave him till he had satisfied her desire, as she expresses her self
afterward, verse. 30. As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not
leave thee.

But Gehazi came near to thrust her away.] As apprehending, that this uncouth
carriage of her self toward the prophet, was neither seemly for her nor him.

Verse. 28. Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say, Do
not deceive me?] That is, why was a son given us, of thy own motion, when I
asked no such thing; yea, when I desired that thou would not deceive me with
vain hopes, if now my misery must be greater by losing him, then it would have
been by remaining childlesse? had I offended by too violent desire of a child,
I might have judged that to have been the cause why my child is now again taken
away; but being given freely without any request of mine, why am I now so soon
deprived of him?

Verse. 29. Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins, etc.] As they used to do
in those countries, where they used long garments, when they meant to make
have, and for the same cause he is enjoined not to stay to salute any body by
the way. Some think the cause of this enjoined haste, was to prevent Gehazies
vainglorious imparting of the business he was sent about to any body he
should meet with by the way, which might have proved a hinderance to the
working of the miracle; but that which others say, is far more probable;
namely, that it was only to make sure that the child might be restored to life
before his death came to be known in the family, that so the fathers grief
might be prevented, and the miracle withal might be concealed.

Verse. 30. And the mother of the child said, As the Lord lives, and as thy
soul lives, I will not leave thee.] Though she did not oppose nor distrust
altogether the course which Elisha had taken for the raising of the child, (for
had she not given Gehazi the key of the prophets chamber, wherein she had
locked up the dead child, verse. 21. how could he have come at him to lay the
prophets staff upon his face?) yet as questioning and doubting whether this
means would be effectual or no; and therefore desiring that he would go along
with her, she resolves confidently that she will not return without him.

Verse. 31. And laid the staff upon the face of the child, but there was
neither voice nor hearing, etc.] Some ascribe this to want of faith, both in
Gehazi and the mother: others think that Elisha gave that direction for the
laying of his staff upon the face of the child, without any special direction
or promise from the spirit of God, only because he had at other times wrought
miracles with this staff: but rather, I think, it is to be ascribed to the
change of Elisha his purpose, had he not yielded to have gone himself, perhaps
the staff might have been effectual; now the Lord was pleased to withhold his
power and help till the prophet came.

Verse. 34. And he went up, and lay upon the child, etc] He applied his body to
the body of the child, so far as it could be done in two bodies of such
disproportion. See the note, 1 Kings 17.21.

Verse. 35. Then he returned, and walked in the house to and fro, etc.] Why he
rose up from lying upon the child to walk to and fro, and then went and lay
upon the child again, it is hard to say: it is said, that perhaps he was
wearied with lying in that manner as he did upon the child, or that perceiving
the flesh of the child to wax warm, as in the foregoing verse it is said it
did, the joy thereof did make him rise up and fetch a turn, and then presently
he lay down upon the child again: But I rather conceive all this proceeded from
the exceeding vehemence and intention of his desires in seeking to God for the
reviving of the child; it being usual with those that are so transported with
strong desires to be thus various in their actions, and sometime to be in one
posture and sometime in another; as finding no rest in themselves, till their
desires be satisfied.

And the child opened his eyes.] Which was a sign that the child was perfectly
restored to life: and thus, as in other miracles, so in this. God was pleased
to make it manifest that the spirit of Elijah rested upon Elisha as his
successor, by enabling him to do the same kind of wonders that the other had
done: Elijah divided Jordan with his mantle, 2 Kings 2.8. so did Elisha too,
verse 14. Elijah multiplied the widow of Zarephaths oil, 1 Kings. 17.14. and
Elisha did as much for a poor prophets widow, verse. 2: etc. of this chapter:
Elijah brought rain from heaven after a time of great drought, 1. Kings 18.41.
and Elisha supplied three kings and their armies with water, when they were
ready to perish with drought, 2 Kings 3.16, 17. Elijah cursed the captains and
their fifties that came to apprehend him, and they were presently destroyed
with fire from heaven, 2 Kings 1.10. And Elisha cursed the children that
reproched and mocked him, and they were presently torn in pieces by two she
bears, chapter ^.24. and so now here Elisha raised from death the Shunamites
son, as Elijah had raised the Sareptans son before, 1 Kings 17.21, 22.

Verse. 33. And Elisha came to Gilgal, and there was a dearth in the land, etc.]
To wit, to visit the College of the prophets which was in this city, and that
the rather, to encourage and comfort them because of the dearth that was now in
the land; and therefore it is said in the next clause, and the sons of the
prophets were sitting before him: to wit, to be instructed by him, as Paul used
to sit at the feet of Gamaliel, Acts 22.3. which is perhaps the rather added,
to intimate, that it was by Elishaes means, that the society of the prophets
was not dissolved, but holy exercises were continued amongst them
notwithstanding the famine.

Verse. 39. And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild
vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds, etc.] That is, going forth to gather
herbs for the pottage, he lighted upon this wild vine, and not knowing it, yet
gathered thereof; now it is generally thought that this was Coloquintida, a
plant that grows in fields and hedg-rowes, somewhat like a vine, the gourds,
that is, the leaves and branches whereof are bitter and poisonous.

Verse. 40. They cried out, and said, O thou man of God, there is death in the
pot.] As fearing by their bitter and unsavory rast there had been poison in
the pottage.

Verse. 42. And there came a man from Baal-shalisha, and brought the man of God
bread of the first fruits, etc.] The first fruits by the law were to be given
to the priests, Numbers 18.12. but the priests were now driven away from the
ten tribes, ever since Jeroboam had set up his golden Calves, and forbidden the
people to go up to the temple at Jerusalem, 2. Chron. 11.14. and therefore this
good man brought these twenty loaves of the first fruits, etc. to Elisha and
the prophets, who instructed the people instead of the priests, and that the
rather out of a care to supply their necessities in this great dearth that was
now in the land.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 5. GO and I will send a letter unto the king of Israel.] Which was
Jehoram the son of Ahab, chap. 3.1.

Verse. 6. I have therewith sent Naaman my servant to thee, that thou may
recover him of his leprosy.] That is, that thou may cause him to be
recovered of his leprosy, for what any prophet in Israel could do, he doubted
not but that the king might command.

Verse. 7. He rent his clothes, and said, Am I a God, to kill and to make alive?
etc.] His words show what was the cause of his grief; namely, the fear that
Ben-hadad the king of Syria, the old enemy of Israel, sought in this to pick a
quarrel that he might invade the land; yet likely enough it is, that to cover
this, he pretended the blasphemy of requiring that of him, which was the only
proper work of God, and in the mean season never thought of what Elisha could
do.

Verse. 8. Wherefore have thou rent thy clothes?] And thus Elisha covertly taxed
the king for so little regarding the miracles which Elisha had wrought, that
now he never entertained a thought of consulting with him, and gave him to
understand that even the Syrians should know that there was a prophet in
Israel, though he and his courtiers would take no notice of him: Let him come
now to me, says he, and he shall know there is a prophet in Israel.

Verse. 10. And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash in Jordan
seven times, etc.] Not going out to him, First, that the miracle might be the
more remarkable, the prophet doing no more but send him a message, that he
should go and wash in Jordan, and he should be clean: Secondly, that Naaman
might the more plainly see, that he did it not to ingraciate himself with so
great a peer of Syria, or out of a hope to get any thing from him, but only to
advance the glory of the God of Israel: Thirdly, the better to try the faith
and obedience of Naaman, which was happily also the reason why he appointed him
to wash seven times.

Verse. 13. And his servants came near and spoke unto him and said, My father,
etc.] Some conceive, that because Naaman had wrought some great deliverance for
Syria, verse. 1. therefore he was usually styled the father of his country, and
that hence it was that his servants gave him this title, My father: others
think that it was in relation to the gentleness of his government, in that he
was to them more like a father then a lord and master: but I rather think that
the great princes and nobles of Syria were usually called fathers, and that
thence it was that Naamans servants used this expression when they spoke to him.

Verse. 14. And his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child.]
Because leprosy used to eat away and consume the flesh, therefore it is said
here of Naaman, that being cured his flesh came again, and that it was like
unto the flesh of a little child; that is, full, clear and fresh* without any
skar or mark of his former disease; ^his former storming at the prophets
directions hindered not the cure, because God intended mercy to him, and would
not have the word of his prophet fail of success.

Verse. 16. As the Lord lives, before whom I stand, I will receive none.]
Though the prophets used to receive presents of those that came to them; yet
here Elisha would receive none of Naaman: and that happily, first, that Naaman
might not think that the prophet had done what he did in hope and expectation
of receiving a reward: and secondly, that he might honor the God whom he
served, and the religion he professed, by slighting and rejecting that earthly
pelf, which worldly men do so much adore, and so might thereby gain Naaman to
embrace the true relition together with them.

Verse. 17. Shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules
burden of earth? etc.] Here was zeal in this new convert without knowledge: as
conceiving that the God of Israel would be the better pleased with his
sacrifices, if they were offered on an altar made of Canaan mold; or at least,
desiring by this outward ceremony openly to confess, that he was an Israelite
in religion though he dwelt in Syria; and that he had joined himself in the
unity of one faith to the people of God, he makes known these his thoughts to
the prophet, as seeking his approbation herein. The mold of Canaan, more then
he required, he might have taken without asking leave of Elisha; who would have
opposed him? but it was not so much the gift of the earth, as the giving of it
for that use, (with the approbation of the prophet) which he required.

Verse. 18. When my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and
he leans on my hand, and I bow my self, etc.] To wit, only that the king
leaning on his shoulder might bow, which he could not if he stood upright and
would not bend his body: and that it was usual with kings in those times to
lean on the shoulders of their nobles, is evident, Chap. 7.2. Then a lord on
whose hand the king leaned, etc. This bowing of his, though he did it only
upon this ground, his own conscience told him was not justifiable, yet because
he could not avoid this, and yet keep his place and favor with the king,
therefore herein he desires to be excused: the Lord, says he, pardon thy
servant in this thing; so intimating, that he desired the prophets prayers to
God for him in this regard.

Verse. 19. And he said unto him, Go in peace.] Not as approving that his bowing
in the house of Rimmon does the prophet bid him Go in peace, for to make a
semblance or do that which should have show of adoring the idol could not be
lawful, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Cor. 6.20. For
you are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are Gods: only as glad to see him thus far, and rather
thinking it fitting to forbear the checking of him for this reservation in hope
of Gods pardoning him, then by pressing too much upon him in the weakness of
his first conversion, to endanger the beating him off; he only dismisseth him
with a civil valediction, biding him farewell, Go in peace; or at the most, he
does but intimate that he did indeed desire that God would be merciful to him,
if he should thorough weakness of faith do so, or that he hoped that the Lord
would direct him, so that he should not offend God with any such thing*

Verse. 20. Behold my master has spared Naaman this Syrian, etc.] Thus
contemptuously did Gehazi speak of Naaman; Naaman this Syrian: to intimate the
reason why he disliked his masters refusing of Naamans gifts; namely, that
being a stranger, and of that nation that had always been enemies to the
people of God, he should rather spare him, then take that which might have done
so much good to him and his, and generally to the colleges of the poor
prophets who had need of some support in those evil times.

Verse. 23. And Naaman said, Be content, take two talents.] To wit, for each of
the young men one; for Gehazi had told him of two young men of the sons of
the prophets that were come to his master, as is expressed in the foregoing
verse.

Verse. 24. And when he came to the tower, he took them from their hand, etc.]
This might be some fort standing in the high way, or some out-house belonging
to the place where the prophet dwelt; and here Gehazi took the silver and the
garments from Naamans servants, not suffering them to go any nearer to the
house, lest Elisha his master should see them.

Verse. 26. Is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments, etc.] He
charge him with receiving olive-yards, and vine-yards, and sheep, and oxen,
etc. because these things in his mind he had already purchased with his two
talents of silver; and Elisha would have him see, that his very thoughts God
had revealed to him, and he pressed withal the unseasonablenesse of this fact,
because they had now to do with strangers, and Naaman himself was but newly
won to God, and Elisha had purposely refused his gifts, to bring the more
honor to God and their religion, all which Gehazi had crossed by his base
covetousness.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. BEhold now, the place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us,
etc.] The succession of two such famous prophets, Elijah and Elisha, and the
many miracles which were wrought by them, could not but draw many in these
corrupt times to join themselves to these sacred societies of the sons of the
prophets: and hence it was, that their college had not now room enough for
them; and therefore they desire liberty of Elisha their master to build
another, and that they affected not either pomp or state, but were contented
with a very homely dwelling, is evident by this, that themselves were to be the
builders of it; Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan, and take thence every man
a beam; and let us make us a place there, verse. 2.

Verse. 8. In such and such a place shall be my Camp.] That is, the king of
Syria resolved upon a place where he would lie in ambush with his army; knowing
that the army of the Israelites was to pass that way, and so hoping on a
sudden to fall out upon them.

Verse. 9. And the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying, Beware thou
pass not such a place, etc.] That is, he sent to Jehoram the son of Ahab,
who was now king, and succeeded his brother Amaziah in the throne of Israel,
Chap. 3.1. Had not Ahab his father spared the king of Syria, when he had him in
his power, 1. Kings 20.34. the Syrians had not been (perhaps) such continual
thorns in the sides of his son; but now he smarted for his fathers foolish
pity: only God was pleased to save his people by the prophet Elisha, that so
they might thereby be rendered more careful to keep God for their friend, or
else might be left without excuse.

Verse. 13. And he said, Go and spy where he is, that I may send and fetch
him.] A resolution that discovered no less folly then rage; for what a
madness was it to lay a plot to surprise him, of whom they had said, that he
knew every word that the king spoke in his greatest secrecy.

Verse. 15. And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, etc.]
Because Gehazi is after this Chap. 8.4. called the servant of the man of God,
some Expositours hold, that it was Gehazi that the text here speaks of; and
consequently that the leprosy of Gehazi was of that sort which did not make
those that had it unclean, and so unfit to converse with others: But yet
because Gehazi is no more mentioned in the story, as employed in the ministering
to Elisha, therefore it is most probable, that upon that fact of his mentioned
in the former chapter, being stricken with Leprosy, he was dismissed from his
attendance upon Elisha, and this other servant here mentioned, was one that
succeeded in his room.

Verse. 18. And he smote them with blindness, according to the word of Elisha.]
To wit, such a blindness as the Sodomites were stricken with, Genesis 19.11.
which was not a deprivation of sight (for they would never have followed a man
that promised to show them the city where the prophet was, if they had been
stark blind) but rather a withholding of their sight from seeing that which
they desired to see, or a dazeling and deluding the sense, that made them
mistake what they saw, and apprehend it to be something else then what it was.

Verse. 19. And Elisha said unto them, This is not the way, etc.] Elisha going
forth of the city to meet them, when he saw them coming toward it, it seems
they enquired of him both concerning the town and concerning the prophet, and
hereupon he answered them, as secretly mocking them, and insulting over them
with these ambiguous words, This is not the way; to wit, which you must go,
Neither is this the city where you must meet with Elisha; Follow me, etc.

Verse. 21. And the king of Israel said unto Elisha, when he saw them, My
father, shall I smite them? etc.] It is not likely that Elisha would bring such
an army of Syrians into the city, but that first he would give warning to the
king to arm themselves in a readiness, that when they came into Samaria,
instead of being able to do any hurt there, upon the opening of their eyes,
they should see themselves begirt with their enemies, ready upon a word given
to cut all their throats: And hence is this speech of the kings to the prophet,
My father, shall I smite them, shall I smite them? his repeating those words,
showing that his fingers itched to make use of this advantage, to be revenged
on the Syrians, though yet he would not do it without the prophets leave.

Verse. 22. Would thou smite those whom thou have taken captive with thy
sword, and with thy bow?] As if he should have said, if thou had taken them
prisoners in the battle thou would not have slain them, much less being
cast into thy hands, not by any force and policy of thine, but only by this
miraculous providence of the Almighty: Now thus God was pleased to have these
bloody enemies of Gods people dismissed in peace, that even they might publish
these miraculous works of God in a strange land.

Set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their
master.] To wit, that both he and his Syrians might there hear what God had
done to this army, whom they had sent to apprehend his prophet.

Verse. 23. So the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.] That
is, they gave over those inrodes into the land, which before had been usual
with them; and that happily as overcome with the favor which was shown them,
at least for the present, yea and when (perhaps some long time after) they did
again invade the land, it was not by sending out such bands of boote-halers as
formerly (fearing perhaps, lest they should be catched in a trap, as now they
had been:) but the king gathered all his host, and went up against them with a
power which he thought they would be no way able to resist.

Verse. 24. Ben-hadad king of Syria gathered all his host, and went up, and
besieged Samaria.] This was that Ben-hadad that had once before besieged
Samaria in Ahabs time, 1 Kings 20.1. Then the Israelites raised the siege, and
made him fly with shame and loss; and the rather happily did he now attempt
the besieging of this city again, that be might blot out the reproach of his
shameful flight from the former siege, encouraged thereto by the great
overthrow he had given the Israelites, in that battle wherein Ahab was slain,
1 Kings 22.34. It may indeed seem strange that Naaman, being so great with the
king of Syria, did not keep him off from invading the land of Israel; But for
this we must consider, first, that Naaman might in this time be dead; or
secondly, that he durst not show himself so far a friend to Gods people, as
to dissuade the king from this war; or thirdly, that perhaps he had lost his
place and favor with the king, beacuse he had embraced the Religion of Israel.
However, in this second siege of Samaria, we see how the Israelites still
smarted for Ahabs impious pity, in sparing this Ben hadad when he had him in
his power.

Verse. 25. An asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, etc.] Which
was as some account, about ten pound sterling But though it were very strange
that so great a price should be given for an asses head, and a clear evidence
that they were put to exceeding great straits in Samaria to get food, not only
because there could be but little meat in an asses head, and asses flesh must
needs be very untoothsome; but especially, because it was an unclean meat,
which the Israelites, by the Law of God, were forbidden to eat, Levit. 11.13.
yet the second instance that is here given is far more strange, to wit, that
the fourth part of a kab of doves dung, was sold for five pieces of silver, to
wit, about twelve shillings and six pence, and therefore some Expositours hold,
that this doves dung was bought for salt or firing; (the inhabitants of the
city being in as great straits for salt or firing, as for food) and others
conceive that some few seeds of corn might be found in the dung, and that for
this they bought it; or that the crop of pigeons, in which there will be some
corn undigested, is here comprehended under the Hebrew word here translated
doves dung. But indeed, why should we think it incredible that they should eat
doves dung, when we find afterward, verse. 29. that mothers did eat their own
children; extremity of famine will force men to feed on any thing that is most
loathsome; whence was that insulting speech of Rabshakeh to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, that he would make them eat their own dung, and drink their own
piss, chap. 18.27.

Verse. 26. As the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, etc.] To wit, to
see if he could descry the attempts of the enemy against the city; and
especially to see whether the watches were kept, and the walls guarded by his
own soldiers, as they ought to be.

Verse. 27. And he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help
thee?] If we read this as it is in the margin of our Bibles, then it seems to
be a passionate speech of the kings, wherein he curses the poor woman for
troubling him with her outcries ( Let not the Lord save thee, etc.) as if he
should have said, the Lord confound thee thou wretched woman; how can I help
thee unless God send help? but according to the translation that is in our
text the meaning is clear; namely, that he did in gentle terms seek to satisfy
the woman, (as thinking she had cried to him for food) that it was not in his
power to help her, unless the Lord would send them help from heaven.

Verse. 29. I said unto her on the next day, Give thy son, that we may eat
him: and she has hid her son.] To wit, to save her child alive, or with a
purpose to eat him alone, and not to let her neighbor share with her.

Verse. 31. Then he said, God do so and more also to me, if the head of Elisha,
etc.] Joram the king being deeply affected with that sad complaint of the woman
that had eaten her child (whereby he saw, to what extremities the inhabitants
of the city were brought by the famine) in a rage presently vowed that day to
cut off Elishaes head, to wit, either because Elisha had threatened this
judgment before it came, or, because the king persuaded himself that Elisha
could have procured help by his prayers, as formerly he had done to the army of
the Syrians at Dothan, and would not; or else, because he had persuaded the
king to hold out the siege, and had assured him of timely help from God, and so
now he looked upon him as the cause of all the misery they now lay under: And
thus the prophet that erewhiles was respected by him as a father, verse. 21. My
father, shall I smite them? is now in a fury designed to lose his head, as if
he had been the sole cause of all their misery.

Verse. 32. But Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him.] That
is, some of the godly magistrates of the city, who were come to consult with
him concerning the misery of the city and to desire his prayers, and were now
hearing him comforting them and instructing them what they should do.

See ye how this son of a murderer has sent to take away mine head?] As if
he should have said, he is his father Ahabs own son, he was a murderer, to
wit the murderer of Naboth and others, and so is this his son Joram; for
behold he has sent one to take away my head.

Shut the door, and hold him fast at the door, is not the sound of his
masters feet behind him? etc.] The most Expositours understand this thus; That
the prophet persuaded the elders to shut the door against the kings messenger,
and not to let him come in, and that because immediately his master would come
to recall this sentence, which in his rage he had passed against him. But
others again hold, that the elders were appointed by the prophet to hold fast
the door, that the kings messenger might not enter in to take off the prophets
head, as his master the king had appointed him; and that because the king
himself was coming immediately after him, and then the prophet meant to make
known to him how suddenly the Lord would relieve them, by sending them all kind
of provision in great plenty.

Verse. 33. The messenger came down unto him: and he said, Behold this evil is
of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer?] This may be the
speech either of the messenger, or of the king that came immediately after the
messenger; whosesoever it was, it seems the prophet had persuaded the king
still to wait upon God; and received this answer, that having waited so long,
it was altogether in vain to wait any longer; they might plainly perceive, that
the Lord meant to deliver them into the hands of the Syrians, and therefore to
what end should they suffer the people still to perish for hunger?

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. THen Elisha said, Hear ye the word of the Lord.] It may be this was
spoken only to the elders, and that messenger mentioned in the latter end of
this foregoing chapter, that was sent to take off Elishaes head: But because,
first, Elisha did there signify that the king was coming immediately after
him; Is not the sound of his masters feet behind him? And secondly, because in
the next verse it is said, that a lord on whose hand the king leaned, answered
the man of God: I rather think, the king came presently after the messenger,
and so this was spoken to the king and those that were come with him.

To morrow about this time, shall a measure of fine flower be sold for a
shekel, etc.] That is, for two shillings and six pence: before, an asses head
was sold for about ten pound, and a cab of doves dung for about twelve
shillings and six pence; and yet now a measure of fine flower, (which was about
a peck and a pottle, as most account it) should be sold for a shekel, which was
about two shillings six pence, and so also two measures of barley, a mighty
change.

Verse. 2. Then a lord on whose hand the king leaned, answered, etc.] Some
Expositours hold that this was that messenger mentioned in the latter end of
the foregoing chapter, that was sent to slay Elisha: but me thinks it is plain,
that these words describe a person not mentioned before, and that the king
himself was present when the words of the prophet was thus slighted by his
great favorite: As for the custom of kings leaning on their nobles hands, see
chap. 5.18.

If the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be?] That is, if
the Lord should cause the heavens to rain corn, if showers of flower and barley
should from the clouds be poured down upon us, there could not be such plenty.

Verse. 3. And there were four leprous men at the entering in of the gate.] For
they might not be within the city, because they were lepers, Levit. 13.44, 46.
but yet withal observable it is, how scrupulously careful the inhabitants of
Samaria were to observe that law of God, of not suffering the lepers to come
amongst them; yea though they were ready to perish for hunger, whilst in the
mean season they made no bones of transgressing Gods law in a matter of greater
weight and consequence, by their gross idolatry.

Verse. 5. And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the camp of the
Syrians.] That is, in the twilight of the evening, and it seems the Syrians
were fled but a little before they came; for of them it is said too, verse. 7.
that they arose and fled in twilight, and that both must be meant of the
evening twilight is evident, because it was in the following night; that first,
the lepers were getting themselves a booty in the tents of the Syrians, verse.
9. If we tarry, say they, till the morning light, some mischief will befall us:
And secondly, that the city was raised by them, verse. 12. and the king arose in
the night, etc.

Verse. 6. For the Lord had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of
chariots, etc,] Which yet the lepers nor none in the city heard; the Lord could
easily have stricken these Syrians dead in the place, but he was pleased
rather, as it were in a way of scorn and derision, to fright them with their
own fancies, and to make them fly, not daring to take their very horses with
them, like so many mad distracted men; when there was not a man near them to do
them any hurt.

Verse. 9. If we tarry till the morning light, some mischief will come upon us.]
This they said, because they judged it so great a fault not to acquaint their
brethren with that which God had done for them: when there were so many amongst
them that were in danger every moment to perish with hunger.

Verse. 10. So they came, and called unto the porter of the city: and they told
them, etc.] That is, the porter of the gate and the watchmen that were with him.

Verse. 11. And he called the porters, and they told it the kings house within.]
That is, the city porter went to the kings palace, and called to the kings
porters there, and acquainted them with the business, who presently went and
told the kings servants within the tidings that were brought them.

Verse. 13. Behold they are as all the multitude of Israel, etc.] That is, we
need not scruple the exposing of these to danger, whether men or horse, that we
send forth to see whether this be true which these Lepers report, for alas they
are as all the multitude of Israel, consumed, and ready to perish for hunger;
and as good dye by the sword of the Syrians, as stay behind to be starved here.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. THe Lord has called for a famine, and it shall also come upon the
land seven years.] And thus the people continuing in their sins, the
judgments of God were doubled upon them. In Elijahs time, God sent a famine
amongst them, but that lasted only three years and a half, James 5.17. Elijah
was a man subject to the like infirmities, and he prayed, and it rained not for
the space of three years and a half, but now this continued full seven years.

Verse. 2. And she went with her household and sojourned in the land of the
Philistines seven years.] Because it is said of this good Shunamite, that she
went with her household, etc. it is probably conceived, that her husband being
dead, she was at present a widow; and a notable discovery it was of the Lords
high displeasure against his people, that in the neighbor country of the
Philistines there was no want, and yet in the kingdom of Israel a sore famine
prevailed, yea and in Judah too: for it is not likely this good woman would
have sought the preservation of her life amongst the Philistines, if she might
have done it amongst her brethren of Judah: though the Philistines were a
wicked people, yet they had not the means of grace as Gods people had; and
therefore it is no wonder, though God was most provoked with the idolatry and
other wickedness of his own people.

Verse. 4. And the king talked with Gehazi the servant of the man of God, etc.]
When the Shunamite came to cry unto the king for her house and her land, (which
in the time of her absence was seized upon by her kindred, or by the officers
of state for the kings use) she found the king talking with Gehazi, concerning
the miracles which Elisha had wrought, and so by that means found favor with
the king, and recovered her estate. Some Expositours conceive that this was
before Gehazi was stricken with leprosy, though that be inserted in the
history before this, chap. 5.21. else they think the king would not have talked
with him: But without very evident grounds, it is not fit to recede from the
order of the history, I conceive not that lepers were ever so secluded from
cohabitation with others, but that they might upon occasion have some
conference with them; especially it might be so here, when the king had so
great a desire to hear a true relation of all the wonders that Elisha had
wrought; only indeed, if this were after Gehazi was a leper, observable it is,
that notwithstanding Gehazi did here speak so honorably of his master, upon
whose word so sore a judgment had seized upon him.

Verse. 6. So the king appointed to her a certain officer, saying, Restore all
that was hers, etc] The word translated officer signifies an eunuch, as it is
in the margin of our bibles: kings it seems in former times had eunuchs to be
the chief officers in their courts, whereupon in process of time all their
chief officers were called Eunuchs. As we see Potiphar to whom Joseph was sold,
though he were a married man, is termed an Eunuch. Genesis 37.36.

Verse. 7. And Elisha came to Damascus, and Ben-hadad the king of Syria was
sick, etc.] The most received opinion is, that Elisha went now to Damascus,
according to a charge given him by Elijah, purposely to anoint Hazael king; but
why was Elijah sent from mount Horeb to Damascus, if God meant not that he
himself should anoint Hazael, 1. Kings 19.15. And the Lord said unto him, Go,
return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus, and when thou come anoint
Hazael to be king over Syria: rather therefore I conceive that Elisha went now
by the special instinct of Gods Spirit, to confirm that to Hazael, by a second
prediction, which formerly upon Elijahs anointing, he did not much believe: and
that the rather because of the present famine in Israel, and so coming thither
found Ben-hadad sick; whether his sickness was occasioned through grief (as
Josephus says) for the shameful flight of his army from the siege of
Samaria, chap. 7.6. especially when he heard it was occasioned by a causeless
fear, the Scripture expresses not; but only notes how in his sickness he
was glad to consult with the Prophet concerning his recovery, whom ere while he
sent to apprehend in Dothan, chap. 6.13, 14. encouraged happily thereto also,
by the miraculous cure that he had wrought upon the leprosy of his servant
Naaman.

Verse. 10. Go, say unto him, Thou may certainly recover, etc.] That is, thy
disease is not mortal, Thou may certainly recover of thy sickness; that
therefore which the Prophet adds concerning his death, howbeit the Lord has
showed me that he shall surely die, does not contradict this which he said
concerning his sickness. The question was whether he should recover of that
sickness wherewith he was visited; to this a direct answer is given, that he
might well recover, notwithstanding his sickness; but withal an intimation is
given to the messenger that he should surely die, to wit, by another means,
though not by his sickness.

Verse. 11. And he settled his countenance steadfastly, till he was ashamed.]
That is, Elisha did fix his eyes steadfastly upon Hazael, until he began to be
ashamed, because he saw he could not forbear weeping; or rather, until Hazael
began to blush, and to be ashamed, because he saw the Prophet look so earnestly
upon him.

Verse. 13. And Elisha answered, The Lord has showed me that thou shall be king
over Syria.] Intimating, that in this regard it was likely enough he would
exercise those cruelties upon the Israelites, which now he made so strange of;
and that because he should then have power to do it, and withal, when once he
sat in the throne of Syria, he would bear the same deadly hatred against Gods
people, which his predecessors had done before him, and thence is Damascus
threatened under those terms, Amos 1.4. I will send a fire into the house of
Hazael, which shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.

Verse. 15. He took a thick cloth, and dipped it in water, and spread it on his
face, etc.] And thus Ben-hadad was strangled by Hazael, and that so, that no
sign or token could be seen in his dead body of any violence that was offered
him, and perhaps too under a pretense of allaying the distemper of heat he was
in, by reason of his sickness.

Verse. 16. And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel,
etc.] Jehoshaphat had designed his son Jehoram to be king, and appointed him
to govern the kingdom in his absence in the seventeenth year of his reign, a
little before he went with Ahab against Ramoth Gilead (and thence the year of
Jehoram king of Israel his beginning to reign, is counted to be both the
eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat, 2. Kings 3.1. and the second year of Jehoram
the son of Jehoshaphat, 2. Kings 1.17.) but at his return he resumed the
royal power wholly to himself, not communicating the same again to his son,
until the fifth year of Joram king of Israel, which was the two and twentieth
of Jehoshaphat: and then this old king took unto him this his eldest son, as
partner in the government, himself yet living; the cause whereof, in all
probability, was some discord and differences which brake out even then
between him and his younger brethren, which as they moved Jehoshaphat to commit
to his younger sons the custody of strong fenced cities in Judah, 2. Chron.
21.3. the better to assure them, if it might have been, against the power of
their elder brother; so also on the other side, it caused him, to put this his
eldest son in possession of the kingdom, whilst himself was living, for
fear of tumult after his death.

Verse. 17. And he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.] To wit, four years
together with his father, and four years himself alone.

Verse. 18. For the daughter of Ahab was his wife.] To wit, Athaliah, verse. 26.

Verse. 19. Yet the Lord would not destroy Judah, for David his servants sake,
as he promised him to give him always a light, etc.] That is, one of his seed,
in whom the soveraigntie of Judah should be continued, though far short of
the glory that formerly they enjoyed, before the revolt of the ten tribes.

Verse. 20. In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, etc.] The
Edomites ever since David's time, 2. Sam. 8.14. had been tributaries to the
kings of Judah, and had been governed by a Viceroy whom they set over them, 1.
Kings 22.47. There was no king in Edom, a deputy was king. But now they cast
off this yoke, and so the prophecy of Isaac began to take effect, Genesis 27.40.
that Esau should break the yoke of his brother Jacob from off his neck. 2.
Chron. 21.2, we read, first, that so soon as his father was dead, he presently
made use of his power against his six younger brethren; and having gotten them
into his hands slew them, and, together with them for company, many of the
great men of the land, such belike, as either formerly or then had taken their
part, and that withal he took upon him to make innovations in Religion,
erecting high places in the mountains of Judah, and forcing the people to
embrace that idolatry which himself had learned from the house of Ahab, verse.
10.11. And these combustions in the land of Judah, we may well think gave
encouragement to the Edomites to revolt at this time, and so God punished these
his abominable courses.

Verse. 22. Yet Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day.] That
is, though Joram overthrew the Edomites in that forementioned battle, verse. 21.
yet they retiring into their places of advantage, persisted resolutely in their
revolt, and so he was forced to return again into his own land; which indeed is
not so strange, if we consider, that he might perhaps hear of the revolt of
Libnah, a city in his own country, and then no wonder though he stayed not to
prosecute his victory in the land of Edom.

Then Libnah revolted at the same time.] Libnah was a great city within Judah,
one of the royal cities of Canaan when Joshua entered it, Josh. 10.29, 30, It
was by him given to the priests the sons of Aaron, Josh. 21.13. and now it
rebelled against Joram, because he had made such innovations in Religion, and
forced the people to idolatry, as is expressed, 2. Chron. 21.10, 11. which no
marvel though the Levites were least able to endure. It is much indeed that
one city alone should venture upon such an attempt; but perhaps the kings
absence whilst he was in Edom, and the discontent of the people; yea perhaps
some correspondence they might have with the Philistines (who ere long invaded
the land, 2. Chron. 21.16, 17.) gave them hope of abettors, and how they sped
in the conclusion, the Scripture expresses not.

Verse. 24. And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
the city of David.] Before his death there was a prophecy in writing
delivered him from Elijah the Prophet, 2. Chron. 21.12. which threatened both
his people, his children, his wives, and his own body, and immediately what was
threatened came to pass: for, first, the Philistines and Arabians brake into
Judea, took the kings house, made spoil of his goods, and slew or carried away
all his children, save the youngest only; and then afterward the Lord smote
him with a grievous disease in his bowels, which left him not till his guts
fell out, and being dead, he was obscurely buried in the city of David, but
not in the sepulchers of his Ancestors the kings of Judah; and that without
the lamentations and solemnities that had been used in other princes funerals,
2. Chron. 21.16. All the time of this kings reign another king of the same
name reigned in Israel, to wit, Joram the son of Ahab his brother in law.

And Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.] He is elsewhere called Jehoahaz 2.
Chron. 21.17. and Azariah, 2. Chron. 22.6. He was the youngest son of Joram,
for all the elder sons were slain, or carried away by the Philistines, 2:
Chron. 21.17. In S. Matthews catalogue of the kings of Judah, it is said,
Matthew. 1.8. that Jehoshapoat begat Joram, and Joram begat Ozias, and so this
Ahaziah who succeeded Joram, and Joash who succeeded Ahaziah, 2, Kings 11.2.
and Amaziah, who succeeded Joash, 2. Kings 12.21. and was the father of Ozias
are quite left out; but this I conceive was only, because the Evangelist
resolving to distribute the Ancestors of Christ into three several ranks
(according to the three great changes that had happened in the state, and
finding just fourteen in the first rank from Abraham to David, he labored to
reduce the other ranks to the same number too, as knowing that equal numbers
are a help to the memory, and so to make just fourteen generations in that
rank; also from David to the captivity he leaves out Ahaziah, Joash, and
Amaziah, and them perhaps rather then others, because they were the next from
Ahab, by Athaliah the daughter of Ahab and wife of Joram.

Verse. 25. In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel,
etc.] Yet chap. 9.29. it is said, that he began to reign in the eleventh year
of Joram king of Israel, which is, because the year of Ahaziahs reign did
concur with the latter end of the eleventh, and the beginning of the twelfth
year of Joram king of Israel.

Verse. 26. Two and twenty years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, etc.]
In the 2. Chron. 22.2. it is said, that he was two and forty years old when he
began to reign; we may reconcile this thus, that he was two and forty years
old when he began to reign alone by himself, but that he was made king also
when he was but two and twenty years old, his father yet living; but then that
must be granted which is before noted upon 1. Kings 22.42. to wit, that Asa
also was made king in his fathers life time; and indeed, because this answer
may have some strong objections made against it, therefore others do rather
reconcile these two places thus, to wit, that those words in 2. Chron. 22.2.
Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, must be
understood of the continuance of Omries pedigree, who was great grandfather to
this Ahaziah. Omri reigned as sole king six years, 1. Kings 16.23. Ahab two and
twenty, 1. Kings 16.29. Ahaziah his son two, 1. Kings 22.51. Joram twelve, 2.
Kings 3.1. And thus Omries stock continued forty and two years; and therefore
it is said, that Ahaziah (who was of that stock by his mother Athaliah) in his
two and fourtieth year began his reign. But this answer methinks is more
unsatisfactory then the other; the words in 2. Chron. 22.2. will hardly bear
such an interpretation.

And his mothers name was Athaliah, the daughter of Omri king of Israel.] That
is, the grandchild of Omri, the daughter of Ahab, the son of Omri, verse. 18.

Verse. 27. He was the son in law of the house of Ahab.] That is, the son of
Ahabs son in law, to wit, the son of Joram by Athaliah Ahabs daughter; yet
perhaps even he also by his mother Athaliahs persuasion married a daughter of
the house of Ahab, though by another wife Joash was born, who succeeded him in
the throne, chap. 12.1.

Verse. 28. And he went with Joram the son of Ahab, to the war against
Hazael the king of Syria in Ramoth Gilead.] Toward the latter end of his reign
Joram king of Israel undertook the recovery of Ramoth Gilead out of the hands
of Hazael then king of Syria (which Ahab his father had formerly attempted with
ill success) and Ahaziah the king of Judah his sisters son joined with him
in that expedition, as Jehoshaphat had formerly done with Ahab.

Verse. 29. And king Joram went back to be healed in Jezreel, of the wounds
which the Syrians had given him at* Ramoth, etc.] That is, Ramoth Gilead:
having won the town, and then manned it strongly, leaving the chief of his
army there behind him with his captains (of whom Jehu was the chief) he
withdrew himself to Jezreel to be cured of the wounds which he received in this
siege of Ramoth Gilead. See the note, chap. 9.14.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. ANd Elisha the prophet called one of the children of the prophets,
and said unto him, Gird up thy loins, etc.] That is, prepare thy self, and go
with speed: the excution that was to be done by Jehu upon the house of Ahab was
to be dispatched presently, whilst Jehu had the army with him at Ramoth
Gilead, and Jehoram was gone from thence to Jezreel: and therefore the prophet
that was to give him his commission, was sent with such speed: which may also
be the reason why aged Elisha went not himself, but sent one of the younger
prophets.

Verse. 2. And make him arise up from among his brethren, and carry him to an
^^nner chamber.] The message sent by this prophet to Jehu, was to be delivered
thus secretly, first, that the prophet might do it without danger or fear: and
secondly, that which was to be done by Jehu, might be done before there was any
notice taken of it by any body that should endeavor to prevent it, and
therefore he was enjoined to call him out from among his brethren; that is, his
fellow captains, and to withdraw him into an inner chamber.

Verse. 3. Then take the box of oil, and pour it on his head, etc.] See the
note 1. Kings 19.15, 16. As for that following clause, then open the door, and
flee, and tarry not, that is added to prevent any delay, by the captains
propounding any questions to him, when he came out from anointing Jehu.

Verse. 4. So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to Ramoth
Gilead, etc.] The doubling of this word, the young man, seems to hold forth
this as observable, that though the service was perilous, and the prophet but
a young man that was sent about it, yet he performed it exactly and boldly.

Verse. 9. And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam, etc.]
These former presidents of Gods dealing with Jeroboam and Baasha are alleged;
first, to discover the more fully, with what severity God would wholly root out
his posterity: secondly, to assure him the better that it should be so, by
calling to mind Gods dealing with others before him in the like manner: and
thirdly, to intimate to Jehu, what he might likewise expect if he were not more
careful to walk in the ways of Gods commandments.

Verse. 11. And one said unto him, Is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow
to thee?] Perhaps the troubled thoughts of Jehu were discerned in his
countenance: however his fellow captains might easily gu^sse that a prophet
(for such it seems they knew him to be, perhaps by his habit) coming in such
haste with an errand so secretly delivered, there was somewhat of importance in
it: and therefore they enquire of him, whether all were well. And yet withal
these Baalitish Russians cannot mention the prophet of God without a flout,
wherefore came this mad fellow hither? for such the prophets were in those
days esteemed, because they pleaded inspiration from God, and spoke and did
sometimes what such carnal wretches thought none but mad men would speak or
do, Jerem. 29.26. and Hos. 9.7.

And he said unto them, Ye know the man, and his communication.] As not being
able to resolve on such a sudden, whether it would be safe for him to discover
what the prophet had said to him, he gives them at first an uncertain answer,
Ye know the man, and his communication; that is, you know him to be a prophet,
and by the man you may guess at his errand, and that what he says is from the
Lord: or, a mad man indeed he is as you rightly guessed, and therefore it is no
great matter what he said.

Verse. 12. And they said, It is false, tell us now.] Hereby they give Jehu to
understand that they knew him not, nor could guess at his errand; or rather,
that they knew he came about some extraordinary business, which therefore they
would have him truly to discover to them.

And he said, Thus and thus spoke he to me, etc.] Being overcome by their
importunity, and withal considering of what importance their aid might be to
effect what was spoken, he resolved to put it to the venture, and told them
exactly all that the prophet had said to him.

Verse. 13. Then they hasted, and took every man his garment, and put it under
him on the top of the stairs, etc.] Great houses have usually an ascent of
stairs of the court into the first rooms, there (or else on some scaffold to
which there was an ascent, and which they used at other times for some other
occasions, (as happily, from thence to make proclamation or speeches in the
hearing of the people) in stead of a throne, they set him on their garments
laid on a heap; or else on something whereon he might be raised aloft in the
sight of the soldiers, they spread their garments, so trimming it up by way of
honoring him, and to signify their subjection to him, and their readiness to
employ all that they had for the advancement of his kingdom (as in the like
respect, we see the people spread their garments in the way, as Christ rode in
triumph into Jerusalem, Matthew. 21.8.) and so having done this, they proclaimed
him king: Nor need we wonder, that the greatest number of the captains should
thus suddenly join with Jehu against Joram their king, and that upon the word
of one, whom by way of derision they had erewhile termed a mad fellow: for
first, it may well be that the house of Ahab was at this time odious to all,
for their horrible wickedness: secondly, Jehu was now, it seems, commander in
chief over the army in Ramoth Gilead, and so highly esteemed amongst the
captains and soldiers: thirdly, when they compared that which was spoken by
this prophet, who had now anointed Jehu, with that which it was well known
Elijah had prophesied concerning the utter extirpation of Ahabs posterity, this
might much prevail with them: and fourthly, there was doubtless a special
hand of God inclining them to the speedy furtherance of that which he had
determined should be done.

Verse. 14. Now Joram had kept Ramoth Gilead, he and all Israel, because of
Hazael king of Syria, etc.] That Ramoth Gilead was a little before this in the
possession of the Syrians, is evident, chap. 8.28. where it is said that
Ahaziah king of Judah went with Joram the son of Ahab, against Hazael king of
Syria in Ramoth Gilead: again, that Joram did in this expedition win Ramoth
Gilead from the Syrians, is evident in this place, where it is said, that Joram
kept Ramoth Gilead, and verse 15. where Jehu advises the captains, not to
suffer any man to go out of the city: It seems therefore, that when they had
taken the town, though Joram went away to Jezreel to be healed of his wounds:
(which was a great advantage for the furtherance of Jehues advancement amongst
the soldiers, and is therefore here mentioned) yet he left his army behind him
in Ramoth Gilead, either because he feared lest Hazael should come with some
forces to recover Ramoth Gilead again out of his hands, and therefore it is
said here, that Joram kept Ramoth Gilead, because of Hazael; or else rather,
because though they had taken the town, yet there was some fort or castle which
the Syrians still held, and for the gaining thereof Jehu and the army was left
in Ramoth Gilead.

Verse. 16. So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel, for Joram lay there,
and Ahaziah king of Judah was come down to see Joram.] This is added both to
clear the following story, and withal to imply, what state and jollity there
was in Ahabs court, when God wrought so great a change: doubtless the house of
Ahab since the revolt of Moab, was never in a more flourishing condition: there
were seventy princes of the blood royal at this time in Samaria, as many
Expositours gather from that, chap. 10.7. And it came to pass, when the letter
came to them, that they took the kings sons and slew seventy persons: Joram
had by valiant fight recovered Ramoth Gilead from the Syrians, (which his
father had attempted in vain) and was indifferently recovered of the wounds he
had there received. The king of Judah was come thither to visit him, and forty
princes of his blood were expected, cha. 10.13. for whose entertainment at a
time of such rejoicing, no doubt both Joram and Jezebel made great
preparations; and yet behold in the midst of this security, Eliahs prophecy
that was now forgotten, shall be fulfilled in their ruin.

Verse. 17. And Joram said, Take an horseman, and send to meet them, and let him
say, Is it peace?] As fearing that some disaster had happened at Ramoth Gilead.

Verse. 18. And Jehu said, What have thou to do with peace? turn thee behind
me.] He would not suffer the messenger to return, lest Joram being warned by
him, should escape by flight, or arm himself for resistance; and therefore he
wills the messenger not to talk of peace for Joram, but to follow him; as
knowing, that it was in vain for him to attempt to fly back, when he commanded
him to stay.

Verse. 20. And the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi.]
That is, the grandchild of Nimshi: for he was the son of Jehoshaphat, who was
the son of Nimshi, ver. 2.

Verse. 21. And Joram king of Israel, and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, etc.]
It was strange that neither of these kings should apprehend that they were
enemies that were descried, when they perceived that they detained the
messengers that were sent to know who they were: but thus we usually find men
infatuated whom God intends to destroy.

Verse. 22. And it came to pass when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace
Jehu?] As if he had said, What is the cause of this thy unexpected coming
hither? have ye taken the strong hold, which the Syrians held in Ramoth Gilead,
by assault or composition? or have the Assyrians come upon you, and put you to
flight? or what is the matter that ye are so suddenly come hither, and in so
great haste?

And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel,
and her witchcrafts are so many?] Idolatry is often in the Scripture called
whoredom, Deuteronomy. 31.16. And this people will rise up and go a whoring after the
gods of the strangers of the land whither they go to be among them; and Levit.
20.5. And I will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit
whoredom with Molech: and men's inveigling or compelling others to partake with
them in their idolatry, is called witchcraft; because as harlots were wont with
their enchanted cups and love-potions, to make men dote upon them; so these
great ones that were idolaters did by their flatteries and threatenings win
others to their spiritual fornication: whence it is that in these very terms
the idolatry of Nineveh in Nahums prophecy, is said to be the cause of her
approaching misery, chap. 3.4. Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of
the well favored harlot, the mistres^^ of witchcrafts, that sells nations
through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts: and these, no
doubt, are principally the whoredoms and witchcraft^ wherewith Jezebel is here
charged by Jehu, though withal it may well be that she was guilty (as
Idolaters use to be) of whoredom and witchcrafts in the ordinar^ sense, and so
Jehu used such expressions as might comprehend both the one an^ the other.

Verse. 24. And smote Jehoram between his arms, and the arrow went out at h^^
heart.] That is, he shot the arrow and smote him betwixt his shoulders, as he
was flying away, so that it went out at his breast through his heart.

Verse. 25. When I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the Lord laid
this burden upon him, etc.] To wit, that dogs should lick the blood of Ahab in
the place where they had licked the blood of Naboth, 1 Kings 21.19. concerning
which see the note there. Now such prophecies as this that contained
threatenings and curses, were usually called burdens, because the evil therein
threatened was like to fall heavy upon those against whom they were denounced,
as is evident, Isa. 13.1. and so in many other places.

Verse. 27. But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of
the garden house, etc.] To wit, choosing that as a secret way, though he fled
toward Jezreel, yet he durst not enter the city, but in the suburbs, where
their garden-houses were, he turned aside into some by way, hoping by that
means to escape; but what the success was, the following words do show: Jehu
and his captains at last overtook him, and so they smote him at a place by
Ibleam, a town that belonged to Manasseh, Josh. 17.11: and so flying further
after he was wounded, even to Megiddo, there they found him out, and slew him.
Indeed the words here would seem to import, that he dyed in Megiddo of the
wounds he received nigh Ibleam, and he fled to Megiddo and dyed there; but by
the relation of this story in the book of the Chronicles, it is evident, that
after the wound he received in his flight he hid himself in Samaria, 2. Chron.
22.9. that is, in the kingdom of Samaria; to wit, in Megiddo, whither he fled,
and so Jehu with his men following him close, at length by making diligent
search in the city, there they found him out and brought him to Jehu, and he
slew him there, 2 Chronicles. 22.9.

Verse. 28. And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and buried
him in his sepulcher, etc.] Which Jehu permitted for his father Jehoshaphats,
sake, 2 Chronicles. 22.9. When they had slain him, they buried him, because said
they, he is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the Lord with all his heart.

Verse. 29. And in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab, began Ahaziah
to reign over Judah.] See the note, chap. 8.25.

Verse. 30. Jezebel heard of it, and she painted her face, and tired her head,
and looked out at a window, etc.] To wit, as hoping with her stately and
imperious looks to daunt the traitor, or at least to express a brave spirit
even in this her desperate condition, and how little she feared what he or his
could do to her.

Verse. 31. And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace who
slew his master?] Intimating, that as Zimri enjoyed not the benefit of his
conspiracy against his lord and master, no more should Jehu; and that as Omri
the grandfather of Joram was settled in the throne of Israel, after Zimri the
traitor received his just reward; so the posterity of Omri, to wit, the sons
of Joram, should be confirmed in the throne of Israel, when just vengeance had
seized upon Jehu for this his treachery against Joram his lord and sovereign.

Verse. 32. And there looked out to him two or three Eunuchs.] Giving some
sign of their readiness to do what he should enjoin them. Concerning Eunuchs,
see the note, chap. 8.6.

Verse. 34. Go see now this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a kings
daughter.] This order Jehu gave, perhaps on a sudden, not remembering at that
time the prophecy of Elijah; nor what the prophet that anointed him had lately
said to him, verse. 10. for presently after, when they brought him back word,
that the dogs had eaten all but her skull, her feet, and the palms of her
hands, then he could say as it is. verse. 36. This is the word of the Lord which
he spoke by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Jezreel,
shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. ANd Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria.] That is, sons and
grandchildren, and that by several wives: neither is it any wonder that these
should be now altogether in Samaria, if we consider, first, that these princes
of the blood might be by Jorams appointment assigned to stay there, when he
undertook that late expedition against Hazael for the recovery of Ramoth
Gilead, that if any thing should happen to him otherwise then well, yet they
might be in a place of safety; and secondly, that perhaps now upon the tidings
of Jehues killing of Joram, the nobles that had the charge of these princes,
might presently fly with them thither for their better safeguard.

Verse. 6. Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be
mine, etc.] And thus Jezebel that by a letter sent to the Elders of Jezreel,
shed the blood of Naboth and his sons, has the blood of all her sons shed
by a letter, sent from Jezreel to the Elders of Samaria.

Verse. 8. And he said, Lay ye them in two heaps at the entering in of the gate,
until the morning.] To wit, that the people going out, and coming in the next
morning at the gate of the city, might be eyewitnesses of the just judgment
of God upon the house of Ahab; and that the people flocking together to see
this ruefull spectacle, he might find them there, and so might take that
occasion to justify himself amongst them concerning all that he had done.

Verse. 9. Ye be righteous, Behold, I conspired against my master, and slew him,
but who slew all these? etc.] This speech of Jehues is diversely expounded by
Interpreters: some conceive they were spoken to the people that were assembled
together to gaze on the heads of Ahabs seventy sons, that were laid on two
heaps at the gate of Jezreel; and that he began with those words, Ye be
righteous: either hereby to show why he was willing to appeal to their
judgment for that which he had done; as if he had said, you are surely
innocent, and have had no hand in any thing that has been done against the
house of Ahab; and therefore I desire to appeal to you, whether it be not
manifest, by this strange act done to the sons of Ahab, that God meant to
have his vengeance executed upon this cursed family; or else, to assure them
that he meant no evil to them; Ye be righteous, that is, I pronounce you
innocent, think not that I intend any harm to you; and so he first quits the
people from fear, and then afterward seeks to clear himself in the following
words, in that which he had done, by showing that he had only executed what
God had determined should be done, as he proves was manifest, by the death of
those seventy persons that could never thus have lost their lives, if there had
not been a secret hand of God, furthering herein the accomplishment of that
which he had long since threatened by the Prophet Elijah; Behold, I conspired
against my master, and slew him, but who slew all these? But then again others
conceive, that these words were spoken to those that had cut off these heads of
Ahabs sons; or to them jointly together with the rest of the people, and that
ironically, Ye be righteous; as if he should have said, you take your selves to
be righteous, and would lay all the blame of that which is done upon me; but
this fact of yours has now made us equally sharers in this business; Behold,
I conspired against my master, and slew him, but who slew all these? that is,
suppose that I should be charged for conspiring against, and killing my master,
yet these heads I am sure you cut off, and not I; yea indeed, neither you nor I
have done any thing herein, but what God would have done; it was not my letter
that could have won you so readily to perform such an act as this, seeing
many ways you might have secured both your selves and them; but that there was
a special hand of God in it, who would have that fulfilled which he had
threatened by Elijah; which is more fully expressed in the following verse; Know
now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of the Lord, for
the Lord has done that which he spoke by his servant Elijah.

Verse. 11. So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and
all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests.] That is, his
houshold-priests, neither is it any wonder that this caused not the priests of
Baal to suspect him, when afterward he called them altogether to Samaria:
because the special reference which these had to the family of Ahab, might be
thought the only cause of his cutting them off, that they might not in time to
come plot any thing by way of revenge against him.

Verse. 13. Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah, etc.] That is,
the sons of his brethren, 2. Chron. 22.8. (for all his brethren, the sons
of his father Jehoram, were either slain, or carried away by the Philistines
and Arabians that had lately broken into Judah, 2. Chron. 22.1.) and these he
slew too, lest they should hereafter revenge the death of Ahaziah, or lay any
claim to the crown of Israel.

Verse. 14. And he said, Take them alive.] That is, Jehu commanded his servants
to take these brethren of Ahaziah alive, both that he might be sure that none
but those of the stock of Ahab were slain; and withal, that they might be made
to know why they were put to death; namely, because they were of the cursed
stock of Ahab.

Verse. 15. He lighted on Jehonadab the son of Rechab, etc.] This man was a
Kenite of the stock of Jethro, 1. Chron. 2.55. the same that either now or
afterward imposed upon his sons an austere rule of civilitie, Jer. 35.6. that
they should drink no wine, nor build houses, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyards,
nor have any; but should all their days dwell in tents, and that (as is most
probable) the better to preserve them from being corrupted with the growing
luxury of those times, and to inure them beforehand to hardness, that they
might be the better able to bear the misery which he foresaw the sins of the
people would bring upon them: It seems he was a man of great note, especially
for his piety in these times, and therefore Jehu the rather desired to be
countenanced by him, and to have his approbation of his zealous proceedings:
whence it was that he took him into his chariot, and carried him to Samaria;
only, first he questioned him whether he did from his heart approve of his
proceedings or no, Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? that
is* Is thy heart faithful toward me, as mine is toward thee?

Verse. 19. But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy the
worshippers of Baal.] When Jehu had slain Ahab and all his posterity, who had
always been the great promoter and supporter of the Baalites, it is likely
that in all places they began to shift for themselves, and to hide their heads,
as fearing what he would do to them: because therefore it would have been then
hard to have any way surprised them severally, and because withal the taking
of any open way of violence against them, might have caused some sedition in
the kingdom, he thought it the wisest way, thus to catch them in a snare
altogether, by pretending for Baal, and proclaiming a solemn assembly for his
service; but how far this blemished his zeal against that horrible idolatry,
we may judge by that rule of the Apostle, that we may not do evil that good may
come of it; Romans 3.8.

Verse. 23. Search, and look that there be here with you none of the servants of
the Lord.] This Jehu spoke, as pretending, no doubt, that he would not have the
worship of Baal profaned by the presence of any that were not cordial to his
service, but withal intending to save them from the sword, (what ever they
might deserve) if curiosity perchance should have drawn any of them thither.

Verse. 25. And it came to pass as soon as he had made an end of offering the
burnt offering, etc.] That is, as soon as the chief priest of Baal had made an
end of their sacrifice, which they had undertaken by Jehues encouragement; so
long it seems Jehu deferred the execution, that if they were not all yet come
thither, he might be the surer to have them all there, ere the soldiers were
let in upon them.

And went to the city of the house of Baal.] Many Expositours take this
indefinitely; to wit, that the guard and the captains went into every city
where there was any temple dedicated to Baal, and beat down the temples, and
destroyed the images, whence they say, that is added verse. 28. Thus Jehu
destroyed Baal out of Israel: But me thinks the words seem here rather to imply
their going first to some city near Samaria, which was particularly dedicated
to Baal, where was Baals chief temple; of which I conceive that is spoken verse.
27. that they brake down the house of Baal, and made it a draught-house unto
this day; for it is not probable, that every house of Baal thoroughout the
kingdom, was turned into a jakes, but only his chief temple, thereby to
express their detestation of that idolatry, wherewith the kingdom of Israel
had been defiled.

Verse. 30. And the Lord said unto Jehu, etc.] To wit, by some prophet that he
sent unto him, perhaps Elisha or the young prophet that was sent to anoint him:
though Jehu continued in the idolatry of Jeroboam, yet because the suppressing
of the idol-worship of Baal, and the rooting out of Ahabs posterity, was in it
self a good service, God promised here that kingdom to his heirs unto the
fourth generation; which was accomplished in the mediate succession of
Jehoahaz, and Jehoash* and Jeroboam, and Zachariah, chap. 13.1. and chap.
14.16. and verse. 29.

Verse. 32. In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short, etc.] That is, to
abate their power, and to make sore havoc amongst the people; for so this is
explained in the next words, And Hazael smote them in all the coasts of Israel:
and then no doubt did he exercise those inhumane cruelties upon the Israelites,
of which Elisha had foretold him, chap. 8.12. I know the evil that thou will do
unto the children of Israel, their strong holds will thou set on fire, and
their young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their children,
and rip up their women with child.

Verse. 36. And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria, was twenty
and eight years.] Whereof six years Athaliah reigned in Judah, and Jehoash the
son of Ahaziah the remaining two and twenty years.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead,
she arose, and destroyed all the seed royal.] That is, all the princes of the
blood royal that were left. Joram had killed his six younger brethren the
sons of Jehoshaphat, immediately upon the death of his father, 2 Chronicles. 21.2,
4. after that all his own sons (save only Ahaziah the youngest, who
succeeded him in the throne) were either slain, or carried away by the
Philistines and Arabians, 2. Chron. 22.1. again, after that forty two princes
of the royal blood Jehu had slain, chap. 10.13, 14. so that it may seem there
were not many of the seed royal left. Athaliah therefore (that happily was
left by her son Ahaziah to govern the kingdom, when he went to help Joram in
his war) taking this advantage of the ruins of this royal family, did
forthwith lay hold upon those few of the princes of the blood that were left,
and slew them, that so she might occupy the royal throne her self, and so
settle the worship of Baal in the kingdom of Judah, which to her grief she saw
was now rooted out by Jehu in the kingdom of Israel. If these princes, whom
she slew, had been only the grandchildren of Jehoshaphat, by some of his other
sons, and not by her husband Joram; or had they been her husbands children by
some other wives, this fact had been the less to be wondered at: but by the
saving of her own sons son out of her hands, to wit, Joash the son of
Ahaziah, it is manifest, that she spared not her own children: and this indeed
is most strange, that she should be so unnatural, especially if we consider
also, that under the title of being protector to her young grandchild Joash,
she might with more ease and safety have done what she list in the kingdom,
and so have made better use of his life then of his death: but for this it may
be answered; first, that ambition and zeal for Idolatry do usually blind men
and women, and make them most unnaturally cruel: Secondly, that there might be
other reasons inducing her thereto (though they be not expressed in the
Scripture) as for instance, perhaps she might have other sons and
grandchildren; either by adultery, or by a former husband, or by some daughter
of Jorams, upon whom she might rather desire to settle the crown of Judah,
perhaps those that brake up the house of God, and bestowed the dedicated things
thereof upon Baalim, 2. Chron. 24.7. For the sons of Athaliah that wicked
woman, had broken up the house of God, and also all the dedicate things of the
house of the Lord did they bestow upon Baalim. Thirdly, howsoever sure we are,
that there is no wickedness so unnatural and unreasonable whereinto a wicked
woman may not run raised up of God to be a plague to wicked and idolatrous
people: and besides there was a special hand of God in it, that those that
were descended from Ahab, (though only by the mothers side might be destroyed,
save only Joash, who was left to succeed in the throne of Judah.

Verse. 2. But Jehosheba the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took
Joash the son of Ahaziah, etc.] This Jehosheba, or Jehoshabeath, 2. Chron.
22.11. the sister of Ahaziah, and daughter of Joram, was married to Jehoiada
the high priest, as is noted in that place of the Chronicles before cited; and
therefore it is not likely that she was the daughter of Joram by Athaliah, but
by some other of his wives, because we cannot well think that he would have
taken a wife of that cursed idolatrous stock. But however, sister she was to
Ahaziah the late king of Judah, and therefore hearing of Athaliahs bloody
project, she stole this young infant her brothers youngest son out of the
nursery, and hid him with his nurse in the bedchamber, that is, in some
bedchamber of the priests, which were adjoining to the Temple, and so kept him
close six years together: how it came to pass that this young* late-born
infant was not missed, or being missed, was not hunted after, and by diligent
search discovered, it is hard to say; most probable it is, that some deceit or
cunning was used, as by the substitution of some other child in his room,
whether dead or living, or by corrupting those Athaliah had employed in this
bloody service, or some such way, by which means Athaliah might verily think he
was killed with the rest; or if she had same small ground to suspect any thing
to the contrary, she might in policy forbear to make any noise of it, lest the
people hearing such a rumor, should be the readier to hearken after
innovations, and be the less conformable to the present government. However,
because Joash this young infant thus miraculously saved, is expressly here
called the son of Ahaziah, and so elsewhere constantly, verse. 4.12. chap.
12.18. 2. Chron. 22.11. 1. Chron. 3.11. it is therefore no way probable, which
some affirm, that he was of the posterity of Nathan, and succeeded in the
throne, because all Solomon's posterity was extinguished by Athaliah; especially
if we consider that the reason intimated in these words why Jehosheba preserved
him, was because of her near alliance to him, as being his aunt his fathers
sister.

Verse. 4. And the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fet the rulers over hundreds,
with the captains, and the guard, etc.] When Athaliah had usurped the crown of
Judah six years, and somewhat more, without any disturbance either of
domestical adversaries, or foreign enemy (for Jehu had enough to do at home
to oppose the victorious armies of Hazael, wherewith he was so far
overcharged) at length Jehoiada began to think of settling him in the throne,
to whom of right it did belong, who was now full seven years old, verse. 21.
Seven years old was Jehoash when he began to reign; and had been hitherto hid
in a cell of the Temple by his wife Jehosheba, not judging it fit to conceal
him any longer, first, that his young sovereign might not want that princely
education which was requisite, and whereof his years began now to be capable:
and secondly, that the idolatry of Baal might not by her means take too deep
root before it were weeded up; having therefore first imparted this secret to
five of the chief captains of the land, in whose fidelity he had best
assurance, and made a covenant with them, afterward by their means he drew in
others of the principal men of the country (both the Levites and others)
only at first procuring that they should repair to Jerusalem, where they
should be further acquainted with the whole matter, 2. Chro. 23.1, 2. and so
accordingly being met together as is here expressed) in the temple, having
taken an oath of secrecy and fidelity of them, he showed them the kings son,
made a covenant with them to advance him to the kingdom, and resolved how the
business should be managed the next sabbath day in every particular, as is
expressed in the sequel of the story. Indeed some Expositours conceive, that
those five mentioned, 2. Chron. 23.1. to whom Jehoiada did first impart the
business, were priests and Levites, and so also all that were employed in this
service; and that because they managed this business in the temple, whither
none (say they) but those of the tribe of Levi might enter; but yet considering
that the court of the people was a part of the temple, and within the g^tes
thereof, and withal because those five men are expressly termed captains of
hundreds, and it is said, that they gathered to them not only the Levites, but
also the chief of the fathers of Israel, 2. Chron. 23.1, 2. I see not why they
should hold that they were only Levites that Jehoiada did now call in to his
help.

Verse. 5. This is the thing that ye shall do; a third part of you that enter in
on the sabbath, etc.] This he spoke to the Levites, the Levites were by an
order established long since amongst them by David, divided into four and
twenty orders or companies, which did in their courses, each company a week
discharge the service of the temple (the rest abiding the whilst in their own
private dwellings, in the several cities of Judah) and so every sabbath day,
they that had served the week before went out, and another came in that served
in their room: and in each company or course there was in David's time a
thousand Levites, besides the porters and singers. Now therefore because the
associates of Jehoiada were not able to bring together secretly so many trusty
and serviceable hands, as would suffice to manage the business; to help this
want, Jehoiada resolved to arm the Levites for the work, and to the end they
might be the stronger, he took in the new company that were to come in on the
sabbath, and did not discharge the old that should have then gone out, but
retained them still, and so by that means without any noise he had made up
such a number as would be able to deal with the queens ordinary guard; for in
probability they might be about three thousand men; which accordingly under the
command of their several captains, (either the chief of the Levites, or those
commanders of soldiers whom he had sworn his associates in this design) he
thus disposed of; those that were newly to enter in that sabbath unto the
service of the temple, (for the work it seems was to be done on the sabbath
day) he divided into three parts, one part whereof he assigned to watch at the
gate of the outer court that led to the kings palace, which was the north gate,
the same it seems which is called, verse. 19. the gate of the guard, where
Athaliah now was, that no body might thence break in upon them: another part he
assigned to be at the gate of Sur; which was the east gate that led into the
city, called also the gate of the foundation, 2. Chron. 23.5: another part to
ward at the south gate, called here the gate behind the guard; that is, the
gate right opposite against that gate where the kings guard used to stand,
which led to the kings house: Again, those that were to go out from the service
of the temple that sabbath, he divided into two parts, and appointed them to be
a guard in the temple unto the kings person, the one on his right hand, the
other on his left: Many conjectures I find amongst Expositours very different
from this which I have noted both concerning the disposing of the Levites, and
concerning the gates at which they were set; but herein it is hard indeed to
determine the certainty, because the passages are so obscure.

Verse. 6, So shall ye keep the watch of the house that it be not broken down.]
That is, that the watch be not disordered by the breaking in of any body;
whereby the temple may be profaned by the rushing in of those, that ought not
to enter into it; the person of our young king may be endangered, and the
business we have in hand may be utterly overthrown.

Verse. 8. And he that comes within the ranges, let him be slain.] By the
ranges are meant the ranks of the Levites thus ranged in their places,
according to the order of military discipline; which if any should offer to
break through by force, they were appointed to slay them.

Verse. 10. And to the captains over hundreds, did the priest-give king David's
spears, etc.] To wit, for themselves and for their men. These spears and
shields might be such as David had taken in the wars, and had laid up in the
tabernacle, as he did the sword of Goliath, as memorials of the great victories
that God had given him, which were afterward by Solomon removed into the
temple; but however I conceive, that there was an armoury in the temple
provided purposely, that they might be in a readiness for the guarding and
defense of that holy place upon all occasions, and that because there were now
found there weapons for so many thousands as were at present employed; and
happily because for this as for other things, David had given directions to his
son Solomon, therefore they are called here, David's spears and shields that
were in the temple: had they been to b^ing in men ready armed into the temple,
they could hardly have carried the business so closely as they did, but the
Levites being the men appointed for this exploit, and they coming in unarmed,
as at other times for the service of Gods house, and being there armed out of
the Magazine that was in a readiness in the temple, there was not the least
noise or suspicion of any thing that was intended, till it was put in execution.

Verse. 12. And he brought forth the kings son, and put the crown upon him,
and gave him the testimony, etc.] That is, the book of the law; as was
enjoined, Deuteronomy. 17.18.

Ver. 13. And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard, and of the people she
came to the people, into the temple of the Lord.] That is, when she heard the
noise of the guard in the temple, shouting and clapping their hands when the
king was crowned, and the people running in the streets, and making toward the
temple with many unusual acclamations and expressions of joy (as it is
expressed, 2. Chron. 23.12. Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and
praising the king) she went to see what was done in the temple, not any whit
suspecting that which was done, and so through the providence of God, did
unwittingly cast her self into their hands: nor was it against the charge given
by Jehoiada, verse. 8. he that comes within the ranges, let him be slain: that
she was suffered to come within the ranges, because she came not in an hostile
manner, but quietly came in amongst them without any mistrust or fear, and it
must needs be known to be of great advantage to get her within their power.

Verse. 14. And when she looked, behold, the king stood by a pillar, as the
manner was, etc.] Where it seems the throne for the king was erected; but the
most of Expositours understand this of the brazen scaffold which Solomon made
in the Temple, 2. Chron. 6.13. the like is noted afterward of Josiah, chap.
23.3. And the king stood by a pillar, and made a covenant, etc.

Verse. 16. And they laid hands on her, and she went by the way by the which the
horses came into the kings house, etc.] Some understand this of the way into
the city, where was the horse gate, mentioned, Neh. 3.28. and Jer. 31.40. but
the words do clearly enough show that it was the ordinary horse and cart way
that led into the court, where were the stables and other outhouses that
belonged to the kings palace, and therefore it is said, verse. 20. that they
slew Athaliah with the sword beside the kings house: even in the place of her
death they sought to cast reproach upon her; her mother Jezebel was trodden under
the horse heels, and now she was dragged by the horse way, and slain amongst
the stables and dunghills of the kings house.

Verse. 18. And all the people of the land went into the house of Baal, and
brake it down, his altars, etc.] And the more cheerfully no doubt they did
this, because they would not be behind the Israelites, where Jehu had already
suppressed the idolatry of Baal, as they did now in the kingdom of Judah.

And the priest appointed officers over the house of the Lord.] That is,
Jehoiada appointed officers for the watch of the Lords house; the rather, for
fear of danger in this sudden change, and withal, perhaps reduced into order,
whatever besides had been disordered in the days of Athaliah, 2. Chron. 24.7.
For the sons of Athaliah that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God,
etc.

Verse. 19. They brought down the king from the house of the Lord, and came by
the way of the gate of the guard to the kings house.] That is, the gate of the
kings house, where the guard usually stood.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 3. BUt the high places were not taken away, etc.] So long had the people
been inured to this erroneous worship of God, that it seems even Jehoiada
himself durst not advice the king to proceed to the reformation of this evil
also, for fear of causing some tumult amongst them.

Verse. 4. And Jehoash said to the priests, all the the money of the dedicated
things, etc.] The Temple was at this time sallen into great decay, through the
wickedness of former kings, but especially of Athaliah For the sons of
Athaliah that wicked woman, 2. Chron. 24.7. had broken up the house of God, and
also all the dedicate things of the house of the Lord did the bestow upon
Baalim: the first act therefore that Jehoash took in hand when he began to rule
without a protector, was the reparation of that holy place; as indeed most
requisite it was that he should be careful to uphold the Temple, that had been
the nursery of his infancy, and the best means to secure his life, and to
uphold his just title to the crown of Judah, and to this end he enjoined the
priests carefully to gather all the money of the dedicated things, that is, all
the money dedicated to the service and repair of the Temple, and then the
particulars are expressed (purposely I conceive to distinguish this money from
that which was brought in for the use of the priests themselves, as the money
for the redemption of the first born and such like) namely, first, the money of
every one that passes the account: that is, the half shekel that they were to
pay when they were numbered from twenty years old and upward, Exodus 30.12, 13.
which is therefore called, 2. Chron. 24.6. the collection of Moses the servant
of the Lord, and of the congregation of Israel for the tabernacle of witness;
and verse. 9. the collection that Moses the servant of God, laid upon Israel in
the wilderness: concerning which, see the notes, Exodus 30.12, 13. secondly,
the money that every man is set at; that is, the money which any man shall by
the priest be appointed to pay for his redemption, when he has vowed himself
to God, according to that law, Levit. 27.2. etc. of which see the note there:
and thirdly, all the money that comes into any man's heart to bring into the
house of the Lord; that is, which any man shall voluntarily give for the
reparation of the house.

Verse. 5. Let the priests take it to them, every man of his acquaintance. In 2.
Chron. 24.5. it is said that Joash appointed them to go out unto the cities of
Judah, and gather this money from year to year; this receiving it therefore
every man of his acquaintance, is meant of their gathering it in the several
cities where they dwelt; (for the Levites were dispersed in several cities of
Judah) where they were acquainted, and well known amongst the people.

Verse. 7. Now therefore receive no more money of your acquaintance, but deliver
it in for the breaches of the house.] That is, he enjoined them to meddle no
more with the receiving of the money, but to pay in that which they had already
received, when the king first set on foot this work: as he appointed them to
collect the moneys above mentioned for the repairing of the temple, so also he
charged them to hasten the work, 2. Chron. 24.5. Go out unto the cities of
Judah, and gather of all Israel money to repair the house of your God from
year to year, and see that ye hasten the matter: when therefore in the twenty
third year of his reign, he saw that yet nothing was done, he took it for
granted that either they had been negligent in collecting the money, or that
they did not faithfully pay in what they received; or at least, that the people
suspecting their diverting of it to their own private uses, did not pay it so
willingly as otherwise they would; and therefore he took the work out of their
hands, and appointed another way for the gathering of the money as is afterward
expressed.

Verse. 9. But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of
it, etc.] To wit, by the command of the king, 2. Chron. 24.8. to prevent all
suspicion for the time to come of any corruption in this business: first, they
made this chest whereinto the money should be put, and wherein it should be
kept; and then they made a proclamation throughout the kingdom, that every man
should bring in the appointed contribution, which accordingly was done with
much alacrity and willingness, 2. Chron. 24.9, 10.

Verse. 10. The kings Scribe, and the high priest came up, and they put it up in
baggs, etc.] In 2. Chron. 24.11. it is, the kings Scribe, and the high priests
officers came up, and emptied the chest, etc.

Verse. 13. Howbeit, there were not made for the house of the Lord, bowls of
silver, snuffers, etc.] That is, not till the temple was fully repaired, but
when that work was finished, the money that was left was employed in making
these vessels for the house, 2. Chron. 24.14.

Verse. 16. The trespasse-money, and sinne-money was not brought into the house
of the Lord: it was the priests.] That is, the money which by the law those men
were to pay by way of satisfaction, according to the estimation of the priests
that had any way wronged the Lord in his holy things, Levit. 5.15. whether it
were done ignorantly or wittingly, in both the cases satisfaction was to be
made, and the one of these is called trespasse-money, and the other sinne-money.

Verse. 17. Then Hazael king of Syria went up.] Notwithstanding this fair
beginning of Jehoash his reign, no sooner was Jehoiada dead, but by his
flattering princes he was drawn away to the worship of idols, and so wrath came
upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespass, 2. Chron. 24.17, 18. namely,
by Gods letting loose Hazael king of Syria upon them, as is here said; from
whom they were fain to purchase their peace by a great sum of money, as is
expressed, verse. 18.

Verse. 20. And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew Joash,
etc.] Some other passages are recorded in the Chronicles not here expressed, as
first, when sundry prophets had in vain labored to reclaim both king and
people from their idolatry, at length Zachariah the son of Jehoiada the
priest, was by the Spirit of the Lord stirred up to admonish them of their
wickedness, who did it accordingly with great courage, assuring them that this
was the cause of Hazaels prevailing against them: whereupon a conspiracy was
made against him, and by the kings commandment (who forgot what his father
Jehoiada had done for him) he was stoned to death: secondly, that according to
the prayer of this blessed Martyr at his death, the Lord look upon it, and
require it, before that year was expired, the Syrians invaded the land again,
and executed the judgments of God with great severitie, for though the Syrians
it seems came rather to pillage, then to perform any great action (for they
came with a small company of men) and Jehoash went out against them with a very
great army, yet by the providence of God, this small band of Syrian rovers,
overthrew that great host of Judah, wherewith being encouraged, they went up
against Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the people, who had drawn
away their king from the worship of the true God, and sent all the spoil of
them to the king of Damascus; and as for Jehoash they left him in sore diseases
(perhaps by tortures they had put him to) which advantage two of his servants
apprehending they made a conspiracy against him, and slew him in his bed when
he had reigned forty years, verse. 1. to wit, two and twenty years with Jehu,
and the rest with his son Jehoahaz, and his grandchild Jehoash, which is
largely related, 2. Chron. 24.18, -- 25.

Verse. 21. For Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of
Shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died.] This Jozachar was also called
Zabad, 2. Chron. 24.26. where also it is expressed that Shimeah was an
Ammonitesse, and that Shomer, there called Shimrith, was a Moabitesse; And
these are they that conspired against him, Zabad the son of Shimeath an
Ammonitesse, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitesse.

And they buried him with his fathers in the city of David.] But not in the
sepulchers of the kings, 2, Chron. 24.25.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. JEhoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria,
and reigned seventeen years.] Yet two years before his death he made his son
Joash king, see verse. 10, 22.

Verse. 3. And he delivered them into the hands of Hazael king of Syria, and
into the hands of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael, all their days.] That is, all
the time of the reign both of Jehu the father and Jehoahaz his son.

Verse. 4, And Jehoahaz besought the Lord.] Namely, when he was brought so low
by the Syrians that he had not left him above fifty horsemen, and ten chariots,
and ten thousand footmen, as is afterward expressed, verse. 7.

Verse. 5. And the Lord gave Israel a savior, etc.] To wit, Joash the son of
Jehoahaz, who afterward prevailed mightily against the Syrians, and after that
also Jeroboam his son, chap. 14.27. so that afterward the children of Israel
dwelt in their tents as beforetime; that is, they dwelt in their houses quietly
and peaceably: see the note, 1 Kings 12.16.

Verse. 7. The king of Syria had destroyed them, and had made them like the dust
by threshing.] That is, he had broken them to pieces, and scattered them (as
corn may be with too much threshing) so that scarce any where was there an army
together, and they were become a people of no power and no esteem.

Verse. 8. Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his
might, etc,] That is, with what courage and valor he resisted the Syrians,
though they still prevailed against him; which is the rather noted to make it
manifest that the calamities that befell the Israelites in his time, were of
Gods just judgment, because of their sins, rather then from any want of
courage and might in their king.

Verse. 9. And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers.] Having reigned seventeen years,
verse. 1. all which time Jehoash the son of Ahaziah reigned in Judah.

Verse. 10. In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah, began
Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign, etc.] Jehoahaz the father of Joash
began his reign, in the three and twentieth year of Joash king of Judah, and
reigned seventeen years, verse. 1. which must needs be till the nine and
thirtieth year of Joash king of Judah complete; and how then did his son
begin his reign in the thirty seventh year of Joash king of Judah, as is here
said? I answer, that Joash was made king his father yet living, and reigned
three years together with his father, but reigned not alone till the last; that
is, the fourtieth year of Joash king of Judah; and hence it is also, that
Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah, is said to have begun his reign in
the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel, chap. 14.1. either
therefore because Jehoahaz being wearied and broken with long adversity,
desired to discharge himself in part of those heavy cares that lay upon him;
or because Elisha had perhaps foretold the victories of this his son, of
which we read, verse. 14.15. etc. two years before his death he made his son
king.

Verse. 12. And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, etc.] As
namely the three great victories which he obtained against the Syrians, of
which Elisha foretold him, verse. 17, 18, 19. and his rescuing many cities of
Israel from the Syrians, verse. 25. and how he prevailed against Amaziah king of
Judah, which is related in the following chapter.

Verse. 13. And Joash slept with his fathers.] Having reigned sixteen years,
verse. 10. to wit, after his fathers death, besides the three years that he
reigned with his father: the first year of his sole government, Joash the
son of Ahaziah reigned in Judah, and Amaziah his son the other fifteen
years.

Verse. 14. Now Elisha was fallen sick, of the sickness whereof he dyed.] To
wit, about five and fifty years at least, as is generally thought, after Elijah
was taken up into heaven; in which time, Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Ahaziah,
Athaliah, and Jehoash swayed the scepter of Judah; and Jehoram the son of
Ahab, Jehu, Jehoahaz his son, and Joash the son of Jehoahaz did
successively sit in the throne of Israel: yet some Expositours hold, that Joash
his visiting this sick prophet related in the following words, was whilst his
father Jehoahaz was yet living, to wit, that when his father had sought unto
the Lord, as is said before, verse. 4. then this his son Joash came both to
visit the sick prophet, and to enquire concerning those sad calamities that had
befallen the kingdom of Israel: and so when he saw him in so weak a condition,
wept over his face, and said, O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel and
the horsemen thereof; with the same words wherewith Elisha had bewailed the
loss of Elijah, chap. 2.12. concerning which, see the note there. Nor is it
strange that this wicked king that would not be guided by the doctrine of
Elisha, should yet thus passionately bewail the sickness of the prophet, if we
consider in what a distressed condition his kingdom was at present, and how
great things God had done for his predecessors the kings of Israel, by
Elishaes means.

Verse. 16. And Elisha put his hands upon the kings hands.] The prophet putting
his hands upon the kings hands when he was drawing the bow to shoot, was to
signify, that through Gods assistance, whose person the prophet did now
represent, he should be victorious over the Syrians, according to those
expressions, Psalm. 18.34, 35. He teaches my hands to war, so that a bow of
steel is broken by my arms: thou have also given me the shield of thy
salvation, etc. Psalm. 144.1. Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches
my hands to war and my fingers to fight. Genesis 49.24. But his bow abode in
strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty
God of Jacob.

Verse. 17. And he said open the window eastward, etc.] To wit, because Syria
lay eastward, and it was to signify the vanquishing of the Syrians by Joash,
that the arrow was to be shot out at that window.

The arrow of the Lords deliverance, and the arrow of deliverance from Syria,
etc.] That is, by this arrow is signified, that the Lord by thy might will
certainly deliver his people, and that from the Syrians, who have hitherto
brought such calamities upon them; and thus even that kindness, which Joash
had now shown to Gods prophets was abundantly rewarded.

Verse. 18. And he said, Take the arrows: and he took them. And he said unto
the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground, etc.] Having by the former sign the
arrow shot out at the window eastward, foreshewen that he should vanquish the
Syrians, now by another sign he undertakes to show him how often he should
overcome them.

Verse. 19. And the man of God was wroth with him, and said, Thou should have
smitten five or six times, etc.] It seems the Lord had shown to Elisha, that so
often as Joash should voluntarily, after a general charge, smite the earth, so
often should Israel smite Syria; and hence was Elishaes anger, that he smote the
earth no oftener: But may some say, seeing the Prophet did not enjoin the king
to smite it often, why should he be angry with him for this? I answer, because
by the prophets explaining the meaning of his former action, to wit, his
shooting out at the window, the king might have easily conceived, that even
this second action that was enjoined of smiting the earth, was also intended as
a parabolicall sign of his smiting the Syrians, and so thereupon might have
been eager to have given many strokes to the earth. Some Expositours indeed
give another reason of the Prophets anger; namely, that he was angry, not
because the king smote the ground no oftener, but because by the kings smiting
the earth so seldom, the Prophet foresaw his future slacknesse in pursuing the
execution of Gods vengeance upon the Syrians, and the deliverance of Gods
Israel: but the former reason of the Prophets anger is I conceive most
agreeable with the words of the text: And whereas this which is here said, Thou
should have smitten five or six times, then had thou smitten Syria till
thou had consumed it; whereas now thou shall smite Syria but thrice, may seem
to contradict what was said before, verse. 17. where it was absolutely promised
Joash, that he should smite the Syrians till he had consumed them: we must
know, that the Prophet there spoke only of an utter consuming those armies of
the Syrians, over whom he was to obtain three memorable victories; but here he
speaks of an utter ruining the whole power of the kingdom of Syria in
general, which should have been if he had smitten the earth five or six times,
but now should not be.

Verse. 21. And it came to pass as they were burying a man, that behold, they
spied a band of men, and they cast the man into the sepulcher of Elisha, etc.]
The meaning of this is, that as they were going to bury a dead man, they spied
a band of Moabites that were broken into their land, to rob and spoil their
country, and so not having time to carry him to the place prepared for his
burial, they removed the stone that covered Elishaes sepulcher, and cast him
in there; whereupon the dead man revived so soon as he touched the bones of
Elisha, and stood up upon his feet: for we must not think that the sepulcher of
Elisha lay open so, that in their fear they could presently without any more
ado cast the dead man upon the bones of the Prophet: however by this singular
miracle the Lord was pleased; First, to teach the people that it was the mighty
power of God, and not any power in Elisha himself, whereby in his life time he
had wrought so many glorious miracles: And secondly, to strengthen the faith of
Joash concerning those victories which this holy Prophet of God had foretold
him a little before his death, in that hereby he might see that God could as
easily revive their dead state, as he had now revived this dead man; yea and
besides, in this miracle wrought by the dead body of Elisha, we have a lively
figure of that life, which all believers do obtain, by applying to themselves
by faith the death of Christ their Savior.

Verse. 22. But Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of
Jehoahaz.] That is, all the time he reigned alone.

Verse. 23. Neither cast he them from his presence as yet.] The Lord did not as
yet quite root out the Israelites from the land of Canaan, which he had chosen
for his habitation; nor turned them off from enjoying any outward communion
with him in his ordinances, as he did afterward.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse. 1. IN the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel,
reigned Amaziah, etc.] That is, in the second year of his reign, after he
began to reign alone, his father Jehoahaz being dead: for he began to reign
three years before his father dyed, and that was the thirty seventh year of
Joash king of Judah (the father of this Amaziah) who reigned forty years
complete. See the note chap. 13.10.

Verse. 2, And reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem.] Of which nine and
twenty years, Joash reigned in Israel fifteen years complete, and something
more; (for he began his reign the year before Amaziah, verse. 1. In the second
year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel, reigned Amaziah: and he
reigned but sixteen years in all, chap. 13.10. and the other, fourteen years
complete, and something more, Jeroboam the son of Joash reigned in Israel;
and therefore it is twice expressed, that Amaziah outlived Joash king of Israel
fifteen years, verse. 17. of this chapter, and 2 Chronicles. 25.25.) but then may
some say: if Amaziah lived but to the fifteenth year of Jeroboam the son of
Joash; how is it said, that Azariah, or Uzziah the son of this Amaziah, began
his reign in the seven and twentieth year of Jeroboam, chap. 15.1? I answer;
either Jeroboam was designed king by his father Joash twelve years before his
death, and so that which was but the fifteenth year of Jeroboams reign, to
wit, when Azariah or Uzziah was made king of Judah, is counted the seven and
twentieth from his first designation to the crown of Israel; or rather Azariah
or Uzziah was not fully seated in the kingdom until twelve years after the
death of Amaziah: see chap. 15.1,

Verse. 3. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, yet not
like David his father, etc.] That is, he did, to wit, in the beginning of his
reign, that which was for the substance of it approved of God; but he did not
do it (as David did) with an upright and perfect heart, 2. Chron. 25.2. And he
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect
heart: he did that good he did, out of respect to men, or to his own advantage;
not out of a sincere desire of pleasing God: such as his father was, such was
he; his father a while out of a respect to men (as long as Jehoiada lived) did
that which was right, but out of a false hollow heart, and so afterward fell
away to idolatry, and so did he.

Verse. 4. Howbeit the high places were not taken away, etc.] This is added by
way of exception not to that which went immediately before, of his doing all
things as Joash his father did, (for his father Joash did not take away the
high places, no more then he did) but to that which is said in the beginning of
the third verse, that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; to
wit, in the beginning of his reign; for as concerning this outward conformity,
which at first he yielded to the law of God, herein he failed, that he did not
suppress that superstitious worshipping of God in the high places.

Verse. 5. And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in his
hands, etc.] It seems the murder of his father Joash. chap. 12.20, 21. was at
least so far approved and applauded by many of the people, as the just
judgment of God upon him for his apostacy to idolatry, and especially for the
death of Zachariah the son of Jehoiada, that Amaziah at his first entrance
upon the kingdom, thought it good policy to dissemble his displeasure, and
give way to the time; and so fo^bore a while to punish the traitors: but
as soon as he perceived his government well established, and found that the
conspiratours (howsoever the deed done was applauded as the handy work of God)
had neither any mighty partakers in their fact, nor strong maintainers of their
persons; he on a sudden called them to an account, and so without any tumult
they were put to death.

Verse. 6. But the children of the murderers he slew not, etc.] Which is noted,
as one of those acts wherein he carried himself commendably in the beginning of
his reign: he might well fear lest the children of those he now put to death,
might seek in after times to be revenged on him, and yet he would rather hazard
this, then transgress Gods law: which enjoined that the children should not be
put to death for any fault of their parents, Deuteronomy. 24.16.

Verse. 7. He slew of Edom in the valley of salt, ten thousand, and took Selah
by war, etc.] Of this valley of salt, see the note 2. Sam. 8.13. whether it
were the happy success of Joash king of Israel, in his wars at this time
against the Syrians, that kindled in Amaziah a desire of undertaking some
expedition, wherein himself might purchase the like honor; or what else it was
that first put Amaziah upon this invasion of the Edomites, it is not expressed:
sufficient cause he had of making war upon them, because in his grandfather
Jehorams time they had rebelled, and so continued unto this time; and therefore
considering of what importance the reducing of them to their former subjection
would be, he went forth against them, and obtained a notable victory, though he
did not wholly subdue them: the particulars of which enterprise are more fully
expressed, 2. Chron. 25.5 -- 16. as first, that though upon a view taken, he
found in his own kingdom three hundred thousand serviceable men for the
wars, yet thinking it the better way in point of policy, to wage this war
chiefly by mercenaries, he hired an hundred thousand able valiant men of the
Israelites for an hundred talents of silver, (who were in those times by reason
of their successful wars against the Syrians, become famous soldiers) to
go with him against the Edomites; for which being reproved by a prophet that
came to him, and threatened with ill success, if he strengthened himself with
the help of these men, whom God did not love, because they were idolaters,
though he prospered them in their wars against the cruel Syrians; however he
stuck a while at the loss of that great sum of money, wherewith he had hired
them, yet at length he dismissed them; and they enraged hereby to revenge this
high disgrace, (as they esteemed it) fell upon the cities of Judah in their
return, and slew three thousand of them, and took much spoil. Secondly that
entering afterward courageously into the Edomites country with his own
soldiers, he obtained against them a notable victory, wherein he not only
slew of them ten thousand, as is here expressed; but also took other ten
thousand prisoners, whom he threw from an high rock, that very place perhaps,
which is here called Selah, or the rock: using it may be such severity against
them, because notwithstanding this his victory, they still stood out, and would
not be reduced again under the subjection of the crown of Judah: and thirdly,
that when he returned home, besotted by I know not what strange witchcraft, he
set up the idol-gods of the Edomites (which among the other spoils he had
brought away) to be his gods, and worshipped them, and burned incense unto
them; for which being reproved by a Prophet, he would not hearken to him, but
checked him for daring to meddle with him, and so received from the Prophet
that fearful doom, that God had determined to destroy him.

Verse. 8. Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz, etc.]
That is, Amaziah puffed up with his late victory in his wars against the
Edomites, sent a proud challenge to Joash, wherein he dared him to meet him
with his best forces, and give him battle: most probable it is, that the
injury done him by the Israelites, whom he had dismissed when he undertook the
late expedition against mount Seir, was the first occasion that provoked him to
quarrel with Joash, 2. Chron. 25.13. But the soldiers of the army which
Amaziah sent back that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the
cities of Judah from Samaria, etc. and that this late wrong might also bring
old matters into question; namely, the slaughter which Jehu the grandfather of
this Joash, had made amongst the princes of Judah; and especially the title
which the kings of Judah had to the kingdom of the ten tribes, as well as
those of Judah and Benjamin, the advice which he took with his counsel, 2.
Chron. 25.17. Then Amaziah king of Judah took counsel and advise, and sent to
Joash the son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, saying, Come, let us see one
another in the face, seems to imply, that they debated amongst them these just
grounds, which he had to make war against the king of Israel: and most likely
it is, that these things were objected by him in this challenge that he sent;
but because he sent this message in an insolent manner, as one that did rather
desire to decide the business by the sword, then to have it otherwise
composed, and to try the strength and courage of the king of Israel in a
pitched battle, therefore is this only expressed, that he challenged him to
meet him in the field, and give him battle face to face; for that is the
meaning of these words, Come, let us look one another in the face.

Verse. 9. The thistle that was in Lebanon, sent to the cedar that was in
Lebanon, etc.] Thus Joash answered Amaziah by a parable; and the drift of it
was to put Amaziah in mind how vain a thing it was for them that are
comparatively weak, and of little strength, easily overborn and trodden down, to
entertain proud and aspiring thoughts concerning themselves, as if they were
above the reach of danger; and he makes the thistles pride in this parable, to
be the desiring of the cedars daughter for his sons wife, therein to couch
secretly an argument from the less to the greater: if it were too much for the
thistle to offer affinity with the cedar, much more then to make war against
the cedar, which he would have Amaziah know was just his case; because he
looked upon Amaziah as a poor, weak, and contemptible king in comparison of
himself, though proud and quarrelsome, he compares him to a thistle, the basest
of all shrubs, though full of prickles; and himself (who had ten of the tribes
of Israel under his command, whereas the other had but two) to a cedar, the
most noble of all trees; only, he compares Amaziah to a thistle in Lebanon, as
well as himself to a cedar in Lebanon; because Amaziah was a king as well as
he: again, from the foolish pride in the thistle in sending such a message, he
implies how far greater the pride and folly of Amaziah was, in sending such a
challenge to him: and last of all, by showing what became of the thistle, There
passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trod down the thistle, he
gives Amaziah to understand what his end would be, if he persevered in his
resolution to make war against him; to wit, that his forces would easily
crush and ruin him; and indeed, the miseries that would befall him are well
compared to the treading down of a wild beast; because war (bellum quasi
bellua) does usually destroy and tread down all before it: and soldiers, as
men void of all reason, and carried on merely with fury and brutish passions,
are wont without all consideration, in a rude and brutish manner, to beat, and
trample down all where they come; and therefore is the time of war called a
day of trouble, and treading down, Isa. 22.5.

Verse 11. But Amaziah would not hear.] To wit, because God would have him
punished for his idolatry, whereunto he was then newly fallen, upon his victory
against the Edomites, 2. Chron. 25.20. But Amaziah would not hear, for it came
of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies; because they
sought after the Gods of Edom.

Therefore Jehoash king of Israel went up, etc.] That is, he stay not till the
enemy brake in, and spoiled his country, but entered the kingdom of Judah,
and so encountered with him in Beth-shemesh which belonged to Judah; which is
added, because there was another Beth-shemesh in the tribe of Naphtali, Josh.
19.38.

Verse. 13. And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah, etc.] And thus, in this
Amaziah the son of Joash, God did yet further revenge the death of Zachariah
the son of Jehoiada, who was most inhumanely and ungratefully murdered in
his fathers days, according to that which he said at his death, the Lord look
upon it, and require it, and withal Amaziah himself was severely punished for
his Apostasy to idolatry upon his victory over the Edomites.

And brake down the wall of Jerusalem, from the gate of Ephraim, unto the
corner gate, four hundred cubits.] Some conceive that this part of the wall
was broken down, that the inhabitants might be rendered hereby the more fearful
to attempt any thing against the kingdom of Israel, the strength of the city
being so far impaired; but such a breach that might be so easily made up
again, could be no great curb to them: others say that it was done at Joash his
command, that at that breach he might enter the city in his chariot, carrying
the king before him, as in triumph; but why should four hundred cubits of the
wall be beaten down that he might enter with his chariot? more probable
therefore it is, that the city at first standing out against him, he battered
down that part of the wall by the north gate, which was toward Ephraim, and
therefore called the gate of Ephraim, and so took the city by force.

Verse. 14. And he took all the gold, and silver, etc. and hostages, and
returned to Samaria.] These hostages he took for assurance of their performing
the conditions he had imposed upon them; but having Jerusalem in possession,
and their king his prisoner, why did he not seize upon the kingdom, and join
the twelve tribes again under his government: I answer, that which lately had
befallen Athaliah, showed plainly how constantly affected the people stood to
the house of David, neither could he tell what forces the people abroad in the
country might presently raise against him; no marvel therefore though he
chose rather to go away with a certain spoil, then to hazard all by aiming at
the crown of Judah, upon such weak and uncertain terms.

Verse. 16. And Jehoash slept with his fathers.] See the note, chap. 13.13. It
seems he outlived not long that sacrilegious act of his, in robbing the Temple
of Jerusalem.

Verse. 17. And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah, lived after the death
of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel, fifteen years.] To wit, un-unto
the fifteenth year of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel. See the
note, verse 2.

Verse. 19. Now they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, etc.] Ascribing
all the miseries that had befallen their city and kingdom to him, who had
provoked the king of Israel to invade their land, whereupon Jerusalem was taken
and pillaged, etc. they were enraged against him, and so conspired together to
take away his life; which though he discovered, and fled to Lachish, yet they
pursued him thither, and there they slew him.

Verse. 21. And all the people of Judah took Azariah, (which was sixteen years
old) and made him king, etc.] To wit, in the seven and twentieth year of
Jeroboam, chap. 15.1. but his father died in the fifteenth year of Jeroboam,
verse. 14. and then (it seems) this his son Azariah or Uzziah, being not above
four years old. Concerning which, see the note chap. 15.1. In this kings
reign Isaiah and Hosea began to prophecy, and Amos and Jonah, Isai. 1.1. Hos.
1.1. Amos 1.1. and verse 25. of this chapter.

Verse. 22. He built Elath, and restored it to Judah, etc.] This Elath we find
mentioned, Deuteronomy. 2.8. so that it was now only repaired, or at least enlarged
or fortified. It was a city of Edom, near the red sea, and therefore it seems
was recovered from them by Azariah or Uzziah.

Verse. 23. Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, began to reign in
Samaria, and reigned forty and one years.] To wit, fourteen years and upwards
with Amaziah (who reigned nine and twenty years, verse. 1.) and twenty seven
years in the days of Uzziah or Azariah, who succeeded his father Amaziah. How
this agrees with that which is said chap. 15.1. see in the note on that place.

Verse. 24. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, etc.] for
this cause Amos in these days prophesied against the house of this Jeroboam
the second, and when Amaziah the priest complained thereof to the king, he was
enjoined not to prophecy any more at Bethel, Amos 7.10, 11, 12. Then Amasiah
the priest of Bethel, sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos has
conspired against thee* in the midst of the house of Israel; the land is not
able to bear all his words: for thus Amos says, Jeroboam shall die by the
sword, and Israel shall be led away captive out of their own land: Also Amaziah
said to Amos, O thou Seer, go flee away into the land of Judah, and there eat
bread, and prophecy there.

Verse. 25. He restored the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath, unto the
sea of the plain.] Concerning Hamoth, see the note, Number. 13.21. and 34.8. The
sea of the plain is that which was called the salt sea, Deuteronomy. 3.17. the utmost
south bounds of the kingdom of Ephraim.

According to the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spoke by the hand of
his servant Jonah, etc.] When Israel was brought so low, as is expressed in the
following verse (which was in the days of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, chap.
13.34, 7.) the Lord by Jonah foretold, it seems, how they should vanquish the
Syrians, and enlarge the coast of Israel, which accordingly came to pass;
first in the days of Joash, who obtained three great victories against the
Syrians, chap. 13.25. but more fully in the reign of Jeroboam his son, the
most prosperous and victorious king that ever reigned over the ten tribes.

Verse. 28. He recovered Damascus, and Hamath, which belonged to Judah, for
Israel.] Though these cities had been in the possession of the kings of Judah;
yet he recovered them for his own kingdom, the kingdom of Israel.

Verse. 29. And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with, etc.] Having reigned
fourteen years in the time of Amaziah and Uzziah kings of Judah, as is above
noted verse 21.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. IN the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel, began
Azariah, etc.] Manifest it is that Amaziah the father of this Aazariah or
Uzziah, was slain in the fifteenth year of Jeroboam: for in the fifteenth year
of Amasiah did Jeroboam begin his reign* chap. 14.23. and Amaziah reigned in
all but nine and twenty years, chap. 14.2. so that the last year current of
Amasiah, was but the fifteenth of Jeroboam; and how then was it the seven and
twentieth of Jeroboam ere his son began his reign? Some say, that Jeroboam
was designed king twelve years before Joash his fathers death, and so the first
year of Azariah or Uzziah king of Judah, though it were the seven and
twentieth year of Jeroboam, from his first being designed king* yet it was but
his fifteenth year, accounting the years of his reign from his sitting in the
throne after the death of his father. But better, I conceive, it is answered by
others, that though Amaziah was slain in the fifteenth year of Jeroboam, yet
his son Azariah was not settled in the throne by the general consent of the
people, till the seven and twentieth year of Jeroboam, when he was sixteen
years old, the foregoing twelve years either he reigned under Protectours,
being but four years old when his father was slain; or perhaps, though he were
acknowledged king by some, who in those troublesome times stuck to him, as the
heir apparent of the house of David; yet generally by the people he was not
acknowledged king, till some order was taken for the redress of those
grievances, which had enraged them so far against his father.

Verse. 2. And he reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem.] Besides therefore
the twelve years spent in his minority, fifteen years more he reigned in Judah,
whilst Jeroboam the second reigned in the throne of Israel three and twenty
years, in the time of Zachariah the son of Jeroboam eleven years, with
Shallum and Menahem (whereof Shallum reigned but a month) two years with
Pekahiah, and a year and upwards with Pekah; so that he lived to see six kings
in the throne of Israel.

Verse. 3: And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
to all that his father Amaziah had done.] To wit, in the beginning of his
reign, as Amaziah had done whilst Zachariah the Prophet lived, he sought the
Lord, and so long he prospered wonderfully (insomuch that considering the
admirable success of Jeroboam at the same time in Israel; it is evident that
the state of Israel did never so flourish since the division of the twelve
tribes, as in the beginning of this kings reign: for having an army of three
hundred and seven thousand men of war, under the command of two thousand six
hundred captains (all whom he furnished with shields, and spears, and other
arms requisite) he overcame the Philistines, of whose towns he dismantled some,
and built others; also he got the mastery over some parts of Arabia, and
brought the Ammonites to pay him tribute; he repaired also the wall of
Jerusalem, which in his fathers days Joash king of Israel had broken down, and
fortified it with towers, whereon he set new invented engines to shoot arrows,
etc. he improved also the riches he had gotten with all kind of husbandry, as
keeping of much cattle, etc. and built towers in the wilderness for the
defense of his cattle and herdsmen, and the wells of water he had dug
there, by which means he might keep the command of the Arabian wilderness,
which was hardly passable if men were kept from those few springs of water that
were found there; all which is related, 2. Chron. 26.5, 15.

Verse. 5. And the Lord smote the king, so that he was a leper, etc.] The cause
of this is expressed, 2. Chron. 26.16, etc. to wit, that Uzziah or Azariah
puffed up with his prosperity, would needs usurp the Priests office, and went
into the Temple to burn incense; whereupon Azariah the high Priest, attended
with fourscore other priests, went in after him, and withstood him, and
reprehended this his presumption: for which, whilst he was wrath with the
Priest, the Lord smote him with a leprosy, and that in his forehead, (that
every one might see the judgment of God upon him) and so he was presently
thrust out of the temple. And thus because his sin was pride and arrogance,
by striking him with such a loathsome disease in his very face, the Lord filled
his face with shame and confusion, making him ashamed to show his face amongst
men; and because he had sinned with so much impudence, coming openly into the
Temple to burn incense, as it were to outface the Priests, therefore God
struck him in the forehead (where impudence is wont to show it self, Jer. 3.3.
Thou had a whores forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed:) and because not
content with the Regal dignity, he would needs usurp the Priests office, he
was not suffered to abide in the throne: for by reason of his leprosy he dwelt
in a several house, that is, in a private dwelling where he might be severed,
as much as was possible, from the society of others: And Jotham the kings son
was over the house, judging the people of the land: that is, he lived in the
kings palace, and kept his court there in stead of his father, whose place he
supplied, and as his Viceroy and deputy governed the whole kingdom; wherein
yet there was something to mitigate the poor kings sorrows, in the midst of
all these miseries that befell him; to wit, that his son did not take this
advantage to depose his father, but was content to govern the people as his
substitute under him. Besides all these particulars, one memorable passage we
find mentioned elsewhere, that is not recorded either here, or in the book of
the Chronicles, to wit, that in this kings reign there was also a most
terrible earthquake, as we see Amos 1.1. The words of Amos, who was amongst the
herdmen of Tekoa; which he saw concerning Israel, in the days of Vzziah, etc.
two years before the earthquake: and again, Zach. 14.5. Ye shall flee, like as
ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Vzziah king of Judah.

Verse. 6. And the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the Chronicles? etc.] The acts of Uzziah or Azariah
were also written by Isaiah the Prophet, 2. Chron. 26.22. Now the rest of the
acts of Vzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet the son of Amos write.

Verse. 7. And they buried him with his fathers in the city of David.] To wit,
in the field of the burial* where the sepulchers of the kings were, but not in
their sepulchers, because he was a leper: 2. Chron. 26.23. So Uzziah slept with
his father, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial,
which belonged to the kings: for they said, He is a leper. When this king died,
it seems the Philistines did greatly triumph and rejoice, because he had been
such a scourge to them, as is related 2. Chron. 26.6, 7. And he went forth, and
warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall
of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, etc. whereupon it was that Isaiah
prophesied, that the grandchild of this Uzziah, to wit, Hezekiah, should sting
them worse then ever he had done, Isa. 14.29. Rejoice not thou whole Palestina,
because the rod of him that smote thee is broken; for out of the serpents root
shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.

Verse. 8. In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah, did
Zachariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months.] The
first of the fifty years of Azariahs reign, was the seven and twentieth of
Jeroboams reign: verse 1. In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboams,
Azariah the son of Amaziah king of Judah began to reign. Jeroboam reigned in
all but one and forty years, chap. 14.23. so that the last year of Jeroboams
reign, was but the fifteenth or sixteenth of Azariahs. Now if Jeroboam died
the sixteenth year of Azariahs reign, how came it to pass that his son
Zachariah began not his reign till the eight and thirtieth year of Azariah,
which was two and twenty years after the death of his father Jeroboam? I
answer, Some hold that the eight and thirtieth of Azariah here spoken on, was
the eight and thirtieth from the time he began to reign with his father
Amaziah: but rather, however it seems upon the death of Jeroboam, Zachariah
found a party that stuck to him, to whom the crown of right did belong, and so
the text speaks of his immediate succeeding his father, chap. 14.29. And
Jeroboam slept with his fathers, and Zachariah his son reigned in his stead:
yet two or three and twenty years did pass before he was by uniform consent
received as king; whether it were the ambition of Jeroboams captains, each
striving to keep what he held for himself; or some general dislike taken both
by Prince and people against Zachariah, though he were the son of so
deserving a father; yet they would not stoop to his government, till at length
wearied with dissension, they were in a manner forced unto it, which was (as is
here said) in the thirty eighth year of Azariahs reign, after which time that
he was by general consent settled in the kingdom, he enjoyed it only six
months.

Verse. 10. And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote him
before the people, etc.] In that little time that he reigned, it seems he
carried himself so ill, that the displeasure of the people newly appeased, was
soon stirred up again, and Shallum one of his captains taking the advantage
hereof, conspired against him, and slew him before the people; that is, the
people not opposing but rather approving what was done: they were not at first
more unwilling to receive him, then they were now glad to be rid of him.

Verse. 12. This was the word of the Lord which he spoke to Jehu, etc.] For
Zachariah was in the fourth descent from Jehu. See the note, chap. 10.30.

Verse. 16. Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, etc.] Many Expositours take this
Tiphsah, to be that mentioned 1 Kings 4.24. but because that was upon the
frontiers of Syria, as is evident, because it is there said of Solomon, that he
had dominion over all the region on this side the river, from Tiphsah even unto
Azzah: and this was not far from Tirzah, (which was in the heart of the
country, and therefore the royal city of the kings of Israel before Samaria)
as is here clearly employed, in that it is said, that Menahem smote all the
coast of Tiphsah, from Tirzah, that is as far as Tirzah; therefore I conceive
that this was some other Tiphsah that was not far from Tirzah. The cause why
Menahem smote this city is here said to be, because they opened not to him; it
seems they refused to acknowledge him for their king, and would not open their
gates to receive him; whereupon being enraged against them, like a true tyrant,
to make the other cities afraid to follow their example, he smote not only the
city, but all the coasts about it, destroying the inhabitants, and exercising
therein all kind of cruelty, as appears by the particular instance here given:
all the women therein that were with child he ripped up:

Verse. 19. And Pull the king of Assyria came against the land, etc.] This was
the first Babylonian Monarch, called in other writers Belosus, and
Phul-Belosus. The Assyrians had hitherto been the great Monarchs of the world:
but this Pull or Belosus joining with Arbaces the Mede, besieged Sardanapalus
the last of the Assyrian Monarchs, an effeminate prince, and hated of all his
subjects, until at last after two years siege in despair he burnt himself: and
thereupon his Monarchy was divided, Arbaces taking to himself the Empire of the
Medes and Persians, and Pull or Belosus the Empire of Babylon and Assyria, and
therefore called himself the king of Assyria, and this was he that now invaded
the land of Israel; and though the cause of the invasion be not here expressed,
yet most likely it is, that by the Arabians and Syrians from whom Jeroboam the
second had taken much (chap. 14.28. He recovered Damascus and Hamath, etc.) he
was now called in to invade the kingdom of Israel, when it had been many years
together weakened by those civil and intestine broiles before mentioned that
were in the land.

And Menahem gave Pull a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be
with them, etc.] That is, he not only purchased his peace with the Assyrian
king by that gift, but also procured a promise of his aid upon all occasions,
for the establishment of his kingdom; whereby it is evident, that though he
had usurped the kingdom, yet he enjoyed it not without opposition.

Verse. 25. And smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the kings house, with
Argob, and Arieh, and with him fifty men of the Gileadites.] These it seems
were Pekahs partners in his conspiracy against Pekahiah the son of Menahem.

Verse. 29. In the days of Pekah king of Israel, came Tiglath-pileser king of
Assryia, etc.] He is called Tilgath-pilneser, 1. Chron. 5.26. and was
doubtless the son of Pull king of Assyria, that had not many years before
invaded the land in the days of Menahem, verse. 19. and therefore called
Tiglath-pull-assir: the cause why he now came into the land of Israel is
expressed elsewhere, though it be not mentioned here: it seems this Pekah king
of Israel combined with Rezin king of Syria, against Ahaz king of Judah, and
did first severally invade his land, and sorely oppressed him, and then
afterward jointly went up to besiege Ahaz king of Judah in Jerusalem;
whereupon Ahaz being at the same time invaded also in other parts of his
kingdoms, by other neighboring nations, sent to this great king of Assyria,
to desire his help against these two kings, as is expressed in the following
chapter, verse. 7. So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria,
saying, I am thy servant and thy son, come up and save me out of the hand of
the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which rise up
against me; and thereupon he came as he desired into the land of Israel (the
rather happily, because this Pekah had slain the son of Menahem, whom his
father Pull had settled in the kingdom of Israel, as is before noted) and so
took the several places here mentioned in the kingdom of Israel; to wit,
Ijon, and Abelbeth-maachah, and Janoah, a town belonging to Ephraim, Josh.
16.6. and Kedesh, and Hazer cities of Napthali, Josh. 19.36, 37. and Gilead,
that is, all the land without Jordan, where the Rubenites, and Gadites, and
half tribe of Manasseh had their possessions, and Galilee, all the land of
Napthali, and carried them captive to Assyria: so that indeed at this time he
subdued in a manner five tribes of Israel; to wit, those without Jordan (who as
they had first their inheritance given them, so they were now first carried
away captives) and the tribes of Zebulon and Napthali who were seated in the
land of Galilee. And this was the first captivity of Israel. Neither do we ever
read that these that were now carried away, or their posterity did ever return
again into the land of Israel, as those of Judah did, that were afterward
carried into Babylon; whence it is, that when the prophet Isaiah threatened the
Jews with the captivity of Babylon, he added this as a comfort, that their
calamity should not be such as when their brethren of Israel, were carried
captive into Assyria, Isa. 9.1. Nevertheless the dimnesse shall not be such as
was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of
Zebulon, and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict
her, by the way of the sea beyond Jordan in Galilee of the nations.

Verse. 30. And Hoshea the son of Elah, made a conspiracy against Pekah,
etc.] Doubtless the people of Israel were greatly enraged, because so many of
their tribes were carried away captive into Assyria by Tiglath-pileser king of
Assyria, and laid all the blame upon this their unfortunate king Pekah; partly,
because by making war against Ahaz king of Judah causelessely, he had
provoked Ahaz to call in the Assyrians to his help; and partly because he got
the kingdom by slaying Pekahiah, the son of Menahem, whom the Assyrian king
had settled in the throne of Israel. Now being thus fallen under the contempt
and hatred of his people, it is no wonder that Hoshea should find enough that
would join with him in a conspiracy to kill him, which accordingly they
accomplished, and so the Lord cut him off by a conspiracy of his subjects, that
himself got the crown by the murder of Pekahiah his Sovereigne.

And reigned in his stead, in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of
Uzziah.] Here it is expressly said, that Hoshea having slain Pekah began his
reign in the twentieth year of Jotham; and yet afterward verse. 33. it is
said that Jotham reigned but sixteen years: and in the first verse of the next
chapter, it is said that Ahaz the son of Jotham began his reign in the
seventeenth year of Pekah. But to reconcile these seeming contradictions, we
must know that Jotham lived twenty years after he was settled in the throne of
Judah, upon the death of his father Uzziah, but that four years before he
died, he wholly resigned his kingdom to his son Ahaz; and so it was in the
fourth year of Ahaz when Hoshea slew Pekah, and took upon himself the title of
king of Israel; but this fourth year of Ahaz, is called the twentieth of
Jotham, because Jotham had still the title of king, though he had four years
before resigned his kingdom to his son Ahaz.

Verse. 32. In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel,
began Jotham, etc.] To wit, after his father Uzziahs death (for he had the
government of the kingdom under his father a long time before this; to wit,
ever since his father became a leper, as is noted verse 5.) About this time
therefore did the prophet Isaiah see that glorious vision, Isa. 6.1. In the
year that king Uzziah died, I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high
and lifted up, and his train filled the temple, etc. and in this kings reign
Hosea and Micah prophesied to the people.

Verse. 33. Five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he
reigned sixteen years, etc.] Some Expositours conceive, that he was thus old
when he began to reign in his fathers lifetime; which they hold, thereby to
resolve that great difficulty concerning the age of his grandchild Hezekiah,
when he began to reign; of which see the note chap. 18.2. But I rather think
it must be understood (for so the words seem clearly to import) of his age when
he began his sixteen years reign, which was after his fathers death; to wit,
to the seventeenth year of Pekah, as is evident in the first verse of the
following chapter: In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah,
Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.

Verse. 34. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, etc.] This
is more fully expressed, 2. Chron. 27.21. And he did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord, according to all that Uzziah his father did; howbeit he
entered not into the temple of the Lord, and the people did yet corruptly.

Verse. 35. He built the higher gate of the house of the Lord.] Or, the high
gate, 2. Chron. 27.3. which was (it seems) the outer eastgate, the gate
whereby they went to the kings palace, 2. Chron. 23.20. And they came through
the high gate into the kings house; the same, I conceive it was, which
afterward for the stateliness of it, was called the beautiful gate of the
Temple, Acts 3.2. and by Jeremy often the new gate, as Jer. 26.10. and 36.10,
etc.

Verse. 36. Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, etc.] Some of these are related
in the Scripture Chronicles; as first, that he built diverse cities in the hills
of Judah, and in the forests, towers and palaces: and secondly, that he
enforced the Ammonites to pay him tribute, to wit, of silver an hundred
talents, of wheat and barley twenty thousand measures, 2. Chron. 27.4, 5.

Verse. 37. In those days the Lord began to send against Judah, Rezin the king
of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah.] That is, toward the end of his
reign, they began to conspire against the land of Judah; but it seems till his
sons reign after his decease, they did not invade the land, the Lord herein
showing mercy to good Jotham, that he took him away before those heavy
calamities, that immediately after fell upon the kingdom of Judah.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. IN the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah, Ahaz the
son of Jotham, etc.] The seventeenth year of Pekah was the sixteenth year
of Jotham, chap. 15.32. at which time Jotham did either resign the kingdom to
his son Ahaz; or at least he left the government to him, but yet the lived at
least four years after. See chap. 15.30.

Verse. 2. Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen years, etc.] If Ahaz was twenty years old when he began his reign,
when he died, sixteen years after, he was but thirty six years old, and then
was Hezekiah his son twenty five years old, chap. 18.2. Twenty and five years
old was Hezekiah when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years
in Jerusalem: whereby it may seem that Hezekiah was born to Ahaz, when he was
yet but ten or eleven years old; which (say some Expositours) we need not
wonder at, considering the singular blessing that nation had for generation:
but because it is very unlikely that the Jews had children so young, therefore
other Expositours do answer this objection two other ways; to wit, first, that
Ahaz was twenty years old when he (that is, Jotham his father) of whom he had
spoken in the former verse, began to reign, to wit, after the death of his
father Uzziah: or secondly, (and I think thus it is better answered) that Ahaz
began to reign when he was first designed king in the life of Jotham his
father, and then he was but twenty years old; and the like must then be said of
Jotham too, chap. 15.30. but when after his fathers death he began to reign as
absolute king himself (from which these sixteen years must be reckoned) he
might be twenty five or twenty six years old, or perhaps more.

Verse. 3. But he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel.] That is, he
worshipped idols as they also did; for so it is expressed, 2. Chron. 28.3. He
burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in
the fire, after the abominations of the heathen.

Yea, and made his son to pass through the fire, etc.] Concerning this
abominable idolatry of making their children to pass through the fire, see
what is noted, Levit. 18.21. But the Ahaz did indeed burn his sons, at least
some one of his sons, as by way of sacrificing them to his idol-gods, is
evident 2. Chron. 28.3. where also the place is named where he offered this
inhumane oblation, to wit* the valley of the son of Hinnom, a valley not
far from Jerusalem: Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of
Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire. This high place was called Tophet,
and was it seems especially used for this execrable idolatry, Jer. 7.31. They
have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of
Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire: and by Josiah it
was defiled, chap. 23.10. He defiled Tophet which is in the valley of the
children of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass
through the fire to Molech.

Verse. 5. Then Rezin king of Syria, and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel,
came up to Jerusalem to war.] No sooner was Ahaz settled in the throne of
Judah, but both Rezin king of Syria, and Pekah king of Israel began straight to
invade Judah; for Pekah reigned in all but twenty years, chap. 15.27. and Ahaz
began not his reign till the seventeenth year of Pekah, verse. 1. In the
seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of Jotham king
of Judah began to reign; and as Ahaz exceeded all the kings before him in
wickedness, so the judgments that God brought upon his kingdom, were most
terrible. First, they each invaded the land severally, as is related in the
Chronicles, and both of them prevailed against Ahaz, and exceedingly weakened
and spoiled his country: for Rezin carried away many of the people captives to
Damascus, and Pekah slew in one day one hundred and twenty thousand of them,
(amongst whom was Maaseiah the kings son (he sacrificed one son to his
idol-gods, and now another was slain by the sword of his enemies) and Azrikam
the governor of his house, and Elkanah the second person to the king: who were
slain by Zichri a mighty man of Ephraim, and carried away also two hundred
thousand prisoners, women and children; though indeed by the counsel of the
prophet Oded, they were returned and delivered back again, 2. Chron. 28.5 --
15. but this invasion here spoken of was after them; when not content with what
spoil they had made in Judah, they resolved to join their forces together, and
to go up and besiege Jerusalem, and to depose Ahaz, and make the son of
Tabeal king of Judah, Isa. 7.5, 6. Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of
Remaliah have taken evil counsel against thee, saying, Let us go up against
Judah and vex it, and let us make a breach in it for us, and set up a king in
the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal: for this is that confederacy of
Rezin and Pekah, whereof the prophet speaks in that chapter: when as is there
related, the king and people* being grievously affrighted at the tidings of it,
Isaiah was sent to comfort Ahaz, and to assure him that they should not prevail
against him; to which end, when he had given him liberty to ask what sign he
would, and Ahaz refused to ask a sign, he had for a sign given him a most
glorious promise of Christ: verse. 14. The Lord himself shall give you a sign:
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name
Emmanuel, Isaiah 7.1 -- 16.

And they besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him.] And so these two kings
that assured themselves of such success, because in their former invasions
they had so spoiled and weakened the land of Judah; proved in the conclusion,
but as two tails of smoking firebrands, as the prophet called them, Isa. 7.4.
that is, their great attempts vanished into smoke, though they thought to have
devoured, and burnt up all before them.

Verse. 6. At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria* etc.] That
is, being forced to leave the siege of Jerusalem, he went (perhaps with their
joint forces) to Elath, which Azariah or Uzziah the grandfather of Ahaz, had
taken from the Syrians, chap. 14.22. and took it, and restored it to Syria.

Verse. 7. So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, I
am thy servant, and thy son, etc.] That is, he yielded to be his vassal, and
tributary, upon condition he would come to help him; and hence it is said,
chap. 18.7. that Hezekiah rebelled against the king of Assyria, just the same
time when Rezin and Pekah vexed Judah on the north: the Edomites and
Philistines laying hold on this advantage, entered upon them from the south,
slew many people, carried away many prisoners; yea the Philistines took six
cities which had formerly belonged to Judah: whereupon Ahaz seeing himself
environed on all sides, he sent for aid unto the Assyrian king, 2 Chronicles. 28.16,
17, 18. At the same time did king Ahaz send unto the king of Assyria to help
him. For again the Edomites had come and and smitten Judah, and carried away
captives. The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and
of the south of Judah: when he craved this aid, it is not certain; but certain
it is, first, that he sinned in craving the Assyrians help, because the prophet
Isaiah had assured him, that these two king should not be able to hurt him:
secondly, that Rezin and Pekah were gone from Jerusalem, before the Assyrian
came against them: (for else Rezin would not have gone with his army to Elath
to recover that, as verse. 6. it is said he did) and thirdly, when the Assyrian
did come, he distressed Ahaz, but he helped him not.

Verse. 9. The king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, etc.]
Though Rezin and Pekah were gone from the siege of Jerusalem, before the
Assyrians came to help Ahaz; yet when he came he invaded the land of Israel,
where what havoc he made, we heard before chap. 15.29. In the days of Pekah
king of Israel, came Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and took Ijon, and
Abel-beth-maachah, and Janoah, and Ked^sh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee,
all the land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria: and then at the
same time, as is here said, he went against Damascus, and slew Rezin, and
carried the people captives to Kir, of which Amos had long before prophesied in
the days of Uzziah, Amos 1.3, 4, 5. Thus says the Lord, For three
transgressions of Damascus and for four, I will not turn away the punishment
thereof, because they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron:
But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall devour the
palaces of Ben-hadad, I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the
inhabitants from the plain of Aven, and him that holds the scepter from the
house of Eden, and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir, says
the Lord: and after Isaiah foretold the same, Isaiah 8.3, 4.

Verse. 10. And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-pileser king of
Assyria.] To wit, to congratulate his success in taking Damascus, doubtless
he was highly pleased with seeing his enemies that had lately besieged him in
Jerusalem, brought on a sudden so low; Rezin being slain, and his kingdom
quite lost, and the king of Israel extremely weakened, and brought into
contempt amongst his subjects, by the carrying away of five tribes of Israel
captives into Assyria: and it is very likely, that he triumphed in the success
of his own counsels, in sending for the king of Assyria, contrary to what the
prophet Isaiah had advised, Isaiah 7.4. little thinking that within a few years
that very nation, in whose victories he now triumphed, should utterly ruin the
kingdom of Judah, as they had done other kingdoms; of which it seems, the
prophet Isaiah gave Ahaz warning, Isaiah 7.17. The Lord shall bring upon thee
and upon thy people, and upon thy fathers house, days that have not come, from
the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria.

And saw an altar that was at Damascus: and king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest
the fashion of the altar, etc.] What moved him to this is expressed in the
Chronicles, 2. Chron. 28.23. For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which
smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them,
therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me; but they were the
ruin of him, and of all Israel: and because he did this also at a time when
God had so heavily afflicted him, his sin was the more grievous; as it is
there noted, verse. 22. And in the time of his distress, did he trespass yet
more against the Lord.

Verse. 11. And Urijah the priest built an Altar according to all that king Ahaz
had sent from Damascus, etc.] Though hitherto this Urijah had maintained the
true worship of God in the Temple, and was not long before this chosen by the
prophet Isaiah as a witness of his prophecy, which he fastened upon the doors
of the Temple, Isaiah 8.1, 2. yet now he turned Apostate and yielded presently
to further this wicked command of Ahaz.

Verse. 12: And the king approached to the altar, and offered thereon.] To wit,
to the gods of Assyria, 2. Chron. 28.23. He sacrificed unto the gods of
Damascus, which smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria,
etc.

Verse. 14. And he brought also the brazen altar which was before the Lord, from
the forefront of the house, etc.] That is, having set up his new altar in the
forefront of the Temple, where the brazen altar which Solomon had made stood;
because he would not have the brazen altar stand above his, he removed that
from the place where it stood betwixt his altar and the Temple, and set it in
on the north side, as it were in a corner out of the way.

Verse. 15. And king Ahaz commanded Vrijah the priest, saying, Upon the great
altar burn the morning burnt offering, etc.] That is, upon his new altar, which
it seems was greater then Solomon's altar; or else more highly esteemed by him,
and therefore so called: yet that it was not of brass, we may probably
conceive, because in the foregoing verse, Solomon's altar is distinguished from
this new altar, by the name of the brazen altar.

And the brazen altar shall be for me to enquire by.] As if he should have
said, meddle not with that but leave that to me, when I shall think fit I will
make use of it, and otherwise there shall be no use made of it.

Verse. 18. And the covert for the sabbath that they had built in the house, and
the kings entry without, turned he, etc.] It is hard to say what this covert of
the sabbath was; some think it was a place provided for the Levites, that kept
the watch before the doors of the Temple, into which they entered every sabbath
day in their courses: but the most probable opinion seems to be, that it was
either some place provided for the priests, when they taught the people on the
sabbath days; or rather some costly covered seat, wherein the kings of Judah
used to hear the priests expounding the law on the sabbath day: whatever it
was, both that, and the kings entry without, that is, the entry whereby the
kings used to pass from their palace to the Temple, Ahaz turned them from the
house of the Lord; that is, he took them from the Temple, and that for the king
of Assyria; that is, either he brake them down, and sold the materials which
were happily costly, to make up the money he gave to the king of Assyria; or
else he diverted them to some other use, that the heathen king seeing him so
estranged from the religion of his fathers, might be the faster friend to him:
it is also added in the Chronicles, that he shut up the doors of the house of
the Lord, and made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem, etc. 2. Chron.
28.24, 25.

Verse. 20. And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
the city of David.] But not in the sepulcher of the kings, 2. Chron. 28.27.
And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in
Jerusalem, but they brought him not into the sepulcher of the kings of Israel.
He began his reign in the end of the seventeenth year of Pekah king of
Israel, and reigned sixteen years verse. 1, 2. the first three years therefore
of his reign, were the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth of Pekah; the
other thirteen years of his reign, Hoshea was partly striving to settle
himself in the kingdom of Israel, and partly settled in the kingdom. See the
note, chap. 17.1.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. IN the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, began Hoshea the son of
Elah to reign, etc.] It is manifest that Hoshea the last king of Israel, slew
Pekah in the twentieth year of Jotham, and that then he assumed to himself the
title of king of Israel, chap. 15.30. And Hoshea the son of Elah made a
conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and slew him in the twentieth
year of Jotham the son of Uzziah: and as manifest it is, that the year
which is there called the twentieth of Jotham, was the fourth of Ahaz his son
(for Jotham reigned but sixteen years, chap. 15.33. Five and twenty years old
was he when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. Now
if Hoshea succeeded Pekah in the kingdom of Israel, in the fourth year of
Ahaz, how is it here said that he began to reign in Samaria in the twelfth
year of Ahaz; surely, because though he thrust himself into the kingdom, yet
he was not acknowledged king, but opposed as an usurper; and that perhaps not
only by the Israelites, but also by the king of Assyria, who in the latter end
of Pekahs reign, had (upon the persuasion of Ahaz) entered into the land of
Israel, and seized upon a great part of the kingdom, chap. 15.29. and thus the
kingdom of Israel was in a manner unsettled, until the twelfth year of Ahaz
his reign, when either by the people, or by the Assyrian king, Hoshea had, it
seems, the crown of Israel confirmed to him; and so he reigned, as it is said
here, nine years: for after the twelfth year of Ahaz his reign (which must
not be reckoned, because it was well nigh ended ere Hoshea was established
king) there are four years of Ahaz his reign remaining (for he reigned
sixteen years, chap. 16.2.) and five years of Hezekiahs reign, which makes
nine years. Indeed chap. 18.1. it is said, Hezekiah began to reign in the
third year of Hoshea: but of that see the note there.

Verse. 2. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, but not as
the kings of Israel that were before him.] To wit, because though he continued
the idolatry of Jeroboam, yet he abandoned the grosser idolatries of many kings
that had been before him; and then besides he suffered such of his subjects as
would, to go up to worship in the Temple of Jerusalem, which the former kings
of Israel would not permit: this we find, 2. Chron. 30.11. etc. where it is
said, that when Hezekiah had proclaimed a solemn passover, many of the ten
tribes went up to keep the passover in Jerusalem.

Verse. 3. Against him came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria, etc.] When Hoshea
had slain Pekah in the fourth year of Ahaz, as is before noted, he found not
so ready admittance into his throne, as perhaps he expected; and whilst the
people were in this combustion amongst themselves, Shalmaneser (called by
others Nabonassar) the son of Tiglath-pilezer, being either desired to come
into the aid of that party that opposed Hoshea; or being of himself ready
enough to take advantage of these civil broils, that he might wholly subdue
that kingdom which his father had already in a great part ruined; he came up
against Hoshea, and at length prevailed so far, that Hoshea was content to
become his servant, and to pay him tribute: and so was settled in the throne of
Israel, which was (as is probable) in the twelfth year of Ahaz, as is above
noted, verse. 1.

Verse. 4. And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea, etc.] That is,
Shalmaneser the Assyrian king, discovered that Hoshea had practiced with So
king of Egypt, to wit, that Hoshea should cast off the yoke of the Assyrian
king, and that he should be supported herein with succor from Egypt; and this
he first suspected, by hearing that Hoshea had sent ambassadors to the king of
Egypt, and then was confirmed in his suspicion, when he found that Hoshea
neglected to pay the tribute, which formerly he had yearly paid: this So is
thought to be the same that by other Historians is called Sua or Sabucus the
Ethiopian, because in Ethiopia he had his education: the encroaching power of
the Assyrian might be well terrible to Egyp^ at this time, and therefore it is
no wonder though he animated Hoshea against the Assyrian: the wonder only
would be, that in a matter that so nearly concerned him, he should afford no
more succor to the king of Israel: but that it is true indeed, that though
this be not here expressed, yet perhaps he might afford him succor, however
they proved too weak to support him against the overbearing power of the
Assyrian Monarch.

Therefore the king of Assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison.] To wit,
when he had taken Samaria, as is afterward related, verse. 6.

Verse. 5. Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went up
to Samaria, and besieged it three years.] To wit, in the seventh, eighth, and
ninth year of Hoshea, which was the fourth, fifth, and sixth of Hezekiah king
of Judah, chap. 18.9, 10. And it came to pass in the fourth year of Hezekiah
king of Judah (which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of
Israel) that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged
it. And at the end of three years they took it, even in the sixth year of
Hezekiah (that is the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel) Samaria was taken.

Verse. 6. In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria took Samaria, and
carried Israel away into Assyria, etc.] And so now all the rest of the ten
tribes were carried away captives, from which they never returned again, and
the kingdom of Israel was utterly ruined, having continued from Jeroboam their
first king about two hundred threescore and two years.

Verse. 9. And the children of Israel did secretly those things that were not
right, etc.] The idolatry of Israel was open and public; but yet because they
covered over this their idolatry and superstition with pretenses of worshipping
the only true God, the God of Israel; therefore it is said, they did secretly,
or covertly, those things that were not right; and besides there were many
private idolatries and impieties practiced amongst them, besides what were
allowed or enjoined by public authority, to which these words may also have
relation, according to that, Ezekiel. 8.12. Son of man, Have thou seen what the
ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of
his imagery? etc.

And they built them high places in all their cities, from the tower of
watchmen to the fenced city.] That is, in all places; not only in their
cities, but also in the most solitary and unfrequented places; there was not so
much as a tower built, where watchmen were appointed to be for the guarding of
the castle, or for the defense of the country, but there they had their idols,
and their high places to worship their idols in.

Verse. 13. Yet the Lord testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the
prophets, and by all the seers.] That is, by all his messengers whom he sent to
them, to whom he made known his will, partly by divine revelations, partly by
visions.

Verse. 15. And they followed vanity, and became vain, etc.] That is, they
followed idols, and did that which argued most gross folly and weakness,
according to that Psalm. 115.8. They that make them are like unto them, so is
every one that trusts in them.

Verse. 17. And sold themselves to do evil, etc.] See the note 1. Kings 21.20.

Verse. 18. Therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them out
of his sight, etc.] That is, he cast them out of the land, which he had chosen
for the habitation of his people, and where he had placed the sacred signs of
his presence among them: whereupon it follows, that there was none left but
the tribe of Judah only: for the tribe of Benjamin, since the revolt of the
ten tribes, was incorporated, as it were, with the tribe of Judah, as one
people; and so were reckoned as one tribe together with them. See the note, 1.
Kings 11.13.

Verse. 19. Also Judah kept not the commandments of the Lord their God. etc.]
This is added as a second cause why the Lord brought this heavy judgment upon
the Israelites; to wit, because the kingdom of Judah was by their example
corrupted and tainted with the same sins, whereby God was still the more
offended: Hosea 4.15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah
offend, etc. and it may also be inserted as an aggravation of Judahs sin, who
would not be warned by the punishment that was inflicted on the Israelites,
according to that Jer. 3.8. when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel
committed adultery, I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce, yet
her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also.

Verse. 20. And the Lord rejected all the seed of Israel, etc.] That is, all of
the kingdom of the ten tribes, as is plainly employed in the former verses: and
indeed though they of Judah were afterward carried away captives also, yet God
did never reject and cast them off, as he did those of the ten tribes: for
within a few years he brought them again into their own land.

Verse. 24. And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah,
etc.] To wit, Shalmaneser, verse. 3. other colonies were also afterward brought
thither by Esar-haddon the son of Sennacherib, Ezra 4.2. We seek your God as
ye do, and we do sacrifice unto him, since the days of Esar-haddon king of
Ashur, which brought us up hither: but doubtless the first colonies of these
heathen people were brought up thither by Shalmaneser, who now carried away the
Israelites captives, and transplanted other nations in their room, and these
were they that after this time were called Samaritans, verse. 29. betwixt whom
and the Jews there was always a most deadly hatred, Luke 9.52. And they sent
messengers before his face, and they went and entered into a village of the
Samaritanes, to make ready for him, And they did not receive him, because his
face was as though he would go to Jerusalem. John 4.9. Then says the woman of
Samaria unto him, How is it that thou being a Jew, ask drink of me which am
a woman of Samaria: for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritanes.

Verse. 25. And so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they
feared not the Lord etc.] They served him not, no not so much as with
performing those outward duties of his worship and service, which he had
enjoined the Israelites.

Verse. 26. Wherefore they spoke to the king of Assyria, etc.] To wit, by those
messengers, whom with this message they had sent to him. See verse. 27.

Verse. 27. Carry thither one of the priests whom ye brought from thence, and
let them go and dwell there, etc.] That is, let the messengers that are come to
inform us, how the lions have devoured our new plantation in Samaria; go back
with the priest that is assigned to go with them, and dwell there again as
formerly; yet some understand these words, and let them go and dwell there, of
a new plantation that were to be sent thither, in stead of those that were
devoured by the lions; which was happily that which went in the days of
Esar-haddon, Ezra 4.2.

Verse. 28. Then one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria*
came and dwelt in Beth-el, etc.] That is, one of the Israelites idolatrous
priests: even they pretended the worshipping of the Lord Jehovah the God of
Israel, though under the images of the golden calves; and doubtless, did
retain most of the ceremonies and ordinances which the Lord had taught his
people; and because in these things he instructed these heathens, therefore it
is said, that he taught them how they should fear the Lord.

Verse. 32. So they feared the Lord, etc.] That is, they worshipped the Lord
Jehovah, the God of the Israelites, after the manner they were taught by that
idolatrous priest of Israel, which the king of Assyria had sent to them; and
because this worship was in many things according to the way of worship which
God had prescribed his people; and because they did it for fear of being
destroyed by lions, as formerly they had been; therefore it is said that they
feared the Lord; yet withal, because they did not truly fear the Lord, but
followed the way of Jeroboams idolatry, and withal worshipped their own
Assyrian gods too, therefore it is said afterward also verse. 34. that they
feared not the Lord.

Verse. 33. They feared the Lord, and served their own gods, after the manner of
the nations, whom they carried away from thence.] This last clause may be read
as it is in the margin, after the manner of the nations who carried them away
from thence, and then the meaning must needs be, that as they feared the Lord
Jehovah, the God of the Israelites; that is, as they did outwardly serve him,
so they did also serve other false gods, as did the nations that had carried
them away, and planted them in the land of Samaria: but if we read it as it is
in our bibles, after the manner of the nations whom they carried away from
thence, then the meaning may be, either, that these new colonies in Samaria,
served both the Lord Jehovah, and withal their own gods, each after the manner
of the several nations, of whom the kings of Assyria had taken some, and
carried them into the land of the Israelites; or else, that these Samaritans
did fear the Lord, and served their own gods, even as the idolatrous Israelites
that were there before them had done; whom the Assyrians had carried away into
captivity: for the word nations may have reference to the idolatrous
Israelites, as in respect of their several tribes; or as jointly considered,
with other bordering nations that were carried captive by the Assyrians, when
the Israelites were carried captive.

Verse. 34. Unto this day they do after the former manner, etc.] All that
follows from hence unto the end of the fourtieth verse, may be understood of
the Israelites, that were carried captive into Assyria; even after this heavy
judgment they continued still obstinate, and feared not the Lord: yet I see
not but that it may be also understood of the Samaritanes, and that to show,
that though they lived in the land of Israel, yet they were far from doing
what God had required his Israel to do.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. NOw it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king
of Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.]
Hoshea slew Pekah in the fourth year of Ahaz, as is before noted, chap. 15.30.
and though he were not immediately acknowledged king of Israel, yet in the
twelfth year of Ahaz he began his reign in Israel, chap. 17.1. and Ahaz
reigned in all but sixteen years, chap. 16.2. so that the last of Ahaz his
reign seems to have been the fifth year of Hoshea, and the first of Hezekiah
perhaps the sixth of Hoshea; and yet here it is said, that the first of Hezekiah
was the third of Hoshea: I answer, that though Hoshea was confirmed king in the
twelfth year of Ahaz, and so it is said in the twelfth of Ahaz he began to
reign in Samaria; yet because he reigned then only as a viceroy under the
king of Assyria, the nine years of his absolute reign are not reckoned, till
he cast off the Assyrian yoke, and took upon him to reign as absolute king;
which was it seems two years after, to wit, in the fourteenth year of Ahaz:
and so the third of Hoshea was indeed the first of Hezekiah.

Verse. 2. Twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign, and he
reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem.] If we compare this place with
chap. 16.2. where it is said that Ahaz Hezekiahs father was twenty years old
when he began to reign, and that he reigned sixteen years, and consequently
was thirty six years old when he dyed; it may seem that Ahaz begat Hezekiah
when he was little above eleven years old: for if Hezekiah was five and twenty
years old when his father was but thirty six, it must necessarily follow that
Ahaz was but eleven years old when his son Hezekiah was born: to avoid this
inconvenience some hold that Ahaz was one and twenty years old, or nigh so
much, when he began to reign, the incomplete year not being reckoned, chap.
16.2. the like also they say concerning the years of his reign, to wit, that
he reigned seventeen years well nigh complete, and so was thirty eight years
old when he died; on the other side they say that Hezekiah was but twenty four
years old when he began to reign; only because he was four and twenty years
old complete, and something more, it is here said, that he was five and twenty
years old when he began to reign. Now according to this computation Ahaz being
thirty eight eight years old when he died, and Hezekiah twenty four, it will
follow that Ahaz was fourteen years old when Hezekiah his son was born,
which, say they, was possible enough; but because we find elsewhere that it was
so usual with the kings of Judah and Israel, to cause their sons that were
to succeed them to be designed kings in their life; I should rather conceive,
that what is said both of Ahaz and Hezekiah, concerning their age when they
began to reign, is meant of the time when they were first designed kings, as
is before noted, chap. 16.2.

His mothers name was Abi, the daughter of Zachariah.] Or Abijah 2. Chron.
29.1. and if she were, as is supposed by many, the daughter of that Zachariah,
by whom so long as he lived Uzziah was kept in the way of truth, chap. 26.5. we
may well think that her piety, manifested in the careful education of this her
son, was a chief means under God that he proved so zealous for the cause of
the true Religion, though his father was so extremely wicked.

Verse. 4. He removed the high places, and brake the images, etc.] Other
particulars are expressed in the Chronicles which are not here mentioned; as
first, that in the first month of the first year of his reign he opened the
doors of the Temple, which Ahaz had shut up, and repaired them, to wit, by
overlaying them with gold where they were decayed. Secondly, that having called
together the priests and Levites, he exhorted them to sanctify themselves, and
to cleanse the house of God, willing them to consider that all the calamities
which had lately fallen upon them, were for those foul corruptions in Religion
which were crept in amongst them, and that this the priests and Levites did
carefully, as he enjoined them; and so the king, with the rulers of the city,
came up immediately to the Temple, and offered sacrifices there in a most
solemn manner unto the Lord. Thirdly, that upon advice taken, because they
could not keep the passover at the usual time, they resolved to keep it on
the fourteenth day of the second month, to this end proclamation was made
throughout the kingdom for the assembly of the people; yea the king sent posts
with letters to the Israelites of the ten tribes, to persuade them also to
return unto the Lord, and to come up unto Jerusalem to keep the passover, and
the feast of unleavened bread; wherein he prevailed with diverse of them (though
the most of them laughed his messengers to scorn) and so there was a great
assembly both of the men of Judah and Israel, in Jerusalem, where they kept the
feast with exceeding great joy: at which time it was that the people by the
kings encouragement beginning first in Jerusalem, and afterward procceeding to
the other cities of Judah, yea, and to some cities of the Israelites too, brake
down all the idols and their appurtenance, as is here relalated; yea, and
removed the high places too, which had hitherto stood in the days of their
best king. And fourthly, that he ordered the courses of the priests and
Levites, and provided both for their work and maintenance, wherein he sound
the people very forward.

And he called it Nehushtan.] That is a lump or little piece of brass: to
intimate the folly of the people in worshipping the brazen serpent, when he had
broken it, he called it Nehushtan.

Verse. 5. After him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor a^y
that were before him.] That is, he excelled all that were before him, and all
that were after him: for the kings that were before him the case is clear; for
the comparison is not betwixt him and David or Solomon, but betwixt him and the
kings of Judah, that sat in the throne of David, ever since the kingdom was
rent into two kingdoms, the kingdom of Judah, and the kingdom of the ten
tribes: now all these he excelled, in that he removed the high places, which
neither Jehoshaphat nor any other of the good kings of Judah had hitherto done.
But how did he excel all that were after him? seeing of Josiah his grandchild
it is said, chap. 23.25. that there was no king before him like unto him? I
answer; this needs not seem strange, if we consider, that though Josiah might
excel him in some things, as indeed he did; yet Hezekiah might excel Josiah
in other things: as first, in that Hezekiah was the first that removed the high
places, though none before him had done it, yet he would not suffer them to
stand; but when Josiah removed the high places, he had the example of this his
good grandfather to encourage him: and secondly, in his many victories over the
Philistines, wherein Josiah was never so successful.

Verse. 7. And he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not.] If
when Ahaz did send to the Assyrian to aid him against Rezin king of Syria, and
Pekah king of Israel, chap. 16.7. he did not only hire him thereto with a
great sum of money, but did al^o covenant to become his vassal, and to pay
him a yearly tribute; and yet within a while after, when Hezekiah succeeded
his father Ahaz in the kingdom, encouraged with his victories over the
Philistines and others, he resolved to cast off the yoke of the Assyrian, and
so withheld the tribute that had been formerly paid; then no wonder it is,
though it be said here of Hezekiah, that he rebelled against the king of
Assyria: some Expositours excuse, yea, commend this fact of Hezekiahs; and that
either by supposing that Ahaz had covenanted to pay tribute for some certain
years, and so that term of years being now expired, Hezekiah was free; or else
by pleading that it was unlawful for Ahaz to subject Gods free people to the
yoke of a heathen prince; and therefore it was lawful for Hezekiah to cast off
his yoke: but rather I conceive, it was a weakness and error in Hezekiah to
do this, though he did it out of a zeal against the subjection of Gods people
to a foreign power: and that first, because it is here expressly termed
rebellion* and he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not:
secondly, because Hezekiah did himself acknowledge afterward, that he had
offended herein, verse. 14. and Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of
Assyria to Lachish* saying, I have offended, etc. and thirdly, because we find
elsewhere, that Zedekiah king of Judah was sharply condemned for casting off
the yoke of the Babilonian king, contrary to the covenant that had been made
with him; as is largely expressed* Ezekiel. 17.12, 13. etc.

Verse. 8. He smote the Philistines even unto Gaza, etc.] The Philistines had
taken many strong cities from his father Ahaz, 2. Chron. 28.18. The Philistines
also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and
had taken Beth-shemesh* and Aialon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages
thereof. Hezekiah therefore did now make war upon them, and did mightily
prevail, taking from them all that they had gotten, as far as Gaza, from the
tower of the watchmen to the fenced city. Concerning which expression see the
note, chap. 17.9.

Verse. 13. Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, did Sennacherib king
of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judah, etc.] Because
Hezekiah had rebelled against the Assyrian Sennacherib, therefore the son of
Shalmaneser in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah, which was eight years after
Shalmaneser had taken Samaria, and carried away the Israelites into captivity,
raised a mighty army and invaded the kingdom of Judah; and thus did the Lord
both punish the wickedness of the people, which was the more insufferable
because it was under the government of so pious a prince; and withal exercised
the patience, and tried the faith of good Hezekiah.

Verse. 14. And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish,
saying, I have offended etc.] At the first entrance of Sennacherib into the
kingdom, Hezekiah buckled himself with all diligence to defend himself and his
kingdom against him; and to that end by the advice of his counsel and
captains, he cut off the waters that were likely to be useful to the Assyrian
army, and fortified Jerusalem^ and calling together his soldiers and men of
war, he spoke comfortably to them, and assured them of Gods assistance, 2.
Chron. 32.2, 8. but it seems, when he saw how suddenly the Assyrian had taken
many cities of Judah, and that proceeding on in his victories he had also
besieged Lachish; he began to fear the worst, and so resolved to try if he
could buy his peace, and sent his ambassadors to acknowledge his offense, and
to entreat his favor, yielding withal to pay what ever tribute he would
impose upon him.

Verse. 17. And the king of Assyria sent Tartan, and Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh
from Lachish, etc.] Having gotten the money above mentioned into his hands,
verse. 14. The king of Assyria appointed unto Hezekiah king of Judah, three
hundred talents of silver, and thirty talents of gold: he notwithstanding went
forward in his enterprise of subduing them; and therefore not only continued
the siege of Lachish, but also sent a good part of his army under the command
of three of his captains, whereof Rabshakeh was chief (and therefore is only
mentioned by Isaiah, chap. 36.2.) And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from
Lachish to Jerusalem to Hezekiah king of Judah:) to besiege Jerusalem, 2.
Chron. 32.9. After this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants to
besiege Jerusalem, but he himself laid siege against Lachish: even now he had a
purpose, as it seems, to invade Egypt, and was therefore resolved not to leave
this kingdom of Judah behind him, to join with the Egyptian, and so to annoy
him: rather he desired to make Jerusalem a place of retreat for his army; and
therefore though he thought good to dissemble with Hezekiah, and to condescend
seemingly to accept of a tribute; yet so soon as he had gotten the gold and
silver into his hands, he perfidiously went forwards in his wars, and now
nothing would serve him, but to have Jerusalem delivered up into his hands.

Verse. 18. There came out to them Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which was over
the household, and Shebna the Scribe, etc.] This Eliakim was he of whom Isaiah
had prophesied, that he should be advanced to that place of dignity in
Hezekiahs court, which at that time Shebna did enjoy, Isaiah 22.20* 21. And it
shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son
of Hilkiah, and I will cloth him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy
girdle, and commit thy government into his hand: and indeed what is there said
of Shebna, that he was over the house, Isaiah 22.15. (Get thee unto this
treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over the house:) is here said of Eliakim;
and for the Shebna here mentioned, the kings scribe or secretary, it was not
(as I conceive) that wicked Shebna, in whose place the Prophet foretold that
Eliakim should succeed, but another officer of Hezekiah of the same name; and
therefore perhaps it is so expressed, Isaiah 22.15. Get thee unto this
treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over the house, to distinguish him from
this Shebna the secretary or scribe.

Verse. 19. Speak ye now to Hezekiah, Thus says the great king, the king of
Assyria.] It is conceived, that this manner of speech they might use by way of
deriding the prophets of Israel, who in their prophesying did ordinarily begin
after this manner, Thus says the Lord God.

Verse. 25. Am I now come up without the Lord against this place to destroy it?
etc.] This Rabshakeh might speak only to terrify the people, though in truth
he had never any such thought concerning the all-ruling providence of God; but
besides having heard of Hezekiahs taking away the high places and altars,
whereon for many years together the people had worshipped the God of Israel, he
might persuade himself that this mavelous success, which the Assyrians had
had in their wars against Judah, proceeded from the wrath of the God of
Israel against his people; and so urges them with this, that doubtless their
own God had brought his master against them, to punish them for this which
Hezekiah had done.

Verse. 26. Then said Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and Shebna, and Joah, etc.]
That is, one of them in the name of them all: though these three men came out
to parley with Rabshaketh and the other Assyrian captains, yet it seems
Rabshaketh when he spoke to them, spoke so loud, and that in the Jews
language, that all the soldiers that were on the wall might hear what he
said; which he did purposely to affright the people, as is expressly noted, 2.
Chron. 32.18. Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews speech unto the
people of Jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to trouble
them, that they might take the city: Eliakim therefore, and those that were
with him, desired Rabshaketh to speak in the Syrian and not in the Jews
language, Speak I pray thee to thy servants in the Syrian language (for we
understand it) and talk not with us in the Jews language, in the ears of the
people that are on the wall: a strange request indeed this may seem, to be
made to an enemy, who they might be sure would do what he could to discourage
the people, and to raise sedition amongst them: but first, it is no wonder,
that men in danger should seek to help themselves in those ways, whereby there
is little or no likelihood that they should do themselves any good: and
secondly, perhaps they desired this of him as refusing to continue the parley,
unless he would speak to them in the Syrian language; upon which ground they
might conceive he would yield to them, as hoping that upon this parley they
would surrender the city to him peaceably.

Verse. 32. Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, etc.]
Because the Assyrian king had lately carried away the Israelites captives into
a strange country, this people could not but fear the like measure, by way of
answering these their fears; therefore he adds these words, wherein he yields
indeed, that they might expect that at his return (for their purpose was to go
against Egypt, as soon as they had perfected the conquest of Judea) they should
be removed out of their country; but withal he adds that they should be
carried to a land as good as their own.

Verse. 36. But the people held their peace, and answered him not a word: for
the kings commandment was, saying, Answer him not.] To wit, lest they should
rashly either exasperate the enemy, or discover their fears, or give any other
advantage to them, by any thing they should say; and because there was no
better way to pull down the swelling pride of this insolent tyrant, then thus
to seem not to mind what he said, or at least, not to judge his words worthy
an answer.

Verse. 37. Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah which was over the household,
and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, to Hezekiah
with their clothes rent, etc.] To wit, because of the blasphemy of Rabshakeh,
and the great distress whereinto they were all like to fall.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 3. THis is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy.] That is,
this is a day wherein the poor people of God are in great trouble, wherein the
Lord has testified his displeasure against us, and rebuked us for our sins,
and wherein the proud enemy has blasphemed Gods name.

For the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring
forth.] That is, such as is the condition of a woman in travel, when the child
is come to the very birth, and then her strength fails her, that she cannot be
delivered; such is our condition: our sorrow is extreme, our danger desperate;
as being brought to such extremities, that unless help come presently, we are
sure to perish, and no power or ability we have to help our selves; so that
unless God do miraculously help us, we must needs perish, both prince and
people: and in such extremities God is wont to come in to the help of his poor
distressed people.

Verse. 4. It may be the Lord thy God will hear all the words of Rabshakeh,
etc.] That is, it may be he will manifest that he has heard them by punishing
him for them.

Wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that are left.] That is, pray
earnestly unto God, for those few that are left of the people of God: he calls
them a remnant, first, with respect to the captivity of the ten tribes who were
carried away into a strange land; and so only Judah and Benjamin were left:
secondly, with respect to the havoc that had been made amongst the people of
Judah, both in the days of Ahaz his father, and now also by Sennacherib in
many of their cities which he had taken; and for these he desires him to lift
up a prayer; that is, to pray fervently: for in fervent prayer the soul of a
man mounts up as it were to heaven, and is above all thinking of earthly
things, according to that of David, Psalm. 25.1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up
my soul.

Verse. 7. Behold, I will send a blast upon him, etc.] That is, I will drive him
out of the kingdom, even as the dust or chafe is driven by a blast of wind;
and thus the Lord shows how unable the Assyrian should be to stand against his
indignation notwithstanding he thought his power could not be resisted. What
this blast was wherewith the Assyrian was driven out of the land, may be
probably gathered by that which is related afterward: it may be meant either of
the report of the king of Ethiopia's arming against him, or of the slaughter
which was made by the Angel in his army, verse. 35. or of the fear and terror
wherewith he was stricken of God upon those occasions, or of all these
together: and so likewise for the rumor that is mentioned in the next words,
and he shall hear a rumor, etc. it may be mean^ both of the rumor that the
king of Ethiopia was come out against him, verse. 9. and of the rumor of the
slaughter made in the Assyrian army, perhaps the tumult, and shreeking, and
groans that were then amongst them.

Verse. 8. So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against
Libnah.] Rabshakeh finding that the inhabitants of Jerusalem would not yield to
open their gates unto him, went presently to Sennacherib to Libnah; either to
inform him of their resolution, or rather to confer with him concerning the
army of Tirhakah the Arabian, or Ethiopian king, whereof it seems he had heard.
Whether he raised the siege, and went away with that army he carried against
Jerusalem, chap. 18.17. it is not expressed. The threatening letters which
Sennacherib immediately sent to Hezekiah, by terrifying him to make him yield,
is a probable argument that Rabshakeh had left his army still before Jerusalem,
under the command of the other captains, and only went himself to Sennacherib,
to consult with him concerning their affairs.

Verse. 9. And when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he is
come out to sight against thee: he sent messengers again unto Hezekiah.] And
withal he gave them letters written to Hezekiah, containing in effect the same
message, verse. 14. and the reason why he thus sought by all means to terrify
Hezekiah, was to make him yield presently to him, that if it were possible he
might be possessed of Jerusalem, before they should hear of the coming of the
Ethiopian army; and that the rather, because that city would be the most
convenient place for him to retreat unto with his army, if need were to shelter
themselves against the Ethiopians.

Verse. 14. And Hezekiah went up into the house of the Lord, and spread it
before the Lord.] That is, he spread Sennacheribs letter before the altar, the
sign of Gods presence amongst them; and this he did, partly, to quicken his
own spirit, and to strengthen his own faith in prayer, by the sight of that
blasphemous writing; and partly, by that outward sign, to imply what he
desired of God; namely, that God would take notice of, and revenge the horrible
blasphemies of that daring wretch, against his great and glorious name.

Verse. 16. And hear the words of Sennacherib, which has sent him to reproach
the living God.] That is, the messenger that brought his letter.

Verse. 21: This is the word that the Lord has spoken concerning him, The
virgin, the daughter of Sion has despised thee, etc.] That is, the inhabitants
of Sion and Jerusalem shall laugh thee to scorn. The people inhabiting any
city, or country, are in the Scripture usually called the daughter of that
city or country, Psalm. 45.12. And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a
gift: Psalm. 137.8. O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed: because they
have been bred, born, and nourished the^e, and have lived under the defense and
government thereof, and ought to be faithful and obedient to the government
under which they live; whence naturally all nations are wont to style their
country, their mother, 2. Sam. 20.19. Thou seek to destroy a city, and a
mother in Israel: and they are called the virgin daughter of Sion, not so much
because they were not now defiled with idolatry, which is spiritual
fornication (for even heathen people are so called Isa. 47.1. Come down and sit
in the dust, O virgin-daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no
throne, O daughter of the Caldeans: Jer. 46.11. Go up into Gilead, and take
balm; O virgin the daughter of Egypt: and where had been grosser idolatry,
then amongst the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the days of Ahaz?) nor because
she had never yet been subdued and brought under the command of any foreign
prince (for after they were under the Babylonian command, they are still called
so, Lam. 1, 15. the Lord has trodden the virgin the daughter of Judah, as in a
winepresse, and 2.13. What thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of
Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin
daughter of Sion?) but rather, because of their constant abode in those places;
for in that regard they might most fitly be resembled to a virgin daughter that
lives with her mother; tenderly and delicately brought up by her: yea, perhaps
in this place this phrase is used also to imply the weakness of Jerusalem at
this time.

Verse. 23. By thy messengers thou have reproched the Lord.] By this
circumstance does the Prophet aggravate the insolent pride of Sennacherib: that
he set his servants to blaspheme the holy name of God.

With the multitude of my chariots I am come up to the height of the mountains,
etc.] That is, the strongest places of the kingdom I have subdued, and passed
through as a conqueror, even those that seemed to them most inaccessible; and
am now come to the sides of Lebanon, that is, their chief city and strength,
the city Jerusalem: and hereby is intimated that nothing could or should stand
in the way of his armies; that as he had hitherto, so he would still subdue the
land before him, take possession of their forts and castles, cut down the tall
cedar trees, and the choice fur trees, that is, destroy there Princes,
Nobles, and great men, enter the lodgings of his borders, and into the forest
of his Carmel; that is, possess himself of their frontier towns, and all the
fruitful and pleasant places of their country; even as conquerours in a land
subdued are wont to do, as they go along, what they please themselves.

Verse. 24. I have dug and drunk strange waters, and with the sole of my feet
have I dried up all the rivers of besieged places.] That is, when I have come
in places most destitute of water, it has been no hindrance to me, because
even there I have dug up strange waters, that is, fountains, and waters,
where never any were seen before; and on the other side where cities have been
environed with great and deep waters, no sooner have I set my foot there to
besiege them, but with the multitude of my soldiers I have dried them up. Thus
he boasts, that nothing could be a let to his numerous army, and laughs to
scorn Hezekiahs policy in cutting of the waters, 2. Chron. 32.3.

Verse. 25. Have thou not heard long ago, how I have done it, and of ancient
times that I have formed it? etc.] As if the Lord should have said, Thou
boastest of the conquest of many nations, but did thou never hear that there
is a God in heaven that rules the world, by whose providence and decree all
such things are done: surely thus it is with thee, now have I brought it to
pass, that thou should be to lay waste fenced cities into ruinous heaps;
that is, that which I before determined, I have now by thee brought to pass,
using thee as my scourge to punish the wickedness of men, and to turn their
strong fenced cities into ruinous heaps; which agrees with that which the
Prophet says elsewhere, Isaiah 10.5, 6. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and
the staff in their hand is mine indignation, I will send him against an
hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a
charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like
the mire in the streets: there is indeed another translation of these words,
which is set in the margin of our Bibles, Have thou not heard how I have made
it long ago, and formed it of ancient times, should I now bring it to be laid
waste, and fenced cities to be ruinous heaps? and according to this translation
the meaning may be, that God had long ago and of ancient times made and formed
the Israelites to be his peculiar people, and had planted them in the land of
Canaan, which he had provided for their inheritance (a thing so famously known,
that Sennacherib must needs have heard of it) and that therefore it was not
likely that God would now suffer him wholly to lay waste their country, and to
turn their cities into ruinous heaps: but the first exposition does far best
agree with the scope of the Lords upbraiding the pride of Sennacherib, in
boasting of what he had done to so many nations.

Verse. 26. Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed
and confounded, they were as the grass of the field, etc.] That is, because I
gave them up into thy power, therefore they were soon and easily destroyed.

Verse. 27. But I know thy abode, and thy going out, etc.] That is, I know all
thy counsels and enterprises; there is nothing thou do advise upon, or
determine, nothing thou do attempt or accomplish, but it is known to me;
yea, thou do nothing but what I have determined shall be done: and this is
fully that which David acknowledges concerning himself, Psalm. 139.2, 3. Thou
know my down sitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thoughts
afar off, thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with
all my ways.

Verse. 29. And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such
things as grow of themselves, etc.] That is, though ye have been hindered from
sowing and planting this year, by reason of the Assyrians that have invaded
your land; yea, though there be no sowing nor planting the next year, (to wit,
either because it was the sabbath year, the year of the lands rest; or
because the Assyrians left not the country till seed time was past) yet there
shall be sufficient that shall grow of it self of the scattered seeds of corn
that fell upon the earth; and hereby some infer, that the Assyrians continued
a time in the land, even after this promise was made to Hezekiah by the prophet
Isaiah, at least, till the seed time of the second year was past: and a very
miraculous passage this was, that for three years they should live of that
which grew of it self; nor is it any wonder that the Lord gives that for a
sign to strengthen their faith, which was not accomplished till the Assyrians
had left the land: we see the like Exodus 3.12. And he said, Certainly I will be
with thee, and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee, when
thou have brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this
mountain. (Concerning which, see the note there.)

Verse. 30. And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah, shall yet
again take root downward* etc.] Because though they should at present be
delivered from the Assyrians, they might fear that being brought to such a
poor number, their nation would never be able long to subsist; this promise is
added concerning future times, to wit, that that small remnant of them which
had escaped the sword of the Assyrians, should like a thriving flourishing
tree, grow and prosper, and replenish the land again, as in former times.

Verse. 31. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape
out of mount Zion.] That is, that poor remnant that now for fear of the
Assyrians, is shut up within the walls of Jerusalem, shall go forth thence (the
enemies being fled) and shall again replenish the land.

The zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this.] The Lords zeal for his own
glory, the fervent love he bears to his people, and his just indignation
against the enemy, shall move him to do this, however his people have deserved
no such favor at his hands.

Verse. 32. He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, etc.]
It is evident that Rabshaketh came up against Jerusalem with a great army,
chap. 18.17. if he removed his army thence when he went to Sennacherib to
Libnah, verse. 8. (which perhaps he did, having heard of the Ethiopian that was
coming against them) then the meaning of this place is clear, that
notwithstanding the threatening letters he had sent, he should not return again
to lay siege unto Jerusalem; but if the army of Rabshakeh lay still before
Jerusalem, then the meaning of these words may be, that though the army of
Rabshakeh had blockt up Jerusalem, and waited for the coming of Sennacheribs
army, who was happily gone against the Egyptian and Ethiopian army, intending
then with their joint forces to assault Jerusalem; yet he should never cast a
bank against it, but should return the way he came, which accordingly came to
pass, verse. 35. as was formerly prophesied by Isaiah, chap. 14.25. I will
break the Assyrian in my land* and upon my mountains tread him under foot; then
shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their
shoulder.

Verse. 34. For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake, and for my
servant David's sake.] That is, because of my promise made to David concerning
the perpetuity of his throne, which had respect chiefly to Christ the son of
David, of whom David was a type.

Verse. 35. And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the Lord went
out, etc.] That is, that very night, after the Prophet had sent this message to
Hezekiah concerning the deliverance of Jerusalem, or that night when the Lord
performed this which the prophet had foretold, the angel of the Lord went out,
and smote in the camp of the Assyrians, one hundred fourscore and five
thousand; and amongst others the captains and leaders of his camp, perhaps even
Rabshakeh amongst the rest who had lately belched forth such execrable
blasphemies against the God of Israel, 2. Chron. 32.21. And the Lord sent an
Angel, which cut off all the mighty men of valor, and the leaders, and
captains, in the camp of the king of Assyria, etc.

Verse. 36. So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, etc.] With shame of face,
2. Chron. 32.21. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. etc. the
book of Tobit also tells us, that at his return, he in a rage slew many of
the Israelites in Nineveh, Tobit 1.18. but of this we find no mention in any of
the canonical books of Scripture.

Verse. 37. And Esar-haddon his son reigned in his stead.] Who in the
beginning of his reign, sent new troops out of Syria into Samaria, to fortify
the colony therein planted by his grandfather Shalmaneser* Ezra 4.2.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. IN those days was Hezekiah sick unto death.] That is, immediately
after the slaughter made in the Assyrian army by the angel, related in the end
of the former chapter: and indeed manifest it is, that Hezekiah sickned in the
fourteenth year of his reign (which was the year wherein Sennacherib invaded
Judea, chap. 18.13. Now in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah, did Sennacherib
king of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judah, and took them:)
for he reigned in all but nine and twenty years, chapter 18.2. now a promise
was made him of living fifteen years longer, verse. 6. and withal it is most
probable, that he fell not sick before the departure of the Assyrian army;
because not long before that, when he had received those blasphemous letters
from Sennacherib, he went into the temple and prayed unto the Lord, etc. chap.
19.14. though he was newly delivered from so great fears, yet partly for the
further trial of his faith, and partly to render him yet better, and to honor
him with the ensuing miracle, God was pleased to visit him with this dangerous
sickness.

Thus says the Lord, Set thy house in order, etc.] That is, make thy will, and
dispose of those things which it is fit should be set in order before thy
death. Hezekiah had not yet a son to succeed him in the throne, for Manasseh
was borne three years after this, as being but twelve years old at his fathers
death, chap. 21.1. and therefore it is probable, that this was one chief thing
which Isaiah had respect to in these words, that he should advise and determine
what was requisite concerning his successor, for (says he) thou shall dye and
not live, that is, thou art but a dead man by the ordinary course of nature;
there is no way of recovery for thee, unless the Lord shall be pleased by his
almighty power to deliver thee: it is true indeed, this condition was not
expressed, yet was it understood; the Lord purposely (or else where) concealing
this part of his will, that Hezekiah receiving the sentence of death in
himself, might the more earnestly seek for help unto the Lord: and that
Hezekiah took it for a conditional threatening, and not a declaration of what
God had absolutely determined, is evident by his praying to God for mercy
herein.

Verse. 2. Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed, etc.] To wit, either
because that wall was toward the Temple, or rather to hide his tears, and that
being thereby the freer from distractions, he might the more freely pour forth
his requests unto God, to whom he now turned, as to his only hope and comfort.

Verse. 3. I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now, how I have walked before thee
in truth, etc.] Besides that love of life, and horror of death, which is
naturally in all men, and which grace has much ado to overmaster, even in the
best of Gods servants, there were many things that made the sentence of death
in a special manner terrible to Hezekiah: as first, because he had yet no
son to succeed him in the throne, chap. 21.1. and it must needs be very
grievous to him to think that the promise made to David and Solomon, 1. Kings
8.25. There shall not fail thee a man in my sight, to sit on the throne of
Israel, should not be made good to him in his posterity, who had to his utmost
endeavored to keep the condition required of God at the giving of that
promise: Secondly, because he could not but fear, lest upon his death Religion
would go to wrack again, lest the reformation newly begun, would soon come to
nothing, and the poor Church of God would quickly be overgrown with
superstition again: Thirdly, because he saw that those that had been already
forward enough to ascribe all the calamities that had befallen the kingdom in
his time, to his suppressing their high places, altars, and idols, would be now
much more bold to insult over him, if God should thus suddenly cut him off: And
fourthly, especially because his own faith must needs be sorely assaulted, and
shaken with these temptations, and that the rather, because the coming of the
Prophet to him in such a manner, as Gods Herald, to threaten him with death,
Thou shall die, and not live, might seem to imply, that God meant to hew him
down in displeasure: doubtless, in these regards the heart of Hezekiah was
almost overwhelmed with terrors; (as himself afterward expressed in his song,
Isa. 38.10. -- 14.) and hence it is, that in this his prayer he pleads his
integrity, that what he had done in the reformation of his kingdom, he had
done with an upright heart, because he knew it was good in his eyes; not by way
of expostulation or pleading his merits, but to support and strengthen his
faith against these temptations, that he might with the more hope and
confidence call upon God, and might by this argument move the Lord to show him
mercy.

Verse. 4. And it came to pass before Isaiah was gone out into the middle court,
etc.] Some read this, before Isaiah was gone out into the middle city: and
indeed it is by many held, that Jerusalem was divided into three parts; whereof
one was the city of David* which is called Zion; another that which was of old
called Jebus, or Salem; and a third, that which lay betwixt these two and
joined them together, and was called the middle city, the same where Huldah
the prophetess dwelt, chap. 22.14. for so some read that place, she dwelt in
Jerusalem in the second part, and accordingly they understand this place that
before the Prophet was gone out of the city of David into the middle city,
the Lord sent him back to Hezekiah with a promise of recovery: but because the
text seems most plainly to speak of the Prophets going out of the kings house,
and the tender compassion of God in the speedy sending back of the Prophet to
comfort the afflicted soul of Hezekiah, is the more eminently discovered by
this, that before Isaiah was gone out into the middle court of the kings house,
he was sent back again to the king, this translation is justly put into the
text of our Bibles, as the best; and this middle court I take to be the same
which is called the court within the porch, 1. Kings 7.8.

Verse. 5. Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy
prayer, etc.] In sending to Hezekiah the promise of his recovery, the Lord
styles himself the God of David his father, because the promise made to David
concerning the continued succession of his seed in the throne of Judah, should
by this means be made good to Hezekiah, who should now live to have an heir to
succeed him; even as in former time, to imply that God would perform to the
Israelites what he had promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he used to style
himself the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

On the third day thou shall go up unto the house of the Lord.] The suddenness
of his recovery makes it evident that it was miraculous, and the mention of his
going to the house of the Lord, sweetens the tidings of his recovery, since
nothing could more glad his heart then to hea^e that having received the
sentence of death in himself, he should yet again praise God in his holy Temple.

Verse. 6. And I will deliver thee, and this city out of the hand of the king
of Assyria, etc.] Though Sennacherib were returned (as is most probable) into
his own country: yet, first, there might be some garrisons left behind here
and there in the cities he had taken: and secondly, just cause had Hezekiah to
fear, that having reinforced his army, he would return again, and endeavor to
wipe of the stain of his present flight; and to remove those fears, the Lord
assures him, that as he had, so he would still deliver both him and Jerusalem
out of the hand of the Assyrian.

Verse. 7. And Isaiah said, Take a lump of dry figs, etc.] That is, a mass
made of dry figs. Both the boil that Hezekiah had in this dangerous
sickness, and the mass of figs appointed to be laid to the boil, which are
ordinarily used for the ripening of such hard, purulent, pestilentiall tumors,
make it very probable it was the plague, whereof Hezekiah was now sick; and
though therefore the medicine prescribed was proper for the cure in a natural
way; yet if we consider how speedy the cure was, we may well think that there
was a miraculous and supernatural virtue added of God, to hasten the operation
of these natural means.

Verse. 8. And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, What shall be the sign that the Lord
will heal me? etc,] Not because he believed not, did Hezekiah desire this
sign, but for the strengthening of his faith; the rather, because the promise
he now made, did so directly contradict what he had said before. See the note
Judge. 6.15.

Verse, 9. Shall the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go backward ten degrees?]
Because it is left to Hezekiahs choice, whether the shadow should go forward,
or backward ten degrees, and both are propounded, as equally miraculous, for
the confirmation of his faith; hence I conceive it is evident, first, that the
Prophet meant it, of the retiring, or going forward of the shadow so many
degrees in an instant, for the leasurely going forward of the shadow, would not
have had any wonder in it, and could not therefore be proffered to him as a
miraculous sign to assure him of his recovery: secondly, that the degrees that
it was to go forward, or backward, were not the lines, wherewith in the dials
the hours are marked out (for there could not be ten hours for it to go
forward, and ten to go backward, since the day was never twenty hours long in
the climate of Judea) but it must be meant of those lesser lines or degrees,
where with half hours, or quarter of hours are marked; yea rather I conceive
it is meant of the quarters, and that because this miraculous motion of the
sun was to be observed in the dial of Ahaz: now had the sun gone backward
ten hours, or five hours, it might have been as well observed in the motion
of the sun; but going back no more then ten of these smaller degrees it could
not be so well observed in the sun it self, as in the shadow of the dial.

Verse. 10. And Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go down
ten degrees, etc.] The very going downward or forward of the sun or shadow
ten degrees, would have been a wonderful miracle, to wit, being done on a
sudden, or in an instant; yet because it is natural for the sun or shadow to
go forward, though it had removed far faster away forward then at other
times, it had not been so great a miracle as to remove backward, which was a
course directly against nature; and therefore does Hezekiah reject this, and
choose the going backward of the shadow to be his sign.

Verse. 11. He brought the shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone
down in the dial of Ahaz.] Though the suns going backward were the cause of
the shadows going backward, as is expressed, Isaiah 38.8. Behold I will bring
again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of Ahaz,
ten degrees backward; so the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it
was gone down: yet the retiring of the shadow is only expressed, because this
miraculous turning of the sun ten degrees backward, was not so easily
discerned in the sun it self, as in the shadow of the dialls, and though
doubtless the shadow went backward alike in all dialls, yet the dial of Ahaz
is only mentioned; either, because it was the court dial, and so in that the
sick king or his servants by his appointment, were to observe the miracle; or
because it was set up by Ahaz in some public place for common use, and so the
miracle was therein most generally observed by the people.

Verse. 12. At that time Berodach-baladan the son of Baladan king of Babylon
sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah.] This Berodach-baladan is called
Merodach-baladan, Isai. 39.1. by other writers Mardocem-padus; and is by many
good writers counted the first Babylonian Monarch, at least he is the first
that took that title: for Esar-haddon succeeding his father Sennacherib in the
monarchy of Assyria, chap. 19.37. it seems this Merodach Sennacheribs
lieutenant in Babylon, taking advantage of the loss of the Assyrians before
Jerusalem (where an Angel had slain so many thousands) and withal of the young
kings weakness, and his contention with his brothers, revolted from him, and
made himself king of Babylon. Now his Caldeans the great Astronomers of those
times, having observed with astonishment, this strange alteration in the suns
motion, and hearing a report that it was done by the God of the Jews, to assure
their king of his recovery; Merodach took this occasion to send his
Ambassadors to Hezekiah, both to enquire of the wonder, 2. Chron. 32.31.
Howbeit in the business of the Ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who
sent unto him, to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, etc. and to
congratulate the recovery of Hezekiah; and withal doubtless to assure to
himself the friendship of Hezekiah, a known enemy to the Assyrian kings, from
whom he was revolted; and therefore it may well be that it was some years after
that miracle was wrought.

Verse. 13. And Hezekiah hearkened unto them, and showed them the house of his
precious things, etc.] Though a little before he had been brought low enough,
yet now he was greatly enriched, partly by the spoil of Sennacheribs camp, and
partly by the rich presents brought him from many places, 2. Chron. 32.23. And
many brought gifts to the Lord to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah king of
Judah: and these riches he showed to the Ambassadors in a vainglorious
ostentation, as being puffed up in his mind, in that he was become the wonder
of the world, for the suns going backward for his sake; and sought to by a
prince so far remote from him, whose Ambassadors he would have see, that
their master had cause enough to desire to be in league with him; and of this
pride is that spoken, 2. Chron. 32.25. Hezekiah rendered not again according to
the benefit done unto him, for his heart was lifted up, etc.

Verse. 14. And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country, even from
Babylon.] This is spoken by way of boasting.

Verse. 17. All that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up
in store unto this day, shall be carried into Babylon, etc.] Thus he is
threatened, both because his heart was lifted up, 2. Chron. 32.25. and because
his ambition to assure himself of the Babylonian friendship, argued too much
trust in his aid; a great sin, in him that had such experience of Gods
defense.

Verse. 19. Is it not good, if peace and truth be in my days?] However it be
grievous to think that these things should befall our posterity in future
times, yet it is Gods mercy, that yet it shall not be in my days.

Verse. 20. And how he made a pool, etc.] This was it seems, a great pool in the
city of David, and the water was brought in pipes under the ground from the
fountain of Gihon* when Sennacherib did first besiege Jerusalem, 2. Chron.
32.30. Hezekiah also stopped the watercourse of Gihon, and brought it to the
west side of the city of David: and is therefore called the kings pool.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. MAnasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, etc.] So that
he was borne three years after his fathers recovery from his dangerous
sickness, chap. 20.6. and he began to reign about four and twenty years
after the ruin of the kingdom of the ten tribes: for Samaria was taken in the
sixth year of Hezekiah, chap. 18.10. after which he reigned three and twenty
years, chap. 18.2. and then Manasseh succeeded him, being then but a child; (of
whose tender years it seems the princes took advantage, that never in their
hearts had approved the reformation that Hezekiah had made, and so drew him to
reestablish his grandfathers idolatry) yet he reigned, as is noted in the
following words, longer then any of the kings of Judah to wit, fifty and five
years.

Verse. 2. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, after the
abominations of the heathen, etc.] Considering all the particulars that are
here afterward mentioned, it is evident that he did worse then all that had
been before him: it is noted, chap. 20.5. that one of the chief things that
made Hezekiah mourn so bitterly, when the Prophet told him he should die of his
sickness, was because he had then no son to succeed him; but alas, could he
have foreseen what a son he should leave behind him, the want of an heir
could not be so bitter, as this would have been:

Verse. 5. And he built altars for all the host of heaven, in the two courts of
the house of the Lord.] That is, not only in the peoples, but in the priests
court also he built altars for the worship of the sun, moon, and stars.

Verse. 6. And he made his son pass through the fire.] See the note chapter
16.3.

Verse. 7. And he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the house,
etc.] That is one of the idols of the grove which he had made, he set up in the
Temple; or a graven image made as a representation of the grove which he had
made: and indeed that there was an image with a carved grove about it, seems to
be most probable, because it is said, chap. 23.6. that Josiah brought out the
grove from the house of the Lord without Jerusalem unto the brook Kidron, and
burnt it, etc.

Verse. 9. Manasseh seduced them to do more evil, then did the nations whom the
Lord destroyed, etc.] To wit, because the Israelites set up more idols then
ever the Canaanites had; but especially, because they sinned against more light
and means of grace then ever the other enjoyed,

Verse. 13. And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the
plummet of the house of Ahab, etc.] That is, I will deal with Jerusalem as I
have dealt with Samaria, and with the house of Manasseh as with the house of
Ahab; as I did utterly destroy Samaria and the family of Ahab; so will I
utterly destroy Jerusalem, and the house of Manasseh: and indeed the posterity
of Manasseh was cut off, as was the posterity of Ahab, Jer. 22.30. because
workmen do try places, which they would have to be levelled, with the line and
with the plummet, therefore the Lord to imply that he would utterly pull down
and destroy Jerusalem and lay it as it were level with the ground, as he had
already dealt with Samaria, and the house of Ahab; he expresses it with this
phrase, that he would stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the
plummet of the house of Ahab: the like phrase is used, Isai. 34.11. He shall
stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness: and to
the same purpose is the next expression here used; and I will wipe Jerusalem as
a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down; that is, as a man
wipeth a dish that has had some oil, or other thing in it, turning it upside
down, and wiping it, that he may be sure the least drop or crumb may no where
be found upon it; so the Lord will utterly overthrow the state of Jerusalem,
turning it upside down, and will clear her of all her wealth, yea of all her
inhabitants, so that there shall be nothing left not carried away.

Verse. 14. And I will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance, etc.] That is,
the tribes of Judah and Benjamin: and because they flattered themselves in
this, that they were the Lords inheritance, therefore by calling them the
remnant of his inheritance, he implies that though they were his inheritance,
yet he would forsake them.

Verse. 16. Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, etc.] To wit, the
blood of the prophets that condemned his evil courses, and others that opposed
his evil ways.

Verse. 17. Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, etc.]
Some of these we have added, 2. Chron. 33. as first, that the captains of the
host of the king of Assyria invaded the land, and carried away Manasseh
prisoner to Babylon: Secondly, how being in that affliction, he repented him of
his sins, and so the Lord brought him again to Jerusalem; the king of Babylon
being content, as it may seem, to set him free upon condition that he should
oppose the Egyptian king, which may be the cause, why Josiah would needs fight
against Pharaoh Necho, 2. Chron. 35.20. And thirdly, that being returned, he
fortified Jerusalem, suppressed idolatry, and did again set up the true worship
of God.

Verse. 18. And was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of
Uzzah.] It is likely this was done by the kings appointment after his
repentance; as judging himself unworthy to be buried in the sepulcher of the
kings of Judah, because of the abominations of his younger years. Why this
garden was called the garden of Uzzah, we cannot say: yet some Interpreters
held that it was called so, because it was in the place where Uzzah was
smitten, for touching the ark with his hand, 2. Sam. 6.7. or because it had
been formerly his garden.

Verse. 26. And he was buried in his sepulcher, in the garden of Vzzah.] That is
Amon: to wit, because his father Manasseh was buried there.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 2. ANd he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, etc.]
Wherein doubtless he was much encouraged by the Prophet Zephaniah, who
prophesied in his days, Zephan. 1.1. The word of the Lord came unto Zephaniah
in the days of Josiah the son of Amon: but especially, by the prophet
Jeremiah, of whom it is expressly noted, that he began to prophecy in the
thirteenth year of Josiahs reign, Jerem. 1.1, 2. The words of Jeremiah, to
whom the word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of
Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign: and this was that Josiah, who was
by name mentioned by the Prophet that foretold the polluting of Jeroboams
altar, about three hundred years before he was borne, 1. Kings. 13.2. And he
cried against the altar in the word of the Lord, and said, O altar, altar, thus
says the Lord, Behold a child shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by
name; and upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places, etc.

Verse. 3, And it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, that the
king sent Shaphan, etc.] That is, in the eighteenth year, not of his age, but
of his reign, for so it is expressed, 2. Chron. 34.8. Now in the eighteenth
year of his reign when he had purged the land and the house, he sent Shaphan
the son of Azaliah, etc. Nor may we think that this was the first act of his
piety, and that till he had reigned eighteen years he did nothing this way; for
in the Chronicles we see (where his acts are related according to the order of
time wherein they were done:) first, that in the eighth year of his reign
being then sixteen years old, he began to bend himself to seek information how
he might serve God, as David had done: secondly, that in the twelfth year of
his reign, he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem of all their idolatry, which
he did also with a great deal of zeal, 2. Chron. 34.3. For in the eight year
of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David
his father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from
the high places, and the groves, etc. and then thirdly, that in the eighteenth
year of his reign, when he was twenty six years old, he set upon the work of
repairing the temple, as is here also related.

Verse. 4. Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may sum the silver, etc.]
The prophet Jeremiah was the son of Hilkiah a priest, Jer. 1.1. but whether
he were the son of this Hilkiah the priest it is uncertain.

Verse. 5. And let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the work, etc.]
That is, into the hand of the overseers of the work, who were Levites, 2.
Chron. 34.12. And the men did the work of the Lord faithfully, and the
overseers of them were Jahath and Obadiah, etc.

Verse. 8. And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the Scribe, I have
found the book of the law in the house of the Lord.] That is, the authentic
and original copy of it, written by Moses, and delivered by him to the
Levites, to be laid up in the side of the ark, Deuteronomy. 31.24, 25, 26. and thus
did the Lord abundantly recompense their zeal for the repair of his Temple, by
bringing to their hands this precious jewel: though it be most probable which
the Hebrew writers say, that Manasseh and Amon had endeavored to burn up all
the books of the law, and so this book was hid in some secret place in the
Temple, by some faithful priests that it might be preserved for future times;
yet it is not likely, but that there were some transcripts of this sacred
volume preserved amongst the people, at least some parcels of it, and that
Josiah amongst others, had not been a mere stranger to the book of the law (for
strange it were, that he should live till the eighteenth year of his reign,
and so piously reform what was amiss, and never see the law of God till now)
rather because this was the original book of the law which Moses himself had
written, there was great joy at the finding of it, and to the king it was
brought as a rare jewel: indeed Josiahs astonishment, verse. 11. And it came to
pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the law, that he rent
his clothes, makes it clear, that he had not formerly read or heard read those
dreadful threats of judgments against idolatry, Levit. 26. or Deuteronomy. 28. which
now were read to him out of this book; but that might be though he had before
seen many copies of the law, his respect to this original of Moses writing,
might make him desirous to hear it all read, and so he might hear those
terrible passages now, which he had not read or heard before.

Verse. 12. Achbor the son of Michaiah, etc.] Or Abdon the son of Micah, 2.
Chron. 34.20.

Verse. 14. Now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the colledge] Or as it is in the
margin, in the second part; now if we read it so by the second part, we must
understand the second city, or the suburbs of Jerusalem, which was encompassed
with walls and gates several from the city: but however it may well be, that
the reason why this clause is added, is to intimate the reason why Hilkiah, and
those that were sent with him to enquire of the Lord, went to Huldah the
prophetess, rather then to Jeremiah or Zephaniah, who at this time prophesied
in the land of Judah, it was because she dwelt in Jerusalem, and so was near at
hand, whereas they were at present in other parts of the kingdom; and indeed
we read that Anathoth was the place of Jeremiahs usual dwelling, Jer. 29.27.

Verse. 20. Thou shall be gathered into thy grave in peace, etc.] That is,
before these troubles and miseries fall upon this place and the inhabitants
thereof, whilst the kingdom does yet flourish in prosperity and peace; for
though Josiah was slain by Pharaoh Necho, chap. 23.29. yet because he died
before that desolation came upon the land, whereof Huldah had spoken, and died
in the love and favor of God also, therefore she said that he should be
gathered to his grave in peace.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 2. ANd the king went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of
Judah, etc.] To wit, to renew solemnly their covenant with God, that if it were
possible, the wrath of the Lord might be appeased, and those judgments
prevented, which the prophetess Huldah had told him were to come upon the
land; and because all were concerned in the danger, all were called to this
assembly, the priests, and the prophets, and all the people: where by the
prophets may be meant not only the prophets that at this time prophesied in
the land, as Jeremiah, Zephaniah, and Urijah; but likewise also those that
lived in the schools of the prophets, whereof there is often mention made in
the Scripture.

Verse. 3. And the king stood by a pillar, etc.] That is, on the brazen scaffold
erected by Solomon, which was made with pillars; or on a throne, which was
according to the custom erected by a pillar in the Temple for the king to
stand on; of which see the note chap. 11.14. and therefore 2. Chron. 34.31. it
is said of Josiah that he stood in his place.

And all the people stood to the covenant.] That is, they consented to renew
their covenant with God, and promised that they would do according to the
covenant.

Verse. 4. And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, etc.] Josiah did
begin to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the groves, and
the idols which the people had worshipped in the twelfth year of his reign
which was six years before the book of the law was found, 2. Chron. 34.3. but
upon his hearing of those grievous threatenings in the book of the law against
idolatry, he now proceeded further and perfected that work of reformation which
was then began; and therefore it is that in the Chronicles, the penman of the
sacred history, undertaking to relate the reformation that Josiah wrought in
the twelfth year of his reign, he adds also what was done afterward when the
book of the law was found; and on the other side, speaking here how he
suppressed idolatry upon the hearing of the law, he joins also many things
which were done of the same nature, in the twelfth year of his reign, that
all his zealous acts in rooting out idolatry might be related together. As here
that he commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order,
etc. to bring out all the idolatrous trash that was in the Temple: where by the
priests of the second order, may be meant the inferior priests; called priests
of the second order, with respect to the high priest, or rather the first two
chief priests of the two stocks of Eliazer and Ithamar, of whom see the note,
2. Sam. 8.17. Some Interpreters understand it of the priests of the order of
Jedaiah, the second of those twenty four orders of the priests appointed by
David, 1. Chron. 24.1.7. but it is hard to say why they should be employed in
purging the Temple, rather then the rest of the priests.

And he burnt them without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and carried the
ashes of them unto Beth-el.] Therewith to defile the prime seat of Jeroboams
idolatry, and withal to express his detestation of these idols, and that
idolatry there first erected; from whence the infection had overspread the
whole land, and had been the main cause of all the evil that was fallen upon
the people of God. By the Law whatever touched the graves of dead men it was
unclean; and thus he manifested his detestation of these idolatrous monuments,
and that he esteemed them as most filthy things, fi^* only for such unclean
places. Nor need it seem strange that Josiah should have this power in Beth-el,
which was a city of Samaria the kingdom of the ten tribes: for, first, Abijah
the son of Rehoboam, had long since taken Beth-el from Jeroboam, and annexed
it to the kingdom of Judah, 2. Chron. 13.19. And Abijah pursued after
Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Beth-el with the towns thereof: and so
perhaps it had ever since continued: and secondly, it seems that the greatest
part of the kingdom of Samaria was at this time under the dominion of Josiah,
whence is that verse. 19. And all the houses also of the high places that were
in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke the
Lord to anger, Josiah took away, and did to them according to all the acts that
he had done in Beth-el: of which two reasons probable enough may be supposed:
for, first, it may be after the flight and death of Sennacherib, when Merodach
opposed himself against Esar-haddon his son, Hezekiah took advantage of this
faction in the North, and laid hold upon so much of the kingdom of Israel, as
he was able to people: or secondly, perhaps the same reason that moved the
Babylonian king to set Manasseh free, when he was his prisoner in Babylon, did
also persuade him to give him with his liberty the dominion of the greatest
part of the country of Samaria; to wit, that he might defend these territories
against the Egyptian, who begun in these times with great power and success,
to oppose the Babylonians; and indeed the earnestness of Josiah in the king of
Babels quarrel, notwithstanding the kings of Judah, had so long held great
amity with those of Egypt, 2. Chron. 35.20, 21, 22. does argue that the
composition which Manasseh had made with that king or his Ancestour, was upon
such friendly terms, as required not only a faithful observation, but also a
thankful requital.

Verse. 5. And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had
ordained to burn incense, etc.] The word in the original, here translated
idolatrous priests, is Chemarim; and because we find them mentioned, Zeph, 1.4.
as distinct from the priests, I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this
place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests; therefore many
Expositours hold, that they were certain ministers of their idolatry different
from the priests, such as the monks are among the papists; or at least, that
they were a peculiar sort of priests so called, either because they wore black
or colored garments, or because they lived a retired life in cells and
cloisters, or because of their fiery zeal, and fervencie in their Religion, or
because they were peculiarly employed in burning incense.

Verse. 6. And he brought out the grove from the house of the Lord, etc.] By the
grove is meant, either the image or similitude of a grove, which was hanged up
in the Temple; or rather a very grove, which idolatours for devotion had
planted near unto the Temple, contrary to the commandment of the Lord, Deuteronomy.
16.21. Thou shall not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar of
the Lord thy God: which therefore Josiah did now cut down, and removed from the
Temple, burning it at the brook Kidron without Jerusalem, and then cast the
powder thereof upon the graves of the children of the people; to wit, both in
contempt of the idols, and in reproach of those that had worshipped them in
their lives, for this is plainly implied, 2. Chron. 34.4.

Verse. 7. And he brake down the houses of the sodomites that were by the house
of the Lord, etc.] These Sodomites (...) were kept, and maintained, not only
for the satisfying of men's unnatural lust, but also for the honor of their
idol-gods, whom they thought pleased with such horrid uncleanness, and
therefore were their houses built close to the Temple, and here the women wove
hangings for the grove, with which hangings they compassed in many several
places in the groves, as so many several tents and chappels^ darker, the
fitter for those horrid deeds of darkness which were there done: for there
they worshipped their idols, and defiled themselves with all kind both of
spiritual, and bodily uncleanness,

Verse. 8. And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and
defiled the high places, etc.] To wit, by beating down their altars, etc. and
turning the places to profane and unclean uses; or doing something to them,
which in the judgment of those that esteemed them sacred, must needs render
them unfit for any sacred employment, as by burning dead men's bones in them,
verse. 14. or any thing of the like nature.

And brake down the high places of the gates that were in the entering of the
gate of Joshuah the governor of the city, etc.] It is very probably thought
by some Expositours that these high places of the gates, were high places built
for the worship of some tutelary gods, whom they esteemed the Gods that were
the guardians and protectours of their city, which were therefore erected nigh
to the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, that is, one that was at that
time the chief captain, or the chief Magistrate of Jerusalem: now the breaking
down of these high places, is particularly expressed, to show that Josiah
regarded not the greatness of any that had any special interest in any
idolatrous monuments, but suppressed them all.

Verse. 9. The priests of the high places came not up to the altar of the Lord
in Jerusalem, but they did eat of the unleavened bread, etc.] These priests
were such as were of the lineage of Aaron, that yet had defiled themselves with
the idolatry of the high places, where they worshipped the true God in a false
manner: now though these were deposed from their offices, nor were ever
suffered more to serve at Gods altar, yet they were allowed to eat of the
unleavened bread, that is, of the provision allowed for the maintenance, and
nourishment of the priests.

Verse. 10. And he defiled Tophet, etc.] This Tophet was a high place on the
east side of Jerusalem, in a very pleasant valley, called the valley of the
children of Hinnom; or as it is Josh. 15.8. the valley of the son of Hinnom,
where the sacrificed their children to Molech, and it was called Tophet, as it
is generally held, from an Hebrew word that signifies a drum, or a timbrel,
either because of the music and dances which they used at the time of those
sacrifices, or rather because by the noise of drums and tabrels they sought
at those times to defen^ the ears of the parents, that they might not hear
the shreekes and cries of their children; and hence it was that the prophet
Jeremy threatened, that in that very valley there should be a mighty slaughter
of the people, so that it should be no more called Tophet, nor the valley of
the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter, Jer. 7.31, 32. yea and the
prophet Isaiah as in allusion to the shreekes or torments of those that were
slain here, calls hell Tophet, Isaiah 30.33. for Tophet is ordained of old, yea
for the king it is prepared; he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof
is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does
kindle it: and so the Evangelist calls hell Gehenna, as Mat. 5.22. and so in
diverse other places as in relation to the Hebrew word Gehinnom; that is, the
valley of the son of Hinnom.

Verse. 11. And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the
sun, etc.] By these horses of the sun, some conceive is meant only a
carved statue, or representation of the sun sitting in a chariot drawn with
fiery horses: but why is it then distinctly said, that he took away the horses,
and burnt the chariots, and that these horses were kept in the suburbs of the
city? others conceive that they were horses kept to be offered in sacrifice to
the sun, as judging the horse for his swiftness, a fit sacrifice for the
sun that runs so swiftly about the earth: but for what use then were the
chariots? more probable therefore it is, that they were horses consecrated to
the sun, wherewith in chariots either the princes were wont to ride forth,
when they went to worship the rising sun; or else the image of the sun was
carried about the city at some certain times, for which only use, they were
still kept at the charge of the kings of Judah in the suburbs of Jerusalem.

Verse. 12. And the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz,
which the kings of Judah had made.] For on the roofs of their houses they used
to sacrifice to sun, moon, and stars, as we see, Jer. 19.13. And the houses
of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah shall be defiled as the
place of Tophet, because of all the houses upon whose roofs they have burnt
incense unto all the host of heaven, etc. Zeph. 1.4, 5. I will also stretch out
my hand against Judah, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and will cut of
the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarims, with the
priests, and them that worship the host of heaven upon the house tops, etc.

And the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the
Lord, etc.] It is expressly said, 2. Chron. 33.15. that Manasseh repenting him
of his former wickedness, took away all the altars which he had built in the
mount of the house of the Lord, and in Jerusalem; and cast them out of the
city: but though he cast them out of the city, yet his son Amon, after his
death restored them, it seems, to their former places; or if they were
demolished and ruined, yet at least he built others in their room; and yet
these which Josiah now did beat to dust, are called Manassehs altars; because
he first set them up in the two courts of the Temple.

Verse. 13. And the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the
right hand of the mount of corruption, etc.] This mount whereon Solomon's high
places stood, was the mount Olivet near unto Jerusalem, 1 Kings 11.7. called
here, the mount of corruption; because it was so full of idols, wherewith the
people had corrupted themselves, according to that expression, Deuteronomy. 32.5. they
have corrupted themselves; yet it is but a weak conceit to think that Solomon's
high places erected to these heathen gods, had continued to this day as some
men hold, seeking hence to infer, that Solomon did never repent and turn
unto the Lord: for what likelihood is there, that neither Asa, nor Jehoshaphat,
nor Hezekiah did meddle with defacing these idolatrous monuments, which were
doubtless in most esteem amongst the people; questionless, Asa that would not
spare his grandmothers idol, and Hezekiah that brake in pieces the brazen
serpent would not suffer these execrable high places to stand undemolished, in
the very face of the Temple; but what these good princes pulled down, the
idolatrous kings that succeeded in the throne of Jupah, did soon set up again;
and because they were erected as in the room of those which Solomon did at
first set up, therefore they were still called the high places which Solomon
built.

Verse. 15. Moreover the altar that was at Beth-el, etc.] See the notes above
upon verse. 4.

Verse. 16. And sent, and took the bones out of the Sepulchers, and burnt them
upon the altar, etc.] That is the bones of the priests that were there buried
out of a superstitious respect to the holiness of the place, 2. Chron. 34.5.
And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altar: above three hundred
years it was now since a Prophet sent from God had foretold, that the bones of
the priests should be burnt upon Jeroboams altar, 1. Kings 13.1, 2. which was
now accordingly accomplished.

Verse. 17. Then he said, What title is that that I see?] Because the man of God
sent to prophecy against Jeroboams altar, had foretold that the bones of the
priests should be burnt upon the altar, the old prophet that seduced him both
buried him in the sepulcher provided for himself, and gave order to his sons
to bury him there also, and withal took order to erect a statue or pillar in
the sepulcher whereon was engraven, that there the man of God was buried, that
had prophesied against the altar, and was afterward torn with a lion, that so
when the time came, of which the man of God had prophesied, his sepulcher might
hereby be known from the rest, and so his bones with the bones of that man of
God, might lie at rest; this was the title or inscription which Josiah now
espied, and being satisfied what it was, he accordingly gave order to let their
bones alone, and so the old prophet had his desire. See 1. Kings 13.31, 32.

Verse. 18. So they let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet that came
out of Samaria.] See the note, 1 Kings 13.11.

Verse. 19. And all the houses also of the high places that were in the cities
of Samaria, etc.] See the note above, verse. 4.

Verse. 20. And he slew all the priests of the high places that were there, upon
the altars, etc.] Though upon the priests the sons of Aaron that had
worshipped the true God in a false manner, in the high places, he laid no other
punishment but this, that they should be for ever disabled from coming up to
the altar of the Lord in Jerusalem, verse. 8, 9. yet these he slew as not being
the Lords priests, but made priests after the order and institution of
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.31. and such as sacrificed to false gods, and perhaps
obstinately opposed Josiah in this reformation; yea, he slew them upon the
altars, and therein fulfilled what was long since prophesied of him, 1. Kings
13.1, 2. and hereby it appears, that even after the ten tribes were carried
away captive into Assyria; yet there were some both of the priests and people,
that either were left behind, or returned again into the land of Samaria.

Verse. 22. Surely there was not holden such a Passover, from the days of the
Judges, etc.] In 2. Chron. 35.18. it is from the days of Samuel the prophet,
etc. doubtless there could not be so great a concourse of the people to eat
the Passover now, when ten of the twelve tribes were carried captive into
Assyria, as there had been in former ages when all the tribes of Israel lived
under the government of Saul and David, and Solomon successively; but this is
spoken with respect to the multitude of sacrifices that were offered at this
passover, given bountifully by the king and princes to the people; but
especially with respect to the exceeding joy of the good people, because
religion was restored again in its purity amongst them, and the solemnity of
all the service that was then performed in the house of God: Josiah gave then
to the people for the passover offering, thirty thousand lambs and kids, and
three thousand bullocks, and his princes and the chief of the Levites, gave
proportionably many thousands more, as is largely set down, 2. Chron. 35.7, 8,
9. and all the service of the feast was performed with very great solemnity.

Verse. 25. And like unto him was there no king before him, etc.] See the note,
chap. 18.5.

Verse. 26. His anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations
that Manasseh had provoked him withal.] So it is said Jer. 15.4. And I will
cause them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth, because of
Manasseh. It is evident that Manasseh repented him of his sins, 2. Chron.
33.12 -- 19. and therefore as sure it is that the Lord did fully pardon him all
his sins, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow; come now and let us
reason together says the Lord, though your sins were as scarlet, they shall
be made as white as snow: yet here the wrath of God against Judah is ascribed
to the sins of Manasseh; which is because the Lord does many times correct
his servants for their sins, though he has fully perdoned them, and that not
only in their own persons, but in their posterity too. Secondly, because those
sins of Manasseh were still secretly harbored amongst the people, though
they yielded to Josiahs reformation for fear; yet in their hearts, and many of
them secretly in their practices too, they did still uphold Manassehs wicked
ways; as was indeed most remarkably evident in that so soon as ever Josiah was
dead, even all his children with the people did soon return to Manassehs
idolatry again: whence it was that the Lord complained of Judah, Jer. 3.10.
that they had not turned to him with their whole hearts but fainedly; and it
was in the days of Josiah the king, verse. 6.

Verse. 29. In his days Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt went up against the king of
Assyria, etc.] To wit in the last year of Josiahs reign, which was thirteen
years after he kept that solemn passover, and perfectly suppressed idolatry
both in Judah, and in a great part of Samaria: it is hard to say who this king
of Assyria was against whom the king of Egypt went up. Some conceive it was
Esar-haddon the son of Sennacherib, and that it was the revolt of the Medes and
the Babylonians from him that invited the king of Egypt at this time to invade
his country, but others far more probably hold that it was Nebulasser the
son of Ben-meradach king of Babylon: for the Babylonians had now gotten the
empire from the Assyrians, and therefore it is no wonder that he should be here
called the king of Assyria.

And king Josiah went against him.] To wit, to hinder him from passing thorough
his country: Pharaoh sent Ambassadors to him to desire him that he might
quietly pass thorough his country, protesting that he directed himself
against the Assyrians only, without any harmfull purpose against Josiah, but
all suffered not to prevail with him, 2. Chron. 35.21, 22. which makes it most
probable that he did it not so much out of a fear of suffering so great an army
to enter his country, as because he thought himself bound in faith and honor
to hinder him in his enterprise against the Babylonians, to whom he was
obliged, either by covenant made at the enlargement of Manasseh, or by gift of
such part as he held in the kingdom of the ten tribes: but the success was,
that Pharaoh slew Josiah, he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seen him: that
is, at the first encounter when he had fought with him, according to that
phrase, chap. 14.8. Come let us look one another in the face; of which see the
note there: and thus God punished the wickedness of the people by taking their
good king from them.

Verse. 30. And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, etc.]
They took him out of the chariot wherein he was wounded, and put him in his
second chariot, and so went presently to Jerusalem with him, but being mortally
wounded, he dyed by the way: hence it is said here that they carried him dead
from Megiddo, and yet in 2. Chron. 35.29. that they brought him to Jerusalem,
and he died, and was buried, etc. what great mourning there was for his death,
we may see 2. Chron. 35.24. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the
singing men, and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations unto this
day, and made them an ordinance in Israel, and behold they are written in the
Lamentations, whence is that, Zach. 12.11. In that day shall there be great
mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo.

And the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed
him, etc.] We read of four sons that Josiah had, 1. Chron. 3.15. Johanan,
Joakim, Zedekiah, and Shallum; of Johanan, we find no where else any mention:
either Jehoahaz must therefore be the same that is called there Johanan, and
Shallum, Jer. 22.11. and then it were no wonder though the people made him king
being the first born: or else rather we must hold, that happily Johanan the
first born dyed before his father, and so was never king, and that this
Jehoahaz was the same that is called Shallum, 1. Chron. 3.15. and was anointed
king by the people, though he was not the eldest of Josiahs sons, of which
see the note verse. 36. either perhaps because he was best affected to the king
of Babel, or because he was most warlike and valiant, and the most likely
therefore to defend them against Necho king of Egypt.

Verse. 32. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, etc.] He
presently set up again the idolatry which his father Josiah had suppressed, and
most grievously oppressed the people, perhaps the faithful that disliked this
alteration; and in regard of this, he is compared to a young lion that devoured
men, Ezekiel 19.2, 3, 4.

Verse. 33. And Pharaoh Necho put him in bands at Riblath, etc.] Pharaoh Necho
returning with victory from Charchemish where he had vanquished the
Babylonian, was willing to revenge the opposition that was made against him at
his going forth by Josiah and his people, who sought to stop him in his passage
through Judea: and so making use of the dissension betwixt Jehoahaz the son
of Josiah by his wife Hamutall and Eliakim the son of Josiah by his wife
Zebudah, who being the elder (of which see the note, verse. 36.) is probably
thought to have stormed that his younger brother should get the kingdom from
him: he soon got Jehoahaz or Shallum into his power, and the rather to testify
that the kingdom was now at his disposing, he deposed him, giving away his
kingdom to Eliakim his elder brother, to whom of right it did belong; only
imposing a tribute upon him and the people, and so carried away Jehoahaz or
Shallum prisoner into Egypt, where he died, according to the prophecy of
Jeremiah, Jer. 22.10, 11. Thus says the Lord, touching Shallum the son of
Josiah king of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah his father, which went
forth out of this place, He shall not return thither any more.

Verse. 36. Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign.]
Hereby it is gathered, that Eliakim called by Pharaoh Jehoiakim, was the elder
brother; because Jehoahaz when he was made king by the people three months
before this, was but twenty three years old: indeed they that hold that
Jehoahaz was the elder brother, as being the same that is called Johanan the
first born, 1. Chro. 3.15. they say that the beginning of Jehoiakims reign, is
accounted from the death of Jehoahaz in Egypt, because till he was dead he
governed but as a viceroy in stead of his brother; but because he was by
Pharaoh made absolute king, more probable it is that he was the elder brother.

Verse. 37. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, etc.] As
being an idolatour and a cruel oppressor of the people; the rather happily in
revenge, because they had formerly preferred his younger brother before him,
which is largely expressed, Jer. 22.13 -- 19. and Ezekiel. 19.5, 6, 7. but herein
was his impiety chiefly discovered, because when the prophets denounced
judgments against him and his people for their evil ways, he would not endure
it, but persecuted them for it; one remarkable instance whereof, which happened
in the beginning of his reign, we have, Jer. 26.20.23. There was also a man
that prophesied in the name of the Lord, Vrijah the son of Shemaiah of
Kiriath-jearim, who prophesied against this city, and against this land,
according to all the words of Jeremiah. And they fet forth Vrijah out of Egypt,
and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king, who slew him with the sword, and cast
his dead body into the graves of the common people.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. IN his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, etc.] About
three years it is evident that Jehoiakim did peaceably enjoy the throne of
Judah, whereon Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt had set him: for it was the third
year of Jehoiakim ere the Babylonians came up against him, Dan. 1.1. In the
third year of Jehoiakim king of Judah, came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,
etc. and the better to prevent all changes, and to settle the kingdom in his
line, according to the accustomed policy practiced by his forefathers, in the
second year of his reign he made his son Jehoiachin or Jeconiah king with
him, when the boy was but eight years old, 2. Chron. 36.9. of which see the
note, verse. 8. but after he had three years peaceably enjoyed his kingdom,
paying tribute to the king of Egypt, in his fourth year Jeremiah prophesied
that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon should invade the land, and that both they
and all the neighboring nations about them, should become his servants, Jer.
25.1.11. which accordingly came to pass; for immediately after this,
Nebuchadnezzar the second entered Judea with a strong army, besieged and forced
Jerusalem, and having Jehoiakim in his power, did at first intend to carry him
to Babylon, 2. Chron. 36.6. but was at last entreated to leave him as his
vassal, taking with him for pledges, Daniel, being but yet a child, with
Ananias, Misael, and Azarias, with a great deal of the Temples treasures: nor
need we stumble at it, that this is said to have been done in the third year
of Jehoiakim, Dan. 1.1. whereas the fourth year of Jehoiakim is accounted the
first of Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 25.1. The word that came to Jeremiah concerning
all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
king of Judah, that was the first year of Nebuchad-rezzar king of Babylon:
since first, the first year of Nebuchadnezzar might well concur with the end
of the third, and the beginning of the fourth year of Jehoiakim; and again,
secondly, perhaps as some hold, Nebuchadnezzar the second came first against
Judea, whilst his father was yet living, in the third year of Jehoiakim, and
prevailed against Jehoiakim; but returning soon upon the report of Necho the
king of Egypts preparations against him, and especially upon the news of his
fathers death, that he might prevent all commotions at home, in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim (having first vanquished the forces of the Egyptians about
the banks of Euphrates, Jer. 46.1, 2. The word of the Lord that came to
Jeremiah the prophet against the Gentiles, against Egypt, against the army of
Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Charchemish,
which Nebuchad-rezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim
the son of Josiah king of Judah) he soon brought Jehoiakim to acknowledge
himself his vassal and tributary, and so as it is said here Jehoiakim became
his servant three years, to wit, the fifth, sixth, and seventh years of his
reign; the Egyptian king could not like of this, and therefore it seems began
to think of restoring Jehoahaz (now prisoner in Egypt) and setting him up as a
domestical enemy against his ungrateful brother: the rumor whereof when it
came to Judea (though Jeremiah prophesied that it should prove idle, Jer,
22.11, 12. Thus says the Lord touching Shallum the son of Josiah king of
Judah, which reigned in stead of Josiah, which went forth out of this place, He
shall not return thither any more. But he shall die in the place whither they
have led him captive,) did much perplex them, being now in danger both of the
Egyptians, if they kept faith with the Babylonians, and of the Babylonians, if
they should revolt again to the Egyptians (and this I conceive might be the
cause of the fast, kept in the fifth year of Jehoiakims reign, in the ninth
month, Jer. 36, 9. At which time Baruch, sent by Jeremiah, did publicly read
the roll of Jeremiahs prophecy before all the people, which being by the
Princes carried to Jehoiakim, he having heard part of it, cut it in pieces with
a penknife, and cast it into the fire) but at length, to wit, in the eighth
year of his reign, which was the fourth of Nebuchadnezzar, hearing of many
glorious rumors of the Egyptians preparations against the Babylonians,
emboldned hereby, he renounced his subjection to the Babylonian, as is
expressed here, that he turned, and rebelled against him, and so sided with the
Egyptians again.

Verse. 2. And the Lord sent against him bands of the Chaldees, etc.] That is,
Nebuchadnezzar (not without the special counsel of God) came up against him,
and that as Josephus says from that siege of Tire, whereof the Prophet speaks,
Ezekiel. 26.7. For thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus
Nebuchad-rezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the North, with
chariots, and with horses, and companies, and much people: and bringing thence
with him some part of his army, consisting of companies, and bands of several
nations, he entered Jerusalem, and laid hold on Jehoiakim, and being enraged
against him for his perfidiousnesse in revolting from him, caused him to be
slain, and cast out into the fields without Jerusalem, to be devoured by birds
and beasts; for so Jeremy had prophesied it should be, Jer. 22.18, 19.
Therefore thus says the Lord concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of
Judah, They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother, or ah sister, They
shall not lament for him saying, Ah Lord, or ah his glory. He shall be buried
with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem: and 36.30. Therefore thus says the Lord of Jehoiakim king of Judah,
He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David, and his dead body shall be
cast forth in the days to the heat, and in the night to the frost. This was
the eleventh year of Jehoiakim, and so the seventh year of Nebuchadnezzar,
three years after Jehoiakims revolt (for either the siege of Tire, or some
other occasions had hitherto detained Nebuchadnezzar, from coming against him)
and hence it is, we read of three thousand and three and twenty Jews, carried
away by him in the seventh year of his reign, Jer. 52.28. This is the people
whom Nebuchad-rezzar carried away captive in the seventh year, three thousand
and three and twenty Jews.

Verse. 3. Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, to remove
them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, etc.] See the note, chap.
23.26.

Verse. 6. So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers: and Jehoiachin his son reigned
in his stead.] For when Nebuchadnezzar had slain Jehoiakim, as is before noted,
and was returned again into his own country, it seems the people made this
Jehoiachin king in his stead, who is also called Jeconiah, 1. Chron. 3.16. and
Coniah by way of contempt, Jer. 22.24. In the genealogy of Christ, Matthew.
1.11. Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, seems to be quite left, at least in our
most usual translations; for though in some few copies it is thus set down,
and Josias begat Jakim, and Jakim begat Jechonias; yet generally in all other
copies it runs thus, And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the
time they were carried away to Babylon; and after they were brought to Babylon,
Jechonias begat Salathiel: and for the resolving of this doubt, many several
answers are given by Expositours; but the most satisfying one I conceive is
this; to wit, that Jehoiakim the father was called Jeconiah, as well as
Jehoiachin the son; and so whereas Mat. 1.11. it is said that Josias begat
Jechonias and his brethren, that is meant of Jehoiakim the son of Josias, who
had many brethren; whereas Jehoiachin had none: and then that which follows
verse. 12. and after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel;
that is meant of Jehoiachin the son of Jehoiakim, and so the several
generations of these kings are fully expressed.

Verse. 7. And the king of Egypt came not again any more out of his land, etc.]
To wit, against Jerusalem: indeed in the latter end of Zedekiahs reign
(Jerusalem being then besieged) the king of Egypt came up to help him against
the Babylonians, Jer. 37.5. Then Pharaohs army came forth out of Egypt, and
when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem, heard tidings of them, they
departed from Jerusalem: but this here is spoken of his coming to subdue the
Jews to reduce them again under his subjection: this Jehoiakim thought he
would have done, when he heard such glorious rumors of the great preparations
he made against Nebuchadnezzer, and thereupon had revolted from the Babylonian;
and for this very cause it is here expressed that he came not, and that the
king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates, all
that pertained to the king of Egypt; to show upon what vain grounds Jehoiakim
had trusted in Egypt, and so thereby had brought all this misery both on
himself and on his kingdom.

Verse. 8. Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign.] To wit,
when he began to reign alone after his fathers death; for in his fathers life
time he was crowned king ten years before this, when he was yet but eight years
old, 2. Chron. 36.9. Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign,
etc.

And he reigned in Jerusalem three months.] In 2. Chron. 36.9. it is three
months and ten days; but the odd days, as usually elsewhere in the
Scripture, are here omitted. Indeed there in the Chronicles verse. 10. it
follows that when the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzer sent and brought
him to Babylon, whereby some may conceive, that it was a twelvemoneth ere
Nebuchadnezzer took him away; and why then should it be said, that he reigned
but three months: but that which is said there is spoken of the year
absolutely considered, and not of the year of Jehoiachins reign; when the
year was expired, that is, at the spring or beginning of a new year, king
Nebuchadnezzer sent and brought him to Babylon: which was when he had reigned
about three months, as is here said: so that that place in the Chronicles is
parallel with that, 2. Sam, 11.1. and it came to pass that after the year was
expired, at the time when kings go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, etc.

Verse. 9. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, etc.] For
which cause he was threatened by the prophet Jeremiah, that he should die
childlesse, and should be carried with his mother and others into Babylon,
Jeremiah 22.21.30.

Verse. 10. At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up
against Jerusalem, etc.] It is not expressed whether this Jehoiachin were made
king by Nebuchadnezzar when he took Jerusalem, and slew his father; or whether
he was made king by the people, when Nebuchadnezzar had left the city: if he
were set in the throne by Nebuchadnezzar, it may well be (as Josephus says)
that Nebuchadnezzar bethinking himself how dangerous it was to leave him in the
throne whose father he had slain, and cast out unburied, he changed his purpose
presently, and sent his captains with an army against Jerusalem; to whom
himself in person came within a while after, as intending to depose him, and to
set up another king in his room.

Verse. 12. And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon,
etc.] That is, he yielded up both him and his to Nebuchadnezzar, as the prophet
Jeremiah had advised him.

And the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.] That is,
in the eight year of Nebuchadnezzars reign.

Verse. 13. And he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the
Lord, and the treasures of the kings house, etc.] And thus was that
accomplished which God had threatened, when Hezekiah showed his treasures to
the king of Babylons Ambassadors, Isaiah 39.6. Behold, the days come, that
all that is in thine house, and that which thy father's have laid up in store
until this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left: yet this
particle all so often mentioned here and in the following verse, all the
treasures, etc. must be understood with some limitation, as namely, that he
carried away all in a manner, or all that he pleased; for that he carried not
all away now when he carried away Jechoniah, is evident, Jer. 27.18. etc. where
there is mention made of vessels that remained in the house of the Lord, and in
the house of the king of Judah even after this, in the days of Zedekiah the
succeeding king; which after this were carried away as is related in the
following chapter, verse. 13.14. etc.

And cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had
made, etc.] Ezra 1.7. it is said, that Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels
of the house of the Lord which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of
Jerusalem, etc. but for the resolving of this doubt, see the note on that place.

Verse. 14. And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the
mighty men of valor, even ten thousand captives, etc.] To wit, out of the
whole kingdom; of which seven thousand were carried out of Jerusalem, that
were men of might, and a thousand crafts-men and smiths, verse. 16. the rest
were carried from other places of the land: and at this time it was that
Ezekiel was carried away captive, Ezekiel. 1.1, 2. In the fifth day of the month
(which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachins captivity.

Verse. 15. And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the kings mother,
etc.] Yet he had no cause to repent that he had hearkened to Jeremiah in
yielding up himself to Nebuchadnezzar; for it fared better with him, then with
those that stayed behind: yea in the thirty seventh year of his captivity he
was greatly honored by Evilmerodach the son of Nebuchadnezzar; see chapter 25.
ver. 27. In the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin, etc.
Evilmerodach king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, did lift up
the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison, and he spoke kindly to him,
and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him, etc.

Verse. 16. And all the men of might, even seven thousand, etc.] See the note
above on verse. 14.

Verse. 17. And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his fathers brother king in
his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah.] So Pharaoh Necho gave Eliakim a
new name when he made him king in stead of his brother, chap. 23.34. and Daniel
and his companions had new names given them, Dan. 1.6, 7. whereby it may appear
that by imposing new names the conqueror showed his power over them; and
caused them to acknowledge as it were, that they were his servants: indeed this
new name of Zedekiah, which signifies the justice of God, was very proper for
this new king, to put him in mind to be just in keeping the covenant he had
made with the king of Babylon, and that God would be just in punishing him if
he proved perfidious, but that Nebuchadnezzar intended any such thing by giving
him this new name, we cannot say.

Verse. 18. And his mothers name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of
Libnah.] So that he was the brother of Jehoahaz (the first of Josiahs sons
that was king of Judah, and was afterward by Pharaoh Necho carried into Egypt)
both by father and mother: for this Hamutal was also the mother of Jehoahaz,
chapter 23.31.

Verse. 19. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, etc.] In 2.
Chron. 36.12. this is added in particular, that he humbled not himself before
Jeremiah the prophet, speaking from the mouth of the Lord.

Verse. 20. Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon, etc.] About the
beginning of Zedekiahs reign, the people began to insult over Jeremiah, seeing
Jehoiachin carried captive into Babylon, that had yielded to Nebuchadnezzar
upon his persuasion; whereupon the Prophet under the type of good and bad
figs, foreshewed that it should be better with those in the captivity, then
those that were left behind, Jerem. 24. After that in the fourth year,
Zedekiah went to Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar, at which time the Prophet gave
Sheraiah a prince that went with him a book, wherein was written all the evil
that should fall upon Babylon, willing him to read it to the Jews, and then to
bind it to a stone, and throw it into Euphrates, in token of the perpetual
sinking of Babylon, Jerem. 51.59, 64. at his return as we see in the 27. and
28. chapters of Jeremiah, all the bordering princes sent messengers to
Zedekiah, persuading him as it seems, to revolt from Nebuchadnezzar; but
Jeremiah did earnestly dissuade both him and them, sending to each of those
princes yokes in token of the Babylonian yoke, whereunto the Lord would have
them submit, and assuring them, that if they would not stoop to his yoke, they
should all perish by sword, fire, and pestilence: at which time also Hananiah
having broken Jeremiahs wooden yoke, and vaunting that in like manner within
two years Nebuchadnezzars yoke should be broken, and Jeconiah with all the
vessels and riches of the Temple, should be brought again to Jerusalem;
Jeremiah foretold of an iron yoke, and to assure the people that Hananiah had
prophesied falsely, he foretold his death, which that year accordingly in the
second month seized upon him* yet at length in the eighth year of his reign,
Zedekiah practiced more seriously with his neighbors, and in confidence of
great aids promised from Egypt, he rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, though he
had formerly taken an oath to be faithful to him, 2. Chron. 36.13. And he also
rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 2. ANd the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah,
etc.] The city was surrounded on the tenth day of the tenth month, in the
ninth year of Zedekiahs reign, verse 1. and was taken by storm on the ninth
day of the fourth month of the eleventh year, the siege therefore continued a
full year and an half: when Nebuchadnezzar first came against the city,
Jeremiah had prophesied that the city should be taken and burnt, and Zedekiah
carried away captive though not slain, as Jehoiakim was; for which he was by
the instigation of the princes clapped up in prison; see Jer. 32, 1, 5.34.1, 7.
Jer. 17.38. etc. Indeed a while the Chaldeans left the siege, for Pharaoh
Hophre a king of Egypt entering the borders of Judah with his army to succor
Zedekiah, Nebuchadnezzar and his Chaldeans fearing the disadvantage of being
set upon by the Egyptian army, whilst they lay before Jerusalem, where the
Jews might also assail them from within the city, they resolved rather to raise
the siege for a time. At this time the Jews begun to entertain great hopes
again, and (as it is probably thought) having in their former extremity set
free their bondmen (as the law required) by the advice of Zedekiah, when the
Chaldeans were gone, they repented them of their charity, and reduced them
again into their former slavery; see Jerem. 34.8, 9, etc. but Zedekiah knowing
that if the Egyptians prevailed not, they should soon be surrounded again with
the Chaldean army; he sent to Jeremiah the prophet to pray for him. and
received this message from him by his servants; that the Chaldeans should
return again, and take the city, and burn it with fire; and being cast for this
by the enraged princes into the dungeon, under a pretense at first of his
attempting to fly unto the Chaldeans; he often earnestly persuaded Zedekiah to
yield himself to the Chaldeans, and so to save both himself and the city. See
Jerem. 37. and Jerem. 38. but he not hearkening to him, what the Prophet had
said came exactly to pass, for the Egyptians not daring to encounter with
Nebuchadnezzar, did soon return again into Egypt, and abandon their enterprise,
and on the other side the Chaldeans did as speedily return to the siege of
Jerusalem, and never after that left it till they had taken it.

Verse. 3. The famine prevailed in the city, and there was no bread for the
people of the land.] Insomuch, that as Ezekiel had prophesied, who begun to
prophecy in the fifth year of Zedekiahs reign, Ezekiel 1.2. parents did eat
their own children, and children their parents, Ezekiel 5.10. Therefore the
fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat
the fathers, etc. Lament. 4.10. The hands of the pitiful women have sodden
their own children, they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of
my people.

Verse. 4. And the city was broken up, etc.] And so the middle gate was
immediately taken, Jerem. 39.3. And all the princes of the king of Babylon came
in, and sat in the middle gate, etc. and then as it follows, all the men of
war fled by night, by the way of the gate between two walls, which is by the
kings garden; for there was it seems a secret gate in some place near to the
kings garden, closed upon each side with a false wall, provided on purpose for
a means of escape in such a time of danger, and through this therefore the
soldiers with the king, Jerem. 39.4. fled now out of the city, being helped in
their flight, either by the darkness of the night, or by the advantage of a
cave or vault under ground, into which the secret gate led them, and through
which they might steal away, the besiegers not seeing them; and thus it came to
pass as Ezekiel had foretold, Ezekiel. 12.12. And the prince that is among them
shall bear upon his shoulder in the twilight, and shall go forth; they shall
dig thorough the wall to carry out thereby; he shall cover his face that he see
not the ground with his eyes.

Verse. 5. And the army of the Chaldees pursued after the king, etc.] Having by
some means received some information of his flight.

Verse, 6. So they took the king, and brought him up to the king of Babylon to
Riblah, etc.] Though therefore it be said verse. 1. that Nebuchadnezzar came
against Jerusalem; yet it seems he himself stayed at Riblah, or at least,
thither he was retired in the time of the siege, that so he might there take
care of his own country, and might supply his army at Jerusalem with men and
provision, as need required.

Verse. 7. And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the
eyes of Zedekiah, etc.] And then was that prophecy of Ezekiel fulfilled, Ezekiel.
12.13. My net will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I
will bring him to Babylon, to the land of the Chaldeans, yet shall he not see
it, though he shall die there.

Verse. 8. And in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, etc.]
Zedekiah being brought to Riblah to Nebuchadnezzar, in the fourth month, and
there used as abovesaid, on the seventh day of the fifth month, Nebuzar-adan
was sent away by the king, with a commission to ruin the city, and carry away
the people; who arriving at Jerusalem the tenth day of the month, did
accordingly effect what the king had commanded, Jer. 52.12. Now in the fifth
month, in the tenth day of the month, (which was in the nineteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzars reign) came Nebuzar-adan captain of the guard, which served
the king of Babylon to Jerusalem; and hence* is, that seeming contradiction
between these two places; whereas here it is said, that it was in the
nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar when these things were done; yet Jer. 52.29.
it is said, that these Jews were carried away to Babylon in the eighteenth of
Nebuchadnezzars reign; this is only because these things were done in the end
of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzars
reign, for with both these years of his reign did the eleventh of Zedekiahs
concur.

Verse. 9. And he burnt the house of the Lord.] To wit, about four hundred and
fifty years after it was first built by Solomon.

Verse. 11. Now the rest of the people that were left in the city, did
Nebuzar-adan captain of the guard carry away, etc.] To wit, eight hundred
thirty two persons, Jer. 52.29. In the eighteenth year of Nebuchad-rezzar, he
carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons.

Verse. 12. But the captain of the guard left of the poor of the land, to be
vine-dressers, and husbandmen.] Yet about four or five years after this, even
these also as it seems were carried away, to wit, in the three and twentieth
year of Nebuchad-rezzer, Jerem. 52.30. In the three and twentieth year of
Nebuchad-rezzer, Nebuzar-adan captain of the guard carried away of the Jews
seven hundred forty and five persons; all the persons were four thousand and
six hundred; that so the land might enjoy her Sabbath: 2. Chron. 36.20, 21. And
them that escaped the sword, carried he away to Babylon, where they were
servants to him and his sons, to fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of
Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her Sabbaths, etc:

Verse. 13. And the pillars of brass that were in the house of the Lord, and
the bases, and the brazen sea, etc.] Indeed that these things should be carried
into Babylon Jeremiah had beforehand prophesied, Jer. 27.21, 22. Thus says the
Lord concerning the vessels that remain in the house of the Lord, and in the
house of the king of Judah and Jerusalem, They shall be carried to Babylon, etc.

Verse. 17. And the height of one pillar was eighteen cubits, etc.] See the note
1. Kings 7.15.

And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the
second priest, etc.] Seraiah was the grandchild of Hilkiah, who was high priest
in Hezekiahs time, and father of Jehozadak, who was carried into Babylon, 1.
Chron. 6.14. and Zephaniah called here the second priest, (concerning which
title see the note, Numb. 3, 32.) was it seems in great esteem with the king,
and therefore usually sent by him to Jeremiah, Jer. 21.1. and 37.3. now because
the priests were always bitter enemies to Jeremiah, Jer. 26.7, 8. hence we may
conceive that both he, and all the rest here mentioned, were picked out by
Nebuzar-adan, not for captivity, but for the sword; because Zedekiah had been
much led by their counsels in resisting the king of Babylon, contrary to what
Jeremiah had commanded them.

Verse. 19. And out of the city he took an officer that was set over the men of
war, and five men of them that were in the kings presence, etc.] Jeremiah
says seven, Jer. 52.25. he took also an Eunuch which had the charge of the men
of war, and seven men of them that were near the kings person; adding two
more to these here mentioned, which were not perhaps of so great note, as these
five were.

And threescore men of the people of the land, that were found in the city.]
That is, of the common people, such as it seems were of the richer sort, and
had most opposed the king of Babylon.

Verse. 22. Over them he made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of
Shaphan, ruler.] Both the favor which Nebuzar-adan showed to this Gedaliah by
Nebuchadnezzars appointment, Jer. 40.5. and Jeremiahs making choice to live
with him, when Nebuzar-adan had taken him out of prison, as Nebuchadnezzar had
given him order to do; and had given him liberty to go with him into Babylon,
or to stay where he pleased in his own country, Jer. 39.11, 12. and 40.1 -- 6,
I say both these make it probable, that he was one of them that had followed
the advice which the Prophet gave both to Zedekiah and the rest; to wit, to
yield themselves to the Babylonian, Jerem. 21.8, 9, 10. Thus says the Lord, I
will set before thee the way of life, and the way of death, he that abides in
this city shall die by the sword, famine, and pestilence, but he that goes
out and falls to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, etc. and that
therefore he was now made provincial governor of Judea by Nebuchadnezzers
command, to rule over them that were carried away captive.

Verse, 23. And when all the captains of the armies, they, and their men, heard
that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, etc.] To wit, amongst
others those that fled out of the city when Jerusalem was taken verse. 4.

And Jaazaniah the son of a Maachathite.] Or Jezaniah, Jer. 40.8.

Verse. 25. Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed
royal, came, and ten men with him, and smote Gedaliah, etc.] This Ishmael (as
it seems) during the siege of Jerusalem, had kept himself out of the storm,
with Baalis king of the Ammonites, Jer. 40.14. and being of the kings seed, he
now envied that the government should be committed to Gedaliah; and stirred up
also by the king of Ammon, he made a conspiracy with some few more to slay
Gedaliah, this Johanan mentioned above, verse. 23. discovered to Gedaliah, and
offered his help to slay Ishmael, Jer. 40.13, 14. but Gedaliah being
incredulous, Ishmael had the better advantage to effect his purpose; for
whilst he was feasting with him, he slew him, and those that were with him,
Jer. 41.1, 2, 3. Ishmael the son of Nethaniah of the seed royal, and ten men
with him, came to Gedaliah, and they did eat bread in Mizpah together: and
Ishmael arose, and ten men with him, and smote Gedaliah the governor, and all
the Jews that were with him, etc. after this, fourscore men coming from
several places of the kingdom, in a most sad and mournful manner, because of
the desolation that was fallen upon Jerusalem, having certain offerings, and
incense with them, which they purposed to offer to the Lord, in the place where
the Temple had stood, the place which God had chosen, though now ruined by the
Chaldeans; Ishmael having notice of it went forth to meet them, and with
counterfeit tears, making show that he also bare a part with them in their
sorrow, he invited them to go with him to Gedaliah, (thereby to try how they
stood affected to him) and so having gotten them into the city, he slew them
all, ten of them only excepted; whom he spared because they promised to
discover unto him some treasures hidden in the fields during the wars: he
also addressed himself presently to return to the Amonites, and carried with
him as captives all the inhabitants of that place, and amongst the rest
Zedekiahs daughters committed to the care of Gedaliah, by Nebuchadnezzer; but
Johanan hearing of it with such forces as he could get pursued him presently,
and overtaking him at Gibeon, the captives fell off him, and Ishmael with eight
men only escaped by flight: all which is largely related in the 40. and 41.
chapter.

Verse. 26. And all the people both small and great, and the captains of the
armies arose and came to Egypt, etc.] Fearing the Babylonian would take
occasion upon the murder of Gedaliah, and the Chaldeans that were with him
utterly to destroy all the Jews that remained in the land, Johanan and the
other captains resolved to fly with the people that were left into Egypt; first
indeed they came to Jeremiah, and asked counsel of him, vowing to do as he
should direct them from the Lord, but when he answered them, that if they
stayed in the land God would show them mercy, but if they went down into Egypt,
they should all perish there, they charged him with prophesying falsely in the
name of the Lord, and despising the oracle of God, they went away to Egypt, and
carried both Jeremiah and Baruch along with them, and inhabited near unto
Taphnes; where when Jeremiah continued to reprove them for their idolatry, and
to foretell the destruction of Egypt, and of the Jews, that sought to shelter
themselves there (for this, with all before mentioned, is largely related by
Jeremiah in the 41, 42, 43, and 44. chapters of his prophecy) he was at length
there (as other histories report) stoned to death by his own ungrateful
contrymen.

Verse. 27. And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
captivity of Jehoiachin, etc.] Zedekiah died in prison in Babylon, Jer. 52.11.
Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and the king of Babylon bound him in
chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his
death: and had only the honor of being buried as a prince, and lamented at
his burial by his people, Jer. 34.5. But thou shall die in peace, and with the
buryings of thy fathers the former kings which were before thee: so shall they
burn odours for thee, and they will lament thee, saying, Ah Lord; for I have
pronounced the word, says the Lord. But Jehoiachin because he yielded himself
at Jeremiahs counsel to Nebuchadnezzer, was at length by Evilmerodach the son
of Nebuchadnezzer, taken out of prison, and used with all princely respect:
indeed whereas here it is said, this was done on the seven and twentieth day of
the twelfth month, Jerem. 52.31. it is said to have been done on the five and
twentieth day; but the reason of this may be, because order was given for his
release on the five and twentieth day, but it was not done till the seven and
twentieth day, as is here said.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the first book of the CHRONICLES.
CHAP. I.
ADam, Sheth, Enosh, etc.] In the book of the kings there is frequent mention
of the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel and of the kings of Judah,
as 1. Kings 14.19. and 1. Kings 15.23. and in many other places. But it is
clear that these books of the Chronicles, which are a part of the sacred
Scriptures, are not the very same that are there mentioned, because many things
which are there said to have been related are not here to be found, as we see
1. Kings 14.19. Yet these were happily collected out of those, and that by
Ezra, as it is generally thought. Their chief scope is to give us the history
of the kings of Judah entirely by it self, without intermingling the story of
the kings of Israel, as it is in the books of the kings; and especially to add
such remarkable passages concerning Judahs kingdom, as were omitted in the
books of the kings: whence they are called by the Greek Interpreters
Paralipomena, that is, passages formerly passed by and omitted. In the first
four verses we have the line of Adam to Noah, no other of the posterity of
Adam being mentioned, because they were all destroyed in the flood.

Verse. 5. The sons of Japheth; Gomer, etc.] See Genesis 10.1.

Verse. 10. And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be mighty upon the earth.] See
Genesis 10.8.

Verse. 18. And Arphaxad begat Shelah.] The Septuagint in their Greek
translation of the old Testament, do both here, and also Genesis 10.14. insert one
generation more then is in the Hebrew, reading the text thus, And Arphaxad
begat Cainan, and Cainan begat Shelah. And yet herein according to our
translation Luke the Evangelist follows the corrupt Septuagint translation,
rather then the Hebrew copies, Luke 3.35, 36. making Salah (or Shelah) the
son of Cainan, and Cainan the son of Arphaxad. Now to this it is answered
that the Evangelist did this, because the Septuagint translation was then of
great esteem, and of most frequent use amongst the Jews; and therefore he would
not for so small a matter, and of no importance, minister any occasion of
contention, it being sufficient for him to show that Christ was the son of
David, even according to the genealogy of David set down by the Septuagint,
which in those times passed for current amongst them; and that the rather
happily, because even to this that clause may be referred, Luke 3.23. (as was
supposed) namely, that in those days it was supposed by them that followed the
Septuagint translation, that Shelah was the son of Cainan, and Cainan the
son of Arphaxad. It is indeed true that some Interpreters do leave Cainan out
of the genealogy of Luke, and allege that in some Greek copies it is not
found, which being granted we cannot say but they had strong inducements to
leave it out. But on the other side admitting our translation of the Evangelist
to be just and warrantable, the answer formerly given for the reconciling of
this difference, is doubtless the most satisfying that I any where find
amongst the Expositours both of the Old and New Testament.

Verse. 35. The sons of Esau; Eliphaz, Revel, etc.] Eliphaz was the son of
Esau by his wife Adah, and Revel by his wife Bashemath, Genesis 36.10.

Verse. 36. The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and
Timna, and Amalek.] Amalek was the son of Eliphaz by Timna his concubine, the
sister of Lotan, the son of Seir; of which see Genesis 36.12. But this Timna
here mentioned was the son of Eliphaz, though of the same name with his
concubine.

Verse. 38. And the sons of Seir; Lotan, etc.] This Seir was Prince of the
Horites, who at first inhabited the land of Edom, till the children of Edom
destroyed them, and dwelt in their room, Deuteronomy. 2.12. The Horims also dwelt in
Seir before time, but the children of Esau succeeded them, when they had
destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead; and therefore is the
genealogy of the Horites here recorded, only because Esau and his son
Eliphaz were joined in affinity with these Princes of the Horites; and perhaps
thence the Edomites took some occasion of quarrel against them, and so seized
upon their country. The posterity of Seir here mentioned were dukes in mount
Seir, as is noted, Genesis 36.30.

Verse. 43. Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, etc,] See
Genesis 36.31.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 6. ANd the sons of Zerah; Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and
Dara.] Zimri as is most probable, was the immediate son of Zerah, as being
the same that is called Zabdi, the father of Carmi, the father of Achan, Josh.
7.1. But the rest, if they were the same Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and
Dara, mentioned, 1. Kings 4.31. that were so famous for their wisdom (as it
is commonly held they were) then were not these the immediate sons of Zerah,
but rekoned here amongst his sons, only because they were of his posterity,
and men famous in their time; but the sons of Mahol, as is expressly noted,
1. Kings 4.31.

Verse. 7. And the sons of Carmi, etc.] Who was the son of Zimri, or Zabdi,
Josh. 7.1.

Verse. 15. Ozem the sixth, David the seventh.] It is evident that Jesse had
eight sons when David was anointed king by Samuel, 1. Sam. 16.10. but
concerning that see the note there,

Verse. 17. And the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmeelite.] See the note 2.
Sam. 17.25.

Verse. 18. And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife, and
of Jerioth.] This was not Caleb the son of Jephunneh, who was but forty years
old when he searched Canaan, Josh. 14.7. but another of the same name, the
son of Hezron, of whom, see Genesis 46.12. and his genealogy is here largely set
down, because there were many men of renown amongst his posterity, and the
chief aim of this chapter is to show how God blessed the tribe of Judah,
according to his promise, Genesis 49.8, etc. Judah thou art he whom thy brethren
shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies, thy fathers
children shall bow down before thee, see also Exodus 31.2.

Her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.] This may be referred
either to Azubah or Jerioth; yet by most Expositours it is referred to the
last; to wit, that these were the sons of Jerioth, and that Calebs sons by
Azubah, are those mentioned, verse. 42.

Verse. 21. And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir, the father
of Gilead, etc.] See Josh. 17.1. Numb. 26.29.

Verse. 22. And Segub begat Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land of
Gilead.] The grandfather of Jair was Hezron of the tribe of Judah, but his
grandmother was of the tribe of Manasseh, the daughter of Machir; and it seems
his father Segub, was by Machir his mothers father, adopted for his son, and
so Jair is called the son of Manasseh, Deuteronomy. 3.14. and joining with his
brethren by the mothers side, in subduing that portion of land which was
assigned to them without Jordan, he had there his portion amongst them, though
he were by the fathers side of the tribe of Judah, see the note upon Numb.
32.41.

Verse. 23. And he took Geshur, and Aram, with the towns of Jair, etc.] That is,
he took Geshur and Aram from those that were the ancient inhabitants. But this
was Geshur without Jordan, in the portion of the half tribe of Manasseh there
seated; for there was another Geshuri within Jordan, that was not subdued when
Joshua began to divide the land amongst the Israelites, Josh. 13.2. As for
Kenath he took that (as it seems) by means of Nobah, who happily was one of his
posterity or captains, and fought against Kenath under the command of Jair,
Numb. 32.41, 42. And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them Havoth-jair. And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the
villages thereof, and called it Nobah after his own name.

Verse. 24. Abiah Hezrons wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa.] That is, the
Prince of Tekoa, or rather the father of the inhabitants of Tekoa.

Verse. 34. Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters, etc.] Ahlai therefore the
son of Sheshan mentioned, verse. 31. died it seems his father yet living; or
else, Ahlai was his daughter, whom he married to his Egyptian servant.

Verse. 42. Now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were, Mesha his
firstborn, which was the father of Ziph.] These were his sons by Azubah his
first wife, of whom mention was made, verse. 18. and Mesha his firstborn is
called the father of Ziph, because he was the father of the inhabitants of Ziph.

And the sons of Maresha the father of Hebron.] That is, the sons of
Maresha were also the posterity of Caleb by Azubah.

Verse 49. And the daughter of Caleb was Achsah.] Caleb the son of Jephunneh had
a daughter also named Achsah, Josh. 15.17. but this must needs be the daughter
of Caleb the son of Hezron.

Verse. 50. These were the sons of Caleb the son of Hur, etc.] This is the
posterity of a second Caleb, the son of Hur, mentioned before, verse. 20. and
the first mentioned is Shobal the father of Kirjath-jearim, which may be
understood as that above, verse. 42.

Verse. 54. The sons of Salman; Beth-lehem, and the Netophathites, Ataroth,
the house of Joab.] Ataroth signifies crowns, and so some understand this word
as an encomium of the Netophathites, that being of the valiantest of Joabs
soldiers, they were the crowns of the house of Joab. But otherwise it may be
taken for the inhabitants of Ataroth, a place mentioned, Josh. 16.2. to wit,
that they also were of the posterity of Salmah; and those words, the house of
Joab, must then be added, to imply, that the posterity of Joab were either of
the inhabitants of Ataroth, or of the posterity of Salmah; to wit, by the
fathers side.

Verse. 55. And the families of the Scribes which dwelt at Jabez. By Scribes
here, Expositours understand such as were exercised in the study of the law,
and so instructed the people herein, whence is that, Jer. 8.8. How do we say,
We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us? Lo, certainly in vain made he
it, the pen of the Scribes is in vain, and Ezra 7.6. This Ezra went up from
Babylon, and he was a ready scribe in the law of Moses.

The Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites,
etc.] The Kenites were doubtless the posterity of Jethro, Judge. 1.16. And the
children of the Kenite Moses father in law, went up out of the city of
palm trees, and the Suchathites (so called, because they dwelt in Tabernacles)
were Kenites (as is here expressly affirmed) yea and perhaps the rest also, in
the former words mentioned with them, and that of the posterity of Hemath, who
was also the father of the Rechabites, of whom we read, Jer. 35.2. yet because
they dwelt with the sons of Salmah, and perhaps matched themselves with their
daughters, they are here inserted amongst Salmahs posterity.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. NOw these are the sons of David, which were born unto him in
Hebron, etc.] What is to be noted in these first four verses, see 2. Samuel
3.2, 3, 5.

Verse. 5. Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four of Bath-shua the
daughter of Ammuel.] Solomon is here named last, because his posterity is
immediately to be expressed, verse, 10. but he was the eldest of these four
sons which David had by Bath-shua, or Bath-sheba, as is evident, 2. Sam.
12.24. and therefore Bath-shebaes only darling, Prove. 4.3. For I was my
fathers son, tender, and only beloved in the sight of my mother.

Verse. 6. Ibhar also, and Elishama, etc.] There are but seven of these
mentioned, 2. Sam. 5.15. For Noga is not there mentioned, and but one
Eliphalet; whereas it is manifest by this place, that he had two sons
(perhaps by two several wives) that were called Eliphelet, as he had two also
that were called Elishama; for he that is called Elishua, 2. Sam. 5.15. is here
called Elishama.

Verse. 15. And the sons of Josiah were, the firstborn Johanan, etc.] Either
Johanan was indeed the firstborn of Josiahs sons, but dyed before his
father, and so never came to the kingdom, and then it is Jehoahaz that was
first king that is here called Shallum, and reckoned in the fourth place; or
else Jehoahaz is here called Johanan, and is called the firstborn, either
because he was indeed the eldest of Josiahs sons, (of which see the notes on
2. Kings 23.36) or else because he was the eldest by his wife Hamutal, (who was
happily his first and principal wife) or at least because he first succeeded
in the throne as the firstborn, 2. Kings 23.30.31.

Verse. 16. And the sons of Jehoiakim; Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his
son.] It is manifest that Zedekiah who was made king of Judah by the king of
Babylon, when Jehoiachin or Jeconiah was carried captive to Babylon, and was
the lost king of Judah, was the son of Josiah, 2. Kings 24.17. the brother of
Jehoiakim, and uncle of Jehojachin or Jeconiah who was king immediately before
him; either therefore Zedekiah the last king of Judah, is here called the son
of Jeconiah or Jehojachin, only because he succeeded him (as his heir) in the
throne of Judah; or else this Zedekiah here mentioned, is not Zedekiah the
son of Josiah king of Judah, but another of that name, the son of
Jehoiakim, and brother of Jehojachin, or Jeconiah, who is no where else
mentioned in the Scriptures.

Verse. 17. And the sons of Jeconiah; Assir, Salathiel his son, etc.] Though
it was prophesied concerning Jeconiah, that he should be as a man that was
childlesse, in regard of having the royal dignity continued in his posterity;
because none of his seed should sit in the throne of David, Jer. 22.30. Thus
says the Lord, Write ye this man childlesse, a man that shall not prosper in
his days: for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of
David, and ruling any more in Judah: yet it is evident by this place, that he
had several sons after he was carried into Babylon; to wit, Assir, and
Salathiel, and Malchiram, etc. eight in number; unless we should conceive,
that Salathiel and those that follow were the grandchildren of Jeconiah, by his
son Assir, as the words seem to imply, Assir, Salathiel his son; or that
Salathiel was called Assir Salathiel, which may seem the more probable,
because, Assir signifies one in bonds; and so Salathiel might be called in
reference to Jeconiahs being carried bound into Babylon, (as we see the like in
Gershom, Exodus 2.22.) as also because Salathiel is named as the son of
Jeconiah, Matthew. 1.12. And after they were brought to Babylon, Jeconias begat
Salathiel. Indeed some conceive that Salathiel came of the stock of Nathan, and
is here only mentioned as a son of Jeconiah, because he succeeded in some
kind of government after Jeconiah, and that he was of the stock of Nathan: But
me thinks it is far more probable that this Salathiel here mentioned, and so
again, Matthew. 1.12. was indeed the true son of Jeconiah, and that both
Salathiel and Zerubbabel mentioned by Luke, chapter 3.27. are diverse from
these mentioned here, and in Matthew.

Verse. 19. And the sons of Pedaiah were, Zerubbabel and Shimei.] Pedaiah is
mentioned in the former verse, as a son of Jeconiah, and made here the father
of Zerubbabel; evident indeed it is, that Salathiel had also a son called
Zerubbabel, Matthew. 1.12. and Salathiel begat Zorobabel. Hag. 1.1. In the second
year of Darius -- came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet, unto
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel. But this Zerubbabel was it seems the son
of Pedaiah, who was the brother or uncle of Salathiel.

And the sons of Zerubbabel; Meshullam, and Hananiah, and Shelomith their
sister.] Probable it is that these two sons of Zerubbabel are here mentioned;
first by themselves, with their sister Shelomith, because these he had by one
wife, and the other five mentioned in the following verse, by another.

Verse. 21. And the sons of Hananiah; Pelatiah, and Jesaiah: the sons of
Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, etc,] That is, all these families were of the
stock of Hananiel.

Verse. 22. And the sons of Shechaniah; Shemaiah: and the sons of Shemaiah;
Hattush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.] That is, the
sons of Shechaniah were six, to wit, reckoning his son Shemaiah, and his
five grandchildren, the sons of Shemaiah.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 1. THe sons of Judah; Pharez, Hezron, etc.] That is, the posterity of
Judah: for only Pharez was Judahs son immediately, and Hezron was the son
of Pharez, and Carmi called also Chelubai and Caleb was the son of Hezron,
chap. 2.9, 18. and Hur was the son of Carmi or Caleb, chap. 2.19. and Shobal
was the son of Caleb, the son of Hur, chap. 2.50. and Reaiah, or Haroe,
chap. 2.52. was the son of Shobal; and because this Shobals posterity were
here to be more fully expressed, verse. 2. therefore in the first verse it is
shown briefly, how he was lineally descended from Judah; from hence unto the
tenth chapter the families of all the several tribes are expressed besides
Zebulon and Dan; and Dan some say is omitted, because there was but one family
of that tribe, to wit, the family of Hushim, Genesis 46.23. But why the
genealogies of these two tribes are omitted, I conceive we cannot certainly
say; yet see what is noted afterward, chap. 7.6.

Verse. 3. And these were of the father of Etam, etc.] It is not expressed who
was this father of Etam, that is, this father of the inhabitants of Etam; only
by the last words of the fourth verse it is clear, that both he and his sons
were of the posterity of Hur, and perhaps by Shobal the son of Caleb, the
son of Hur, as those were, mentioned in the former verses; for in the latter
end of the fourth verse, with reference to that which went before, it is said,
These are the sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephratah, that is, the first born
of Caleb by his wife Ephratah, chap. 2.19. the father of Beth-lehem for he was
the grandfather of Salmah, who was the father of the inhabitants of Beth-lehem,
chap. 2.50, 51.

Verse. 5. And Ashur the father of Tekoa, had two wives, etc.] This Ashur was
the posthumus son of Hezron, born of his wife Abiah after Hezron was dead,
chap. 2.24.

Verse. 8. And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel, etc.]
It is not expressed here who was the father of this Coz; but by the joining of
these words to those that went before, it may seem that he was the son of
Helah or Ethnan, the last mentioned in the former verse, and so of the
posterity of Ashur.

Verse. 9. And Jabez was more honorable then his brethren, etc.] Jabez is here
mentioned as the father of one of the forenamed families of Aharhel.

Verse. 11. And Chelub the brother of Shuah, begat Mehir, etc.] This Chelub is,
(as I conceive) added as another head of the families of Aharhel, mentioned
verse. 8.

Verse. 12. These are the men of Recah.] That is, these sons of Chelub were
the inhabitants of Rechah.

Verse. 13. And the sons of Kenaz; Othniel, etc.] It is not expressed whose
son Kenaz was, but probably it may be thought by the adding of this to that
which went before, that he was the son of Chelub, verse. 11.

Verse. 14. And Meonothai begat Ophrah.] Who was also (as it seems) the son of
Othniel, as was also Hathath, mentioned in the former verse.

And Seraiah begat Joab, the father of the valley of Charashim, etc.] Or
craftsmen; which stood in the confines of Judah and Benjamin. See Neh. 11.31 35.

Verse. 15. And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh, etc.] Who was the
son of Kenaz, or at least of his posterity, and therefore called the
Kenezite, Numb. 32.12.

Verse. 16. And the sons of Jehaleleel; Ziph, and Zipha, Tyria, and Asareel.]
And Jehaleleel was also it seems the son of Kenaz, mentioned the last in the
foregoing verse.

Verse. 17. And the sons of Ezra were, Jether, etc.] The son (as it seems)
of Asareel.

And she bare Miriam, etc.] To wit, the wife of Ezra.

Verse. 18. And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered, etc.] This was a second wife of
Ezra.

And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took,
etc.] The sons of Ezra being named, here we have next expressed the sons of
Mered, who was one of Ezra's sons, verse. 17. He had it seems also two wives,
the first Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, as here it is expressed; the second
Hodiah the sister of Maham, verse. 19. and by these Mered had the father of
Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite, verse. 19. This I conceive is
the plainest exposition of this intricate place.

Verse. 20. And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Ben-hanan, and
Tilon.] It is not expressed whose son this Shimon was, only it is generally
thought that he is reckoned as one of Chelubs posterity, mentioned verse. 11.

And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Ben-zoeth.] This Ishi was happily the
son of Filan before mentioned.

Verse. 22. Who had the dominion in Moab, etc.] It seems that in the times when
the Moabites were tributaries to the kings of Judah, these sons of Shelah
before mentioned, were by their appointment governors in Moab.

Verse. 23. These were the potters and those that dwelt amongst plants and
hedges: there they dwelt with the king for his work.] That is, of these sons
of Shelah came also those that were potters, and those that dwelt amongst
plants and hedges; that is, those that were gardiners and husbandmen to the
kings of Judah.

Verse. 24. The sons of Simeon were, Nemuel, etc.] Because the tribe of Simeon
had their inheritance assigned them within the inheritance of the children of
Judah, Josh. 19.1. therefore is their genealogy here joined with Judahs. Here
are but five sons of Simeon mentioned, whereas Genesis 46.10. there are six
mentioned, which may be, because happily one of them never came to be reckoned,
as the head of a family; yea happily died without issue: nor need we be
troubled that their names are not the same, since the Israelites had usually
two or three several names.

Verse. 31. These were their cities, unto the reign of David.] Either this is
added, because there was in the cities of Simeon some alteration in David's
time, to wit, because one of these cities, namely Ziklag, having been in the
possession of the Philistines, was by Achish given to David, and thenceforth
being a part of the crown land of the kings of Judah, it was ordinarily
reckoned one of Judahs cities; or else only to express, that even unto David's
time (not excluding the times following) they were esteemed the inheritance of
Simeon, as here is said. Yet some understand this clause thus; These were their
cities, unto the reign of David, that is, so long as the kingdom of Judah
remained in David's posterity, to wit, until the captivity of Babylon.

Verse. 32. And their villages were, etc.] That is, their towns or cities
unwalled.

Verse. 34. And Meshobab, and Jamlech, etc.] These are mentioned because they
were in their time great men, and because of that particular exploit they did,
verse. 39, 40, etc. though it be not expressed from which of his sons they
descended.

Verse. 41. And these written by name, came in the days of Hezekiah king of
Judah, and smote their tents, etc.] To wit, the tents of the children of Ham;
that is, the Canaanites that dwelt there before, verse. 40. and so the posterity
of Simeon dwelt in their room. This must needs be done in the beginning of
Hezekiahs reign, for in the sixth year of his reign, the ten tribes were
carried away captive, 2. Kings 18.10, 11. And at the end of three years they
took it: even in the sixth year of Hezekiah (that is the ninth year of Hoshea
king of Israel) Samaria was taken. And the king of Assyria did carry away
Israel unto Assyria. So that it seems they did not long enjoy these their new
conquests, unless happily this new colony of the tribe of Simeon, were part of
that small remnant of the ten tribes that were not carried away (and that
happily because they dwelt far up in the kingdom of Judah) but remained in
the land even in the days of Josiah, Hezekiahs grandchild; whence is that. 2.
Chron. 24 9. And when they came to Hilkiah the high Priest, they delivered the
money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that kept the
door had gathered of the hand of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and of all the remnant
of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin, and they returned to Jerusalem.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. HE was the first born, but forasmuch as he defiled his fathers bed,
his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph, etc.] Because it might be
questioned why the genealogy of Reuben was not first set down, who was Jacobs
firstborn son, this clause is inserted, wherein two reasons are given why
Judahs genealogy was first set down, and not Reubens; the first, because though
Reuben was Jacobs firstborn, yet for his incest with his fathers concubine, he
lost his birthright, and it was given to the sons of Joseph* Genesis 48.5. who
was the eldest son of Rachel, that should have been his first wife,
concerning which see the note there: the other, because the genealogy was not
to be reckoned after the birth right; that is, either as it was Reubens by
nature, or as it was the sons of Joseph by Jacobs gift (to wit, in regard of
a double portion of inheritance) but Judahs genealogy was to have the
pre-eminence, because the tribe of Judah had always the honor of being
esteemed the chief of the tribes, Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of
him came the chief ruler, to wit, David and his successors kings of Judah;
yea, at last Christ also the promised Messiah, of whom David was a type.

Verse. 4. The sons of Joel; Shemaiah his son, etc.] Amongst the posterity
of Reuben Joel is here particularly mentioned, because of him Beerah descended,
v. 6. who was the prince of the Reubenites at the time of the captivity, and
then amongst others carried away captive. Whose son Joel was it is not
expressed, only it is thought most probable, that he was of the stock of
Hanoch Reubens eldest son; because Beerah who descended from him, was Prince
of the Reubenites at the time of the captivity.

Verse. 7. And his brethren by their families, (when the genealogy of their
generations was reckoned) were the chief, Ieiel, and Zechariah, etc.] That is,
the chief of the rest of the Reubenites his brethren (when the genealogy of
their generations was reckoned, to wit, either in the days of Jotham, verse.
17. or rather at the captivity) were Jeiel, and Zechariah, and Bela, the three
heads happily then living of the other three families of the Reubenites,
descended of Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.

Verse. 8. Who dwelt in Aroer, etc.] That is, the Reubenites before mentioned.

Verse. 10. And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagarites, etc.]
That is, the Ishmaelites, the posterity of Abraham by Hagar: and the Gadites
and half tribe of Manasseh, joined with them in this war, verse. 18, 19. The
sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and half the tribe of Manasseh, of valiant
men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to shoot with bow, and skillful in
war, were four and forty thousand seven hundred and threescore that went
out to the war. And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and
Nephish, and Nodab.

Verse. 12. Joel the chief, and Shaphan the next, etc.] These were heads either
of several families or houses in the tribe of Gad, either at the time of the
captivity, or in the days of Jotham, ver. 17. when they were reckoned by their
genealogies.

Verse. 14. These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, etc.] That is,
the seven before mentioned were of the stock of Abihail, who was the son of
Huri, etc.

Verse. 16. And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, etc.] But how then was all
Bashan given unto the half tribe of Manasseh, Deuteronomy. 3.13. And the rest of
Gilead and all Bashan being the kingdom of Og gave I unto the half tribe of
Manasseh: all the region of Argob, with all Bashan, which was called the land
of giants. I answer, that it was all that Bashan that was the kingdom of Og
that was given to them; but it seems some other part of the country adjoining,
which was not of Ogs kingdom, was also called Bashan, wherein the Gadites
dwelt; or, the Manassites had all Bashan, that is, all in a manner.

Verse. 17. All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king
of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.] That is, toward the
latter end of the reign of Jeroboam the second, when Jotham the son of
Uzziah governed the kingdom, because his father was stricken with leprosy, 2.
Kings 15.1, 5. or else the words may be meant of two several times when the
genealogies of the Israelites were taken and reckoned, one in the days of
Jeroboam, the other in the days of Jotham.

Verse. 19. And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Nephish, and
Nodab.] Which were several families or plantations of the Ishmaelites or
Hagarites, as is evident Genesis 25.15.

Verse. 24. And these were the heads of the house of their fathers, even Epher,
etc.] See the note above, ver. 12.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. THe sons of Levi; Gershon, etc.] Levi was next in age to Reuben
(Simeon only excepted, whose genealogy was joined with Judahs, chap. 4.24.
because they dwelt amongst the tribe of Judah) and therefore is Levies
genealogy next recorded: for the genealogy of Gad, and the half tribe of
Manasseh is only inserted with Reubens in the former chapter, because they
dwelt together with the Reubenites without Jordan.

Verse. 4. Eleazar begat Phinehas, Phinehas begat Abishua, etc.] Eleazar
succeeded his father Aaron in the high priesthood, in the fourtieth year after
their coming out of Egypt, Numb. 20.25, etc. and 33.18. and was high priest all
the time of Joshua, and died immediately after him, as may seem by the relation
of their deaths together, Josh. 24.29, 33. Phinehas his son that succeeded
him, was he that slew Zimri and Cozbi in the wilderness, and had thereupon a
promise from God, that the high priesthood should be settled upon him and his
seed for ever: see Numb. 25.7. -- 13. He succeeded his father Eleazar about the
death of Joshua, Josh. 24.29, 33. How long he lived high priest it is no where
expressed; but probable it is he was high priest all the time that the people
served the Lord after Joshuahs death, in the days of the elders that outlived
Joshua, Judge. 2.7. and perhaps in the time of the first revolting of the people
in the time of the Judges (which must needs then be a matter of much grief to a
man of such zeal as he was) for it is evident that when the Israelites made
war against Benjamin, he was high priest, Josh. 20.28. And Phinehas the son
of Eleazar, the son of Aaron stood before it in those days. As for the next
three that follow, Abishau, and Bukki his son, and Vzzi his son, they were
it seems high priests in those corruptest times of Israel under the Judges:
whereto agrees that which is by some said, that in the days of Uzzi it was
that Eli (and so his posterity after him) got the high priests office, not
being of Eleazars stock, but of the stock of Ithamar: and if so it were, then
the four next following of the stock of Eleazar were never high priests, to
wit, Zerahiah, and Meraioth, and Amariah, and Ahitub; but Zadok the son of
Ahitub, verse. 8. was the first that recovered that dignity again, which was in
the days of Solomon, who thrust out Abiathar of the posterity of Eli, and of
the stock of Ithamar, from being high priest, and put Zadok the son of Ahitub
in his room, 1. Kings 2.27, 35.

Verse. 10. And Johanan begat Azariah, (he it is that executed the priests
office in the temple that Solomon built in Jerusalem.] That is, this is that
Azariah of whom such honorable mention is made in the book of the Chronicles,
2. Chron. 26.16. etc. who did so worthily execute and maintain the honor and
office of the priesthood against the intrusion and usurpation of Uzziah the
king of Judah; and it is expressly noted that it was in the temple which
Solomon built in Jerusalem, because at the time when this was written, there
was another Temple in Jerusalem built by Zerub-babel. Yet some understand these
words of Johanan the father of Azariah, that he was that Jehoiada that was high
priest in the days of Athaliah, by whom both the Temple and Commonwealth were
preserved, when they were in danger to be ruined by her.

Verse. 13. And Shallum begat Hil^iah.] Who found the book of the Law in the
days of Josiah, 2. Kings 22.8.

Verse. 14. And Azariah begat Seraiah, etc.] Seraiah was the high priest whom
Nebuchadnezzar slew: see 2. Kings 25.18, -- 21. He was also the father or
grandfather of Ezra, Ezra 7.1. Now after these things in the reign of
Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the
son of Hilkiah, etc. and then Jehozadak his son was the father of Josuah,
who was so famous at the return of the Jews, and the rebuilding of the Temple,
Hag. 1.1. In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the
first day of the month, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the Prophet, unto
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Josuah the son
of Josedech the high priest.

Verse. 19. And these are the families of the Levites according to their
fathers.] That is, of these before named were the several families of the
Levites called, to wit, the family of the Libnites, etc.

Verse. 20. Of Gershom; Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,
etc.] Here follows a catalogue of those that were successively the Heads both
of the Gershonites, Kohathites, and Merarites; perhaps unto the days of David,
who did dispose of the Levites into new orders: and whereas Zimmah is here said
to be the son of Jahath, thereby is meant that he was his grandchild: for
Shimei was the son of Jahath, and Zimmah the son of Shimei, verse. 42, 43.

Verse. 25. And the sons of Elkanah; Amasai, and Ahimoth.] The sons of
Elkanah are here more particularly expressed, because from him descended that
Elkanah, who was the father of Samuel.

Verse. 26. As for Elkanah, the sons of Elkanah; Zophai his son, etc.] This
is another Elkanah, who was the son of Mahath, and grandchild of Amasai,
mentioned in the former verse, as is evident, verse. 35, 36.

Verse. 27. Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.] The father of Samuel.

Verse. 31. And these are they whom David set over the service of song in the
house of the Lord, etc.] That is, these are they that David made chief in the
three quires of singers after the Ark had rest, that is, after it was brought
to David's house (for before it was removed from one place to another) to wit,
these mentioned in the sequel of this chapter; Heman of the Kohathites, ver.
33. who was the chief, and therefore had the middle quire, and Asaph (who stood
on Hemans right hand) v. 39. and was of the Gershonites; and Ethan, who was
also called Jeduthun, chap. 25.1. and was of the Merarites, and stood on Hemans
left hand, ver. 44. These were in their times famous men, as being the chief
singers, and withal Prophets, and penmen of some of the Psalms; 2. Chron.
29.30. Moreover, Hezekiah the king, and the princes commanded the Levites to
sing praise unto* the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer.

Verse. 33. Heman a singer, the son of Joel, the son of Shemuel.] That is,
Samuel; for Heman was Samuels grandchild.

Verse. 50. And these are the sons of Aaron; Eleazar his son, Phinehas his
son, etc.] By occasion of the mention that is made of the several offices
and employments of the priests in the foregoing verse, the catalogue of the
sons of Eleazar is here again set down unto the days of David, by whom the
priests were divided into four several orders.

Verse. 57. And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of Judah, etc.] And
Simeon, Josh. 21.9. And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah,
and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here
mentioned by name.

Verse. 60. All their cities throughout their families, were thirteen cities.]
To wit, the eleven here mentioned, and Ain in Judahs portion, and Gibeon in
Benjamins, which are reckoned amongst the rest, Josh. 21.16, 17. but are not
here mentioned.

Verse. 61. And unto the sons of Kohath, which were left of the family of that
tribe, were cities given out of the half tribe, etc.] That is, to the rest of
the sons of Kohath, to wit, those that were not of the priests the sons of
Aaron, there were cities given out of the half tribe of Manasseh, that was
placed within Jordan; yea, and by lot there were given them in all ten cities,
to wit, four out of the tribe of Ephraim, and four out of the tribe of Dan,
and two out of the half tribe of Manasseh, most of which are expressed by name,
verse. 67, etc. and more fully, Josh. 21.21.

Verse. 65. And they gave by lot -- these cities which are called by their
names.] To wit, above, ver. 57, etc.

Verse. 66. And the residue of the families of the sons of Kohath, had cities,
etc.] Here the cities that were given to the rest of the Kohathites are
expressed also by name, which were before spoken of, ver. 61. as they are also
Josh. 21.20. though indeed many of the names there and here differ; concerning
which see the notes there.

Verse. 69. And Aijalon with her suburbs, etc.] These were given them out of the
tribe of Dan; as also Eltekeh and Gibbethon, which are not here mentioned,
Josh. 21.23, 24.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. NOw the sons of Issachar were, Tola, and Puah, Jashub, etc.] This
Puah and Jashub we called Phuvah and Job, Genesis 46.13. Having before set down
the genealogies of Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachars is next here
related, because Issachar was Jacobs next son by Leah.

Verse. 2. Whose number was in the days of David two and twenty thousand and
six hundred.] To wit, when he appointed Joab to number the people, 2. Sam. 24.1.

Verse. 3. And the sons of Uzzi; Izrahiah: and the sons of Izrahiah;
Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, five.] That is, there were five
descended of Uzzi, to wit, Izrahiah, and his four sons.

Verse. 4. And with them, by their generations, after the house of their fathers
were bands of soldiers, etc.] Hereby it is evident that there were six and
thirty thousand men of the posterity of Uzzi alone; so that the two and twenty
thousand six hundred, mentioned before verse. 2. was the number of the posterity
of Tola by his other sons, Uzzi being excepted, whose posterity are here
numbered by themselves, as being more then all the rest together.

Verse. 5. And their brethren among all the families of Issachar, were men of
might, etc.] That is, all the children of Issachar together, were fourscore
and seven thousand men of might when Joab numbered them.

Verse. 6. The sons of Benjamin; Bela, and Becher, and Jodiael, three.]
Jediael is called Ashbel, Genesis 46.21. Zebulun was the sixth son of Leah, born
next after Issachar; but neither Zebuluns nor Dans genealogy is at all here
mentioned; perhaps because at the return of the people out of Babylon, (when it
is thought that Ezra wrote this book) their genealogies were not found.
Benjamins genealogy is therefore next inserted, who was the son of Rachel;
yet here are but only three of Benjamins ten sons mentioned, perhaps because
the posterity of these only were numbered, when Joab numbered the people, verse.
2.

Verse. 12. Shuppim also, and Huppim, etc.] That is, these also were of
Benjamins posterity.

Verse. 13. The sons of Naphtali; Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum,
the sons of Bilhah.] That is, the grandchildren; for Bilhah Rachels handmaid
was the mother of Naphtali, whose sons these were.

Verse. 14. The sons of Manasseh; Ashriel whom she bare, etc.] There was an
Ashriel that was the son or one of the posterity of Gilead, Numb. 26.30, 31.
These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites: of
Helek, the family of the Helekites: And of Asriel, the family of the
Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites: either therefore
this was another Ashriel, the immediate son of Manasseh by his wife; whereas
Machir was Manassehs son by his concubine the Aramitesse: or else Ashriel is
here reckoned only as one of the posterity of Manasseh; whom she bare, that
is, either the wife of Gilead, or the wife of Hepher, the mother of Zelophehad,
and thence it follows, verse. 15. that Zelophehad (who was the son of Hepher,
the son of Gilead, Number. 27.1.) was the second, that is, the second son of
Hepher, the younger brother of Ashriel. And if we thus take Ashriel for one of
the posterity of Gilead the son of Machir, then we must understand that the
following words, But his concubine the Aramitesse bare Machir, etc. are only
added, to show that this Ashriel, and the rest afterward mentioned, were not
the posterity of Manasseh by his wife, but by his concubine the Aramitesse:

Verse. 17. These were the sons of Gilead, etc.] To wit, Ashriel and
Zelophehad above mentioned; but not Peresh, and Sheresh, and his posterity the
last here mentioned: for they were the sons of Machir by Maachah, and so the
brethren of Gilead.

Verse. 18. And his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishhad, etc.] That is, Gileads
sister.

Verse. 19. And the sons of Shemida were Ahian, etc.] And Shemida was also the
son (or of the stock) of Gilead: see Numb. 26.30, 32.

Verse. 21. Whom the men of Gath that were born in that land slew, etc.] Either
this must be referred to all those before named, verse. 20. the sons of
Ephraim; Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, etc. to wit, as
taking them all to be the several sons of Ephraim; namely that Shuthelah,
verse. 20. was the son of Ephraim, and so also Bered (who seems to be
mentioned as the son of Shuthelah) was another son of Ephraim, and Tahath
another, and so on forward: who were all slain by the men of Gath, when the
Israelites were in Egypt: or else (if this seems not so probable, because then
Ephraim should have two sons called Shuthelah, and two called Tahath) then
though those in the twentieth verse be taken as several generations, to wit,
that Shuthelah was the son of Ephraim, and Bered his grandchild, and Tahath
his grandchild, and so forward, yet Zabad the first mentioned verse. 21. must be
reckoned another son of Ephraim, and Shuthelah, and Ezer, and Elead his
grandchildren, whom the men of Gath slew: or thirdly, if all those before
mentioned be reckoned as several succeeding generations, to wit, that
Shuthelah the son of Ephraim begat Bered, and Bered Tahath, and Tahath
Eladah, and Eladah Tahath, and Tahath Zabad, and Zabad Shuthelah, and Ezer, and
Elead, then the words ( whom the men of Gath slew, etc.) must be referred only
to some of the former of these here mentioned: or fourthly, that which follows,
verse. 22. And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to
comfort him, must be meant of Zabad, who was called also Ephraim, perhaps only
because he was the head of that tribe; for it is not possible, that Ephraim
should live to see these last here mentioned, if they be all taken as several
succeeding generations, to wit, seven generations. However, though this which
is said concerning the cause why the men of Gath slew them; to wit, because
they came down to take away their cattle, may be meant of the Philistines of
Gath, that coming upon the Israelites dwelling then in Egypt, to take away
their cattle, they slew these sons of Ephraim, that armed themselves to
resist them; yet rather I think it is meant of the sons of Ephraim, to wit,
that there being usually war betwixt Egypt and the Philistines their
neighbors (to which those places may have reference, Exodus 1.10. Come on, let
us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that when
there fall out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against
us, and so get them up out of the land, and 13.17. And it came to pass when
Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the
land of the Philistines, although that was near: for God said, Lest
peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt.)
the sons of Ephraim at a certain time armed themselves to make an inrode upon
the land of the Philistines, and were slain by the men of Gath; for why is it
said, the men of Gath that were born in that land, but to intimate, that they
inhabited the land that was invaded by the sons of Ephraim? and of this
slaughter of the Ephraimites, some understand that place, Psalm. 78.9. The
children of Ephraim being armed and carrying bows, turned back in the day of
battle.

Verse. 24. And his daughter was Sherah, who built Beth-horon the nether, and
the upper, etc.] That is, Sherah famous in her time for building, that is,
rebuilding, beautifying, and fortifying these cities, (for the upper and nether
Beth-horon were cities in Canaan before the Israelites possessed them, Josh.
16.6.) she was also of the stock of Beriah: for had she been the immediate
daughter of Beriah, the son of Ephraim, she could not have lived to enter the
land of Canaan.

Verse. 26. Ammihud his son, Elishama his son.] Who was prince of the
children of Ephraim at their going down out of Egypt. Numb. 7.48. On the
seventh day, Elishama the son of Ammiud, prince of the children of Ephraim,
offered.

Verse. 35. And the son of his brother, Helem.] That is, Helem was the son
of Shomers brother, called before verse. 32. Hotham.

Verse. 38. And the sons of Jether, etc.] This Jether is called Ithran in the
former verse, as most conceive.

Verse. 39. And the sons of Ulla, etc.] Who was happily another son of
Jether, or else his grandchild the son of Ara before mentioned.

Verse. 40. And the number throughout the genealogy of them that were apt to
the war and to battle, was twenty and six thousand men.] To wit, happily when
they were numbered in the days of David, as above verse. 2.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. NOw Benjamin begat Bela his firstborn, etc.] Some thing was before
said concerning three of Benjamins sons, chap. 7.6. but here the genealogy
of Benjamin is more fully expressed. 1. Because the tribe of Benjamin did
always most constantly adhere to the house and kingdom of David. And secondly
to discover the stock of Saul the first king of Israel. Indeed Genesis 46.21.
there are ten sons of Benjamin named, but the genealogy of five of them
only is here recorded; because happily of the others there were no men of any
great renown, or perhaps because their genealogies were lest, Ashbel the
second, is called also Jediael, chap. 7.6. and Aharah Ahiram. Numb. 26.38. and
Ehi, Genesis 46.21. and Nohah Naaman, Genesis 46.21. and Rapha Rosh, Genesis 46.21.

Verse. 3. And the sons of Bela were, Addar, and Gera, etc.] Five other sons
of Bela are mentioned, chap. 7.7. to which here are added nine more, neither is
it necessary that we should think that all these were the immediate sons of
Bela; (for here we see are two Geraes mentioned, and men do not use to call two
sons by one name) but only that they were men of renown of his posterity.

Verse. 6. And these are the sons of Ehud, etc.] The meaning of this place (I
conceive) is, that some of these before mentioned that were of the posterity of
Bela, were more immediately the sons of Ehud, chief of the fathers of the
inhabitants of Geba, who finding that place too strait for them, removed
themselves to Manahath, together with Naaman, and Ahiah called Ahoah verse. 4.
and Gera, and dwelt there.

Verse. 7. He removed them, and begat Vzza, and Ahihud.] That is, Ehud or Gera
removed them, and being seated in Manahath, he begat Uzza and Ahihud.

Verse. 8. And Shaharaim begat children in the country of Moab, after he had
sent them away.] That is, after Ehud or Gera had sent away this colony from
Geba to Manahath, Shaharaim (who was it seems one of them) begat children in
the land of Moab, whither it seems upon some occasion he was removed.

Hushim and Baara were his wives.] Hushim called also Hodesh, verse. 9.

Verse. 12. The sons of Elpaal; Eber, etc.] To wit, besides those that dwelt
in Jerusalem mentioned, verse. 17, 18, 28.

Verse. 13. Beriah also and Shema, who were heads of the fathers of the
inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove away the inhabitants of Gath.] To wit, that
they might dwell in their room; yet some understand it, that they came upon the
men of Gath, when they had slain the sons of Ephraim, and put them to flight,
so revenging the death of their brethren.

Verse. 14. And Ahio, Shashak, and Jerimoth, etc.] Here begins the catalogue of
the heads of the several families of Benjamin that inhabited Jerusalem. First,
the sons of Beriah the son of Elpaal, verse. 14, 15, 16. Secondly, the
sons of Elpaal, verse. 17, and 18. Thirdly the sons of Shimhi, or verse. 13.
Shema the son of Elpaal, verse. 19, 20, 21. Fourthly, the sons of Shashak,
verse. 22, 23, 24, 25. who was a son of Beriah, verse. 14. And fifthly, the
sons of Jeroham, who is no where else mentioned, verse. 26, and 27.

Verse. 33. And Ner begat Kish, etc.] This Ner the grandfather of Saul, was also
called Abiel, 1. Sam. 9.1. Now there was a man of Benjamin whose name was Kish,
the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, etc. and he had (besides Kish) a son
also called Ner, the father of Abner, 1. Sam. 14.50.51.

Verse. 36. And Ahaz begat Jehoadah.] Called also Jarah, chap. 9.42.

Verse. 37. Rapha was his son.] Called also Rephaiah, chap. 9.43.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 2. NOw the first inhabitants, etc.] In the former chapters we had the
genealogies of those that were before the Babylonian captivity; but here now we
are told who they were that returned out of Babylon, Now the first inhabitants
that dwelt in their possessions in their cities were the Israelites; that is,
those who first returned from Babylon, and were again settled in their several
possessions were the children of Israel (for not only those of Judah and
Benjamin, but some also of the other tribes returned thence, verse. 3. to wit,
such as sled to Judah when the ten tribes were first carried away by
Tiglath-pileser and Shalmaneser; and such as did at first leave the land of
Israel, when Jeroboam did first set up his golden calves there: the priests
also, the Levites and the Nethinims, that is, (as the word signifies) men
given, to wit, to God and to the service of the Temple, and it is meant of the
Gibeonites; see the note Josh. 9.21.

Verse. 3. And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children
of Benjamin, etc.] To wit, every tenth man amongst them chosen by lot, and such
as did besides voluntarily offer themselves to dwell there, Nehem. 11.1, 2. And
the rulers of the people dwelt at Jerusalem; the rest of the people also cast
lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem, the holy city, and nine parts
to dwell in other cities. And the people blessed the men, that willingly
offered themselves to dwell at Jerusalem.

Verse. 5. And of the Shilonites; Asaiah the first born, etc.] That is, the
sons of Shiloni, Neh. 11.5. and he that is here called Asaiah, is in
likelihood the same that is there called Maaseiah.

Verse. 7. Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of
Hasenuah, etc.] Nehem. 11.7. Meshullam is said to be the son of Joed, the
son of Pedaiah; either therefore Meshullams father was called both Joed and
Hodaviah, and his grandfather both Pedaiah and Hasenuah; or else these here
mentioned were his father and grandfather, and those mentioned in Nehemiah were
his progenitors farther off.

Verse. 9. And their brethren, according to their generations, nine hundred and
fifty and six.] Nehem. 11.8. they are said to have been nine hundred twenty and
eight; but there (it may seem) only those are numbered that were chosen by lot
to dwell in Jerusalem, here those also that did voluntarily proffer themselves
to dwell there. Nehem. 11.2. And the people blessed all the men that willingly
offered themselves to dwell at Jerusalem.

Verse. 11. And Azariah the son of Hilkiah, etc.] Called also Seraiah, Neh.
11.11. and it is said here that this Azariah or Seraiah was the ruler of the
house of God, to wit, at the return of the people from Babylon: whereby is not
meant that he was high priest, (for Joshua was then high priest, Hagg. 1.1.)
but that he was the chief, or one of the chief of the inferior priests, who
were called the second priests, Numb. 3.32. And of his brethren there were when
they returned from Babylon, eight hundred twenty and two, Nehem. 11.12.

Verse. 12. And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, etc.] Neh.
11.12. it is evident that there were three descents between Pashur and Jeroham;
and there also, verse. 13. it is expressed, that of his brethren there were two
hundred forty and two.

And Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, etc.] Nehem. 11.13. he
is called Amashai, the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasiai, the son of
Meshilemoh, the son of Immer: and of this family it is said that there were,
verse. 14. an hundred twenty and eight.

Verse. 14. And of the Levites, Shemaiah, etc.] Having formerly set down the
chief of the priests that returned from Babylon, here he also adds who were
the chief of the Levites that returned; of whom there were at Jerusalem
(besides those that were seated elsewhere, and the porters, and others
afterward mentioned) two hundred fourscore and four, as is noted Nehem.
11.18.

Verse. 15. Mattaniah the son of Micah, the son of Zichri.] Called also
Zabdi. Nehem. 11.17.

Verse. 16. And Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, that dwelt in the villages of the
Netophathites.] Who were of the tribe of Judah, amongst whom the Levites were
seated at first, till their cites could be assigned them.

Verse. 17. And the porters were Shallum and Akkub, etc.] That is, these were
the chief; for of them in all there were an hundred seventy and two, Nehem.
11.19. besides those that were porters in the inner entries, verse. 21, 22.

Verse. 18. Who hitherto waited in the kings gate eastward.] That is, Shallum
the chief of them, and those of his course or family, unto the time of the
writing of this book, waited in the east gate, which was called the kings gate,
because formerly the kings of Judah used to go into the Temple at that gate.

Verse. 19. And Shallum the son of Kore and his brethren: (of the house of his
father) the Korahites were over the work of the service, keepers of the gates
of the Tabernacle.] That is, he and the rest of the Korahites, were keepers of
all the outer gates of the tabernacle or Temple; for even the Temple is
sometimes called the tabernacle.

And their fathers being over the host of the Lord, were keepers of the entry.]
That is, and the fathers of them, the heads and chief of them kept the entry,
that is, the entry by which they passed from the outer court into the court of
the priests, the inward gate: or else it may be meant of the fathers of these
Levites, who waited upon the tabernacle before the Temple was built, and so is
added only to show, that these Levites were now keepers of the gates of the
temple, as their fathers in former times had waited at the entry of the
Tabernacle; and were over the host of the Lord, that is, over the Levites, when
after the manner of an host or army they pitched about the Tabernacle, when the
Israelites went through the wilderness. And indeed this exposition seems the
more probable, because of that which follows in the next verse.

Verse. 20. And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them in time
past.] That is, Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, had the
chief command over the Levites in time past.

Verse. 21. And Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah, was porter of the door of
the Tabernacle of the congregation.] That is, he (and perhaps his brethren) was
porter of the door that led out of the priests court into the Temple, so that
his was of all the chief place; see chap. 26.1, 2.

Verse. 22. All these which were chosen to be porters in the gates, were two
hundred and twelve.] See the note above, verse. 17. and Nehem. 11. and chap.
23.5.

These were reckoned by their genealogies in their villages: whom David and
Samuel the seer did ordain in their set office.] That is, whereas before the
days of Samuel, the Levites did all promiscuously intend the whole service of
the Tabernacle, when Samuel judged Israel, 1. Sam. 7.6. he it seems began to
divide the work amongst them, and to appoint them their several charges and
employments, which David afterward did much perfect, appointing so many
several courses for the several services of the Temple, and so by their
turns they attended, in their several places, the work of Gods house.

Verse. 23. So they and their children had the over sight of the gates of the
house of the Lord, namely, the house of the Tabernacle, by wards.] Some at one
gate, and some at an other.

Verse. 25. And their brethren, which were in their villages, were to come after
seven days from time to time with them.] That is, the brethren of the four
chief porters mentioned, verse. 17. served by turns; and every week one company
went out, and another company came in.

Verse. 31. And Mattithiah, one of the Levites (who was the first born of
Shallum the Korahite,) had the set office over the things that were made in the
pans.] That is, to look to the provision of flower and such things as were kept
in the treasuries and store-chambers requisite for these uses, and to deliver
them at times convenient to the priests, by whom they were made ready, and
offered to the Lord.

Verse. 33. And these are the singers, chief of the fathers of the Levites, who
remaining in the chambers, were free.] That is, the Levites; they were also the
singers in the Temple, who were freed from all other employments, because they
were continually employed in that work.

Verse. 35. And in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, etc.] The stock of Saul is
here again repeated, to make way to the story of the kings, which is begun with
the death of Saul in the following chapter.

Verse. 37. And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah.] Called Zacher, chap. 8.31.

Verse. 39. And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat Saul, etc.] See the note, chap.
8.33.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 2. ANd the Philistines slew Jonathan, etc.] See the note 1. Sam. 31.2.
in which chapter many other passages of this chapter are explained.

Verse. 6. So Saul died and his three sons, and all his house died together.]
That is, all his servants and attendants that accompanied him in this war, 1.
Sam. 31. 6.

Verse. 10. And they put his armor in the house of their gods, etc.] That is,
in the house of Ashtaroth. See 1. Sam. 31.10.

Verse. 12. And buried their bones under the oak, etc.] Having first burnt their
bodies. See 1. Sam. 31.12, 13.

Verse. 13. So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the
Lord, even against the word of the Lord, etc.] To wit, both in not staying
Samuels coming, as he was appointed, seven days, when he warred against the
Philistines, and also in sparing Agag and the best of the spoil, contrary to
the Lords command, in his war against Amalek.

Verse. 14. And enquired not of the Lord.] See 1. Sam. 28.6.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. THen all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, etc.] To
wit, Ishbosheth being slain, when David had already reigned seven years in
Hebron: for betwixt the death of Saul and this anointing of David by all the
tribes of Israel, many things are recorded in the four first chapters of the
second of Samuel, which are here omitted: now what needs explanation in these
three first verses, see in the notes upon 2. Sam. 5, 1, 2, 3.

Verse. 4. And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, etc.] To wit, to take the
strong hold of Zion, a part of Jerusalem which was still in the Jebusites
possession; see 2. Sam. 5.6.

Verse. 5. And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shall not come
hither.] Adding withal by way of derision, except thou take away the blind and
the lame; of which see 2. Sam. 5.6.

Verse. 6. So Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was chief.] Joab was
before one of David's chief captains, 2. Sam. 3.22, 23. but not the General
over all his forces, or if he were, it was not over all the forces of Israel,
but only over the forces of Judah (for till now the other tribes had not taken
them for their king:) that honor was now conferred upon him for this service
of his, in taking the fort of Zion.

Verse. 8. And he built the city round about, even from Millo round about, etc.]
See 2. Sam. 5.9.

Verse. 10. These also are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, etc,] See
2. Sam. 23.8.

Verse. 11. Jashobeam an Hachmonite, the chief of the captains, he lift up his
spear against three hundred, etc.] Called also Adino the Eznite, and the
Tachmonite, 2. Sam. 23.8, 9.

Verse. 12. And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, who was one
of the three mighties, etc.] The second of the first three; see 2. Sam. 23.9.
the third was Shammah, 2. Sam. 23.11. whose name is not here expressed;
concerning whom, and the brave exploit here mentioned of this Eleazar and
Shammah, see 2. Sam. 23.11. Eleazar when he had done slaying them, was not able
to take his hand from his sword

Verse. 15. Now three of the thirty captains went down to the rock to David,
etc.] See 2, Sam. 23.13.

Verse. 17. And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the
water of the well of Beth-lehem, etc.] See the notes concerning this passage,
2. S^^. 23.15, 16.

Vees. 19. These things did these three mightiest.] That is, David's three chief
worthies; yet some conceive that it is meant of the second three, whereof
Abishai was the chief. 1. Because the words immediately following, verse. 20.
And Abishai the brother of Joab he was chief of the three, etc. seem to have
respect to that which went before. 2. Because this is only expressed thus, 2.
Sam. 13.17. These things did these three mighty men, whence they infer that
they are here called the mightiest only with respect to the thirty; of whom,
or in regard of whom, they were the mightiest, not that they were the three
chief of his worthies: but the first exposition I conceive most probable, see
2. Sam. 23.13.

Verse. 20. And Abishai the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three.] See 2.
Sam. 23.18.

Verse. 22. Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of
Kabzeel, etc.] See 2. Sam. 23.20.

Also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowie day.] This may be added
to intimate how the lion came to be shut up in a pit, to wit, the pits mouth
being covered with snow, as he was going over it he fell into it.

Verse. 24. These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name
among the three mighty.] See 2. Sam. 23.22.

Verse. 27. Shammoth the Harorite.] 2. Sam. 23.25. he is called Shammah the
Harodite. So also are many other of the following names much different from
those in Samuel, as may be observed by comparing both places together,

Verse. 34. The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the
Hararite.] And Shammah the other son of Hashem, or Jashen, as is expressed,
2. Sam. 23.32, 33. though here omitted.

Verse. 41. Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai, etc.] 2. Sam. 23. Uriah
is the last mentioned; but to those some other are here added, because though
they were not of the thirty, yet they were captains of great note and esteem in
David's armies.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 3. THe chief was Ahiezer, etc.] To wit, of the children of Benjamin that
came to help David, as is said in the foregoing verse.

Verse. 4. And Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over
the thirty.] That is, among and over the thirty warriers of the tribe of
Benjamin here mentioned, that came to David to Ziglag, whose colonel he was.

Verse. 8. And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David into the
hold to the wilderness, etc.] This may be meant of the hold at Ziklag, which
was in the wilderness of Judea, whither these Gadites came, men whose faces
were like the faces of lions, that is, undaunted, fierce and terrible to their
enemies.

Verse. 14. One of the least was over an hundred, and the greatest over a
thousand.] That is, they were all captains of bands, (to wit, before they came
to David, or after David began to reign in Hebron) some of them over an
hundred, some over a thousand.

Verse. 15. These are they that went over Jordan in the first month, when it
had over-flown all his banks.] Jordan did usually in the first month overflow
all his banks; see Josh. 3.15. and 4.19. yet these Gadites (that must
necessarily pass the river to come to the help of David, because they dwelt in
the land of Sihon and Og beyond Jordan) would not hereby be kept from the
succor of David, but made some shift to get over, either by swimming, or by
boats, etc. and this is here noted, to show how zealous they were in David's
cause: yet were there any enemies appointed to hinder their passage, happily
this inundation of Jordan was an advantage to them, as making the enemy secure,
when they thought because of the flood there was no danger of their coming
over, and to that end happily it is expressed.

And they put to flight all them of the valleys, both toward the east, and
toward the west.] This is either meant of such of Saul's soldiers as were in
these troublesome times appointed to be in the valleys, that lay upon the banks
of Jordan, to guard the foords and passages of Jordan, lest any well-affected
to David should from those parts come over to his aid, upon whom these Gadites
came suddenly, and scattered them, some flying one way, and some another; or
rather (as some conceive) it is meant of the Philistines and others, who
prevailing in the last war wherein Saul was slain, had seized upon certain
towns and villages in the valleys, whence they were immediately driven by these
warlike Gadites.

Verse. 18. Then the spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the captains, and
he said, Thine are we David, etc.] That is, God by his spirit moved him to
answer with such confidence, and detestation of all thoughts of treachery, as
is afterward expressed, and that in the name of them all, that all jealousies
concerning those of the tribe of Benjamin that were in their company, verse. 16.
might be removed.

Verse. 21. And they helped David against the band of the rovers, etc.] To wit,
the Amalekites that had burnt Ziklag, 1. Sam. 30.1, 2. whom David with his
four hundred men pursued, verse. 10. taking these seven captains of Manasseh
along with him that at that time were newly come to him for his help.

Verse. 22. For at that time day by day, there came to David to help him, until
it was a great host, like the host of God.] That is, innumerable as the Angels;
Dan. 7.10. A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him: thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened. Besides, the Hebrews say
a thing is of God when it is excellent, as Cedars of God, etc.

Verse. 24. The children of Judah that bare shield and spear, were six thousand
and eight hundred, etc.] In many of the other tribes there are many more, yet
was the tribe of Judah the greatest of all, and most zealous for David; but
they had formerly anointed David to be their king, neither was it therefore
necessary that they should now approve their desire of him, by coming in such
multitudes to be present at Hebron, at this solemnity of his being anointed
king there over all Israel, as the other tribes did.

Verse. 27. And Jehoiada was the leader of the Aaronites.] The meaning of this
is not, that Jehoiada was the high priest (for certainly Abiathar that came to
David in his troubles, and brought the Ephod with him, 1. Sam. 23.6. was at
this time high priest) but the meaning is, that he was the chief of those of
Aarons family that came now with the tribes of Israel to Hebron, to submit
themselves to David's government, and to attend the solemnity of his
inauguration there.

Verse. 28. And Zadok, a young man mighty of valor, etc.] That is, he was
another chief man, and leader amongst these sons of Aaron, in bringing them
in to submit themselves to David's government. And the rather, as I conceive, is
he and the two and twenty captains of his fathers house here particularly
mentioned, because he was afterward the high priest in the days of Solomon; 1.
Kings 2.35, Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of Abiathar.

Verse. 29. For hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of the
house of Saul.] That is, unto this time the greatest part of this tribe of
Benjamin, had sought to keep the kingdom in Saul's family, and so could not yet
be from their hearts contented with settling David in the throne, and therefore
there came but a few (in comparison) of this tribe to David.

Verse. 31. And of the half tribe of Manasseh, eighteen thousand, etc.] That is,
of that half of Manasseh which was seated within Jordan (for the other half are
spoken of afterward verse. 37.) there were eighteen thousand which were
expressed by name, that is, which were chosen by name to be employed in this
service.

Verse. 32. And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, etc.] Some refer
this to their knowledge in Astrology, by which they might be able to foresee
the air and seasons, a matter of great consequence in many affairs; and this
they judge the more probable, because the children of Issachar were for the
most part much exercised in husbandry, as is noted upon Genesis 49.14. and Deuteronomy.
33.18. and such men in old time were very skillful in the knowledge of the
stars, etc. But I rather think it is meant of men that were singularly
prudent, and able to give advice for the doing of every thing that was to be
undertaken, in the fittest time and season; and that, first, because we find
the like phrase used concerning Ahasuerus his counselors, Esth. 1.13. to wit,
that they were wise men which knew the times; and secondly, because it is said
in the next words, that all their brethren were at their commandment, that is,
that out of the high esteem they had of these men's wisdom and singular
prudence, they were still willing to be directed and ordered by them.

Verse. 38. All these men of war, that could keep rank, etc.] To wit, all
those before mentioned, which are in all three hundred twenty two thousand two
hundred twenty two.

Verse. 39. And there they were with David three days, eating and drinkinge for
their brethren had prepared for them.] That is, the rest of the Israelites.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. ANd David consulted with the captains of thousands, etc.] See 2. Sam.
6.1.

Verse. 2. And David said unto all the congregation of Israel, If it seem good
unto you, and that it be of the Lord our God, etc.] That is, if it shall appear
to you that this counsel which I give is of the Lord our God; or if you like
of it, and God shall also approve of it by blessing and assisting us therein,
and that he does not by any oracle or rub laid in our way cross us herein, let
us send for the people from all places (it is in the text, our brethren every
where that are left in all the land of Israel, to wit, because the Philistines
had lately slain and driven away many of them,) that we may remove the ark to
Jerusalem; for thither they were now removed from Hebron, and had vanquished
the Jebusites there, as is noted before, chap. 11.4.

Verse. 3. And let us bring again the ark of our God to us; for we enquired not
at it in the days of Saul.] That is, from the days of Saul hitherto, we have
suffered the ark to continue in a private house, no man regarding it, and have
contented our selves to worship God in the Tabernacle at Gibeah, though the
ark, the testimony of Gods presence were not in it. But why does he not also
say in the days of Samuel, since ever since his days the ark had been in the
house of Abinadab? Surely, first, because he desired to accuse themselves that
were then living, rather then their forefathers: And secondly, because in the
days of Samuel by reason of the continual wars they had with the
Philistines, they had not so good opportunity to remove the ark, as they had
afterward.

Verse. 6. And David went up, and all Israel to Baalah, etc.] The several
passages that need any light of explication concerning this removal of the
ark; see in the 1. Sam. from verse. 2. to verse. 10.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse. 1. NOw Hiram king of Tire sent messengers to David, etc.] See the notes
of this chapter in 2. Sam. 5.11, 12. etc.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. ANd prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent.]
To wit, before he fetched the ark from Kiriath-jearim, or Baalah, chap. 13.6.
for then his purpose was (verse. 12.) to have brought it home to his own house,
where he had prepared a tent for it, see 2. Sam. 6.17.

Verse. 2. Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites,
etc.] See 2. Sam. 6.12.

Verse. 5. Of the sons of Kohath: Vriel the chief, etc.] Those mentioned
afterward, verse. 8, 9, 10. were also the posterity of Kohath; but these
Kohathites of whom Uriel was the chief were of other families then those there
mentioned, perhaps of the family of Amram and Izehar, Numb. 3.27.

Verse. 8. Of the sons of Elizaphan: Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two
hundred.] This Elizaphan is thought to be the same that is called Elzaphan the
son of Uzziel, Lev. 10.4. the rest of the sons of Uzziel are mentioned
verse. 10. but the Levites of Elzaphans posterity are here particularly
mentioned, happily because they were so many of them.

Verse. 11. And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, etc.] Some
conceive that Abiathar here mentioned was the high priest, and Zadok his great
deputy, the same that is called the second priest, 2. Kings 25.18. and indeed
certain it is that Abiathar was at this time the high priest, and so continued
till Solomon's reign, 1. Kings 2.27. But I rather conceive that these two were
the two heads (under the high priest) of the two families of Eleazar and
Ithamar, even the same that are elsewhere called Zadok and Ahimelech, 2 Samuel
8.27.

Verse. 17. Ethan the son of Kushaiah.] Or Kishi. chap. 6.44.

Verse. 18. And with them their brethren of the second degree, Zachariah, etc.]
These Levites here mentioned are said to be of the second degree, either only
because they were inferior in dignity to those three before mentioned, verse.
17. that were the chief of the quire; or happily because those three of the
first degree went before the ark, and these followed after it; or those three
of the first degree began the music, and then these of the second degree
answered them. Ben the second of those here mentioned seems to be left out,
verse. 20, 21. where the rest are named again. But I conceive rather, that he it
is, that is there also called Azariah, verse. 21. And whereas it is added in the
close of this verse, that all these that were thus now appointed to play on
several instruments, at least the two last of them, were such of the Levites,
as were also the porters; hereby I conceive is meant, not only that their
office was to keep the doors at other times; to wit, either in the Tabernacle
of Moses that was at Gibeon, chap. 16.39. or in the tent which David had
prepared at his house, to which they were now carrying the ark; but also that
at present they had the charge of keeping off those that might otherwise have
pressed in upon the ark.

Verse. 19. So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were appointed to sound
with cymbals of brass.] Here is expressed what instruments they were severally
to play upon.

Verse. 20. And Zachariah, and Aziel -- with psalteries on Alamoth.] By Alamoth
is meant either some musical instrument, or tune so called; or else, as most
Expositours hold, that part in music which we call the treble, we find it in
the title of the forty sixth Psalm, To the chief musician for the sons of
Korah. A song upon Alamoth. The word in the original signifies young maidens,
or virgins, and so Expositours do therefore the rather think it is meant of the
treble, because their voice is shrill, and fittest for that part in music.

Verse. 21. And Mattithiah, and Eliphaleh -- with harps, on the Sheminith to
excel.] Hereby is meant a several tune also, or instrument of eight strings:
for the original word signifies the eight, it is mentioned in the title of
the sixth Psalm, To the chief musician on Neginoth, upon Sheminith, a Psalm of
David; but most hold that it was the base which being the most graceful part
of music, is therefore said to excel.

Verse. 23. And Berechiah, and Elkanah were doore-keepers for the ark.] That is,
they were appointed to keep the door of the tent where the ark was afterward
kept, and accordingly were employed now in observing that no body should press
in upon the ark; the like is again said verse. 24. of Obed-Edom, and Jehiah; and
happily two went before the ark, and two came after it.

Verse. 26. And it came to pass when God helped the Levites that bare the ark,
etc.] That is, so soon as they perceived that God was with them in the
business, and did not strike them with death as Uzza was, by way of
thankfulness they offered up sacrifices, and this was so soon as they had gone
six paces, 2. Sam. 6.13. yet others very probably understand this place thus,
that when the Levites that had carried the ark, did by the Lords appointment
set it down, that so others might take it up, and they might be eased, at every
such resting place, they offered seven bullocks and seven rams.

Verse. 27. David also had upon him an ephod of linen,] See 2. Sam. 6.14.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. SO they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the
tent, etc.] See 2. Sam. 6.17.

Verse. 5. Asaph the chief, etc.] Heman is named in the first place as chief of
the three principal singers, chap. 6.33. but Asaph it seems was the chief of
those that were deputed to this service in the house of David, where the ark
was now placed; the rest being employed at present in the Tabernacle at Gibeon,
verse. 39, 40. And Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the
tabernacle of the Lord in the high place that was at Gibeon, to offer burnt
offerings unto the Lord, upon the altar of the burnt offering continually
morning and evening, and to do according to all that is written in the law of
the Lord which he commanded Israel:

Verse. 7. Then on that day David delivered first this Psalm to thank the Lord
etc.] That is, this was the first Psalm he delivered them to sing, the
several parts whereof were afterward much enlarged by David, and reduced into
several Psalms, as we may see Psalm. 105. and Psalm. 96.

Verse. 8. Give thanks unto the Lord, etc.] From hence to the end of the two and
twentieth verse is the beginning of the hundred and fifth Psalm, and the sum
of it is, to praise God for the public benefits afforded to his Church and
people, the children of Israel; in regard whereof in times of any great joy
Gods people used to sing this Psalm, as may be probably gathered from that
which we read, Isa. 12.4. And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call
upon his name, etc.

Verse. 11. Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face continually.] That is,
seek to know and to assure unto your selves the Lord and his strength, (by
which you can only hope to be strengthened, defended, and delivered in times
of trouble) and his favorable presence; and that by resorting to the ark,
which is the outward sign of his presence amongst you, to counsel and
instruct you (and therefore from thence he used to give his oracles, Exodus
25.22.) and to be your strong fortress and defense; in regard whereof the ark
is elsewhere called, the strength of God, Psalm. 78.61. And he delivered his
strength into captivity; and the ark of his strength, Psalm. 132.8. Arise O Lord
into thy rest, thou and the ark of thy strength; yea, and this must be done
with perseverance, and therefore is the word continually added, seek his face
continually.

Verse. 12. Remember his mavelous works that he has done, his wonders, and
the judgments of his mouth.] That is, his law and statutes given on mount
Sinai, or rather, the judgments which he executed upon the adversaries of his
people, called the judgments of his mouth, because they came by his decree and
appointment, and because of many of them he spoke beforehand to Moses, and
Moses as Gods herald threatened Pharaoh and his people, Exodus 7.1.

Verse. 13. O ye seed of Israel his servant, etc.] Psalm. 105.6. it is O ye seed
of Abraham, and then, O ye children of Jacob his chosen ones, that is, his
adopted and peculiar people, and that merely of Gods free grace and election.

Verse. 15. Be ye mindful always of his covenant.] Psalm. 105.8. it is, He has
remembered his covenant for ever.

The word which he commanded to a thousand generations.] That is, the
conditions of the covenant, which on Isreal's part was the law of faith and
obedience, and on Gods part the promises, which for the greater certainty may
be also said to be commanded, Psalm. 133.3. There the Lord commanded the
blessing, even life for evermore.

Verse. 19. When ye were but few even a few, etc.] Psalm. 105.12. it is, when
they were but few: and this is expressed, first, to imply the freedom of Gods
grace in choosing them to be his people, Deuteronomy. 7.7. secondly, to magnify the
more the Lords protecting them.

Verse. 20. And when they went from nation to nation, etc.] To wit, when they
went up and down in the land of Canaan, where were seven mighty nations, Deuteronomy.
7.1. and sometimes removed thence to other kingdoms, as to Egypt, Genesis 12.10.
and Gerar, Genesis 20.1. for under this clause all the travels of the Patriarchies
are comprehended.

Verse. 21. Yea, he reproved kings for their sakes.] As Pharaoh, Genesis 12.17. and
Abimelech, Genesis 20.3.

Verse. 22. Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.] That
is, wrong not those whom I have consecrated to my self by the anointing of my
holy spirit (my Christians) according to that 1. John 2.20. But ye have an
unction from the holy one, etc. and verse. 27. But the anointing which ye have
received of him abides in you, etc. to whom therefore I do familiarly reveal
my will, that they may teach and instruct others, Genesis 20.7. Restore therefore
to the man his wife, for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou
shall live, etc. and thus the Prophet implies that the Lord did thus defend
them, not only because they were poor helpless miserable men, unjustly
oppressed; but also because by special covenant God had taken them into his
protection.

Verse. 23. Sing unto the Lord all the earth, etc.] From hence to the 34. verse
is the ninety sixth Psalm, and the chief drift of it is to stir up all
nations to praise the Lord, and consequently it includes a prophecy of Christ,
and of the gathering of all nations into the Church by the preaching of the
Gospel: and therefore Psalm. 96.1. to express the strange and unlooked for
change that should be then in the Church, these words, a new song, are added,
and sing unto the Lord a new song.

Verse. 27. Glory and honor are in his presence, strength and gladness are in
his place.] That is, God is a king of infinite majesty, glory, and honor, most
strong and mighty, and the fountain of all strength and gladness to his
people; such his people find him in his sanctuary where he reveals himself unto
them, and such therefore with glad hearts they acknowledge him to be, Psalm.
96.6. Honor and majesty are before him, strength and beauty are in his
Sanctuary.

Verse. 29. Bring an offering and come before him, worship the Lord in the
beauty of holiness.] Thus the Prophet speaks of the worship of God in the
days of the Gospel, under these figurative expressions of the Legal worship;
for his meaning is only this, that in those days the Gentiles, should have as
free access to the worship of God as the Jews, as being then one people with
them, fellow citizens of the Saints, and of the household of God: and so equally
admitted with them to offer unto God in the assemblies of his people (the
beauty of holiness) those Evangelicall sacrifices which should be acceptable
to God, as were these legal offerings under the Law.

Verse. 30. Fear before him all the earth.] To wit, especially when you present
your selves before him in the assembly of his Saints.

The world also shall be stable that it be not moved.] That is, this is the
benefit that shall follow upon men's subjecting of themselves to the government
of God in Christ, that whereas by rebellion against God, the whole world tends
to confusion and ruin, by submitting themselves to Gods Scepter all shall be
established, and the state of the Church shall be unmovable and eternal.

Verse. 31. Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice?] So blessed and
happy shall those times be, and shall yield such abundant matter of exceeding
great joy, that if the very senseless creatures could shout and rejoice it
were well: for this is an hyperbolicall expression of the bliss and joy of
these times.

And let men say among the nations, the Lord reigns.] That is, the happiness
of those times shall be that men shall stoop to Gods Scepter: which therefore it
is fit men should confess to Gods glory; yea, and by publishing it to seek the
drawing in of others, and so to enlarge the kingdom of God.

Verse. 35. And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us
together, etc.] This may have respect, first, to the firm knitting together of
the people that had been divided, some favoring Saul's posterity, and some
David's: secondly, to the reducing of the captived Israelites to their own land,
if at any time carried away (and so it is prophetically spoken) or thirdly, to
the gathering of Gods elect out of all nations to be his people in the days of
the Gospel; and then the reason of this request is added in the following
words, that we may give thanks to thy holy name, and glory in thy praise, that
is, in thy praise-worthy-works, or in our praising of thee: for indeed the
faithful servants of God do count it their happiness that they may praise
God, and do therefore glory in it.

Verse. 41. And with them Heman, and Jeduthun, etc.] See the note before verse. 5.

To give thanks to the Lord, because his mercy endures for ever.] This last
clause (because his mercy endures for ever) is therefore added, because in
many of their Psalms of praise, this was still the foot of the song, as is
evident, 2. Chron. 5.13. and 7.3. Ezra 3.11. Jer. 33.11. and in many other
places.

Verse. 42. And with musical instruments of God.] That is, with holy musical
instruments, such as were set apart for the service of God.

Verse. 43. And David returned to bless his house.] See 2.6.20:

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1: NOw it came to pass, as David sat in his house, that David said to
Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dwell in an house of cedars, etc.] See the notes upon
these four first verses in the 2. Sam. 7.1. etc.

Verse. 5. For I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up
Israel, unto this day.] That is, I have never caused a house to be built to my
dwelling place: so that though the ark, the sign of God presence had been a
while in the house of Obed-Edom, chap. 13.13. that does not imply any
contradiction to this which God here says, see other things noted concerning
this, 2. Sam. 7.6.

But have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to another.] That is,
in a tent removed too and fro, and so it is expressed, 2. Sam. 7.6. Even to
this day I have walked in a tent, and in a tabernacle: yet withal these words
may imply the removing of the ark to several tents, at least the last removal
of it, to that new tent or tabernacle which David had prepared for it.

Verse. 7. Thus says the Lord of hosts, I took thee from the sheep cote, etc.]
See 2. Sam. 7.8. where also we shall find all other passages in this chapter
explained, that need any explanation.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. NOw after this, it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines,
etc.] What is to be noted in this chapter we may find in the notes upon the 2.
Sam. 8.1. etc.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 2. I Will show kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, because his
father showed kindness to me, etc.] See the notes for this chapter, in 2, Sam.
10

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass, that after the year was expired. etc.] See 2.
Sam. 11.1.

But David tarried at Jerusalem.] And then he committed adultery with Bathsheba,
which with other passages thereto belonging, are largely related in the 11. and
12. chapters of the second book of Samuel.

And Joab smote Rabbah, and destroyed it.] See 2. Sam. 12.26. etc.

Verse. 2. And David took the crown of their king from off his head, and found
it to weigh a talent of gold, etc.] Concerning this crown of the king of the
Ammonites, and the severitie which David used in punishing the people. See 2.
Sam. 12.30.31.

Verse. 4. And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with
the Philistines, etc.] In the 2. Sam. 21.15. there is mention made of another
battle with the Philistines together with these three here expressed, wherein
Abishai slew Ishbybenob a giant that was likely to have slain David: but that
is here omitted, and that happily, because only in these three there was
something to be added, which was not there expressed.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. ANd Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number
Israel.] He provoked David to this sin, whereby wrath came upon all Israel.
See also 2. Sam. 24.1.

Verse. 2. And David said to Joab, and to the rulers of the people, Go, number
Israel, etc.] See 2. Sam: 24.1.

Verse. 3. But my lord the king, Are they not all my lords servants?] That is,
there is no need therefore to make enquiry how many are thy people, and how
many are not, since they are all my lords servants, and ready always to be
employed in thy service.

Verse. 4. Joab departed, and went throughout all Israel, and came to
Jerusalem.] To wit, after nine months and twenty days, 2. Sam. 24.8.

Verse. 5. And all they of Israel were a thousand thousand, and an hundred
thousand, etc.] See 2. Sam. 24.9.

Verse. 6. But Levi and Benjamin counted he not among them: for the kings word
was abominable to Joab.] That is, because what Joab did in this business, he
did it altogether against his mind and in a manner was forced to do it:
therefore these two tribes he left unnumbred, emboldened herein by the
pretenses he might make for it: as for Levi, that the enquiry being only to
know the numbers of those that were fit for war, there was no need of taking
the number of that tribe: and for Benjamin, Jerusalem being the chief city of
that tribe, the number of them might be taken there, and that afterward at more
leisure; as likewise because the plague was begun, c. 27.24.

Verse. 7. And God was displeased with this thing, therefore he smote Israel.]
Concerning these following passages unto the 18. verse, see the notes 2. Sam.
24.10. etc.

Verse. 18. Set up an altar unto the Lord, in the threshing floor of Ornan the
Jebusite.] See 2. Sam. 24.17. and thus the Lord did both begin the discovery of
his purpose to David, that this was the place wherein he would have the Temple
built, see chap. 22.1. and also brought the people to make the more precious
account, and the more reverently to esteem of that place, by causing that
sacrifice to be offered there whereby this grievous plague was stayed, in which
so many thousands in so short a time had been taken away: yea, happily at this
very time the Lord made known to David by Gad, that in that place the Temple
should be built; which seems the more probable, because David would needs
purchase the threshing floor of Ornan, which he needed not have done, if he
had not intended to set it apart for Gods service in future times also.

Verse. 25. So David gave to Ornan for the place, six hundred shekels of gold by
weight.] See 2. Sam. 24.24.

Verse. 26. And he answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of
burnt-offering.] A sign both of Gods accepting of his sacrifice, and granting
his desire for the staying of the plague, and likewise of his purpose to have
that place set apart for the building of the Temple.

Verse. 30. But David could not go before it to enquire of God, etc.] This is
added, to show the reason both why David did not of himself go presently to
Gibeon, when he saw the Angel of the Lord stand with a drawn sword threatening
Jerusalem, that there he might offer up sacrifices to appease his wrath, but
only fell down and prayed unto him; and also why the Lord did not send him to
Gibeon to sacrifice, when he meant to accept a sacrifice for the staying of the
plague. Concerning which see the notes 1. Sam. 24.18.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. THen David said, This is the house of our Lord God, and this is the
altar, etc.] That is, this is the place of which God spoke long since by his
servant Moses, where he intended to have a house built which must be the
settled place of his worship and service, and where there must be an altar
instead of this I have now set up; wherein only they must offer up sacrifices
unto him, Deuteronomy. 12.11. There shall be a place which the Lord your God shall
choose to cause his name to dwell there, thither shall you bring all that I
command you, your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, etc. And this David
knew, either by the discovery of the prophet Gad, who happily acquainted him
with Gods purpose herein, or else thorough the special instinct of Gods
spirit, himself gathered so much from Gods sending him to sacrifice there, and
from Gods miraculous testifying his acceptance of the service there done him,
by sending fire from heaven to consume the sacrifice, chap. 21.26, 28.

Verse. 2. And David commanded to gather together the strangers that were in the
land of Israel, and he set Masons to hew, etc.] And the building of the Temple
by the help of strangers, was a notable type of the calling of the Gentiles: As
for David that set them on work, he had received from God the pattern whereby
the Temple was to be built, and every part thereof, chap. 28.11, 12, 19. and
accordingly therefore he prepared many materials, and set these workmen on work
about them, to which Solomon afterward added what was not done, when he came to
enter upon the work, 1. Kings 5.17, 18.

Verse. 3. And brass in abundance without weight.] So much that they weighed it
not; it would have been too great a trouble and charge to receive it in, and
deliver it out by weight.

Verse. 5. And David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, etc.] See 1.
Kings 3.7.

Verse. 8. Thou have shed blood abundantly, and have made great wars; thou
shall not build an house unto my name, etc.] Because the Temple was to be a
type of Christ, and of the Church, and Christ is the king of peace, Heb. 7.2.
and the Church was to be gathered not by war and bloud-shedding, but by the
preaching of the Gospel the tidings of peace, therefore the Lord would not have
the Temple built by David but by Solomon, who was a peacable prince; this is
doubtless the principal ground of this reason given why David might not build
the Temple, as is evident, because there is mention of the wars of David, in
the prosecution whereof David did God good service; yet withal, because David
was the cause of shedding the blood of Urijah and those that were slain with
him, the Lord might also have respect to that, and by way of correction for it,
to show how displeasing it was to him, might take in that amongst the reasons,
why David might not have the honor to build the Temple.

Verse. 10. He shall build an house for my name, etc.] See the notes upon 2.
Sam. 7.13, 14.

And I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever.] A great
question may be made how this promise made to David concerning his son
Solomon, was accomplished in Solomon's posterity, especially if we hold that
which many eminent Divines do with much earnestness maintain; namely, that
Christ was not the son of David by Solomon, but by Nathan: It is most
probable, that none of the posterity of Solomon did ever sit in the throne of
David, after Zedekiah was carried captive into Babylon; nor yet ever had the
supreme power of government, after they returned from Babylon again: now
therefore if this promise were not made good in the eternity of Christ's
kingdom, then it seems it was not made good at all: but to this I answer;
First, that by the Hebrew word, which is here translated for ever, there is no
more intended in many places, then a continuance for a long time, as here
happily, that so long as the kingdom of Judah should continue, one of Solomon's
posterity should sit in the throne: Secondly, that this promise might be
conditional; to wit, that if his posterity should keep covenant with God, then
they should for ever sit in the throne of David: And thirdly, that the promise
might be made good in the eternity of Christ's kingdom, in that Christ was that
king of whom Solomon was a type; though he was not lineally descended out of
the loins of Solomon.

Verse. 12. Only the Lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee
charge concerning Israel, etc.] That is, and the Lord instruct thee, and direct
thee how thou ought to govern his people Israel; and in remembrance of this
we see Solomon begged wisdom of God, 1. Kings 3.9.

Verse. 14. Now behold, in my trouble I have prepared for the house of the Lord,
etc.] That is, I have prepared materials for the building of the house (that
when thou come to the crown, thou may the more readily set upon the work)
not according unto my desire, nor according to that which the transcendent
Majesty of God might require, but according as I was able, by reason of my
continual troubles.

Verse. 18. And the land is subdued before the Lord, and before his people etc.]
The Lord is here joined with Israel, as the king with his people; and that the
rather, because by the subduing of the land the people enjoyed their
possessions and dwellings, and the Lord his worship and service.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. SO when David was old and full of days, he made Solomon his son
king over Israel.] That is, he declared his mind to his people and princes,
that after his death, his will was that Solomon should be king, and that
because the Lord had so appointed, as is more fully expressed, chap. 28 -- 1 --
6. where also it is evident, that this was done before David was bedrid, verse.
2. Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me my brethren,
etc. and consequently, that Adonijahs attempt 1. Kings 1.5. was against the
express command of David, emboldened therein only by David's weakness, and
the encouragement of such princes of his faction, as misliked David's preferring
Solomon before his elder sons; and therefore we see that David caused Solomon
to be actually anointed king, 1. Kings 1.33.34.

Verse. 2. And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests
and the Levites.] To wit, to make known unto them that Solomon by the Lords
express appointment was to succeed him in the throne: Secondly, to persuade
the princes to assist Solomon in the building of the Temple: Thirdly, to
establish a settled order for the attendance and service of the priests and
Levites in the Temple; for the number of the Levites being exceedingly
increased, and they being then to serve not in several places as before, some
at the Tabernacle in Gibeon, some before the ark in David's tent, chap. 16.37.
etc. but altogether in the Temple, as the Lord was pleased to appoint an order
for their service to prevent confusion, so it was requisite the princes and
people should be informed of Gods will herein, and that David did nothing
herein without direction from the Lord, chap. 28.11, 12, 13 -- 19.

Verse. 3. Now the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and upward,
etc.] David's numbering of the Levites from the age of thirty years, was
according to the directions that God gave to Moses when they were first
numbered, only then they numbered not any above fifty years, Numb. 4.2, 3. Take
the sum of the sons of Kohath, etc. from thirty years old and upward, even
until fifty years old; but now it seems they numbered all from thirty years and
upward, not staying at those that were above fifty years; and that because they
were not now to carry the holy things as they did in Moses time; and therefore
even those above fifty years though weakened with age, might serve in the
Temple, as well as those that were younger: and for the same cause also it
seems when he had distributed the thirty eight thousand, that were numbered from
thirty years old and upward, to their several employments; to wit, four and
twenty thousand for the ordinary service of the Temple, and six thousand for
officers and Judges, verse. 4. four thousand for porters, and four thousand
for the quire, verse. 5. afterward he gave order that all their posterity from
twenty years old and upward, should in each rank be taken in verse. 24. First,
because they were not any longer to carry the tabernacle and the vessels
thereof; and therefore such strength of body was not now necessarily requisite
as before: as is expressed, verse. 24, 25. And secondly, because now when they
were to serve only in their courses, the service of the Temple, would employ
them all, even those from twenty years being taken in.

Verse. 4. And six thousand were officers and Judges.] And these were dispersed
in several places of the land, to judge of causes that were brought before
them (for having no other civil and judicial laws, but those of Moses, the
Levites were always joined with the other elders of the people in this work)
and happily to train up the young Levites and other officers belonging thereto,
of which see what is further added in note, chap. 26.29.

Verse. 5. Moreover, four thousand were porters.] So many were at this time set
a part by David to this employment; yet of these it seems there were found at
their return from Babylon, only two hundred and twelve, chap. 9.22.

And four thousand praised the Lord with the instruments, etc.] Whereof two
hundred eighty eight were eminent men for cunning, and happily teachers of the
rest, see the note, chap. 25.7.

Verse. 6. And David divided them into courses, etc.] To wit into twenty four
courses, as were also the priests, according to the command of the Lord by Gad
and Nathan the prophets, 2. Chron. 29.25. And he set Levites in the house of
the Lord, etc. according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the kings
seer, and Nathan the prophet; for so was the commandment of the Lord.

Verse. 8. The sons of Laadan, the chief was Jehiel, etc.] That is, the chief
of the posterity of Laadan, heads of families at this time when David divided
them to their several employments and their several courses, were Jehiel, and
Zetham and Joel, and so this word sons must be understood hereafter in this
chapter.

Verse. 9. The sons of Shimei; Shelomith, etc.] This is not Shimei the son
of Gershon, verse. 7. (for his posterity are spoken of afterward in the
following verse,) but another that was it seems the head of a family amongst
the sons of Laadan, perhaps one of those mentioned also in the foregoing
verse, though called there by another name.

Verse. 11. But Jeush and Beriah had not many sons: therefore they were in one
reckoning, etc.] That is, they were joined together and counted as one family,
and that because there were not many of their posterity.

Verse. 13. Aaron was separated, that he should sanctify the most holy things,
he and his sons for ever, etc.] That is, he and his posterity were set apart
to the work of the priesthood, to be employed about the most holy things,
according to the holy ordinances which God had appointed.

Verse. 24. These were the sons of Levi, etc. from the age of twenty years and
upward.] To wit, when they came to serve in the Temple: for though at this time
when they were assigned to their several employments, they were only numbered
that were thirty years old and upward, verse. 3. yet before his death David gave
order that in each family and office of the Levites, all of twenty years old
and upward should be taken in to the service of the Temple, verse. 27. For by
the last words of David the Levites were numbered from twenty years old and
above; and the reason is prefixed; verse. 25, 26. For David said, The Lord God
of Israel has given rest unto his people, that they may dwell in Jerusalem for
ever; and also unto the Levites, they shall no more carry the tabernacle, nor
any vessels thereof, etc. see the note, ver. 3.

Verse. 28. Because their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron, for the
service of the house, etc. and in the purifying of all holy things, etc.] That
is, the washing and cleansing both of the holy places and vessels, yea, and the
sacrifices before they were offered by the priests upon the altar.

Verse. 29. And for all manner of measure and cise.] That is, the Levites also
took care to see that those things that were employed in the service af the
Temple, as fine flower, and wine, and oil, for the meat offerings, etc. should
be given to the priests according to that weight and measure appointed by the
law; for to some sacrifices there was a greater measure of these required, and
to some less, see Numb. 15.4, 6, 9. and Levit. 23.13. and the Levites were to
look that the just measures was observed in all these things: yea, many
Expositours conclude from hence, that the Levites had the overseeing of all
public measures, and kept the patterns or standard of them in the Temple,
whence they say it is, that the just shekel is called the shekel of the
sanctuary, Exodus 30.31.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Verse. 3. ANd David distributed them, both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar,
etc.] That is, David distributed all the priests the sons of Aaron into two
parts; all that were of the sons of Eleazar in one, over whom Zadok was the
chief; and all that were of the sons of Ithamar in the other, over whom
Ahimelech was chief, to wit, under the high priest, who accordingly attended in
the Temple, according to their offices in their service.

Verse. 4. And there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar, then of
the sons of Ithamar, etc.] That is, there were more heads of families found
among the sons of Eleazer, then among the sons of Ithamar; and consequently
being to divide the priests into twenty four orders or courses, in each of
which there was one to be the chief and head of the rest, he appointed sixteen
of these courses among the sons of Eleazar, and but eight among the sons of
Ithamar.

Verse. 5. Thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another, etc.] That is,
having divided the priests into twenty four parts, those of Eleazer into
sixteen parts, and those of Ithamar into eight, there were lots cast amongst
these divisions promiscuously, not preferring those of one Image before those
of another, to determine both which of these companies should serve first, and
which second, and so in order, each company being to serve a week, and then to
go out, and also which of those that were heads of families in each company,
should be the chief of that company: and so the first company was chosen by
lot, and the lot fell upon Jehoiarib to be the head of that company, which was
thenceforth called the course of Jehoiarib, and so after the same manner in all
the rest.

Verse. 10. The eighth to Abijah.] Of this course was Zachariah the father of
John the Baptist, Luke 1.5.

Verse. 19. These were the orderings of them in their service to come into the
house of the Lord, according to their manner, under Aaron their father, etc.]
That is, as Eleazar and Ithamar did in former times discharge the work of the
priesthood in the house of God under Aaron their father; so did these sons of
Eleazar and Ithamar now in their courses discharge the same work, after the
same manner: or else the meaning of these words is only this, that after their
manner, that is, week by week, chap. 9.25. or after the manner appointed in the
Law, these priests in their several courses did all discharge the work of the
inferior priesthood, being all of them under the command of the high priest,
who is here called Aaron, because he held the same place that Aaron formerly
did.

Verse. 20. And the rest of the sons of Levi were these, etc.] Having in the
former part of the chapter expressed the several courses of the priests, here
now are added the several families of the rest of the sons of Levi, that
were not priests, to wit, the Levites, and (as some conceive) who they were of
those families that were heads of the several companies of the Levites, that
were to serve in the Temple in their turns and courses, as the priests also
did: or rather, because the Gershonites were set down before, chap, 23.7. these
that are here added, are said to be the rest of the sons of Levi, to wit, the
Kohathites and Merarites, who especially attended upon the Priests.

Verse. 31. These likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons of
Aaron.] That is, as the priests being divided into twenty four companies,
there were lots cast for them, as is abovesaid, verse. 5. so was it on the
other side with the Levites too, according to the several employments whereto
they were set a part; they were divided into twenty four divisions, and lots
were cast who should attend the service in the first course, coming in and
going out with the first course of the priests, and so who should be in the
second course, with the second course of priests, etc. This is expressed
concerning the singers in the next chapter; and the like it seems therefore was
done both for the porters, and those that attended upon the priests, and did
the other work of the Lord, chap. 23, 4, 5.

In the presence of David the king, and Zadok and Abimelech, and the chief of
the fathers of the priests and Levites, even the principal fathers over
against their younger brethren.] There may be a double sense of these last
words, to wit, either that as the principal fathers sat with David, and
Zadok, and Abimelech to see this work done, so on the other side their younger
brethren stood to be distributed to their several courses, as the lot fell
amongst them; or rather, that as the chief of the fathers were chosen by lots,
as heads over the rest, so were their young brethren also.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. DAvid and the captains of the host separated to the service of the
sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophecy with harps,
etc.] By the captains of the host, here some understand the chief of that
sacred host of the priests and Levites who served in the Temple: but the most
of Expositours understand it of those princes of Israel mentioned chap. 23.2.
whom David called together when he went about this work of establishing an
order for the service of the priests and Levites, who are here called captains
of the host; because indeed the chief Nobles and Princes of Israel, were
captains of David's host. However, that which is said of these captains is, that
they separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of
Jeduthun who should prophecy with harps, etc.] That is, that having appointed
the four and twenty sons of Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun (called also Ethan,
chap. 15.17.) to be the chief in the four and twenty quires of singers, that
were to perform that service in their several courses (which is here called
prophesying with cymballs, etc. of which see the note 1. Sam. 10.5.) after that
they also separated such other of their brethren the Levites here after
mentioned, as were to be instructed by them, and to join in that service under
them in their several courses.

Verse. 2. The sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which prophesied
according to the order of the king.] For he gave order for the several courses
of the singers, yea and happily too for the tunes and times of singing, and
withal the most of the Psalms they sung were penned by David, and by him were
assigned some for the sons of Asaph, others for the sons of Jeduthun and
Heman, as by the title of many Psalms is evident.

Verse. 3. The sons of Jeduthun; Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, and
Hashabiah, and Mattathiah, six, etc.] That is, there were six of Jeduthuns
posterity that were heads of several courses of the singers. Indeed here are
but five named (unless, as some think, Jeduthun the father be reckoned into
the number) but the sixth was Shimei, mentioned ver. 17. who is omitted here,
happily because he was not the son, but the grandchild of Jeduthun, and this
is indeed the more probable, because that Shimei mentioned verse 17. is no where
here named.

Verse. 5. All these were the sons of Heman the kings seer in the words of
God, to lift up the horn.] By the kings Seer may be meant, either that he was a
Prophet, as Na^^an and Gad were; or at least that he was employed in that
prophetical work of setting forth the praises of God, as the other in Psalms,
and Hymns, and spiritual songs, composed by men that were inspired by God, and
therefore called here the words of God, and that to lift up the horn, whereby
some musical instrument is meant; or else the meaning is, that these sons of
Heman were chiefly employed in singing those Psalms which concerned some
glorious victories that God had given his people or the exalting and
strengthening of David's kingdom, which was especially accomplished in Christ,
and consequently contained many glorious promises concerning the kingdom of
Christ the promised Messiah.

Verse. 7. So the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed in
the songs of the Lord, even all that were cunning, etc. That is, the numbers of
these sons of Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman, together with their brethren which
were cunning and expert in music, leaders and teachers of others, was two
hundred eighty eight. It is manifest that there were four thousand Levites set
apart for singers, chap. 23.5. If all these therefore served in the Temple (as
is most probable, though some Expositours hold indeed that some of them were
employed in the Synagogues) being divided into twenty four courses, there must
needs be about eight score in every course: but under each of the twenty four
sons of Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman, there were appointed eleven that were
cunning men of the sons and brethren of these chief singers, to be leaders
end instructers of the rest, which indeed with the twenty four heads of each
courses, do make two hundred eighty eight: for twenty four times twelve
amounts to two hundred eighty eight.

Verse. 8. And they cast lots, ward against ward, as well the small as the
great, the teacher as the scholar.] That is, for every course of the Priests
there was also a course of the Levites that were singers and so all were
assigned to their several courses by lot, as well the chief of them that were
of the sons and brethren of Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman, and teachers of the
rest, as those that were of an inferior rank, the Levites that served under
them, and were instructed by them.

Verse. 9. The second to Gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons were
twelve.] And the like must be understood of Joseph, who had the first lot. See
the note upon verse. 7.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 1. OF the Korhites was Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of
Asaph.] This was not Asaph the chief musician, but another Levite of the same
name, called also Ebiasaph, chap. 6.37.

Verse. 2. And the sons of Meshelemiah were, Zechariah the firstborn, etc.]
Here are named seven sons of Meshelemiah, verse. 2, 3. and of Obed Edom also
seven sons (besides Shemaiah) verse. 4, 5. and six grandchildren the sons
of Shemaiah, verse. 7. and four sons of Hosah, verse. 10, 11. which together
make twenty four; and therefore I conceive they are here named, because they
were the heads of the twenty four orders and courses of the porters that came
up in their turn to do their service, together with the twenty four courses of
the priests and singers: though it be not noted which had the first course, and
which the second, as is before noted of the priests and singers.

Verse. 5. For God blessed him.] That is, Obed-edom, because he received the ark
into his house, therefore the Lord blessed him, as is noted before, chap. 13,
14. to wit, not only with a numerous issue, but with great prosperity in all
other regards, and hence it was, that eight of his sons (besides his
grandchildren by Shemaiah) were heads in the four and twenty courses of the
porter or guard of the Temple.

Verse. 6. For they were mighty men of valor.] The work of the porters was not
only to keep all unclean persons from entering into the holy place; but also to
prevent all confusion at the resorting of the people on their solemn festivals
to the Temple, when they came in great multitudes, as also to be a guard to the
holy place upon all other occasions; and therefore it was requisite that they
should be men of might and valor: and the sons of Shemaiah being men eminent
this way, they were appointed to be heads of the several divisions and courses
of the porters.

Verse. 8. Threescore and two of Obed-Edom] The number of these, as also of
those, verse. 9, 11. is expressed I conceive, because in every division they
were the chief; for there were in all of the porters four thousand, chap. 23.5.

Verse. 12. Among these were the divisions of the porters, even among the chief
men, having wards one against another.] That is, amongst these chief men of
these families, were their several courses of porters, divided ward against
ward, answerable to those of the singers and other Levites, to wit, in four
and twenty courses.

Verse. 13. And they cast lots as well the small as the great, according to the
house of their fathers for every gate.] Being divided into twenty four
divisions (which were to come up in their several courses and orders for the
service of the Temple, and having waited a week, to depart to their dwellings,
and another to come in their steads) they did also cast lots to know how the
service should be divided amongst them, and in particular, which of them should
have the charge of the several gates of the Temple. But may some say, being
there were but eighteen of the sons and brethren of Meshelemiah verse. 9. to
whom by lot the charge of the east gate fell, verse. 14. how could there be in
each of the twenty four courses some of the sons and brethren of Meshelemiah
to take the charge of the east gate: I answer; first, that those eighteen of
Meshelemiahs sons and brethren, verse. 9. were happily the chief, and besides
these there were many more: yea, secondly, happily under the lot of Meshelemiah
many other Levites were comprehended, besides his sons and brethren, for
there were of these porters four thousand in all, chapter 23.5.

Verse. 14. And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah, etc.] That is to Shelemiah
or Meshelemiah, verse. 1. and his company, there fell the custody of the east
gate, which was the chief gate, as being in the front of the Temple, and to
Zechariah his son the custody of the north-gate.

Verse. 15. To Obed-Edom southward, and to his sons, the house of Asuppim.]
That is, the house of gatherings, so called, either because this, was the house
where the seventy Elders did use to assemble and gather themselves together,
and sit in council; or else because here the gifts of the people were gathered
and laid up: this house was also in or at the south gate, and so Obed-edom and
his sons had also the charge thereof; and indeed that here in following times
the greatest part of the Temples treasures were laid up, may be probably
gathered from that which is said, 2. Chron. 25.24. And he took all the gold and
silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed-edom.

Verse. 16. To Shuppim and Hosah, the lot came forth westward, with the gate
Shalleeheth, by the causes of the going up, ward against ward.] The families of
these two, were it seems joined together under one head. It is generally held
that there was no gate westward either into the court of the priests or the
people; but yet out of the court of the Gentiles it seems there was a gate
westward, and therefore it is expressly said, chap. 9.24. In four quarters
were the porters toward the east, west, north, and south; and here that Shippim
and Hosah were designed by lot to be porters westward: we find no mention of
this gate Shallecheth elsewhere in the Scripture: but that it was on the west
side is clear by the words in this place, and that it was by the causey of the
going up, which needs must be some causey on the west side whereby they went up
to the Temple, and therefore could not be, as some think it was, that ascent
mentioned 1. Kings 10.5, which was doubtless on the east side toward the
frontispice of the Temple, and because the word Shallecheth signifies casting
out, therefore it is held that out of this gate they used to cast forth all
their ashes and sweepings, etc. out of the Temple. However, it seems clear by
the words, that there was another gate westward, besides this that was called
Shallecheth, because it is said that the lot westward fell to Shuppim and
Hosah with the gate Shallecheth, ward against ward, whereby I conceive is meant
that whilst one company waited at the gate Shallecheth, another company waited
at the other west gate, and this I take to be that which verse. 18. is called
Parbar, for there it is said that Parbar was west ward, and that of these
porters there still waited four at the causey, that is the gate Shallecheth
which was by the causey, and two at Parbar.

Verse. 17. Southward four a day, and toward Asuppim two and two.] That is, at
the house of Asuppim were still successively two waiting, besides the four
that were at the south-gate where this house of Asuppim was; or else the
meaning is, that of the four that waited southward, two were still at the
south gate, and two at the house of Asuppim.

Verse. 18. And Parbar westward, etc.] See the note above, verse. 16.

Verse. 20. And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of the house of
God, and over the treasures of the dedicate things.] Even those that had the
custody of the treasures were comprehended under the four thousand that were
called porters, chap. 23.5. and having therefore expressed who were the chief
porters, that had the custody of the several gates and doors of the Temple,
in these following verses is expressed, to whom by lot it fell to be the
porters for the custody of the sacred treasures, and there being two divisions
of them, some that had the charge of the treasures of the Temple, to wit, the
holy vessels, and vestments, etc. and some that had the custody of the dedicate
things, to wit, the free will gifts that were given, and the money that at
certain times for the repairing of the Temple and for the daily sacrifices, was
collected amongst the people; first in these words is expressed who was chosen
to have the oversight of those that were employed in both these services, to
wit, Ahijah.

Verse. 22. Zetham, and Joel his brother, which were over the treasures of the
Lord.] That is, which had the custody of the holy vessels and vestments, and
such other things as were used in the Temple. See the former note.

Verse. 23. Of the Amramites, and the Izharites, etc.] That is, these that are
mentioned in the sequel of the chapter were of these families, and were
employed, as is afterward expressed.

Verse. 24. And Shebuell the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler of
the treasures.] That is, the treasures of the dedicate things, not the
treasures of the house of God, to wit, the holy vestments, and vessels, etc.
which were in the custody of Jehiel and his sons, as is before noted verse.
21, 22. but the treasures of the dedicate things which were in the custody of
Shelomith and his brethren, verse. 25, 26. over whom this Shebuell was the ruler.

Verse. 25. And his brethren by Eliezer: Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his
his son, etc.] The meaning is, that all these were the sons of Eliezer.

Verse. 29. Of the Izrahites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward
business over Israel, etc.] Besides those Levites that attended on the priests
in their service, and the porters and singers, there were six thousand that
were dispersed throughout the land for Officers and Judges, chap. 23.4. whose
charge was for the outward business over Israel; that is, to take care of
those things that were to be done abroad out of the temple; as to give
judgments in matters of doubt concerning the Law, to train up the younger
Levites in the knowledge of the Law, to look to the gathering, and receiving of
such moneys as was to be collected amongst the people for the service of the
Temple (as when they were numbered, and upon other occasions) and to make
provision throughout the land for wood, and all other provision necessary for
the sacrifices, and all other services for the Temple: and these were some of
the family of the Izharites, and some of the Hebronites, verse. 30.31. and
because there the number of the Hebronites is expressed, and where there charge
lay, to wit, that seventeen hundred were Officers among them of Israel, on this
side Jordan westward, verse. 30. and two thousand seven hundred without Jordan
eastward, verse. 31, 32. It may be probably inferred that there were of the
Izharites sixteen hundred (which makes up the just number of the six thousand
Judges and Officers, mentioned chap. 23.4.) and that all these were employed
(under Chenaniah the chief of them) within Jordan westward, because otherwise
there would be far more employed amongst the two tribes and a half without
Jordan, then in all the land of Israel besides.

Verse. 30. A thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of Israel on
this side Jordan westward, in all business of the Lord, and in the service of
the king.] That is, in providing such sacrifices as the king offered (which
were indeed many, upon many occasions) or by the service of the king, may be
meant the service they did for the Temple, only with respect to the kings
command and jurisdiction, or the putting of the kings decrees in execution for
the observing of Gods Laws; for other Officers the king had that were employed
in the kings civil affairs.

Verse. 31. Among the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, etc.] That is, amongst
those Hebronites that were without Jordan.

And there were found among them mighty men of valor, at Jazer of Gilead.]
Where there number was taken.

Verse. 32. And his brethren, men of valor, were two thousand and seven hunred
chief fathers, whom king David made rulers over the Reubenites, etc.] There
were in all of these judges and officers but six thousand, chap. 23.4. so that
though all the Isharites ver. 19. were employed within Jordan; (as is probable
they were) yet there were almost as many in the two tribes and an half without
Jordan, as were amongst the other nine tribes and an half within Jordan. To
wit, because being divided (as it were) from Gods people by the river Jordan,
there was the more care requisite to retain them in their obedience to the Law,
and to prevent any backsliding or remissness in the worship of God at
Jerusalem, whither with the other Israelites they were bound at certain times
to resort.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. NOw the children of Israel after their number, etc.] As in the former
chapters is shown, how David distributed the Priests and Levites into twenty
four courses, so here we are told how the Militia of the kingdom were also
divided into twelve courses, twenty four thousand in each course, who in their
turns one month in the year, were still in arms ready to be employed in any
service for the State, as the king should appoint them: by which means all the
able men of the kingdom were still trained up to be expert in the use of their
arms, and there was always a sufficient number ready in arms, if on a sudden
there should be any occasion to make use of them: neither was it any great
burden to the people though for that month they bore their own charges,
because all the rest of the year they were free to follow their own
employments.

Verse. 3. Of the children of Perez, was the chief of all the captains of the
host for the first month.] To wit, Jashobeam of whom in the former verse, who
was also chief of David's Worthies. See chap. 11.11. It seems he was of the
posterity of Perez or Pharez the son of Judah, Gen, 46.12. and therefore he
had the pre-eminence of being commander in chief over the first course, and it
may be had some command over the captains in the other courses.

Verse. 4. And of his course was Mikloth also the ruler.] To wit, after the
death of Dodai. Some understand that he was Dodai his Lieutenant; but why then
is not the Lieutenant of every course and company likewise named? Rather
therefore I conceive, that Mikloth was the captain of this course after Dodai,
as is said of Zebadiah, verse. 7. that he was captain the fourth month after
his father Asahel was dead, who died in the beginning of David's reign.

Verse. 5. The third captain of the host for the third month, was Benaiah the
son of Jehoiadae a chief priest.] If the words be read as it is in the margin
(the son of Jehoiada a principal officer) there is no difficulty at all in
them; but if we read them as in our text (the son of Jehoiada a chief priest)
by the son of Jehoiada, must be meant the son in law of Jehoiada: for it is
not likely that the priests were in ordinary course captains and commanders of
David's bands of soldiers, though sometimes indeed upon extraordinary occasions
it is evident that the priests did arm themselves.

Verse. 22. These were the princes of the tribes of Israel.] That is, these were
the heads of the tribes, who had chief power in the civil government. The
Princes of Gad and Asher are not here expressed, perhaps because the Gadites
and the Reubenites, or the half tribe of Manasseh without Jordan, had but one
Prince over them both, and so likewise the children of Asher might be joined
with some tribe that bordered upon them.

Verse. 23. But David took not the number of them from twenty years old and
under.] Having set down the Princes of the tribes, it might be expected that in
the next place should be set down the number of each tribe that were under
these Princes: especially because the people had been so lately numbered by
David. In answer whereto therefore this clause is inserted, and two things
concerning this are affirmed: First, that David gave order to number only
those of twenty years old and upwards; and that because the Lord had said he
would increase Israel like to the stars of the heavens, and so David would
not attempt to have them so numbered, to wit, because he would not seem to
question the truth of that promise; and withal because he did indeed think it
would be an endless and tedious work. And secondly, verse. 24. Joab the son
of Zeruiah began to number, but finished not, because there fell wrath for it
against Israel, to wit, because the plague being begun, he saw the work was
displeasing to God, and so gave it over, chap. 21.6. But Levi and Benjamin
counted he not: for the kings word was abominable to Joab.

Verse. 24. Neither was the number put in the account of the Chronicles of king
David.] To wit, both because the work was not finished, and because their
proceeding so far in it, had brought so great wrath upon Israel.

Verse. 32. And Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the kings sons.] That
is, their tutour, one that was to see that they were in all things trained up
and instructed as beseemed the princes of Israel.

Verse. 33. And Hushai the Archite was the kings companion.] That is, his chief
favorite, in whose company he most delighted.

Verse. 34. And after Ahithophel, was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and
Abiathar.] That is, after Ahithophels death, Jehoiada and Abiathar were his
chief counselors.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd David assembled all the Princes of Israel.] Here is repeated what
was said before, chap. 23.2. for both that and this are meant of the same
assembling of the princes.

Verse. 2. Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said, etc.] This
phrase here used for David's standing up upon his feet, may seem to imply, that
though he were now in the general assembly of the princes and people, yet even
now he began to be so far infeebled with age, that he used to lie along upon
a bed or couch; only being now to be speaker in the assembly, to make known
the will of God concerning Solomon his son, he strengthened himself (being
happily assisted therein by his nobles or servants) to stand up upon his feet.
And indeed within a while after this, we see he lay bedrid in great extremity
of weakness. 1. Kings 1.1.

I had in my heart to build an house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the
Lord, and for the footstool of our God.] That is, the ark, or the propitiatory,
or mercy-seat wherewith the ark was covered: for elsewhere also we find the ark
termed Gods footstool, as Psalm. 99.5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at
his footstool: and Psalm. 132.7. We will go into his tabernacle, we will worship
at his footstool. And the reasons why the ark is so called, may be first,
because the Lord being represented as sitting between the wings of the
Cherubims as in a throne, the body of the ark was in that respect in stead of a
footstool to him: and secondly, to intimate how they ought to judge of Gods
presence there in a spiritual manner; that the people might not entertain any
carnal and earthly conceits of Gods presence there, not consonant to the
infinite glory and majesty of God: the ark is called Gods footstool, so to
raise their thoughts of God above the world, and to teach them so to conceive
of Gods presence in the ark, as withal to acknowledge that he dwells on
high, and fills heaven and earth with his glory; yea, that the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 1. Kings 8.27.

Verse. 4. Howbeit, the Lord God of Israel chose me before all the house of my
father, to be king over Israel for ever.] To wit, in my posterity: and this was
accomplished in Christ. See Luke 1.32, 33.

Verse. 14. He gave of gold by weight, for things of gold, for all instruments
of all manner of service, silver also for all instruments of silver, etc.] To
wit, the golden vessels for the service of the holy place, the silver vessels
for the Priests court.

Verse. 15. Even the weight for the candlesticks of gold.] For the holy place
were these candlesticks made: for though there was but one candlestick in the
tabernacle of Moses, yet in the Temple there were ten candlesticks of pure gold
for the holy place, 1. Kings 7.49. As for the candlesticks of silver here also
mentioned, they were doubtless for the porch of the courts, and happily also
for the chambers that were about the courts.

Verse. 16. And by weight he gave gold for the tables of shewbread, etc.] For
in the temple there were several tables of shewbread, 2. Chron. 4.19. As for
the silver tables here mentioned also, they were for the chambers of the
Priests, and other places of the temple.

Verse. 18. And gold for the pattern of the chariot of the Cherubims, etc.] This
must needs be meant, not of the two Cherubims that were upon the Mercy-seat,
one at each end (for they were made in Moses time, and now carried by Solomon
into the Temple*) but of those two greater Cherubims made by Solomon's
appointment of Olive wood, and covered over with plates of gold, and that to
stand before the ark, to hide and cover it even from the eyes of the high
Priest, when he came into the most holy place, 1. Kings 6.23. And it is called
the chariot of the Cherubims, not only because it was the representation of
Gods presence there attended with his holy Angels, who are called the Lords
chariots: Psalm. 68.17. The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands
of Angels: but also happily because there was in these Cherubims thus standing
before the ark, some resemblance of the chariots used in those times; yea and
some add, that hereby was signified also that Gods presence in the ark was not
so fixed amongst them, but that he would leave them if his people should too
far provoke him by their sins.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. SOlomon my son, whom alone God has chosen, is yet young and
tender, etc.] See 1. Kings 3.7.

Verse. 4. Three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven
thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the house withal.]
To wit the gold to overlay the walls of the Temple; and the silver to overlay
the walls of the other houses and buildings adjoining to the Temple: and as
ordinarily we account the value of the talents there was prepared by David of
gold, eleven millions two hundred and fifty thousand pound sterling, and of
silver two millions six hundred twenty five thousand pound sterling; and
accordingly we may compute what the Princes gave, verse. 7.

Verse. 11. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
etc.] That is, thou art great, and powerful, and glorious, etc. And all
greatness and power and glory that is conferred upon any man comes from thee,
and therefore ought to be employed to thy service at thy command.

Verse. 15. For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all our
fathers, etc.] As if he should have said, even the land wherein we live, it is
but lent to us for a time, and but a short time do we continue in it, being all
as a shadow that passes suddenly away, and continues not: so that the very
land being thine, and we but as wayfaring men, that only make use of it for a
while; consequently, all that we enjoy is thine, and not ours, and of thine own
have we given thee. But besides, the drift of this clause may be also to show
another motive that made them willing to give so freely to the building of the
Temple; to wit, because they by reason of the brevity of their lives, could not
hope long to enjoy these things, and therefore could not but think them better
bestowed upon this service of God, then kept for themselves.

Verse. 18. Keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart
of thy people.] That is, this readiness to consecrate themselves, and all that
they have to thy service.

Verse. 21. And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, etc.] To wit, before
the ark which which was now in David's house, in the tent which there he had
prepared for it: and therefore it is said, verse. 22. that the people did eat
and drink before the Lord on that day.

And sacrifices in abundance for all Israel.] That is, the sacrifices were
offered in the name of all the people, and in such abundance, that all the
Israelites present might eat of the peace offerings that were then offered to
the Lord.

Verse. 22. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, etc.]
This, though subjoyned immediately to that which went before, concerning their
sacrificing the next day after that David had made known his mind to the
people, is yet to be understood of the anointing of Solomon after David's
death, as is evident: first, because the making of Zadok the sole high priest
instead of Abiathar, is here joined with it, and it cannot be denied but that
was done after David's death, 1. Kings 2.35. secondly, because it follows in
the next verse, that Solomon sat on the throne as king instead of his father
David: thirdly, because when David made these things known in a public
assembly of his Princes, he was not yet bedridden, chap. 18.1, 2. so that
Adonijahs attempting to make himself king (at which time Solomon was first
anointed, 1. Kings 1.33, 34.) was after this. And last of all, because it
follows verse. 24. that the other sons of David submitted themselves to
Solomon, which was not till Adonijahs usurpation was defeated, 1. Kings
1.9.49.50.

Verse. 23. Then Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord.] All kingdoms and
thrones are the Lords, because all kings are the Lords vicegerents, and have
their power from him; but the throne of the kingdom of Israel is upon more
peculiar grounds called the throne of the Lord; to wit, first, because the
disposing of this throne the Lord wholly challenged to himself, Deuteronomy. 17.15.
Thou shall in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose: and secondly, because the kings of Judah were figures of Christ the
true anointed, to whom the throne of David was promised, that is, that he
should be king of the Israel of God for ever, Luke 1.33. And he shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever, etc.

Verse. 28. And he died in a good old age.] To wit, when he was seventy years
old; for David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forty years, 2. Sam. 5.4.

Verse. 29. Now the acts of David the king, first and last, Behold, they are
written in the book of Samuel the Seer, and in the book of Nathan, etc.] Some
understand this thus, that the acts of David were related in the history or
books of Samuel, which are written by Nathan the prophet, and Gad the Seer.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the second book of the CHRONICLES.
CHAP. I. Verse. 3.
SO Solomon and all the congregation with him, went to the high place that was
at Gibeon, etc.] To wit, because being now settled in his kingdom, maugre the
opposition of those that favored not his cause, he desired now in a solemn
manner to praise God for his mercies, and to seek unto the Lord for wisdom,
that he might be the better able to govern the people committed to his charge.

Verse. 5. The brazen altar that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur,
had made, he put before the tabernacle of the Lord.] That is, Moses: of whom
mention was before made verse. 3.

Verse. 7. In that night did God appear unto Solomon.] To wit, in that night
after they had made an end of sacrificing those thousand burnt offerings
mentioned in the former verse; (for it is not likely they offered a thousand
burnt offerings in one day upon one altar) and that in a dream, as is
expressed, 1. Kings 3.6. where see also what is to be noted, either in Solomon's
prayer, or Gods answer to him.

Verse. 14. And he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, etc.] See 1. Kings
10.26. and 1. Kings 4.26.

Verse. 16. And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn, etc.]
See 1. Kings 10.28, 29.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 2. ANd Solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear
burdens.] See 1. Kings 5.15, 16.

Verse. 3. And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tire, saying, As thou did
deal with David my father, etc.] In the 1. Kings 5.3. it is said also that he
alleged to Huram, that he knew that David could not build an house for the
worship of God by reason of his continual wars, whereof himself being eased,
he was now resolved to undertake the work; where also such other passages in
this message of Solomon to Huram, as need any exposition, are already explained.

Verse. 8. For I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in Lebanon.]
That is, excellently; better than any of my servants, see 1. Kings 5.6.

Verse. 10. I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut timber, twenty
thousand measures of beaten wheat, etc.] Or if this did not like him,
whatsoever hire himself did appoint, 1. Kings 5.6.

Verse. 12. Huram said moreover, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc.] See 1.
Kings 5.7.

Verse. 13. And now I have sent a cunning man, etc.] His name was Huram, chap.
4.16. or Hiram 1. Kings 7.13. concerning which, and what is further herein to
be noted, see the note there.

Verse. 15. The wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine which my lord has
spoken of, let him send unto his servants.] Thus he accepts of the hire for his
servants, which Solomon had proffered, verse. 10. but withal he made a request
to him for a certain yearly provision for his own household, which Solomon
granted him also, 1 Kings 5.9, 11. Of which, and some other passages in the
king of Tyres answer, see the note there.

Verse. 17. And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of
Israel.] See 1. Kings 5.15, 16.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. THen Solomon began to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem in
mount Moriah, etc.] See the notes for the first part of this chapter, in the
sixth chapter of the first of Kings.

Verse. 14. And he made the vail of blew and purple, etc.] Which was hung upon
chains of gold, betwixt the holy and the most holy place, see 1. Kings 6.21.

Verse. 15. Also he made before the house two pillars, etc.] Concerning these
two pillars, see the notes, 1. Kings 17.15. etc.

Verse. 16. And he made chains, as in the oracle, and put them on the heads of
the pillars.] That is wreaths of chain-work. See 1. Kings 7.17.

And made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the chains.] That is, an
hundred in each of the two rows that went round about upon the network of each
chapter, see 1. Kings 7.18.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 1. ANd ten cubits the height thereof.] If their cubits contained a foot
and an half, as is usually held, then according to our measures this altar was
five yards high, and consequently there was some way for the priests to ascend
up to offer their sacrifices on this altar, though they might not ascend by
such steps as are in a ladder, lest their nakednesses should be thereby
discovered, Exodus 20.26. Neither shall thou go up by steps unto mine altar,
that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon, See the notes, Exodus 27.1. etc.

Verse. 2. Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits, etc.] Concerning this sea,
see the notes, 1. Kings 7.23. etc.

Verse. 6. He made also ten lavers, and put five of them on the right hand,
etc.] See the notes, 1. Kings 7.39. etc. they were set upon so many several
bases, which are there also largely described.

Verse. 7. And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, etc.]
To wit, which the Lord made David to understand in writing, much alike to that
in the Tabernacle, as it seems by the description which is given of them, 1.
Kings 7.49. And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right hand, and five
on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongues
of gold; concerning which, see the note there.

Verse. 9. Furthermore, he made the court of the priests.] Called the inner
court, 1. Kings 6.36.

Verse. 16. All their instruments did Huram his father make to king Solomon,
etc.] To wit, Solomon's father: so Solomon it seems called him out of the great
respect he bare him for his singular wisdom and skill, and the good service he
did him in making all these things for the Temple.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. THen Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, etc.] What needs
explanation in this chapter is already explained in the nine first verses of
the eight chapter of the first book of the Kings.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. THen said Solomon, The Lord has said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.] The annotations of this chapter unto the 41. verse, see 1.
Kings 8.12. etc.

Verse. 41. Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou, and
the ark of thy strength.] In these words Solomon does as it were invite the
Lord in the ark, the sign of his presence, to enter and take possession of the
Temple as his resting place, that is, the place of his settled abode; and that
because the ark was now no longer to be removed from place to place, but to
continue there: and herein he seems to allude to the prayer which Moses used at
the removal of the ark, as they traveled through the wilderness, Numb.
10.35. Rise up, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, etc. And he calls
the ark, the ark of Gods strength, as elsewhere it is called Gods strength and
glory, Psalm. 78.61. He delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory
into the enemies hand, because it was the sign of Gods presence amongst them,
as their strength and defense, which had been manifested by many mighty works
which the Lord had wrought, as it were by the presence of the ark; as the
dividing of Jordan, and the fall of the walls of Jericho, etc. Now because we
find this last clause of Solomon's prayer, Psalm. 132.8, 9, 10. that Psalm it
may well be was composed by Solomon upon this occasion of the dedication of the
Temple. See the note, 1. Kings 8.54:

Let thy priests, O Lord, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice
in goodness.] The first clause may be understood two several ways, either of
Gods saving and preserving the priests, Let thy priests, O Lord, be clothed
with salvation, that is, let thy salvation be as a garment to defend them, or
as a robe to adorn them, (for it is indeed an honor and glory to men, that the
great God of heaven and earth should make such precious account of them, as to
be always watchful over them to preserve and save them) or else of the
preservation and salvation of the whole people, this being a decking and
glorious ornament to the priests, that they stood as typical mediators
betwixt God and them, and were the isntrumental means of their preservation
and, salvation; even as it is now the glory of the ministers of the Gospel,
that they are the means of saving souls: whence it is, that S. Paul says of
the converted Thessalonians, that they were his joy, his glory, and crown of
rejoicing, 1. These. 2.19.20. Indeed in Psalm. 132.9. this clause is expressed
thus, Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; but even that also the
most Expositours understand of Gods righteousness in saving and defending his
priests: as for that last clause of this verse, it is meant doubtless of the
goodness of God* let thy saints rejoice in goodness, that is, let thy holy
people rejoice in thy goodness and bounty to them in all regards; yet because
the goodness of God to his people consists chiefly in his making them good,
even this may be also comprehended in this request of Solomon's, that Gods
people may rejoice in goodness and grace, rather then in outward blessings.

Verse. 42. O Lord God, turn not away the face of thine anointed.] That is, deny
not the request of me thine anointed; because when petitioners are denied their
requests, their faces are turned away with shame and confusion: hence is this
phrase, turn not away the face of thine anointed.

Verse. 42. Remember the mercies of David thy servant.] That is, the mercies
which thou have promised to David.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. NOw when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from
heaven, etc.] See the notes, Levit. 9.24. and 1. Kings 8.54.

Verse. 3. And praised the Lord, saying, For he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever.] That is, they sang Psalms of praise, the burden and foot whereof
was this, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. And such we see the
136. Psalm was, and therefore happily that was sung at this time: the like
expression we have again, verse. 6.

Verse. 6. David praised by their ministry.] That is, the Levites sung the
Psalms which David composed and appointed to be sung.

Verse. 7. Moreover, Solomon hallowed the middle of the court, etc.] See 1.
Kings 8.64.

Verse. 8. Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast, etc.] Concerning this
feast, see also the notes. 1. Kings 8.65.66.

Verse. 12. And the Lord appeared to Solomon by night, etc.] See 1. Kings 9.1, 2.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 2. THe cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built them,
etc.] Solomon had given them to Huram, and Huram not liking them had restored
them to Solomon, and so Solomon built them. See 1. Kings 9.11, 12. In which
chapter we have also most of the other passages of this chapter; and therefore
I must refer the reader to the annotations there.

Verse. 11. For he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David, etc.] In
the foregoing words it is said, that Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh
out of the city of David, unto the house that he had built for her: and here
the reason given for this is, for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house
of David king of Israel; and why so? Because the places are holy whereunto the
ark of the Lord has come: Concerning which, a question of great difficulty may
be moved, to wit, why the house of David should be counted so holy, that
Solomon's wife might not be suffered to dwell there? and that even after the ark
was already removed thence into the Temple: we read not any where else that
the presence of the ark made any place holy any longer then it continued there;
(for was the house of Obed-edom holy after the ark was carried from thence?)
yet here thirteen years after the ark was carried into the Temple, (for so long
it was after the finishing of the Temple, ere Solomon had built his own house,
and the queens house, 1. Kings 7.1.) Solomon refused to let his wife dwell in
David's house, because the ark had been there; yea, the words seem to imply,
that all places were esteemed holy where the ark had been, the places are holy
says Solomon, whereunto the ark of the Lord has come. But for resolving of
this, two answers may be given: First, that those words, for he said, My wife
shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the places are
holy, etc. contain the reason why Solomon resolved to build an house for his
wife (at which time the ark was yet in the house of David) not why he brought
up his wife into the house he had built for her, when indeed the ark had been
long before removed into the Temple, and so must be referred to the words
immediately foregoing (the house that he had built for her) Solomon brought up
the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David, unto the house that he had
huilt for her: and then to show, what moved him to build an house for her, this
clause is added, for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David
king of Israel, because the places are holy whereunto the ark of the Lord has
come. Or secondly, that Solomon resolved that because the places were holy,
whereunto the ark was brought, therefore it was not fit that his wife who was
born of heathen parents, and had not her self perhaps at that time, embraced
the faith of Israel, should dwell in the house which had been holy in this
regard: though David's house ceased to be holy after the ark was removed thence,
in regard of the Symbolicall sign of Gods presence, yet out of his
superabundant respect unto that sign of Gods presence, he thought it not fit
to make that a dwelling place for her and her followers, that were aliens and
strangers to the house of Israel, which had been the holy dwelling place of the
most high God: and this I conceive to be the best and most satisfying answer.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. ANd when the Queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, etc.] See
1. Kings 10.1. where also many other passages of this chapter are explained in
the Annotations upon the several passages there.

Verse. 8. Which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne.] That is, the
throne of Israel, 1. Kings 10.9. All thrones are Gods, because all power is of
God, and he disposes all the kingdoms in the world to whom he pleases,
Daniel 4.32. The most high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will. But the throne of Israel was the Lords in a more special
respect, because there was a special covenant betwixt God and Israel, in
regard whereof he was more peculiarly their God and king, and their kings his
deputies, and types of Christ, Psalm. 2.6. I have set my king upon my holy hill
of Sion.

Verse. 10. And the servants of Huram, etc.] See 1. Kings 10, 11, 12.

Verse. 12. And king Solomon gave to the Queen of Sheba, all her desire,
whatsoever she asked, besides that which she had brought unto the king.] That
is, besides what he gave her of his own royal bounty, 1. Kings 10.13. in lieu
of those gifts which she had brought to him; or rather, besides what he gave
her in gifts of the same kind with those which she had given him, to wit, gold,
and spices, and precious stones, he gave her also other things that were
greater rarities to her, because she had them not in her own country.

Verse. 13. Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon, etc.] See 1. Kings
10.14. etc.

Verse. 25, And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses, and chariots,
etc.] See 1. Kings 4.26.

Verse. 28. And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, etc.] See 1.
Kings 10.28.

Verse. 29. Now the rest of the acts of Solomon first and last, are they not
written in the book of Nathan, etc.] See 1. Kings 11.41.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. ANd Rehoboam went to Sechem.] This story is related as here in 1.
Kings 12.1. Concerning which therefore see the Annotations there.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 4. ANd they obeyed the words of the Lord, etc.] See 1. Kings 12.24.

Verse. 11. And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, etc.]
That is, many places that were by situation and nature strong, he fortified
also by art, and made them castles, and put captains in them, some of which
were perhaps his sons whom he dispersed unto every fenced city throughout
Judah and Benjamin, verse. 23. And he dealt wisely, and dispersed all his
children throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced
city,

Verse. 12. And in every city he put shields and spears.] That is, weapons both
for defense and offense.

Verse. 14. For Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from executing the
priests office unto the Lord.] To wit, by forbidding them to go up to Jerusalem
to execute the priests office in the Temple, as by the Law they were enjoined:
and this is ascribed not only to Jeroboam, but also to his sons, because he
used them as his instruments in restraining them from going up to sacrifice at
the Temple, having happily given them the charge and command of the fenced
cities, as Rehoboam did his sons, verse. 23.

Verse. 15. And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils,
and for the calves which he had made.] Hereby it appears that Jeroboam set up
other idols besides his golden calves, in which he pretended the worship of the
true God, and why he said in them to have served devils, see Levit. 17.7.

Verse. 17. So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the
son of Solomon strong, three years.] That is, by the access of these Levites
and others of the ten tribes the kingdom of Judah was strengthened, and so
continued three years. Indeed till the fifth year Shishak invaded not the land
of Judah, chap. 12.2. But in the fourth year they began to corrupt themselves;
and because so soon as they forsook God, God also forsook them, therefore even
then are they counted as a weakened people, their defense being then departed
from them: as was evident in the preparations which Shishak immediately made
against them.

For three years they walked in the way of David and Solomon.] To wit, before
his fall, and after his repentance: for by this place amongst others, it
appears that Solomon before his death repented him of his idolatry, and turned
unto the Lord, though he could not so soon purge the land of those idolatrous
monuments which himself had raised; as it was with Manasseh, chap. 33.18. For
it is not likely that the beginning of Rehoboams reign would have been
David-like, if Solomon had died and left the kingdom in so corrupt a
condition. Yet some conceive that Solomon is here joined with David, because
himself continued incorrupt from idolatry, though he suffered high places to be
set up for his wives.

Verse. 18, And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jeremoth, etc.]
Though Rehoboam had eighteen wives, verse. 21. yet three of them only are
expressed by name: the third, because he had by her Abijah who succeeded him in
the throne, and the first two only to make way to the mention of the third,
because he married them first, and then afterward took the third to wife, to
wit, Maachah the daughter of Abishalom the mother of Abijah. Concerning whom,
see the notes, 1. Kings 15.2.

Verse. 22. And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the chief, to be ruler
among his brethren, etc.] That is, he gave him the preheminency in all respects
above his brethren, as intending that he should succeed him in the throne. Now
if he were not his eldest son, unless, he had express direction for this
from God, it was doubtless against that Law, Deuteronomy. 21.15.

Verse. 23. And he dealt wisely, and dispersed all his children throughout all
the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced city.] The wisdom and
policy of Rehoboam in dispersing his other sons into the several fenced
cities in the out-skirts of his kingdom was this, that hereby they were kept,
either from variance amongst themselves, or from consulting together against
their brother Abijah, and perhaps under a pretense of honoring them with the
charge of those places, were little better then prisoners there, under the eye
of some that were appointed to watch over them; (for indeed otherwise there
would have been little policy in putting the strong places of the kingdom
into their hands) to which purpose also it was (as I conceive) that the better
to content them, he allowed them most liberal and princely maintenance in all
regards, which is employed in the following clause, he gave them victuals in
abundance.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass when Rehoboam had established the kingdom,
etc.] See the notes for these two verses, 1. Kings 14.22. and 25.

Verse. 7. They humbled themselves, therefore I will not destroy them, etc.]
This humiliation of Rehoboams (and so it is likely of his Princes too)
proceeded only from a base slavish fear of the wrath that he saw was coming
upon him, and therefore it said after this, that he did evil because he
prepared not his heart to seek the Lord; yet so far did the Lord regard this,
that he resolved so far, or so long to deliver them, that he would not now
utterly destroy Jerusalem, and the Temple by the hand of Shishak, as he did
afterward in a like case with Ahab, 1. Kings 21.27. Concerning which see the
notes there.

Verse. 8. Nevertheless, they shall be his servants, etc.] That is, they shall
become tributaries to the king of Egypt, (upon which condition it seems Shishak
rendered up to Rehoboam the cities which he had taken) that they may know my
service (says the Lord) and the service of the kingdoms of the countries;
that is, that they may know how much better it had been to have served me, then
by sin to bring themselves into bondage to other nations, which indeed they had
cause to complain of, as Isaiah 26.13. O Lord, other lords besides thee have
had dominion over us.

Verse. 9. So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the
treasures of the house of the Lord, etc.] Not the holy vessels, but the
treasures of the Temple, and the treasures of the kings house, which were
yielded it seems for the ransom of Jerusalem, and those other cities which he
had taken.

Verse. 12. And also in Judah things went well.] That is, after this time things
began again to prosper and go well with the kingdom of Judah. But some read
it as in the margin, and yet in Judah there was good things; and then it is
added as another reason, why God did not utterly destroy Jerusalem at this
time, to wit, because there were some in Judah that feared God, and continued
constant in that way of his worship which he had prescribed: for that which is
said, verse. 1. that he forsook the Law of the Lord, and all Israel with him,
must be understood only of the generality of the people, that all in a manner
had corrupted themselves.

Verse. 15. And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.]
See 1. Kings 12.24.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. NOw in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam, began Abijah to reign
over Judah, etc.] Or Abijam, see the notes, 1. Kings 15.1, 2.

Verse. 4. And Abijah stood upon mount Zemaraim, which is in mount Ephraim, and
said, Hear me thou Jeroboam, and all Israel, etc.] To wit, having first by his
Heralds or messengers desired a parley, or at least liberty to say somewhat
that he had to say, both to Jeroboam and the people, for otherwise being so
near the enemy that they might hear what he said, he could not have stood thus
to speak to them without danger.

Verse. 5. The Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for
ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt.] See Numbers 18.19.

Verse. 7. And there are gathered to him vain men, the children of Belial.] See
Deuteronomy. 13.13.

And have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when
Rehoboam was young and tender hearted, etc.] That is, when Rehoboam was newly
entered upon his kingdom, unexperienced in matters of state, and much more in
warlike affairs, as having always been brought up in his fathers peaceable
reign, delicately and daintily; and being not yet settled in that throne (as a
plant that has not yet taken root) was easily shaken and terrified with the
insolences of his rebellious subjects; that thus we must understand these
words is evident, because Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he began
to reign, as we may see, 1. Kings 14.21.

Verse. 10. The Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him, etc.] Though he
walked in all the sins of his father Rehoboam 1. Kings 15.3. and suffered
idolatry in his kingdom (which his son Asa did afterward reform, 1. Kings
15.12, 13.) yet because withal the true religion was openly professed, and the
true worship of the true God openly and incorruptly maintained in the Temple at
Jerusalem, he boasts of their assurance of Gods favor, and seeks to scare the
Israelites from hoping to maintain their party against them.

Verse. 11. The shewbread also set they in order upon the pure table, etc.]
That is, upon the tables of the shewbread. And so we must also understand the
next clause, and the candlestick of gold, etc. for there were in the Temple ten
candlesticks, and ten tables, chap. 4.7, 8. and it is but a poor conceit of
some, that because but one table here is mentioned, therefore Shishak had
carried away the rest: for thus also table is put for tables, 1. Kings 7.48.

Verse. 17. So there fell down slain of Israel, five hundred thousand.] And yet,
the men of Judah that slew them, were but four hundred thousand in all, verse.
3.

Verse. 19. And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Beth-el
with the towns thereof, etc.] Which stood in the borders of Benjamin and
Ephraim, Josh. 18.13. and had in it one of Jeroboams calves, 1. Kings 12.29.
some conceive that this is meant of another Beth-el, because Jeroboams idol
stood still, and was not destroyed in the days of Asa, etc. but this is no
sufficient argument, since perhaps this Beth-el was afterward recovered from
the kings of Judah, and perhaps was now taken by composition, etc.

Verse. 20. Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah:
and the Lord stroke him, and he dyed.] That is, Jeroboam: for of Abijahs death
the text speaks after, chap. 14.1. perhaps he was struck in the days of
Abijah, but he dyed not till the second year of Asa the son of Abijah.

Verse. 21. But Abijah waxed mighty, and married foureteen wives, and begat
twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.] Partly before he was king, and
partly after; for he reigned in all but three years, 1. Kings 15.2.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse. 1. SO Abijah slept with his fathers, etc. and Asa his son reigned in
his stead.] In the twentieth year of Jeroboam, 1. Kings 15.9. where also are
many several Annotations that may serve for the explaining of several
passages in this chapter.

Verse. 9 And came unto Mareshah.] A city in Judah, Josh. 15.44.

Verse. 13. And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto Gerar.]
Which was a city of the Philistines; whereby it seems very probably that they
also joined with the Ethiopians in invading the land of Judah; especially
because it is expressly also said in the following verse, that they smote all
the cities round about Gerar.

Verse. 15. They smote all the tents of cattle, etc.] That is, the tents of the
Arabians, who indeed were wont to dwell in tents, and so to remove from place
to place for the feeding of their cattle. It seems the Ethiopians passing
through Arabia, the Arabians aided them in their invasions of the land of
Judah; and so now Asa and his soldiers smote their tents and carried from them
abundance of cattle.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 2. THe Lord is with you, whilst ye be with him, etc.] As if he should
have said, By experience you now see in this your victory over the Ethiopians,
that whilst you walk in Gods ways he will not fail to bless you.

Verse. 3. Now for a long season Israel had been without the true God, etc.]
That is, now for a long time, ever since their revolting from Rehoboam, the ten
tribes have lived under Jeroboam in a manifest apostacy from the true God, not
having Gods priests to instruct them, and not regarding the law of God,
according to which they ought in all things to have ordered themselves.

Verse. 4. But when they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord God of Israel,
and sought him, he was found of them.] That is, in former times when the
Israelites in their trouble did repent and return unto the Lord, he was always
ready to receive them into his favor again. And this is added to imply, that
though the ten tribes had thus forsaken the Lord, yet if they would as in
former times have returned to the Lord, he would have pardoned them.

Verse. 5. And in those times there was no peace, etc.] That is, ever since the
revolting of the ten tribes from Rehoboam, and their apostacy from the true
God; whereof he had before spoken, verse. 3.

Verse. 6. And Nation was destroyed of nation, etc.] To wit, in the wars
betwixt the kingdom of Judah and the kingdom of Israel; wherein they also
made use of the auxilliary forces of other nations.

Verse. 7. Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak, for your work
shall be rewarded.] That is, go courageously and constantly forward in the
reformation begun amongst you, and the Lord shall be still with you.

Verse. 8. And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet,
he took courage, and put away the abominable idols, etc.] Either this is meant
of some prophecy of Oded the father of this Azariah, which he declared unto
them at this time, together with this his own exhortation; or else of some
prophecy of Azariah himself, he also being here called by the name of his
father Oded. As for that which is said, that when Asa had heard these words,
and this prophecy, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of
all the land, etc. we see that he had in a great part done this before, chap.
14.3. but it seems now upon a more diligent search made throughout his
kingdom, he put away the remainder of the idols that were found amongst them;
and that not only out of the land of Judah and Benjamin, but also out of the
cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim, which may be meant of the cities
which his father Abijam had taken, chap. 13.19. but yet there is mention made
of cities of Ephraim which Asa himself took, chapter 17.2.

And renewed the altar of the Lord.] That is, the altar which Solomon had
built, having some way lost its beauty in so many years (which is no wonder,
considering how continually it was used and stood in the open court) he renewed
it, and beautified it again; and then in a solemn manner observed again
sacrifices thereon.

Verse. 9. And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them
out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon.] Hereby it is manifest that
even the tribe of Simeon did revolt from the kingdom of Judah, or at least the
greatest part of them, however they had their inheritance within the portion of
Judah, Josh 19.1. and that therefore either they removed from their first
habitation, and transplanted themselves amongst other tribes of Israel: or else
that they stood out against Judah, and clave to the party of the other tribes,
yea, though they had their dwelling within Judahs portion.

Verse. 10. So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third
month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.] Which was the twelfth of
Baasha king of Israel. By this it appears that Zerah the Ethiopian did not
invade the land of Judah, till the fourteenth year of Asa. Indeed Asa lived in
peace but ten years, chap. 14.1. But it was therefore Baasha king of Israel not
Zerah, that immediately after those ten years were ended, made war against
Asa. As for the third month, it was that wherein the feast of Pentecost was
kept.

Verse. 15. And the Lord gave them rest round about.] To wit, at that time when
Asa and the people made this covenant with God; then the Lord gave them rest,
the land not being invaded by any of her enemies.

Verse. 16. And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa, etc.] That is, the
grandmother. The Annotations concerning these three following verses, see 1.
Kings 15.2, 10, 14, 15.

Verse. 19. And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of the
reign of Asa.] Unto the five and thirtieth year (that is, until the five and
thirtieth year was ended, whence is that chap. 16.1. In the six and thirtieth
year of the reign of Asa, Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah, etc.)
of the reign of Asa, that is of the kingdom of Judah since it was divided
from that of Israel; which was the fifteenth year of Asa: for that thus these
words must be expounded is evident, because Baasha died in the six and
twentieth year of Asa, 1 Kings 16.8. and therefore could not come up in the
six and thirtieth year of Asa, as is expressly said in the first verse of the
following chapter: we have a like passage afterward, chap. 22.2.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. IN the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa, Baasha king of
Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, etc.] That is, in the thirty
sixth year of the kingdom of Judah, which was the sixteenth year of Asa, and
the fourteenth of Baasha. See the last note in the former chapter, as also see
the note 1. Kings 15.17. where also several other passages in the five first
verses of this chapter, are already explained.

Verse. 7. Because thou have relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the
Lord thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine
hand.] Whereas if he had gone on (as he intended, verse. 3.) in his league with
the king of Israel to invade thy land, thou should have overcome him as thou
did the Ethiopian; now thou have deprived thy self of this glory and booty.

Verse. 9. Therefore, from henceforth thou shall have wars,] To wit, with
Basha, 1. Kings 15.16. And there was war betwixt Asa and Baasha king of
Israael all their days.

Verse. 12. And Asa, in the thirty and ninth year of his reign, was diseased
in his feet.] About the six and twentieth year of his reign Baasha died, and
Elah his son succeeded him 1. Kings 16.8. about the seven and twentieth year
of his reign Zimri one of his captains slew Elah, and all the house of Baasha,
1. Kings 16.9. etc. and within a few days Omri being made king by the
soldiers, forced Zimri desperately to burn himself, and about the one and
thirtieth year of Asa, was peaceably settled in the throne of Israel, Tibni
his competitour dying, 1. Kings 16.22.23. And about this nine and thirtieth
year wherein Asa fell sick of the gout, Omri died, and Ahab his son
succeeded him, 1. King. 16.29.

Verse. 14. And laid him in the bed, which was filled with sweet odours and
diverse kinds of spices, etc.] After the manner of embalming kings used in
those times they filled the beer whereon he was laid, or coffin whereinto he
was put, with all kinds of odours and sweet spices.

And they made a very great burning for him.] That is, they burnt sweet
prefumes at his burial in very great plenty.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. ANd Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened
himself against Israel.] In the latter days of Asa, after he fell into those
grievous sins mentioned in the former chapter, the kings of Israel (as God
threatened, chap. 16.9.) did it seems in their several times renew their wars
against Judah, to wit, Baasha, Omri, and Ahab, and had happily often the better
of them; but about the third or fourth year of Ahab, Asa dying, 1. Kings
22.41. Jehoshaphat succeeded him, and making great preparations to withstand
them, he was greatly strengthened against the kingdom of Israel.

Verse. 3. And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first
ways of his father David.] Which were purer and freer from sin then were his
latter days: for whilst he was in continual troubles, we read not any such
foul sins he fell into, as afterward being settled in his kingdom, when he
committed adultery with Uriahs wife, and many other ways transgressed Gods
Laws.

And sought not unto Baalim.] To wit, as did Ahab at this time king of Israel:
whether by Baalim we understand all false Gods in general, or in particular
the the idols of Baal, the God of the Sydonians, 1. Kings 16.31, 32. for that
these words are spoken by way of comparing of Jehoshaphat to Ahab, we may see
by that which follows, verse. 4. But sought to the Lord God of his father, and
walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.

Verse. 6. And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord.] That is, he
became zealous, and very courageous in Gods cause, and went forward with an
high, and magnanimous spirit, without any baseness, fear, or carnal respects.

Moreover, he took away the high places and groves out of Judah.] The high
places, whereon the God of Israel was worshipped, though contrary to his Law,
were not by Jehoshaphat taken away, chap. 20.33. and therefore this must be
meant of such high places and groves, wherein they worshipped idol-gods. These
indeed Asa his father had taken away, chap. 14.3. but it seems in the latter
and declining days of Asa, when he lay sick, some of the people that lingered
still after their former idolatry, made use of the advantage of these times,
and did secretly set up their high places and groves again: and these they were
that Jehoshaphat after search made did now take away.

Verse. 7. And in the third year of his reign, he sent to his princes, etc. to
teach in the cities of Judah.] To see that they were taught. We may not think,
that at other times the people of God did now live in the kingdom of Judah
without any ordinary teaching; but because he found that the people were in
many places so inclined to idolatry (as having set up their high places, which
his father Asa had pulled down) these choice priests and Levites mentioned,
verse. 8. were sent as visitours into the several parts of his kingdom, to see
whether they were truly taught, and by their own personal teaching, both to
confirm those that were rightly instructed, and to convince those that were
corrupt, and to show them how expressly the Law did forbid, and threaten all
idolatry whatsoever. And with them these princes were sent to countenance, and
encourage them, and happily to punish those that should oppose them, or that
should be found obstinate in their errors.

Verse. 13. And the men of war, mighty men of valor, were in Jerusalem.] That
is, his Generals, and captains, and some companies of their soldiers still
attended with them.

Verse. 14. Adnah the chief, and with him mighty men of valor, three hundred
thousand.] That is, under his command.

Verse. 16. Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself unto the
Lord.] To wit, to fight his battles, some say as a Nazarite.

Verse. 19. These waited on the king, besides those whom the king put in the
fenced cities, throughout all Judah.] That is, these captains before mentioned,
and some of their bands by course: for it is not likely that so many hundred
thousand did at one time attend on the kings person at Jerusalem. Yea, because
the total number of the soldiers here mentioned, amounts to eleven hundred
and threescore thousand (and it seems not probable that Jehoshaphat would have
been so affrighted with the multitude of the Moabites and Ammonites that came
against him, chap. 20.12. if he had had eleven hundred and threescore thousand
trained men in his kingdom, besides those wherewith his strong cities were
manned) Therefore some conceive it more likely, that he had not all these at
one time, but successively; the trained band of Judah being first under the
command of Adnah, and then Adnah being dead, under the command of Jehohanan;
and so likewise the trained band of Benjamin, under the command of Amasiah
first, then Eliada, and then Jehozabad, and were in the several times of these
Generals, sometimes more, and sometimes less.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. NOw Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance, and joined
affinity with Ahab.] To wit, by marrying his eldest son Joram to Athaliah
Ahabs daughter, chap. 21.6. and 2. Kings 8.18.

Verse. 2. And after certain years, he went down to Ahab to Samaria.] To wit,
about the seventeenth year of his reign. See the notes for this chapter, 1.
Kings 22.1. etc.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 2. ANd Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him.] Who
reproved Asa Jehoshaphats father, see chap. 16.7.

And said to king Jehoshaphat, Should thou help the ungodly, and love them
that hate the Lord?] That is, ought thou thus to join thy self in such
strict ways of love and friendship with such a wicked idolatrous wretch, such
an enemy to God and all goodness as Ahab is? In some cases to join in league
with infidels and idolaters, is not unlawful, Genesis 14.13. when it is done
only to uphold peace, to maintain mutual traffic, or for the common defense
of their countries; but otherwise unnecessarily, as out of love and friendship
to join with them and help them, is doubtless unlawful; and so it had been
now with Jehoshaphat.

Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord.] That is, God is highly
displeased with thee, and has determined to pour forth his displeasure upon
thee: and this might have respect to that invasion of the Moabites and
Ammonites, which followed not long after, chap. 20.1. or happily to some
dissension that began at present betwixt his sons, the seeds of that horrid
slaughter which his eldest son did afterward make amongst them, chap. 21.4.

Verse. 3. Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, etc.] This is
added to intimate, that because of this the Lord would deal gently with him,
and even in judgment remember mercy.

Verse. 4. And he went out again, etc. and brought them back unto the Lord God
of their fathers.] That is, where he found any idolatry, or any corruptions
amongst the people, he reduced them to the true worship of God, and reformed
what was out of order amongst them.

Verse. 5. And he set judges in the land, etc.] To wit, where he found any
wanting.

Verse. 6. Ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
judgment.] That is, whose person ye represent, and who is present seeing all
you do; and accordingly ready to stand by you and defend you if you judge
aright, and to punish you if you deal unjustly:

Verse. 8. In Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests,
and of the chief of the fathers of Jerusalem, etc.] See above verse. 5. This is
meant of the high senate or council of the Sanhedrim in Jerusalem, to which all
appeals were made from inferior courts, and to which all causes of difficulty
were referred, both for ecclesiastical and civil affairs; and therefore it is
said here that they were for the judgment of the Lord, that is, for
ecclesiastical causes, concerning which God had determined in his law what
should be done; and for controversies, to wit, in causes merely civil. See
Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10.

Verse. 10. And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that dwell
in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, etc.]
That is, where each party shall pretend that they have the law or statutes on
their side; and so one shall allege one law, and another an other, see Deuteronomy.
17.8. etc.

Verse. 11. Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the Lord.]
That is, in all matters ecclesiastical, or which are determined in the law of
the Lord.

And Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, for all
the kings matters.] For all civil affairs, or those things which were
determinable by the civil statutes of the king and kingdom.

Also the Levites shall be officers before you.] That is, they shall be
officers in every city, subordinate to the great Sanhedrim in Jerusalem, from
whom they should receive their power and directions.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. THe children of Ammon, and with them other beside the Ammonites, came
against Jehoshaphat in battle.] That is, the Edomites of mount Seir, verse. 10.

Verse. 2. There comes a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea, on
this side Syria.] That is, the dead sea, which lay betwixt Judah and Syria: and
because they came from those parts, some Expositours conceive it to be very
probable, that Jehoshaphats aiding of Ahab in his wars against the Syrians,
chap. 18. was the first occasion of this invasion of his land.

Verse. 5. And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in
the house of the Lord before the new court.] Some Expositours understand this
of a new court added of late years to the Temple, for those that were strangers
and unclean amongst the Israelites to worship God in: but because of this we
have no mention at all in the Scriptures, it is better by others expounded of
the court of the priests, which Solomon built; and that it is here called the
new court, because it was of late newly repaired and beautified, and that
happily by Asa when the altar of burnt offerings was also renewed, chap. 18.8.
Others again understand it of the court of the people, and that this had been
lately repaired, and perhaps divided into two courts, the one being appointed
for the men and the other for the women (as it is generally held, that though
at first when Solomon built it it was but one court, yet afterward it was
divided into two) or that having been ever since the revolt of the ten tribes
alienated to other uses (because then there was no use of so large a court as
was provided for the meeting of the twelve tribes) now upon the coming in of so
many of the ten tribes to the kingdom of Judah, it was opened and restored
again to the service of the Temple. But because it is most probable that
Jehoshaphat stood to pray amongst the people upon the brazen scaffold which
Solomon had built, 2. Chron. 6.13. which was in the court of the people,
therefore I rather think this new court before which he stood, was the priests
court newly repaired.

Verse. 13. And all Judah stood before the Lord with their little ones, their
wives and their children.] In times of public humiliation they used to bring
their little ones to the assemblies, Joel 2.16. Gather the children, and those
that suck the breasts. First, that the bowels of the people might be the more
moved by the sight of those their little ones, now in danger to be cruelly
butchered by these enemies, and so they might be rendered the more serious and
vehement in their prayers, and more courageous in withstanding the enemy, when
they should come to fight against them. And secondly, being presented before
the Lord, as a pitiful object of his mercy, he might also be moved to take
compassion on them.

Verse. 16. Behold they come by the cliff of Ziz, and ye shall find them at the
end of the brook, etc.] By telling them beforehand the place where they should
meet their enemies the next day, he let them see with what assurance they might
believe whatever else he said unto them.

Verse. 20. Believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.] This it is likely was
spoken with special reference to the prophecy of Jehaziel the Levite, which
they had heard the day before, concerning their subduing the mighty army that
was coming against them.

Verse. 21. And when he had consulted with the people, etc.] That is, when he
had advised with the heads and rulers of the people, concerning their ordering
of the battle, etc. he appointed singers unto the Lord to go before the army,
as it were to triumph beforehand for the victory promised, and that should
praise the beauty of holiness; that is, Gods most holy majesty, the glory of
Gods sanctuary his dwelling place (which also is therefore called the beauty
of holiness, Psalm. 29.2. Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, and
Psalm. 96.9. O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.) and to say praise
ye the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever, which was the foot of several
Psalms of thanksgiving composed by David and others, as in particular, of the
136. Psalm, wherein there is an enumeration of many several mercies which God
afforded to his people; and that therefore was happily at this time sung by the
Levites.

Verse. 22. And when they began to sing and to praise, the Lord set ambushments
against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, etc.] That is, the Lord
did suddenly and unexpectedly cut them off, as when men are cut off by enemies
that ly in ambush against them, and that by sending some unexpected strife
amongst those nations, whereupon they fell out amongst themselves, and slew one
another; and so that was accomplished which the Levite had foretold, verse. 17.
Ye shall not need to fight in the battle, etc. Yet some Expositours understand
this ambushment of the holy angels that came suddenly in upon them by the Lords
command, and slew them; whereupon they mistaking the matter, and supposing it
had been their own companions, flew upon them, and so sheathed their swords in
one another bowels.

Verse. 31. He was thirty and five years old when he began to reign, etc.] See
1. Kings 22.41.

Verse. 33. Howbeit the high places were not taken away.] See the notes, chap.
17.6.

For as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their
fathers.] That is, though Jehoshaphat did endeavor to reform what was amiss,
chap. 19.4. yet from the high places the people would not be reclaimed.

Verse. 36. And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish,
etc.] See 1. Kings 22.48.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 2. ALl these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.] That is,
king of the Israelites in the kingdom of Judah. Usually in the sacred history
the kings of the ten tribes are only called kings of Israel: it may be
therefore that Jehoshaphat is here so called, because many of the ten tribes
had now joined themselves to the kingdom of Judah, chap. 15.9. They fell to
him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the Lord his God was with
him.

Verse. 3. And their father gave them great gifts of silver and of gold, and of
precious things, with fenced cities in Judah.] See the Annotations for most
passages in this chapter, 2. Kings 8.16. etc.

Verse. 11. And caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, etc.]
That is, to worship Baal; and herein this sin of Jehoram is aggravated, that
he set up this idolatry in Jerusalem, where was the Temple, Gods dwelling place.

Verse. 12. And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, etc.]
Elijah was taken up into heaven in Jehoshaphats time, and Elisha was succeeded
in his room, 2. Kings 3.11. either therefore this is meant of some other
Elijah, or of Elisha, and that he is here called Elijah as the Baptist
afterward was, because he came in the spirit and power of Elijah or else (which
is more probable) this prophecy was written by Elijah whilst he lived upon
the earth (as Isaiah wrote beforehand concerning Cyrus. Isaiah 45.1. and the
prophet that was sent to Jeroboam prophesied of Josiah 1. Kings 13.2.) and
committed either to Elisha, or the other prophets, and by them now sent to
Jehoram; whose insolent cruelty was such, that the prophets durst not show
themselves in his presence.

Verse. 14. Behold, with a great plague will the Lord smite thy people, and thy
children, etc.] See the event, verse. 16, 17, 18. and thus his slaying his
brethren was punished with the loss of his own children.

Verse. 19. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his
fathers.] See chap. 16.14.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. ANd the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son,
king in his stead, etc.] See the Annotations of most of this chapter, in 2.
Kings 8.24. etc.

Verse. 9. And he sought Ahaziah and they caught him, (for he was hid in
Samaria) and brought him to Jehu.] He was first wounded in his flight from
Israel not far off from Ibleam, which was not far from Megiddo, and being
wounded fled to Megiddo, and at Megiddo he was at length slain, 2. Kings 9.27.
But how is it then said that he was h^d and taken in Samaria? I answer; 1. That
by Samaria here may be meant only the kingdom of Samaria, as is noted on the
2. Kings 9.27. Or, 2. that not thinking himself safe in Megiddo, whither he at
first fled to hide himself, he thence fled to Samaria, where he was found, and
thence brought back to Megiddo and slain there.

So the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom.] That is,
there was none of his children of years to maintain their right to the kingdom
against such as would usurp the regal power as Athaliah immediately did.

Verse. 10. She arose, and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of Judah.]
See the Annotations for this and the following verses, in 2. Kings 11.1, 2.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. ANd in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, etc.] See 2.
Kings 11.4. etc.

Verse. 4. A third part of you entering on the sabbath of the priests and of the
Levites, shall be porters of the doors.] This third part here spoken of seems
to be the same that in 2. Kings 11.6. are said to have had the charge of the
gate behind the guard, which was the south-gate. Whereas therefore it is here
said, that they were porters of the doors, it is either because this gate was
called the gate of the doors or thresholds (for some cause unknown to us;) or
else because besides the charge of the keeping of the gate behind the guard,
mentioned in the book of the Kings, they were also appointed to be porters of
the doors of the Temple. See the notes on 2. Kings 11.5.

Verse. 5. And a third part at the gate of the foundation.] That is the
eastgate called also the gate of Sur, 2 Kings 11.6. it was happily called the
gate of the foundation, because it stood lower than the rest, and from thence
they went up by an ascent into the great court.

And all the people shall be in the courts of the house of the Lord.] That is,
in the court of the people which was divided into several courts; for we
cannot think that the people were appointed to be in the priests court.

Verse. 6. Let none come into the house of the Lord, save the priests, etc.]
That is, into the priests court.

But all the people shall keep the watch of the Lord.] That is, shall guard the
holy place, that no man enter it, or they shall observe to do in this service
of the Lord what is given them in charge.

Verse. 8. And took every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, etc.]
That is, every man that was the head of the family took those that belonged to
them.

For Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.] See 2. Kings 11.5.

Verse. 9. Moreover, Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds,
spears, etc.] See 2. Kings 11.10. where also are many several notes for the
following passages of this chapter.

Verse. 11. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the
king.] Zechariah therefore the son of Jehoiada, that was afterward slain at
the command of this king, chap. 24.21. had now an hand in setting the crown
upon his head.

Verse. 13. Also the singers with instruments of music, and such as taught to
sing praise.] That is, that lead the song, as being the most skillful, and at
other times teachers of the younger sort.

Verse. 16. And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the
people, etc.] That is, between the Lord (of whom mention was made before, verse.
14. and again in the last words of this verse) and the king and the people, as
it is expressed, 2. Kings 11.17. or betwixt himself and the king and the
people, to wit, in Gods behalf.

Verse. 20. And they came through the high gate into the kings house.] That is,
the chief gate of the kings house, called the gate of the guard, 2. Kings.
11.19.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 4. ANd it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to repair the
house of the Lord.] See 2. Kings 12.4, 5.

Verse. 5. Howbeit, the Levites hastened it not.] For in the three and twentieth
year of his reign they had done nothing to the repairing of the house, 2.
Kings 12.6.

Verse. 6. Why have thou not required of the Levites to bring out of Judah and
out of Jerusalem, the collection, according to the commandment of Moses, etc.]
By this collection may be meant either the half shekel, which every man paid
when they were numbered, Exodus 30.12.13. which is called the money of every one
that passes account, 2. Kings 12.14. or else the voluntary contributions which
the people were to give after the manner as they did for the building of the
tabernacle at the commandment of Moses, Exodus 35.5. an order which it seems was
observed in future times, Neh. 10, 32. Also we made ordinances for us, to
charge our selves yearly with the third part of a shekel, for the service of
the house of our God.

Verse. 7. For the sons of Athaliah that wicked woman, had broken up the house
of God, etc.] To promote the worship of Baalim they robbed the Temple; and so
there was not in the treasuries of the Temple any competent sum of money,
whereby the decays thereof might be repaired. Indeed the sons of Joram by
Athaliah were all slain by the Arabians, save only Ahaziah, chap. 21.17. But
this might be done before that.

Verse. 8. And at the kings commandment they made a chest.] The Levites being
forbidden by Joash to meddle any more with the collection of the money, because
of their former neglect, 2. Kings 12.7.

And set it without the gate of the house of the Lord.] To wit, by the gate
whereby they went out of the great court, and on that side the gate where the
altar stood, 2. Kings 12.9.

Verse. 14. They brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada,
whereof were made vessels for the house of the Lord, etc.] See 2. Kings 12.13.

Verse. 16. And they buried him in the city of David amongst the kings, because
he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house.] That is,
the house and family of David; or rather the Temple the house of God.

Verse. 17. Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made
obeisance to the king, etc.] In the most fawning and flattering manner they
presented themselves before him, and withal petitioned him, that every one
might worship God as they pleased themselves, namely, in the high places, after
the manner of their fathers; to wit, because it was burdensome to go up from
all places to the Temple; or because every one desired to have his own proper
place of devotion. Now this request is employed, though not expressed in the
following words, then the king hearkened to them: and they left the house of the
Lord God of their fathers.

Verse. 18. And wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespass.]
For Hazael king of Syria (as it is related, 2. Kings 12.17.) invaded the land,
and having taken Gath addressed himself to Jerusalem, having sufficient
pretense for what he did (if his ambition cared for pretense) because the kings
of Judah had formerly assisted the Israelites against the Syrians at Ramoth
Gilead: and so formidable to Joash was this approach of Hazael toward
Jerusalem, that he took all the hallowed things, and all the gold that was
found in the treasures of the Temple, and in his own house, and with that
present purchased his peace. Some conceive that this invasion of Hazael
(mentioned in the Kings) is the same with that inrode of the Syrians spoken of,
verse 23. of this chapter, but that cannot be: for this was before the slaying
of Zachariah, verse. 20. that after it, verse. 23. in this the matter was
compounded without a battle, in that a battle was fought to Joash his great
loss, verse. 24. in this Hazael was present, 2. Kings 12.11. in that the
Syrians sent the spoil they took to their king at Damascus, verse. 23. And last
of all, in this the Syrians had great forces (else Joash would not have been
afraid of them) in that they came with a small band of men, verse. 24.

Verse. 20. And the spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the
priest, etc.] It is a great question amongst Expositours, whether this were
that Zechariah of whom our Savior spoke, Matthew. 23.35. From the blood of
righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew,
etc. Most conceive it is, and that because this Zechariah was slain by the
Jews, and that (as is expressed in the following verse) in the court of the
house Lord: nor do we read in Scripture of any other Zechariah that was so
slain: for though this was the son of Jehoiada, and that Zachariah of whom
Christ speaks, is expressly called there the son of Barachias; yet to this
it may be answered, that Jehoiada was so called Barachias; or that he is called
Barachias, which signifies the blessed of the Lord, because he was in his time
such a blessed instrument of so much good to the people of God: and it may well
be the drift of Christ's words, to show that the blood of all that were long ago
slain, should be charged upon that generation, and so in that regard this
Zechariah is joined there with Abel. But now others hold that it is not this
Zechariah of whom our Savior speaks there, but that Zachariah which is last
but one of the small Prophets, that was raised up of God to encourage the
people that were come back from Babylon to rebuild the Temple. And indeed,
first, because that Zachariah is expressly called the son of Barachiah,
Zach. 1.1. as it were purposely to distinguish him from this Zechariah the
son of Jehoiada. And secondly, because the words of our Savior seem rather
to imply that all the blood of Gods righteous servants, slain in former times,
from the first to the last, should be charged upon them; and so Abel is
mentioned as the first, and Zachariah as the last, I cannot see but that very
probably it may be understood of that Zachariah, and that he after the
reedifying of the Temple, flying to the altar for Sanctuary, when the Jews were
for some cause enraged against him, was there slain, as our Savior says,
between the Temple and the altar.

Verse. 25. For they left him in great diseases.] To wit, by reason of wounds
received in the fight, or some exquisite tortures, which happily the Syrians
had put him to.

His own servants conspired against him, for the blood of the sons of
Jehoiada the priest, etc.] Hereby it may appear, that having slain Zechariah,
they slew also his brethren the sons of Jehoiada; perhaps lest they should
avenge his death; yet some conceive that the plural number is put for the
singular, sons for son, as it is also in many other places.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. AMaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, etc.]
To wit, in the second year of Joash king of Israel. See the notes for this
chapter, 2. Kings 14.1. etc.

Verse. 13. But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they
should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria
even unto Beth-horon.] Beth-horon was one of the cities of Ephraim, Josh. 15.3.
but because some of the Israelites cities had been taken by the kings of Judah,
in the wars betwixt those two kingdoms, therefore it is here said, that in
their return from Samaria, they fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria to
Beth-horon.

Verse. 23. And Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah the son of
Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, etc.] That is, the son of Ahaziah; for Ahaziah
was also called Jehoahaz, chap. 21.17. and 22.1.

Verse. 24. And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were
found in the house of God with Obed-Edom.] That is, with the posterity of
Obed-Edom. See 1. Chron. 20.15.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 1. THen all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old,
and made him king, etc.] To wit, in the seven and twentieth year of Jeroboam
the second king of Israel, 2. Kings 14.21. See the notes for this chapter, 2.
Kings 15.1. etc.

Verse. 5. And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in
the visions of God.] That is, who was a Prophet, one that was accustomed to see
the visions of God; or else, it is meant that he was one that had singular
understanding in the writings of Moses, and David, and other the Prophets and
servants of God, that had written in former times; and consequently, an able
instructour and counselor to Uzziah in those things that concerned the
knowledge of God and of his Laws; or that was skillful to interpret the dreams,
and nightly visions of other men, as Joseph and Daniel had, Genesis 41.15. Dan.
1.17. and 2.19.

Verse. 9. Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at
the valley gate, etc.] It is likely that the repairing of that great breach
which Joash king of Israel had made in the wall, chap. 25.23. from the gate of
Ephraim to the corner gate, was the first occasion that put the king upon these
buildings.

Verse. 19. And while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up
in his forehead.] See the 2. Kings 15.5. Though he were leprous happily all
over his body, yet it appeared in his face only.

Before the priests in the house of the Lord, from beside the incense altar.]
For there standing, he was stricken with the leprosy.

Verse. 22. Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah first and last, did Isaiah the
prophet the son of Amos write.] We find nothing of his history in the
prophecy of Isaiah which we have; this therefore may relate to some part of
the book of Kings written by Isaiah, or some other history which he wrote that
is not now extant.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. JOtham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned sixteen years, etc.] See 2. Kings 16.2. etc. and 15.33.

Verse. 2. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
to all that his father Uzziah did.] That is, he did that which was right, but
not with a perfect heart: and therefore it follows in the next words (to show
that yet he was not altogether so ill as his father) that he entered not into
the Temple, to wit, to offer incense, and to incroach upon the priests office,
as his father did.

And the people did yet corruptly.] That is, they sacrificed, and burnt incense
still in the high places, 2. Kings 15.35.

Verse. 3. He built the high gate of the house of the Lord, etc.] See 2. Kings
15.35.

And on the wall of Ophel he built much.] This Ophel was a tower on the outside
of the city. See chap. 35.15. Neh. 3.26.27. and 11.21. and was (as is there
noted) the place where in those times the Nethinims dwelt.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. AHaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen years in Jerusalem, etc.] See many several notes for this chapter in
2. Kings 16.2. etc.

Verse. 10. But are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord
your God?] That is, since God has delivered the men of Judah into your hands
because of their sins, and that you cannot but know that you also have given
the Lord as just cause to have punished you, the consideration hereof should
have moved you to show them mercy, and not to have exercised such horrible
cruelty against them, as you have done.

Verse. 16. At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to help
him.] That is, the king of Assyria that had many kings under him. After that
Rezin king of Syria, and Pekah king of Israel had severally made inrodes into
the land of Judah, as is above related, verse: 5, 6. etc. and had made great
spoil in the country, not content with this they resolved to join their forces
together, and to go up against Ahaz again, and besiege Jerusalem, as is
related, 2. Kings 16.5. and this combination of these two kings it was,
accompanied with the loss he sustained at the same time by the Edomites and
Philistines, verse. 17, 18. that made him send to the king of Assyria for help;
of which see 2. Kings 16.7.

Verse. 19. For the Lord brought Judah low, because of Ahaz king of Israel,
etc.] That is, king of Judah. See the note on chap, 21.2.

Verse. 20. And Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed
him, but strengthened him not.] It is manifest that this king of Assyria, as on
the behalf of Ahaz went up against Damascus, and took it, and slew Rezin, 2.
Kings 16.9. as likewise that at the same time he invaded the land of Israel,
and made great havoc there, 2. Kings 15.29. yet because Rezin and Pekah had
raised the siege of Jerusalem, as the prophet Isaiah had foretold, Isaiah 7.4.
Fear not, neither be faint-hearted for the two tails of these smoking
firebrarnds, etc. before the king of Assyria stirred forth to help him, Rezin
in his departure taking Elath, which Uzzah the grandfather of Ahaz had won
from the Syrians, 2. Kings 16.6. And secondly, because when he did come forth
to his help, though he did indeed sorely afflict both the Syrians and the
Israelites, yet he restored not to Ahaz any of the cities which his enemies had
taken from him, nor did him any other good in recompense of the great treasures
which Ahaz had given him, but perhaps did other ways distress him, therefore
it is here said, he distressed him, but helped him not. As for that phrase, he
made Judah naked, see the note, Exodus 32.35.

Verse. 23. For he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus, which smote him, etc.]
The occasion whereof was a journey he took to Damascus to meet with
Tiglath-pilneser king of Assyria, and to congratulate his vanquishing of Rezin:
for there he took up that resolution of sacrificing to the gods of Damascus
which smote him, to wit, in that expedition of Rezin king of Damascus against
Judah, whereof mention is made before, verse. 5. and to that end sent the
pattern of an altar he had seen there to Uriah the priest, according to which
he built an altar, which was placed in the Temple, and thereon did Ahaz
sacrifice to these heathen gods, 2. Kings 16.10 -- 16.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. HEzekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old, etc.]
Viz. in the third year of Hoshea. See the notes, 2. Kings 18.1, 2.

Verse. 3. He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the
doors of the house of the Lord.] And in the first day of the month: for then
presently they began to cleanse the Temple, verse. 17.

Verse. 4. And gathered them together in the east-street.] That is, the street
before the eastgate, the chief gate of the Temple.

Verse. 6. And have turned away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and
turned their backs.] That is, they have openly, basely, and opprobriously
forsaken the worship of God in his Temple. The like expression we have Jer.
2.27. They have turned their back unto me, and not their face.

Verse. 17. And on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the
Lord, etc.] That is, in eight days they purged and sanctified the Temple it
self, the most holy, and the holy place, and the porch before the holy place
they began with, or came to on the eighth day; and then in eight days more
they purged the courts and chambers thereof, and so made an end on the
sixteenth day of the first month: and all this is noted to imply, what a deal
of idolatrous trash Ahaz had brought into the Temple, when they were so many
days employed in the removing and casting it out, and setting all things in
order as they were in former times.

Verse. 21. And they brought seven bullocks and seven rams, etc.] That is,
they brought all kind of clean beasts appointed for sacrifice, some for the
consecrating of the Temple, etc. some for sin offerings, some for burnt
offerings, and some for peace offerings; and seven they brought of each sort,
to signify the generality of the sacrifice, that it was for the whole
kingdom, the prince, and all the people.

Verse. 23. And they brought forth the he-goats for the sin offering, etc.] To
wit, the seven he-goats mentioned verse. 21. In Levit. 4.13. the law enjoyneth a
young bullock to be offered for a sinne-offering for the congregation; but that
was for the expiation of some one particular sin, whereof through ignorance
the whole congregation might be guilty; and now the expiation was to be made
for all the many sins, whereof the whole land, both king and people were
guilty; in which case they were not tied to that law, in Levit. 4.

Verse. 24. And they made reconciliation with their blood upon the altar, to
make an atonement for all Israel.] That is, not only for the kingdom of
Judah, but also for the brethren of the ten tribes, who had been sorely of late
oppressed by the Assyrians; which was the reason why Hezekiah gave express
charge concerning this.

Verse. 31. Now ye have consecrated your selves unto the Lord, come near and
bring sacrifices, etc.] That is, Let the people now bring in their sacrifices,
or do you, O priests, bring in the peoples sacrifices.

Verse. 33. And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen, and three thousand
sheep.] That is, the other sacrifices of several sorts, to wit,
peace offerings, and free-will-offerings, were six hundred oxen, and three
thousand sheep.

Verse. 34. But the priests were too few, so that they could not slay all the
burnt-offerings.] Which was properly the work of the priests only, Levit. 1.5,
6.

For the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves, then the
priests.] That is, they were more forward to sanctify themselves then the
priests were; and so there were more of them sanctified.

Verse. 35. And also the burnt-offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the
peace offerings, and the drink offerings, etc.] That is, these things (besides
the burnt-offerings) were to be offered on the altar; so that the priests being
but few, had not leisure to slay all the sacrifices.

Verse. 36. For the thing was done suddenly.] It was evident that God had
extraordinarily inclined the hearts of the people to this reformation, because
it was done so suddenly.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. ANd Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to
Ephraim and Manasseh, etc.] That is, to the remainder of the ten tribes that
were not yet carried away by Tiglath-pilneser king of Assyria, as many of their
brethren were, 2. Kings 15.29.

Verse. 2. The king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the congregation
in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.] See Numb. 9.10, 11.

Verse. 3. For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not
sanctified themselves sufficiently, etc.] To wit, when they should have kept
it; that is, the foureteenth day of the first month: for the Temples purgation
was not finished till the sixteenth day, chap. 29.17. And in the sixteenth day
of the first month they made an end.

Verse. 6. He will return to the remnant of you, that have escaped out of the
hand of the king of Assyria.] To wit, out of the hands of Pull, and
Tiglath-pilneser, for both these kings already carried away many of the ten
tribes into captivity; but the last captivity under Shalmaneser, (as is most
likely) had not yet been.

Verse. 14. And they arose, and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem,
etc.] To wit, by the kings encouragement, and at this time also the brazen
serpent which Moses made was broken in pieces, 2. see Kings 18.4. This was done
in Jerusalem before they kept the Passover: how they proceeded afterward
after the same manner in other places, we see chap. 3.11. Now when all this was
finished, all Israel that were present, went out to the cities of Judah, and
brake the images in pieces, etc.

Verse. 15. And the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified
themselves, etc.] That is, the priests and Levites that had been hitherto
remiss, were ashamed of their own negligence, when they saw the forwardness
of the people, and so sanctified themselves, etc.

Verse. 16. The priests sprinkled the blood, which they received of the hands of
the Levites.] To wit, the blood of the sacrifices upon the altar, as was
accustomed in all sacrifices, Levit. 1.5. And he shall kill the bullocks before
the Lord, and the priests Aarons sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle
the blood round about, etc.

Verse. 17. For there were many in the congregation that were not sanctified:
therefore the Levites had the charge of the killing of the passover, etc. By
the passeovers here are meant (as I conceive) the sacrifices which by the law
were to be offered at the feast of the Passover, and did accompany the eating
of the Paschall lamb, as Deuteronomy. 16.2. Thou shall therefore sacrifice the
passover unto the Lord thy God of the flock and heard, called elsewhere the
passeover-offerings, chap. 35.7, 8. And Josiah gave to the people of the flock
lambs and kids for the passeover-offerings, etc. These sacrifices were to be
killed according to the rule of the law by the priests only, Levit. 1.5. Here
therefore a reason is given why at this time the Levites had the charge of
killing them, namely, because there were so many of the people that were not
sanctified but were unclean; and consequently, there were so many sacrifices to
be offered for their purifying and cleansing, that the priests alone could not
do the work, and therefore the Levites were employed therein.

Verse. 18. For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim and Manasseh,
Issachar, and Zebulun had not cleansed themselves, etc.] That is, though the
Levites did help the priests, as is before said, yet very many of the
Israelites did eat the Passover being not purified from their uncleanness.

Verse. 20. And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.] That is,
he sanctified them by his spirit in an extraordinary way; or, he did not punish
them, but forgive them that their infirmity, and accepted them as if they had
been purified.

Verse. 22. And Hezekiah spoke comfortably to all the Levites, that taught the
good knowledge of the Lord.] That is, he encouraged them in their work, and
gave them hope of Gods mercy to the people, as concerning those that had eaten
the Passover and were not cleansed according to the Law.

Verse. 24. And a great number of the priests sanctified themselves.] To wit,
that were not before sanctified, see verse. 3. and chap. 29.34.

Verse. 26. For since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel,
there was not the like in Jerusalem.] That is, since the Israelites were
divided from Judah and Benjamin.

Verse. 27. Then the priests the Levites arose, and blessed the people, and
their voice was heard, etc.] That is, the Lord heard their prayer, and blessed
them as was promised, Numb. 6.27. And they shall put my name upon the children
of Israel, and I will bless them.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 1. NOw when all this was finished, all Israel that were present, went
out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, etc.] See chap.
30.14.

In Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all.] To
wit, in those cities of Ephraim and Manasseh that had been taken in the wars
by the kings of Judah from the kings of Israel: for all this was done by the
authority and command of Hezekiah. See 2. Kings 18.4.

Verse. 2. And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests, and the Levites,
etc. to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents
of the Lord.] That is, in the Temple, called the tents of the lord, because
there the priests and Levites (who for their several functions number and
order are called an army or host, Levit. 4.3.) kept the watch of the Lord, and
there the people assembled together in troops as soldiers in the camp, and
that to pray unto the Lord, which is the chief service of our spiritual
warfare.

Verse. 3. He appointed also the kings portion of his substance, for the
burnt-offerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt-offerings, etc.] All
the particular sacrifices here mentioned as is written in the law of the Lord,
that is, which in the law were severally prescribed for every feast, and for
the daily sacrifice, Number. 28. they were ordinarily provided by the people in
general, as it was also afterward, Nehem. 10.32, 33. Also we made ordinances
for us to charge our selves yearly with the third part of a shekel, for the
service of the house of our God, for the shewbread, and for the continual
meat offering, and for the continual burnt-offerings of the Sabbaths, and of
the new moons, etc. but now it seems to ease the people in their poverty,
Hezekiah appointed a portion for and toward these services out of his own
substance.

Verse. 4. He commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion
of the priests, and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of
the Lord.] That is, that they might not be distracted with worldly cares of
providing for themselves, nor follow their callings heavily for want of
maintenance, but might cheerfully bend themselves wholly to the service of the
Lord.

Verse. 5. The children of Israel brought in abundance the first fruits of corn,
wine, and oil, etc.] To wit, those in and about Jerusalem, where the
commandment was first given: for of the Israelites inhabiting the other cities
of Judah the following verse speaks: or else in this verse there is mention of
the tithes and first fruits of such as grew out of the earth, and in the
following verse of the tithes of cattle and such other things. And concerning
the children of Israel and Judah that dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also
brought in the tithes of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of holy things, that is,
all other tithes that were by the Law of God due; which are here called the
tithe of holy things, because the tithes were to be set apart from the rest of
their goods, as things consecrated and holy to the Lord: yet happily these
words are specially intended of those second tithes, which were not given for
the maintenance of the Levites, but separated for other holy uses, for which
see Deuteronomy. 14.22. and Levit. 27.30.

Verse. 7. In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps,
and finished them in the seventh month.] For in the third month was their
harvest, and therefore the feast of Pentecost, which was in that month, was
called the feast of harvest, and in the seventh month they gathered all other
fruits of the land, and therefore the feast of Tabernacles which was in that
month, was called the feast of in gathering in the end of the year, Exodus
23.16.

Verse. 9. Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites concerning
the heaps.] That is, he demanded how it came to pass that they had spent no
more of that provision that was brought in for them.

Verse. 10. And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok, answered him,
etc.] There were still two chief priests of the two several families of
Eleazar and Ithamar, that had the chief command in the Temple under the high
priest, of which it seems this Azariah was one, who is therefore also called,
verse. 13. the ruler of the house of God.

For the Lord has blessed his people; and that which is left is this great
store.] That is, since they brought in their first fruits and tithes, God has
so abundantly blessed the people, that their offerings have yielded us
sufficient provision, and this overplus which is left besides.

Verse. 12. And brought in the offerings and the tithes, and the dedicate things
faithfully, over which Cononiah the Levite was ruler, etc.] To wit, to see the
offerings and the tithes, and the dedicate things safely stored up, and
carefully preserved in the several garners or chambers appointed for them, and
to keep an account, both of what was brought in, and what was delivered forth,
according to the order established, 1. Chron. 26.20.

Verse. 14. And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter toward the east,
was over the free-will-offerings of God, etc.] As these before mentioned, verse.
12, 13. had the charge of keeping the offerings and tithes and dedicate things;
so Kore and those under him, mentioned, verse. 15. had the charge of
distributing them to the priests and Levites, to whom they belonged.

Verse. 16. Beside their genealogy of males, from three years old and upward,
etc.] Here is expressed more particularly who they were to whom these holy
things were distributed; to wit, (besides the males of three years old and
upward, but under the age of twenty years, who had also their portion allotted
to them, verse. 18.) they give both to the priests and Levites, from twenty
years old and upwards, as they came in their courses to do their service in the
house of the Lord; yea, and besides, verse. 18. they gave to all that were
registered in the genealogies of the priests and Levites, even to their little
ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters through all the
congregation.

Verse. 18. For in their set office they sanctified themselves in holiness.]
That is, in this their office, to which they were sanctified and set apart,
they did faithfully, and in an holy manner discharge that trust that was
reposed in them, and were careful to keep themselves from pollution, that so
they might be capable of eating these holy things.

Verse. 19. Also the sons of Aaron the priests, which were in the fields of
the suburbs of their cities, etc.] That is, besides those mentioned before,
verse. 14, 15. that were to distribute the holy things to those that dwelt in
Jerusalem, or that came up thither in their several courses for the service of
the Temple; there were others also chosen, who were then expressed by name of
the priests that dwelt in the other cities of the kingdom, that were to give
portions to the priests and Levites that were then abiding in those places, and
not attending in Jerusalem upon the service of God in the Temple.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse. 1. SEnnacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped
against the fenced cities, etc.] See the notes, 2. Kings 18.13. etc. for many
several passages in this chapter.

And thought to win them for himself.] That is, resolved to take them for
himself, and indeed accordingly he took many of them, 2. Kings 18.13.

Verse. 3. He took counsel with his princes, and his mighty men, to stop the
waters of the fountains, which were without the city.] That is, to fill up the
fountains and springs with earth, and to carry the waters by pipes under ground
into the city, that so the Assyrians if they came against Jerusalem might be
distressed for want of water, whilst they within the city were abundantly
supplied.

And they did help him.] That is, his Princes and his mighty men aided him in
this work.

Verse. 4. Who stopped all the fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst
of the land, etc.] That is, the brook Gihon, of which verse. 30. that ran
through the midst of the country where Jerusalem stood. See 1. Kings 1.33.

Verse. 10. Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem?] That
is, being thus shut up without hope of help, yet notwithstanding ye still
refuse to yield up the city?

Verse. 17. He wrote also letters to rail on the Lord God of Israel, etc.] To
wit, upon Rabshakeh his return to Sennacherib at Libnah, and the report of the
approach of Tirhakah the king of Ethiopia. See 2. Kings 19.8, 9.

Verse. 18. To affright them, and to trouble them, that they might take the
city.] That is, to sow the seeds of discord amongst them, whilst some should
desire to have the city yielded up, and others should oppose them.

Verse. 20. For this Hezekiah the king, and the prophet Isaiah the son of
Amos, prayed and cried to heaven.] See 2. Kings 19.14, 15. and at the same time
Isaiah sent a comfortable message to Hezekiah, wherein he prophesied of the
destruction of Sennacherib, and the good of Sion.

Verse. 21. And the Lord sent an angel which cut off all the mighty men of
valor, etc.] A hundred fourscore and five thousand in all, and that in one
night. See the note, 2. Kings 19.35,

They that came forth of his own bowels, slew him there with the sword.] That
is, his own sons Adramelech, and Sherezer. 2. Kings 19.27.

Verse. 22. Thus the Lord saved Hezekiah, etc. and guided them on every side.]
He governed them and took care of them all as a shepherd does of his flock.

Verse. 24. In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto the
Lord.] The prophet Isaiah having visited him, and told him that he should die
and not live. See the notes. 2. Kings 20.1, 2, 3.

And he spoke unto him, and he gave him a sign.] That is, he assured him that
he should recover, and confirmed that promise with a sign from heaven; but
withal he gave him also direction to lay a lump of figgs to the boil. See the
2. Kings 20.5. etc.

Verse. 25. For his heart was lifted up.] And this he manifested in showing his
riches to the Babylonian Ambassadors, for which he was reproved and threatened
by the prophet Isaiah. See 2. Kings 20.12, 19.

Verse. 27. And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honor. etc.] This is
added to show what it was for which his heart was lifted up, as was said
before, v. 25.

Verse. 30. This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon,
etc.] The brook Gihon divided it self into two streams, one of which Hezekiah
turned from the usual channel, and brought it strait down into the west side
of the city of David.

Verse. 31. Howbeit, in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of
Babylon, etc.] To wit, the Ambassadors which Besodach-Baladan king of Babylon
by the advice of his princes sent unto him, see 2. Kings 20.12. God left him,
to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart. See Genesis 22.1.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 1. MAnasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign.] See 2. Kings
21.1. etc. many several notes for the explanation of this chapter.

Verse. 6. And he caused his children to pass through the fire, in the valley
of the son of Hinnom,] See 2. Kings 16.3.

Verse. 10. And the Lord spoke to Manasseh, and to his people.] To wit, by his
servants the prophets: the sum of their prophesies is expressed, 2. Kings
21.11 -- 15.

Verse. 11. Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the captains of the host of the
king of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns.] It seems he thought to
hide himself in some woods and thickets, and therefore it is said here, that he
was taken among the thorns. The like is said concerning the Israelites, when
they were afraid of the Philistines that were come into their land, 1. Sam.
13.6. When the men of Israel saw they were in a strait, then they did hide
themselves in caves and in thickets.

Verse. 14. Even to the entering in of the fish-gate, etc.] So called, because
there they used to sell fish.

Verse. 15. And he took away the strange gods, and the idols out of the house of
the Lord.] That idol mentioned verse. 7.

Verse. 20. And they buried him in his own house.] To wit, in the garden of his
house, called the garden of Vzza, 2. Kings 21.18.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Verse. 2. ANd he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, etc.] See
many several notes for this chapter, 2. Kings 22.2. etc. and 23.1. etc.

Verse. 11. And to floor the houses, which the kings of Judah had destroyed.]
That is, the chambers of the priests and Levites which joined to the Temple.

Verse. 12. And the overseers of them were Jahath, etc and other of the Levites,
all that could skill of instruments of music.] Those being purposely it seems
chosen to oversee the work, that might also at set times praise the Lord,
whilst the work went forward, with instruments of music.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse. 3. ANd said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy
unto the Lord, Put the holy ark in the house, which Solomon the son of David
king of Israel did build.] It seems that in his father Ammons reign, either
the ark had been put out of the most holy place, that some idol might be set up
in the place thereof, and so was set aside in some other place of the Temple;
or perhaps quite removed out of the Temple; or else it had been purposely
carried out by the priests, that it might not stand there amongst those
heathenish idols that were brought into the Temple: and therefore now Josiah
calls upon the Levites to restore the ark to its own place again in the Temple,
where formerly it stood. Indeed the Levites might not enter the holy place; but
they might bring it to the entrance of the Temple, and there the priests might
receive it of them: and perhaps by the Levites here are meant all the tribe of
Levi, both priests and Levites.

It shall not be a burden upon your shoulders.] That is, the ark the testimony
of Gods presence must abide in the Temple his dwelling place, and must not be
carried from one place to another upon your shoulder, as it was before the
Temple was built.

Verse. 5. And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
families of the fathers of your brethren the people, etc.] It seems the
several families of the Levites were severally appointed to attend upon the
sacrifices and offerings of the several families of each tribe; some to be
employed in that holy service for such and such families, and other for others:
and hence it is that they are here appointed to stand in the holy place, that
is, to attend the service that was to be done, according to the divisions of
the families of the people, and after the division of their own families.

Verse. 11. And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled the blood,
etc.] See chap. 30.17.

Verse. 12. And they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give according
to the divisions of the families of the people, etc.] That is, of those cattle
that were given both for sacrifices of all kinds and for the passover, they
set apart such cattle as should be for burnt offerings, which were wholly to
be offered upon the altar, that so then of the rest they might give unto the
people, partly for paschall lambs, partly for peace offerings, whereof both
priests and people had their share; or else it may be meant of removing from
the peace offerings, the fat, the kidneys, etc. that were to be burnt upon the
altars.

Verse. 13. But the other holy offerings sod they in pots, etc.] To wit, so much
of the peace offerings, as was to be prepared for the offerers to eat before
the Lord.

Verse. 18. And there was no passover like to that, etc.] See 2. Kings 23.22.
where are also many other notes for the following part of this chapter.

Verse. 25. And all the singing-men and the singing-women spoke of Josiah in
their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel, etc.] The
meaning of this may be, that it grew to a custom which they observed as a law;
or else that it was indeed established for an ordinance, that in all the
mournful ditties which were sung upon occasion of any public calamity, they
should still mention the mourning that was at the death of Josiah, which
accordingly the singing-men and the singing-women did upon all such occasions
constantly observe. As for that following clause, And behold they are written
in the Lamentations, thereby may be meant some volume of mournful ditties
extant in those times, wherein it was evident how this was practiced amongst
the people; or else it may be referred to Jeremiahs Lamentations for the death
of Josiah.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse. 5. THen the people of the land took Jehoohaz the son of Josiah, and
made him king, etc.] See 2. Kings 23.30.

2. And he reigned three months in Jerusalem.] In which time he set up
Idolatry again, and did evil according to all that his fathers had done. See 2.
Kings 23.32.

Verse. 3. And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem.] That is, he deposed
him from being king at or in Jerusalem, to wit, that he should no more reign
as king in that city: but at Riblah this was done; for thither the king of
Egypt sent for him, and there he deposed him and put him in bands: or else it
may be that he was deposed at Jerusalem, and put in bands at Riblah, as is
expressed, 2. Kings 23.33. concerning which see the note there.

And condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.]
which accordingly Eliakim exacted of the people, and then paid it to Pharaoh,
2. Kings 23.35.

Verse. 4. And turned his name to Jehoiakim.] As a memorial that he was his
vassal, and that he had made him king.

And Necho took Jehoahaz his brother and carried him to Egypt.] Where he died.
2. Kings 23.34.

Verse. 5. Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign etc.]
See 2. Kings 23.36.37.

Verse. 6. Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in
fetters, etc.] See 2 Kings 24.1, 2.

Verse. 8. His abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, etc.]
To wit, his rebellion against Nebuchadnezzar and other things which he did, 2.
Kings 24.1, 2, etc,

Verse. 9. Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, etc.] See 2.
Kings 24.8, 9.

Verse. 10. When the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, etc.] That is,
when the new year came in, Nebuchadnezzar sent his servants, as is related, 2.
Kings 24.10. who besieged Jerusalem: whereupon Jehoiachin by the advice of
Jeremiah yielded up himself and his into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, who
carried him to Babylon, 2. Kings 24.15. together with ten thousand captives of
the people, verse. 12, 13, 14.

And made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.] That is, his
uncle, his fathers brother by the father, but the brother of Jehoahaz both by
father and mother, see 2. Kings 24.17, 18.

Verse. 13. And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him
swear by God.] Which did greatly aggravate his sin, Ezekiel. 17.15, 16. But he
rebelled against him in sending his Ambassadors into Egypt, that they might
give him horses and much people; shall he prosper? shall he escape that does
such things? or shall he break the covenant and be delivered? As I live, says
the Lord God, surely in the place where the king dwells that made him king,
whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him, in the
midst of Babylon he shall die: See 2. Kings 24.20.

Verse. 17. Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, etc.] See
2. Kings 25.2. The city was besieged a full year and a half, and was at length
taken by force, and the people exposed to the rage of their merciless enemies;
Zedekiah indeed by a secret way escaped with his wives, children, and
principal servants to the plains of Jericho; but being there overtaken, was
carried back to Nebuchadnezzar, where his children being first slain before his
face, his eyes were put out, and so being bound in fetters of brass, he was
carried to Babylon, see 2. Kings 25.1 -- 7.

Verse. 20. And them that had escaped from the sword, carried he away to
Babylon.] To wit, by Nebuzar-adan captain of his guard; some immediately after
the taking of Jerusalem, and some in after times: indeed some of the poorer
people, together with some that had followed the party of Nebuchadnezzar, were
left behind to till the ground, and one Gedaliah was left to be their
governor; but he being slain by Ishmael, they all sled for fear into Egypt,
where they afterward endured all kind of misery.

Where they were servants to him and his sons, until the reign of the
kingdom of Persia.] That is, to Nebuchadnezzar and Evilmerodach his son, 2.
Kings 25.27. and Belshazzar his grandchild, son of Evilmerodach, according
to that Jer. 27.6.7. And now have I given all these lands into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar, etc. and all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his
sons son: in which times doubtless the miseries of the Jews were many and
great; though withal the bitterness thereof was somewhat allayed, partly by
the prophesying of Ezekiel amongst them, partly through the favor they might
find by means of Jechoniah, Esther, Mordecai, Daniel and others, that were in
their times much respected and honored by these Babylonian kings.

Verse. 21. To fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the
land had enjoyed her sabbaths, etc.] That is, the city of Jerusalem being thus
destroyed, the people carried away, the land lay desolate seventy years, which
was ten sabbaths of years as Jeremiah had prophesied, Jer. 25.11. This whole
land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve
the king of Babylon seventy years: and 29.10. After seventy years be
accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, And so that came to pass which God
threatened, Levit. 26.34, 35. Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as
it lies desolate, and you be in your enemies land, etc. because it did not rest
in your sabbaths, when you dwelt upon it. Some indeed do begin the seventy
years captivity from the carrying away of Jechoniah, 2. Kings 24.12. and that
first, because Jeremiah writing to those that were carried away with him, tells
them, that after seventy years the Lord would visit them, Jer. 29.10. secondly,
because Ezekiel does usually reckon the years of the Babylonian captivity from
that of Jechoniah, Ezekiel. 1.2. and the 8 -- 1. and the 20.1. etc. yea and does
distinguish it from the destruction of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 40.1. In the five and
twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth
day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the city was smitten, in the
self same day the hand of the Lord was upon me: thirdly, because that captivity
was most notable, both for the number and for the quality of those that were
then carried away; to wit, the king, his mother, his servants, princes and
officers, and all the mighty men of valor, even ten thousand captives, etc. 2.
Kings 24.12, 13, 14. But yet I conceive these seventy years are rather to be
numbered from the destruction of Jerusalem; first, because Dan. 9.2. they are
called the seventy years of the desolations of Jerusalem; secondly because the
same term of seventy years is set for the subjection of other neighboring
nations, Isaiah 23.15. And it shall come to pass in that day that Tire shall
be forgotten seventy years, etc. and so also Jer. 25.11. and it is well known
that Nebuchadnezzar did not subdue those neighboring nations and make himself
the great monarch of those parts of the world, till the time that Jerusalem was
taken and destroyed: and thirdly, because here and elsewhere usually the
prophecy of the seventy years, is said to be fulfilled in the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the following desolation of that country.

Verse. 22. Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, etc.] See Ezra 1.1

ANNOTATIONS Upon the book of EZRA.
CHAP. I.
NOw in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, etc.] That this book of Ezra
was always acknowledged by the Jews a part of the sacred Canon of Scripture, I
find not questioned by any: indeed who was the penman and writer of it we
cannot absolutely say, yet generally it is held that it was written by Ezra
whose name is set as the title of the book, and it is the more probable,
because he was of the chief stock of the priests, the son, that is, the
grandchild of Seraiah, chap. 7.1. who was the chief priest in the days of
Zedekiah, and slain by the Chaldeans when Jerusalem was destroyed by them, 2.
Kings 25.18.21. and withal, because he lived when these things were done which
are related in this book, to wit, in the time of the peoples return from
Babylon, and was a ready scribe, as is expressly noted of him, chap. 7.6. and
so the more likely to continue the history of the commonwealth of the Jews in
his times, as the prophets that lived in the former ages had severally done in
their times. The first two verses are word for word the same that we have in
the close of the foregoing book of the second of Chronicles (which has moved
some Expositours to think that the books of the Chronicles were also written by
Ezra) and therein we are told, that in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia,
that is, in the first year of his Empire, the first year of his reign over
Babylon (for he had then been king of Persia above twenty years) he gave the
Jews liberty to return again into their own country: we must know that
Nebuchadnezzar after the taking of Jerusalem had subdued all the nations round
about, as was prophesied of him; yea even Egypt amongst the rest, the greatest
and strongest of all those bordering nations, Jer. 25.9, 10, 11. Behold, I will
send and take all the families of the north, says the Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar
the king of Babylon my servant; and will bring them against this land, and
against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about,
etc. And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these
nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years, Isa. 20.4. So shall the
king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives,
young and old, naked and barefoot: see also Jer. 43.10, 11. and 44.30. and thus
was the Babylonian Empire raised by Nebuchadnezzar, which he left to
Evilmerodach his son, and he to Belshazzar his son, according to that, Jer.
27.7. All nations shall serve him, and his son, and his sons son: But
then in Belshazzars time this great Empire was ruined by the Medes and
Persians, who besieged Babylon, took it, and destroyed it utterly, and slew
Belshazzar, and so fulfilled what was prophesied, Isa. 47.1. Come down, and sit
in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground, there is no
throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans, etc. and so Jer. 50.1, 2, 3. and thus the
Empire was translated from the Babylonians to the Persians: indeed in this
war against Babylon, the Medes had the chief stroke for Darius Medus (or
Cyaxares) did command in chief in this war, and the army consisted most of
his people, Isa. 13.17. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which
shall not regard silver, etc. and Jer. 51.11. The Lord has raised up the
spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device is against Babylon, etc. and
therefore when Balthazar or Belshazzar was slain he was made king, Dan. 5.30,
31. In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain, and Darius
the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old: but yet
withal, first, because Cyrus (who was then absolute king of Persia, or Viceroy
thereof under Darius the Mede) did join with Darius in this expedition against
Babylon, and by his valor and policy chiefly the city was taken, as being
the man preordained and forenamed by God himself for this great action:
secondly, because Darius it seems stayed not in Babylon, but returned into
Media, and left Cyrus as his Viceroy in his room: and thirdly, because (Darius
who was Cyrus his great uncle, and as some think his father in law also) lived
not full two years after, but left all to Cyrus his heir: therefore even from
the first Cyrus was esteemed the Monarch of those parts, and however in truth
till the death of his uncle Darius the Mede, he was absolute Monarch, but held
also under him as his Viceroy, as is evident, Dan. 6.28. This Daniel prospered
in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian: yet the very
first year after the conquest of Babylon was reckoned as the first year of
Cyrus reign, as we see here, where it is said that in the first year of Cyrus
king of Persia God stirred up his spirit to let the Jews go home to their own
country, etc. that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
fulfilled, to wit, the promise concerning the deliverance of the Jews out of
their captivity at the end of seventy years, through the favor of Cyrus, Jer.
29.10. After seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and
perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return this place.

Verse. 2. Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven has given me
all the kingdoms of the earth, etc.] It seems that by Daniel or some other of
the Jews, that it was discovered to Cyrus that many years before the Lord had
told them by his prophets, that one Cyrus should vanquish Babylon with other
nations, and then should freely deliver the Jews out of their captivity, and
cause their city and Temple to be again built, all which for his better
satisfaction they might show him in the writings of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa.
44.1. -- 13. And hence it was that he acknowledged that God had charged him to
build the Temple, and confessed that those kingdoms which he had subdued were
given him of God; using these high terms, The Lord God has given me all the
kingdoms of the earth, either out of an affectation of the universal Monarchy
of the whole world; or out of an hyperbolicall ostentation of the largeness of
his Empire, to which all the kingdoms in those parts of the world were
subdued: according to those expressions we meet with elsewhere, Luke 2.1. There
went out a decree from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed; and
Acts 2.5. And there was dwelling at Jerusalem Jews devout men out of every
nation.

Verse. 4. And whosoever remains in any place where he sojourneth, let the men
of his place help him with silver, etc.] That is, whosoever abides as a
stranger or sojourner in any place of my dominion and has a mind to go up to
Jerusalem, let the men that dwell in that place furnish him with all provisions
requisite for his journey, beside that which they shall send by them as a
free-will-offering for the building or service of the Temple: the transporting
of silver, and gold, and other commodities is in many places severely
forbidden, and so happily it was there; the king therefore gives license to the
Jews by his proclamation, for the carrying away of these things, and withal
encourages the people to afford them what help they could, by letting them
know that his desire was they should be plentifully furnished with all things
necessary.

Verse. 5. Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the
priests and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised to go up,
etc.] To wit, both of these and the other tribes also: some even of Judah and
Benjamin went not, as being well settled where they were, and loath to remove;
or desirous to see first how these will speed; but those whose spirits God had
stirred up went, not of these tribes only, but of others also, 1. Chron. 9.3.
And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children of
Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim and Manasseh; and therefore some
conceive that at this time that prophecy of Ezekiel was fulfilled, Ezekiel.
37.16, 17.21, 22. Son of man, take thee one stick and write upon it, For
Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick,
and write upon it, For Joseph the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of
Israel his companions. And join them one to another into one stick, and they
shall become one in thy hand: and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God,
Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen whither they
be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own
land. And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel,
and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations,
neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms, any more at all.

Verse. 7. Also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of the
Lord, etc.] Though the most of them were cut and defaced, and only laid up in
the treasury of the house of their gods (of which Bell was the chief, Esaias 46.1.
Bell boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, etc. Jer. 51.44. I will punish Bell in Babylon,
etc. and that as a monument of the taking of Jerusalem, 2. Kings 24.13. And he
carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the Lord and the treasure
of the kings house, etc. or else that place in the kings must be meant of the
vessels which Solomon made, which being old and worn with age were cut in
pieces, there being others also made afterward for the use of the Temple,
which were carried away whole, and now restored: at this time also the king
sent letters with them to command his deputies in Syria to afford them all
necessaries, chap. 6.1.

Verse. 8. And numbered them unto Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah.] That is,
Zerubbabel; for he that laid the foundation of the Temple is called Zerubbabel,
chap. 3.8. In the second month began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, etc.
to set forward the work of the house of the Lord: and elsewhere Shebazzar,
chap. 5.16. Then came Shebazzar and laid the foundation of the house of God: he
was the chief prince of the tribe of Judah, and of the blood royal, the son
of Salathiel, and grandchild of Jechoniah, Matthew. 1.12. and so was by Cyrus
made ruler of those that now went up to Jerusalem, chap. 5.14. Those did Cyrus
the king take out of the Temple of Babylon, and they were delivered unto one
whose name was Sheshbazzar, whom he made governor: and thus the government was
still in the tribe of Judah according to that prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49.10.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc.

Verse. 9. Nine and twenty knives.] These knives were such doubtless as were
used by the priests in killing the sacrifices, and being it seems trimmed
richly with gold and silver, are therefore reckoned here amongst the plate that
was carried out of the Temple by Nebuchadnezzar, and now restored by Cyrus.

Verse. 10. Silver basins of a second sort, four hundred and ten.] That is, of
another size, or of another kind and fashion, happily those of the first sort
were for the service of the Temple, these of the second sort for the courts and
chambers.

And other vessels a thousand.] That is, other vessels of the chief sort: for
this is not the number of all the other vessels, great and small, not before
mentioned, as is evident in the following verse.

Verse. 11. All the vessels of gold and of silver, were five thousand and four
hundred.] That is both of those before mentioned, and those that are here
particularly expressed.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. NOw these are the children of the province, that went up out of the
captivity, etc.] In this chapter we have a catalogue of those that went out of
Babylon with Zerubbabel, when Cyrus by his proclamation gave them liberty to
return. Some conceive they are called the children of the province, because
they had dwelt in Babylon. But I rather conceive that it is the land of Judea
which is here called the province, and so with respect thereto, the Jews are
here called the children of the province, because Judea was now one of the
provinces that were in subjection to the Babylonian Empire, according to that
Esther 1.1. Ahasuerus which reigned from India even unto Ethiopia, over an
hundred and seven and twenty provinces. Now though it be most probable that
some of the ten tribes that were carried into Assyria before Nebuchadnezzars
reign, did now return with Zerubbabel, chap. 1.5. yet because there were but
few of them to speak of, therefore they that returned, are said to be those
whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away, and they are said to have returned every
one unto his city, whereby is meant not the cities wherein they had formerly
dwelt, but the cities appointed them by their present governors for their
dwelling; for those of the ten tribes that did now return, dwelt not in the
cities of Samaria, but in the cities of Judah.

Verse. 22. Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, etc.] These that are here expressed by
name, were doubtless the chiefest and most eminent of those that went now with
Zerubbabel, the most of them happily captains and governors of the people, and
then afterward he adds in the sequel of the chapter, the number of the men of
the people of Israel, that is, how many there were of the people. Now
concerning those that are expressed by name, we must note; first, that Jeshua
was the high priest the son of Jozadak, chap. 3.2. called elsewhere Joshua
the son of Josedech, as Haggai 1.1. the great assistant of Zerubbabel, in the
building of the Temple: secondly, that in Nehem. 7.7. where the catalogue of
those that did at first go up with Zerubbabel is again set down, some of these
here mentioned are called by other names, as Seraiah is there called Azariah;
Relaijah, Raamiah; Misper, Mispereth; and Rehum, Nahum; and withal there is
one added there, to wit, Nahumani, that is not mentioned here: and thirdly,
that it is not probable that either Nehemiah here mentioned, was that famous
Nehemiah the penman of that book of Scripture which is called by his name; or
Mordecai, that famous Mordecai that was Esthers uncle, but two others of the
same name: for first, had that Nehemiah gone up in the first year of Cyrus, he
must needs have been well stricken in years, and yet we see he was cup bearer
to Artaxerxes, Neh. 2.1. and the Persians used to have young men to attend them
in such places: and secondly, from the first year of Cyrus to Darius the last
who was beaten by Alexander the great, there was at least two hundred years and
upwards, and till the time of that Darius the last, did that famous Nehemiah
live; for in his book mention is made of Jaddua the priest, Neh. 12.11. of whom
we read in Josephus that he met Alexander the great in his priestly robes, and
so stayed him from doing any hurt to the city and Temple: and as for Mordecai
Esthers uncle, he brought up Esther in Shushan in Persia long after this in the
days of Ahasuerus (or Zerxes) and therefore did not return with Zerubbabel in
the first year of Cyrus, as this Mordecai did.

Verse. 3. The children of Parosh, etc.] That is, the posterity of Parosh, or
rather the family whereof Parosh was the head or chief: afterward verse. 21.
many of the people are mentioned by the names of the cities where they had
formerly dwelt, as the children of Beth-lehem, the children of Netophah, etc.
but that the proper names here mentioned are not the names of cities, but the
names of men that were the heads of families is evident, Neh. 10.14. where many
of them are mentioned as the chief of the people that sealed the covenant.

Verse. 5. The children of Arah, seven hundred seventy and five.] Neh. 7.10. it
is six hundred fifty two, which must thus be reconciled, that seven hundred
seventy five (as here is said) gave up their names in Babylon that they would
return, but only six hundred fifty two mentioned in Nehemiah, came up into
Judea; the rest changing their minds, or dying by the way: and the like must be
held concerning verse. 8, 27, 28, 33, 42, 60.

Verse. 6. Of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and
twelve.] Neh. 7.11. the number is, two thousand eight hundred and eighteen; to
wit, because when they came up into Judea, there were six more then had given
up their names in Babylon, the like must be held concerning verse. 10, 11, 13,
14, 15, 17, 19, 35, 41, 65.

Verse. 16. The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.] That is,
whereas there were several families descended of Ater of the children of
Hezekiah, who was the head of one of those families, there were ninety and
eight.

Verse. 21. The children of Beth-lehem, etc.] That is the children of those that
were formerly inhabitants of Beth-lehem: and so we must understand the
following verses, wherein there are any towns or cities mentioned.

Verse. 25. The children of Kirjath-arim, Chephirah, etc.] Or Kiriath-jearim and
Ceprah, Neh. 7.29.

Verse. 29. The children of Nebo, fifty and two.] Not Nebo in the tribe of
Ruben, but Nebo in the tribe of Judah, called usually Nob, and therefore
Nehemiah calls it the other Nebo. Neh. 7.33.

Verse. 30. The children of Magbish, an hundred fifty and six.] These are not
mentioned at all in Nehemiah, see above verse. 5.

Verse. 43. The Nethinims.] See 1. Chron. 9.2.

Verse. 44. The children of Siaha.] Or Sia, Neh. 7.47.

Verse. 55. The children of Solomon's servants.] That is, the strangers,
proselytes that were employed by Solomon in the building of the Temple, and
having lived long amongst the children of Judah, were now reckoned amongst them.

Verse. 61. Which took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and
was called after their name.] Some conceive that Barzillai was a priest, and
these priests that married the daughters and heirs of the family, were
therefore called by that name, but because they could not prove their
genealogy were put from the priesthood: Others conceive, that these priests
marrying into the noble family of Barzillai, disregarding the honor of the
priesthood, because in the captivity where they were not employed as priests in
offering up sacrifices, they had neither any profit nor honor by being
priests, did therefore choose to be called after the family of their wives; but
now being returned to Judea, and the priesthood growing into fame and request
again, these degenerate priests would fain have taken place among the priests
of the Lord; but not being now able to prove their genealogy they were amongst
others put from the priesthood.

Verse. 63. And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat, etc.]
Tirshatha is a name of office, as the commissary the governor or deputy of the
king. It is elsewhere given to Nehemiah, Neh. 8.9. And Nehemiah which is the
Tirshatha: and therefore some think that this catalogue was taken by Nehemiah
though it be set down here: but because Nehemiah came out of Babylon so long
after the Jews came first thence, therefore it is rather here meant of
Zerubbabel who was now chief governor, called also Sheshbazzar, chap. 1.8. and
whereas it is here said, that these priests that could not prove their
genealogy, should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a
priest with Urim and with Thummim, hereby it is manifest, that the Urim and
Thummim was either lost or burnt together with many other things when the
Chaldees took Jerusalem, and indeed however Zerubbabel hoped as it seems by
these words, that they might by the providence of God he had again; yet they
were never found again, the Lord thereby teaching the Church that the
ceremonies were going and the Messiah coming, that salvation was not to be
placed in the ordinances of Moses, but that they were shortly to expect the
true Urim and Thummim Christ Jesus, the high priest of their profession.

Verse. 64. The whole congregation together, was forty and two thousand three
hundred and threescore.] That is, both of those of Judah and Benjamin, of whom
the particular numbers are before punctually expressed, and those of the other
ten tribes who are not here mentioned. If we sum up the particular numbers
before set down, they all amount but to twenty nine thousand eight hundred and
eighteen, which is above twelve thousand less then the total sum here
expressed, and these no doubt were those of the other ten tribes that returned
with their brethren of Judah and Benjamin, 1. Chron. 9.3. And in Jerusalem
dwelt of the children of Judah and of the children of Benjamin, and of the
children of Ephraim and Manasseh: we no where read of so many that were
carried into Babylon, but it seems they multiplied greatly in Babylon as
formerly in Egypt.

Verse. 65. And there were among them two hundred singing-men, and
singing-women.] These were such as were employed amongst them in singing at
their weddings and funerals, and such other solemnities, 2. Chron. 35.25. in
Nehemiah 7.67. it is said there were of these two hundred forty five, but for
this, see the note above, verse. 6.

Verse. 68. When they came to the house of the Lord which is at Jerusalem, etc.]
That is, to the place where the Temple had stood.

Verse. 70. So the priests and the Levites, and some of the people, etc.] That
is, some of the people dwelt in the cities to the priests and Levites assigned
for their habitation.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. ANd when the seventh month was come, etc.] That is, when the seventh
month approached, for they began to offer burnt offerings on the first day of
the month, verse. 6. From the first day of the seventh month began they to
offer burnt offerings unto the Lord, etc. because there were many festivals by
the law appointed to be kept on this month (which were the first after their
return out of Babylon) to wit, the feast of trumpets on the first day, Levit.
23.24. the feast of expiation or day of atonement on the tenth day, Levit.
23.27. and the feast of Tabernacles, on the fifteenth day, Levit. 23.34. and
besides the first feast of the dedication of the Temple was on this month, 1.
Kings 8.2. etc. therefore the people having spent some time in settling their
own domestical affairs in the several towns and cities where they were to
dwell, at least the seventh month approaching they did unanimously assemble
together unto Jerusalem, that they might build the altar, and prepare for the
keeping of these solemnities.

Verse. 3. And they set the altar upon his bases, etc.] That is, they built the
altar upon the foundations of Solomon's altar which were still standing, and the
reason of this is added in the following words (for fear was upon them because
of the people of those countries) that is, they laid not a new foundation for
haste, because they feared, that if it were not soon dispatched, they should be
hindered by the Samaritanes the neighboring inhabitants of that country, who
already it seems began to threaten them, and to bandy against them. Yet some
conceive that in these words a reason is given, not why they built the altar
upon the old bases or foundations of Solomon's altar, but why they would not
stay the building of the altar till the temple was built: it was, because they
were afraid of the Samaritanes; and so they hastened the building of the altar,
that by offering up sacrifices to God, they might seek his favor and
assistance against those their envious and malignant neighbors.

Verse. 4. They kept also the feast of tabernacles, etc.] With what
extraordinary solemnity this feast was afterward kept, we see, Neh. 8.13.18.

Verse. 6. From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt
offerings, etc.] Which was the day appointed by the law for the feast of
trumpets, Levit. 23.24. In the seventh month, in the first day of the month,
shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets.

Verse. 9. Then stood Joshua, with his sons and his brethren, etc.] Not the
son of Josedech the high priest, but a Levite of the same name, of whom
mention is made before, chap. 2.40.

Verse. 11. Giving thanks unto the Lord; because he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever toward Israel, etc.] To wit, singing the 118. or the 136.
Psalm. See 2. Chron. 5.13. and 7.3.

Verse. 12. Ancient men that had seen the first house, when the foundation of
this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice, etc.] To wit,
both because many of the holy things that were in the former house were like to
be wanting in this, and especially because the glory of this building was not
likely to equal the glory of the first which Solomon built; a shadow
intimating the wearing away of the legal ceremonies. Yea thus it continued to
be with the people, when afterward the building of the Temple went forward in
the days of Darius, whence it was that Haggai the Prophet, who prophesied in
the second year of Darius the king, Hag. 1.1. did encourage and comfort the
people with that promise, Hag. 2.9. The glory of this latter house shall be
greater then of the former; which yet he meant not of the glory of the
building; but of the glorious appearance of Christ the promised Messiah herein:
nor needs it seem strange that some were now living that had seen the former
Temple; for that was destroyed in the eleventh year of the captivity, 2.
Kings 25. and therefore it was but threescore years after that when the
foundations of this new house were laid.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 2. THen they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the fathers, and
said unto them, Let us build with you, etc.] This they did doubtless not out
of any sincere desire to set forward the building, or to advance the worship of
God (for these Samaritanes that spoke this were always deadly enemies to the
Jews) but either to curry favor with Cyrus (for because he now favored the
Jews and gave way to the building of the Temple, therefore they would be as one
people with them, and approve it by joining with them in this holy work) or
else out of hope that their people being mingled with the Jews in this work,
there would some contention arise, and so the work would be hindered; yet to the
end they might prevail with the Jews, they alleged they served and sacrificed
to the true God of Israel (as indeed they pretended to do, though withal they
served their idol-gods too, 2. Kings 17.33. They feared the Lord, and served
their own Gods) even since the days of Esarhaddon king of Assure, who was the
son of Shalmaneser, and grandchild of Sennacherib, 2. Kings 19.37. and it
seems brought a new colony of several nations into the land of Samaria, as his
father had done before him.

Verse. 3. You have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto our God, etc.]
Thus Zerubbabel and the rest answered the Samaritanes, because they were
idolatours, and neither were of the stock of Israel, nor did purely worship the
God of Israel: therefore they protested against them, that they had nothing to
do with the Temple to sacrifice there, and so also not to join with them in the
building of it, alleging withal that they would build it themselves, as say
they, king Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us, wherein they give them
to understand that the commission they had from the king, did warrant them to
do what they did.

Verse. 4. Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah,
etc.] That is, when Samaritanes could not by fraud accomplish their desires,
because the Jews would not admit them to join with them in building the Temple,
then they used other means to hinder them in their work; to wit, partly by
threatening them, and by raising any false rumors that might discourage them,
and partly, no doubt, by using all means that they might not have those
materials and money out of the kings revenues which Cyrus had commanded should
be given them for the building of the Temple, chap. 6.3, 4.

Verse. 5. And hired counselors against them, to frustrate their purpose,
etc.] That is, the Samaritanes did not only do what themselves could to hinder
the Jews in building the Temple, but by bribes also they secretly hired such as
were powerful with the king of Persia; to wit, the deputies and governors in
Samaria and other provinces, yea, and those that were of his privy counsel in
Persia, to advise the king by many false pretenses and informations, to
disanull that decree which had been made for the building of it* and this they
did all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius
king of Persia; that is, all the days of Cyrus and Cambyses his son, and
Smerdis the Magus (who a while usurped the kingdom after Cambyses death) unto
the second year of Darius the son of Hystaspes, when the work of the Temple
was again set forward, verse. 24. So it ceased unto the second year of the
reign of Darius king of Persia; and that by the encouragement of the Prophet
Haggai, Hag. 1.1. In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month,
in the first day of the month, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet
unto Zerubbabel, etc, It may seem strange indeed that the building of the
Temple should be hindered in Cyrus time; but for this we must know that Cyrus
going abroad a while after the return of the Jews, to finish such other warlike
expeditions as he had in hand, he left Cambyses his son, or Viceroy, to
govern the kingdom in his absence, who is therefore called the Prince of the
kingdom of Persia, Dan. 10.13. and with him those counselors mentioned did
so far prevail, that he countermanded the building begun. Cyrus being dead,
Cambyses reigned in his stead, a wicked and cruel Prince (that as other
histories report, slew his brother and married his own sister, and afterward
put her to death) and no marvel though he were an enemy to the Jews, when he
reigned as absolute king in his own right, having been so when he governed the
kingdom as Viceroy in his fathers right: especially if we consider what other
histories report, that he was resolved to invade Egypt, and therefore he might
well fear the Jews, who were accused to be always a rebellious people, and
ready still to side with Egypt: whilst he was abroad following the wars, one
Smerdis one of his Magi (pretending himself to be Smerdis the brother of
Cambyses) usurped the kingdom, whereof Cambyses hearing, as he was mounting
his horse to haste home, his sword unsheathing ran into his thigh, and so he
died without issue: God revenging the great wrong he had done to his people. He
being dead, the seven Princes of Persia soon slew the usurping Magus, and and
then Darius Hystaspes was chosen Emperor, in whose second year a decree was
made for the Jews rebuilding of the Temple, chap. 6.1. Many learned men indeed
are of opinion that it was Darius Nothus, that was long after Darius Hystaspes,
that made this decree, and that Darius the son of Hystaspes is here mentioned
inclusively, as one of those kings in whose time the building of the Temple was
hindered: but from the first year of Cyrus to the second of Darius Nothus is
ordinarily accounted above one hundred and thirty years: and first, Zerubbabel
being of some good years when he came out of Babylon, it is not probable that
he should live so long, and yet we know that he laid the foundations of the
Temple in Cyrus his days, and he also finished it in the sixth year of
Darius, according to that prophecy, Zach. 4.9. The hands of Zerubbabel have
laid the foundation of this house, his hands shall also finish it; and thou
shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent me unto you: and secondly, some of
those that had seen the Temple before it was destroyed by the Chaldeans, were
it seems alive when that decree of Darius was made, Haggai 2.3. Who is left
among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how do you see it now? is
it not in your eyes in comparison of it, as nothing? which could not be if it
were Darius Nothus; either therefore it was Darius the son of Hystaspes that
renewed Cyrus his decree, or else of necessity we must hold that the king of
Persia reigned not in their several times, so long as it is by all Historians
reported they did, which if we might admit, then happily it might be said that
it was Darius Nothus (of whom mention is made, verse. 24. of this chapter, and
chap. 6. verse. 1. who made a new decree to second that of Cyrus for the
rebuilding of the Temple, and that these words are meant of the reign of
Darius the son of Hystaspes inclusively, he being numbered amongst those kings
in whose times the enemies of the Jews did by underhand dealing trouble them,
and seek to frustrate their purpose in building the Temple.

Verse. 6. And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, wrote
they unto him an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.]
They that hold that Darius the son of Hystaspes is mentioned in the former
verse inclusively, to wit, that to the end of his reign, the enemies of the
Jews did secretly hire counselors against them to hinder them in their work,
they also hold that Ahasuerus here mentioned, was Xerxes that fourth rich king
of Persia, mentioned Dan. 11.2. And the fourth shall be far richer then they
all, and by his strength through his riches he shall stir up all against the
realm of Grecia; and that he was called Ahasuerus, that is an hereditary
prince, because he was the first son of Darius Hystaspes by his wife Atossa,
who was the daughter of Cyrus, and that in the beginning of his reign the
Jews enemies began first openly to write letters of accusation against them
for building the Temple: and so again likewise they hold that Artaxerxes
mentioned in the following verse, was Artaxerxes Longimanus the son of Xerxes
by Esther the daughter of Abihail, Esther 2.15. who is by other authors called
Amestris the daughter of Otan, and so that the building of the Temple ceased in
the reign of both these kings, until the second year of Darius Nothus who
was the bastard son of this Artaxerxes, and succeeded him in the throne, but
for the reasons mentioned in the former note, and withal, because it is not
probable that the Temple lay so long unbuilt, and especially in the days of
Ahasuerus or Xerxes the husband of Esther, therefore the more probable opinion
of all other Interpreters generally is, that it is Cambyses the son of Cyrus
who is here called both Ahasuerus, verse. 6. and Artaxerxes, verse. 7. so that
what was generally affirmed, verse. 5. is now more particularly expressed in the
sequel of the chapter.

Verse. 7. And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithridath, etc.] Some
Interpreters translate this word Bishlam in peace, and so they would have the
meaning of the words to be, that Mithridath and the other here mentioned wrote
to Artaxerxes against the Jews, secretly and cunningly; when in the mean
season they carried themselves toward the Jews, as if they had been at peace
with them and meant them no hurt: but better I conceive is this word by our
Translatours taken, as the name of one of the chief of those that wrote to
Artaxerxes. And as concerning this Artaxerxes, it is said before in the
foregoing note, that though some hold it was Artaxerxes Longimanus the son of
Xerxes, who is called Ahasuerus in the former verse; yet most generally it is
held that the same Cambyses the son of Cyrus, who is called Ahasuerus in the
former verse, is here called Artaxerxes, verse. 6. it is said that they wrote to
Ahasuerus against the Jews, where Cambyses is called by the name given him
amongst the Chaldees, and now in this verse undertaking to set down the copy of
the letters, the penman of this story does again repeat the time when, and the
king to whom it was written, only here he calls him by his Persian name which
it seems was used in the letter, to wit, Artaxerxes.

And the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and
interpreted in the Syrian tongue.] That is, in the Syrian tongue, and with
Syrian characters.

Verse. 8. Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe, wrote a letter
against Jerusalem, etc.] That is, the letter was composed by Rehum the
Chancellor and written by Shimshai the scribe, though it was written in the
name of those mentioned verse. 7. and others the Governors in Samaria, and from
this to verse. 19. chap 6. the story is written in the Chaldee tongue.

Verse. 9. The Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, etc.] These were several people
that were placed by the Assyrians in Samaria, who joined now in writing these
letters to Artaxerxes.

Verse. 10. And the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asnappar
brought over, etc.] The most of Expositours think that it is Esarhaddon
mentioned before, verse. 2. the son of Sennacherib who brought over a colony
of these nations into Samaria, that is here called the great and noble
Asnappar, yet it may be meant of some great commander or chief officer of
Esarhaddon, employed by him in bringing over this colony.

And the rest that are on this side the river.] That is, Euphrates that divided
the Jews from the Babylonians.

Verse. 12. And have set up the walls thereof, and joined the foundations.]
Because there is no mention any where made that they had at this time meddled
with building of the walls: but on the contrary we read, that long after this
complaint was made to Nehemiah, Nehem. 1.3. that the wall of Jerusalem was
broken down and the gates thereof burnt with fire, that is, that they continued
in that condition as Nebuchadnezzar had long ago left them; therefore it is
most likely that this was a mere falsehood which the Samaritanes charged upon
the Jews, only thereby to stir up jealousies in the king of Persia against
them; and indeed it is not probable that they would undertake the building of
the city walls, when they were not well able to go through with that work which
they had first set upon, and were so zealously intended to finish it, to wit,
the building of the Temple.

Verse. 15. That search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers.]
Because this Artaxerxes was a Persian, and the rebellion of the Jews which is
here objected, was not against the Persians, but against the Assyrians and
Babylonians, to what end should search be made in the records of Artaxerxes his
father? I answer: First, that the Persians did usually aid the Assyrians and
Babylonians against the Jews, and because of this there might be mention made
of the rebellion of the Jews against the Syrians in the records of the Persian
kings, see Isaiah 22.6. Secondly, that by his fathers here may be meant the
Babylonian kings only, because the Persians succeeded them in their Empire, or
perhaps because they pretended some title of succession, as conquerours to
establish themselves the better, are usually wont to do.

Verse. 24. So it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of
Persia.] That is, of Darius Hystaspes; yet some think it was Darius Nothus the
bastard son of Artaxerxes Longimanus.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. THen the prophets, Haggai the prophet, and Zachariah the son of
Iddo prophesied unto the Jews, etc.] The building of the Temple having a long
time ceased, Darius at length being chosen king of Persia, the prophet Haggai
was sent from God to the Jews, in the second year of Darius in the sixth
month, Haggai 1.1. and then two months after him Zachariah the son of Iddo,
that is, the grandchild of Iddo; for he was the son of Barachiah the son of
Iddo, Zach. 1.1. In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius came the
word of the Lord unto Zachariah the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo the
prophet, etc. and was afterward slain by the Jews, Matthew. 23.35. and so both
these prophets did jointly together reprove the Jews for neglecting this work,
and did persuade them to set upon it again, showing them that the famine that
had been of late amongst them, was a punishment of God upon them for neglecting
of this work. It is true indeed, they had been commanded by the king of Persia
to desist from building the city, chap. 4.12.21. but there was no one word in
that letter to forbid the building of the Temple: and besides there being now a
new king in Persia, and of another family, why did they not afresh return to
their work? these prophets therefore did sharply reprove their sloth, and
incite them to set forward the work

Verse. 2. And with them were the prophets of God helping them.] To wit, by
exhorting and stirring up the people to buckle themselves closely and
courageously to the work, and happily also by doing what they could do to help
the work forward, for the peoples greater encouragement.

Verse. 3. At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the
river, etc.] The Jews had been hitherto busy enough in building for themselves
goodly and fair houses, Haggai 1.4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your
cieled houses, and this house lie waste, and these men then hindered them not;
but no sooner do they set upon the building of the Temple, but again they
bandied together against them.

Verse. 4. Then said we unto them after this manner, What are the names of the
men that make this building?] It is evident that these adversaries of the Jews
inquired concerning the names of those that were principal agents in this
business, as we see verse. 10. We asked their names also to certify thee, that
we might write the names of the men that were the chief of them; and therefore
Expositours understand this as spoken in their person, we said, that is, we
Tatnai, Shether-Boznai, and the rest said unto the Jews, What are the names of
the men? etc. Neither do we see how it can be otherwise taken if it be read
with an interrogation, as our translatours have rendered it.

Verse. 5. But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews, that they
could not cause them to cease, till the matter came to Darius.] That is, the
Jews being a poor unsettled friendlesse people, might well have been feared by
the threatening of these their powerful adversaries, but by the providence of
God over them they were so encouraged, and their enemies so far restrained,
that nothing was done to hinder them, but they were content to let them go on
till the matter was brought to Darius his knowledge, who afterward gave them
liberty and encouragement to go on in their work.

Verse. 16. And since that time even until now, has it been in building, etc.]
Though often interrupted, so that of late the work had ceased many years
together, Chap. 4.24. to wit, the eight years of Cambyses reign, and the two
first years of Darius Hystaspes.

Verse. 17. Let there be search made in the kings treasure house, which is there
at Babylon, etc.] Where the records were kept, see chap. 6.1.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. ANd search was made in the house of the rolls, where the treasures
were laid up in Babylon.] That is, in the Empire of Babylon, whereof Media was
now a part; for this roll now sought for, was found at Achmetha, which was a
chief city in the province of the Medes, verse. 2. And there was found at
Achmetha in the place, that is in the province of the Medes, a roll, etc. yet
it may be they first searched in the house of the rolls in Babylon, but finding
it not there, they searched further in other places, and found it at last at
Achmetha or Ecbatana, that is in the province of the Medes.

Verse. 3. And let the foundations thereof be strongly laid, the height thereof
threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits.] The height of
Solomon's Temple was but thirty cubits, 1. Kings 6.2. And the house which king
Solomon built for the Lord, the length thereof was threescore cubits, and the
breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, only the
tower which was over the porch, was one hundred and twenty cubits high, 2.
Chron. 3.4. And the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it
was according to the breadth of the house twenty cubits, and the height was one
hundred and twenty: and yet it seems not that this Temple which Zerubbabel
built, did any way equal much less surpass the Temple of Solomon, as we may
see by that of the Prophet, H^ag. 2.3. Who is left among you that saw this
house in her first glory? and how do ^ou see it now? is it not in in your eyes
in comparison of it, as nothing? If therefore ^yrus gave liberty to build the
whole Temple sixty cubits high; yet either it was not built so high as Cyrus
had allowed them to build it; or else, this measure appointed for the outmost
height of the Temple, is meant of that part where it was to be raised highest
(according to the pattern of the former house) to wit, the tower of the porch,
which was before one hundred and twenty cubits high, 2. Chron. 3.4. and now
allowed to be but sixty cubits high; or else, the cubits here meant were the
common cubits, whereas in those places in the Kings and Chronicles, the sacred
or geometrical cubits were meant. As for the directions here given for the
breadth of it, the breadth thereof was threescore cubits, it is manifest that
Solomon's Temple was but twenty cubits broad, 1. Kings 6.2. and as manifest it
is that the very foundations of this Temple which Zerubbabel built, came far
short of Solomon's Temple, chap. 3.12. Many of the priests and Levites, and
chief of the fathers, who were ancient men that had seen the first house, when
the foundation of his house was laid before their eyes, wept; and therefore was
not doubtless forty cubits broader then Solomon's, as by this place it may
seem: either therefore the cubits intended by Cyrus were not so large as those
sacred gcometricall cubits, by which the measure of Solomon's Temple was set
forth (which is indeed the usual answer of most Expositours) or else by the
breadth thereof here is meant the utmost extent of it, both north and south,
and also east and west, (and so the length, as being comprehended in the
breadth, is not here mentioned) and then indeed this house must needs be far
short of that which Solomon built, whose length alone was sixty cubits, though
but twenty cubits broad, 1. Kings 6.2.

Verse. 4. With three rows of great stones, and a row of new timber.] Some
Expositours conceive that Cyrus in this direction given for the building of the
Temple, had respect to the fashion of building used amongst the Persians in
their most stately houses or Temples, according to which he thought fit the
Temple should be made; but because this direction agrees so fully with the
description of the buildings about the inner court of Solomon's Temple, 1. Kings
6.36. And he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and a row of
cedar beams; I rather conceive, that it is here meant also concerning the new
raising of those buildings about the priests court, that they should be made as
formerly, with three rows of great stones, and a row of timber; that is, with
three galleries of stone, and one of timber, or three galleries of stone, each
of them being covered or floored with timber.

Verse. 6. Now therefore Tatnai, governor beyond the river, etc.] Here begins
the decree of Darius, which is now added to that former decree of Cyrus,
wherein far greater encouragement is granted to the Jews for the building the
Temple, then ever before, and so the promises of Haggai, and Zachariah,
wherewith the encouraged the people to set upon the work, were abundantly
fulfilled. The chief cause why Darius afforded them this favor, was because
God had inclined his heart thereto; yet because he had married Atossa the
daughter of Cyrus, even in that regard he might be the more forward to further
the work which Cyrus had begun.

Be ye far from thence.] That is, meddle not with them to hinder them in
their work.

Verse. 12. And the God that has caused his name to dwell there, destroy all
kings and people that shall put to their hand, to alter and to destroy this
house of God, etc.] That is, to alter this decree of mine by destroying this
house of God which I have appointed to be built.

Verse. 14, And they builded, and finished it, etc. according to the commandment
of Cyrus and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia.] They that hold the Temple
was finished in the sixth year of Darius Nothus, they also hold that this
Artaxerxes here mentioned, was Artaxerxes Mnemon the son of Darius Nothus,
and that because he reigned with his father in this sixth year of Darius when
the Temple was finished, his father Darius being then employed in his wars
against Secundianus and others, and that therefore it is here said that the
Temple was built and finished, according to the commandment of Cyrus and
Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia; but if the Darius here mentioned, were
Darius the son of Hystaspes (as to many it seems more probable, of which see
the note, chap. 4.5.) then by Artaxerxes here, either Zerxes is meant the son
of Darius Hystaspes, that fourth and rich king of Persia, Dan. 11.2. who was
also called Artaxerxes and Ahasuerus the husband of Esther, who being made
coemperour with his father Darius, therefore it is said, that the Jews builded
and finished the Temple, according to the commandment of Cyrus and Darius, and
Artaxerxes king of Persia; or else, Artaxerxes Longimanus or Longhand, is meant
the son of Zerxes by Esther, and grandchild of Darius Hystaspes, and that he
is here joined with Cyrus and Darius, because though the fabric it self of the
Temple was fully finished long before his reign, to wit, in the sixth year of
his grandfather Darius, verse. 15. And this house was finished on the third day
of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the
king; yet it was afterward much beautified, and in that regard finished, by the
commandment of this Artaxerxes the son of Zerxes, when he gave commission for
the building of the walls of Jerusalem.

Verse. 15. And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar,
which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king.] Here the time
is set down when the fabric of the Temple was finished, to wit, the third day
of the month Adar, which was their twelfth month, in the sixth year of the
reign of Darius; for that it was not quite finished in regard of the
beautifying, and happily in regard of the further enlarging of it, is evident
from that which was said before, verse. 14. And they builded, and finished it,
etc. according to the commandment of Cyrus and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of
Persia: since hereby it is plain, that though the fabric of the Temple was
finished in the sixth year of Darius, as is here said, yet somewhat was done
afterward for the more complete finishing of it in the reign of Artaxerxes
the son or grandchild of this Darius; but how does this agree may some say,
with that which the Jews said to our Savior, Joh. 2.20. Forty and six years
was this Temple in building; since according to the computation of the most of
those historians that lived about these times, Cyrus reigned after he came to
the Empire but seven years, and Cambyses but eight years; so that from the
second of Cyrus when the foundation of the Temple was first laid, to the sixth
of Darius Hystaspes, and so including all the time wherein the Jews were forced
to cease from building the Temple, there will be found not above twenty years;
but to this two answers are given by Expositours: for first, some say that the
Jews spoke not of the building of the Temple in the time of the Persian kings,
but of the building of it by Herod, who did in a manner build it anew; and that
was properly the Temple of which Christ then spoke: and indeed though Josephus
says that he was not full nine years in building it, yet considering that
above thirty years after they were still beautifying and enlarging the Temple,
with some addition or other, I see not but that it may be very probably thought
that the Jews spoke indeed of the building of the Temple by Herod: and
secondly, others say that Cyrus reigned after he came to the Empire thirty
years, to which if we add the eight year of Cambyses his son, and two years
of the usurpation of the Magi, as some account, then the sixth year of Darius
Hystaspes, makes six and forty years; and if it could be made good out of
those that have written the history of these times, that Cyrus reigned so long
after he came to the Empire, this answer would fully satisfy.

Verse. 18. As it is written in the book of Moses.] Because Ezra alleges here
the book of Moses, it may hence appear, that not Ezra (as some have said) but
Moses himself did write those five first books of the Scripture, commonly
called the books of Moses.

Verse. 21. And all such as had separated themselves unto them, etc.] That is,
such as were become proselytes.

Verse. 22. For the Lord had made them joyful, and turned the heart of the king
of Assyria unto them.] That is, the king of Persia: for since the conquest of
the Assyrians by Cyrus, even the Persian kings were also called kings of
Assyria, as were before the kings of Babylon, 2. Chron. 33.11. and this phrase
of turning the heart of the king of Assyria to them, has respect either to the
hatred of the former kings of Assyria, who did at first subdue the Jews, and
carried them captive into Babylon, or else to the late displeasure of Cambyses,
who had opposed the rebuilding of the Temple all his time; in his reign their
enemies prevailed, and they could not be heard, but now the Lord had turned the
heart of the king of Assyria to favor them, according to that, Prove. 21.1. The
kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns it
whithersoever he will.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. IN the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of
Seraiah, etc.] This Artaxerxes, in whose reign Ezra went up from Babylon to
Jerusalem, was the same that was mentioned before, chap. 6.14. And the Elders
of the Jews builded, and they prospered, etc. according to the commandment of
Cyrus and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia, where it is noted as most
probable that it was Artaxerxes Longimanus the son of Zerxes, and in whose
time also some thirteen years after this Nehemiah was sent to Jerusalem, Neh.
2.1. at which time Ezra was still living, Neh. 8.1. and whereas it is said that
Ezra was the son of Seraiah, the meaning is, that he was the grandchild of
Seraiah, for Seraiah was slain by Nebuchadnezzar, 2. Kings 25.18, 21. and
therefore if Ezra had been his immediate son, he was born before the
captivity, which has no show of probability, considering how many years
passed betwixt the captivity under Nebuchadnezzar, and the reign of
Artaxerxes Longimanus.

Verse. 3. The son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth.] Betwixt Azariah and
Meraioth there are six generations more expressed, 1. Chron. 6.7 -- 10. which
are here omitted, to wit, Johanan, Azariah, Ahimaaz, Zadok, Ahitub, and
Amasiah; which was done doubtless only for brevities sake, the drift of this
catalogue being only to show that Ezra was of the stock of Aaron: but why
these were left out rather than others, there cannot I think any sure reason be
given.

Verse. 6. This Ezra went up from Babylon, and he was a ready scribe in the law
of Moses.] That is, an acute learned and ready expounder of the law, not only
by writing but also by words of mouth, according to that expression of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 45.1. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer: for the same that
is called by Mark a scribe, Mark 12.28. And one of the scribes came, and heard
them reasoning together, and asked him which is the first commandment, is
called by Matthew a lawyer or a doctor of the law, Matthew. 22.35, 36. Then one
of them which was a lawyer a^ked him a question, etc. saying, Master, which is
the greatest commandment in the law? so that it seems as amongst the Grecians
their great wise and learned men were called Philosophers, and amongst the
Chaldeans Magi, so amongst the Jews their great Doctors were called Scribes.

Verse. 7. And there went up some of the children of Israel, and of the priests,
etc.] Of those that hitherto had stayed in Babylon and Assyria, and went not up
at first with Zerubbabel, there did some now go up with Ezra in the seventh
year of Artaxerxes, which was about fifty eight years after the sixth year of
Darius mentioned chap. 6.15. (if it be meant of Artaxerxes Longimanus) for
Darius lived after that thirty years, Xerxes his son one and twenty years,
and after him succeeded this Artaxerxes.

Verse. 10. For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord, and to
do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments.] That is, the chief aim
of his journey was to instruct the people, and to reform those things that were
out of order amongst them, and accordingly the Lord prospered his journey; but
withal observable it is, how these three particulars are here joined together,
to wit, that he had prepared his heart, first, to seek the law of the Lord:
that is, to endeavor to understand the law of God; secondly, to do it, that
is, to yield obedience thereto in his own particular; and thirdly, To teach in
Israel statutes and judgments; that is, to instruct the people also in the
laws of the Lord.

Verse. 14. Thou art sent of the king, and of his seven counselors, to enquire
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, etc.] The Emperors of Persia had always seven
chief princes, which were over all the rest and next unto the king; of these
Darius the son of Hystaspes was one, and by them he was chosen Emperor,
Cambyses the son of Cyrus being dead, and the usurping Magus being discovered
and slain; and so likewise there is mention again made of them, Esther 1.14.
Now hence it is said that Ezra was sent of the king, and of his seven
counselors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law;
that is, to make enquiry whether all things were done amongst them according to
the rule and direction of Gods law.

Verse. 16. And all the silver and gold that thou can find in all the province
of Babylon, etc.] To wit, say some Expositours, that belongs to the Temple at
Jerusalem; but others understand this clause of the silver and gold which Ezra
could gather among the several subjects of the king of Babylon, from whom Ezra
had power by virtue of this clause in his commission to receive what they would
freely contribute, as well as from his brethren the Jews; of whom the next
clause is added, with the free will offering of the people and of the priests.

Verse. 18. And whatsoever shall seem good to thee and to thy brethren, etc.] To
wit, the rest of the priests.

Verse. 22. And salt without prescribing how much.] Because they used salt, yea
perhaps much salt in all their sacrifices, Levit. 2.13. And every oblation of
the meat offering shall thou season with salt, etc. and so Mark 9.49. For every
sacrifice shall be salted with salt: and withal, because it was a commodity
not so costly as the rest, therefore there was no measure appointed for that,
but the kings treasurers were to allow them as much salt as they would require.

Verse. 26. And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the
king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death,
etc.] Which was more then the Jews were allowed to do when the Romans were
their lords, John 18.31. The Jews said unto him, It is not lawful for us to
put any man to death.

Verse. 27. Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, which has put such a thing
as this in the kings heart, etc.] These are Ezra his words, and here the Hebrew
begins again in the original books.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 2. OF the sons of David, Hattush.] It may be this is that Hattush of
the stock of David, mentioned 1. Chron. 3.20.

Verse. 3. Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh, etc.] This
clause of the sons of Pharosh is added, to distinguish this Shechaniah from
the other mentioned verse. 5. As for the several numbers here mentioned of
those that went with Ezra (besides such as are expressed by name) they make one
thousand four hundred ninety and six, to wit, males besides women.

Verse. 13. And of the last sons of Adonikam, etc.] These here mentioned are
said to be of the last sons of Adonikam, either because they come now at last
with Ezra out of Babylon, whereas other of the sons of Adonikam, went away
before with Zerubbabel, chap. 2.13. or else because they were descended of the
youngest and last born sons of Adonikam.

Verse. 15. And I gathered them together to the river that runs to Ahava,
etc.] Ahava was it self a river, verse. 21. Then I proclaimed a fast there, at
the river Ahava: this place therefore where they assembled together, as the
first place for their randezvous from all parts, was where either Euphrates (or
some other river) and the river Ahava met together, as indeed Babylon was a
country full of rivers, Psalm 137.1. By the waters of Babylon we sat down,
etc. and here they abode in tents three days, waiting to see whether any more
of their brethren would come thither to them.

And I viewed the people and the priests, and found there none of the sons of
Levi.] That is, none saving such as were priests, no Levites: that therefore
which was said before, chap. 7.3. there went up some of the children of Israel,
and of the priests, and of the Levites* etc. was spoken with reference to the
Levites that were now sent for by Ezra and came accordingly.

Verse. 16. Then sent I for Eliezer, etc.] That which is here noted by way of
distinction concerning these eleven men whom Ezra chose to send unto Iddo for
Levites, to wit, that the first nine were chief men, and the two last Jarib and
Elnathan were men of understanding, may well I conceive be thus understood,
that the first nine were of the chiefest rank and dignity amongst them,
princes or heads of families, and the other two were men of special note for
their wisdom, learning, and eloquence, and therefore picked out for the well
mannaging that great business that they had now in hand.

Verse. 47. And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief, at the place
Casiphia, etc.] Because he had special use of the Levites, to wit, to help in
that which was the chief business of his journey, the instructing of the
people in the law of God, and the reforming of those things he should find out
of order amongst them, according to the rule and direction of the law; when he
found that there was none of the Levites amongst those that were going up with
him, he dispatched certain messengers to a place called Casiphia, where he knew
there were many Levites, and Iddo was the chief magistrate there, or else they
were trained up in the knowledge of the law (as in a College) under Iddo their
chief doctor and president, to desire him that he would send them certain
Levites to go up with him to Jerusalem, that they might assist him in that work
which he had now undertaken. Where this Casiphia was we cannot say, only this
we may say, that because these messengers went thither and came back with the
Levites and Nethinims, which Iddo sent him within the compass of so few days
(for Ezra begun his journey upon the first day of the first month, chap, 7.9.
upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from Babylon, etc. and
went away from the river Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month, as is
expressed verse. 21. Then we departed from the river Ahava on the twelfth day of
the first month, etc.) it is not probable that by Casiphia is meant as some
conceive the Caspian mountains, which were in the furthest part of Media,
betwixt Armenia and Hyrcania.

Verse. 18. They brought us a man of understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the
son of Leui, etc.] That is the grandchild of Levi, Exodus 6.16.19.

Verse. 20. Also of the Nethinims, whom David and the princes had appointed for
the service of the Levites, etc.] Because the Gibeonites were appointed for the
service of the Levites by Joshua, long before David's time, and were thence
called Nethinims, that is, men given to God; therefore some Expositours
conceive, that David did add to the Nethinims, others that were not of the
Gibeonites: but there is no necessity why we should thus understand this place:
for it may well be that the Gibeonites were those Nethinims of whom it is said
here, that David and the princes had appointed them for the service of the
Levites; and that because though Joshua did first design them to this service,
yet David did confirm them therein, and perhaps gave some special orders for
the manner of their attendance.

Verse. 24. Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests Sherebiah,
Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them.] That is, together with twelve
of the chief of the priests, I separated twelve of the Levites, Sherebiah,
Hashabiah, etc. to wit, the Levites above mentioned, verse. 18, 19. that were
sent from Iddo, and these were joined with the priests in this care of taking
charge of these holy things, to see that nothing were lost by the way, as they
carried them from Babylon to Jerusalem.

CHAP. IX.
Verse, 1. THe princes came to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the
priests, and the Levites have not separated themselves, etc.] It being well
known that the principal cause of Ezraes coming was to reform such abuses as
were crept in amongst them contrary to the law; some of the princes that were
best affected came presently to him, and informed him of this, as one of the
most heinous evils tolerated amongst them; to wit, that not the people only
but the princes also, yea, the priests and Levites that could not pretend
ignorance of the law, had married wives of those idolatrous nations their
neighbors about them, and so also were tainted by that means in many things
with their abominations: Some Expositours conceive, that this was done before
their return out of Babylon; and indeed though these nations here mentioned,
the Canaanites, Moabites, Ammonites, etc. dwelt far from Babylon, yet we must
consider, that many of them were carried away by Nebuchadnezzar as the Jews
were, Jerem. 25.9. Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north,
says the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon my servant, and will
bring them against this land, and against all these nations round about: But I
rather think they had fallen into this sin since their return from Babylon,
being sore corrupted with a very little rest, as Exra implies in his prayer,
verse. 8 -- 10. however not only single persons but even those that were
married offended herein, to the great vexation of their former wives, Mal.
2.11, 13. Judah has profaned the holiness of the Lord, which he loved, and
has married the daughter of a strange god -- And this have ye done again,
covering the altar of the Lord with tears, etc. which is meant of the tears of
their first wives; and so far was this corruption spread at present, that
amongst others, even the sons of Joshua the son of Jozadak were in the
transgression, chap. 10.18. And among the sons of the priests there were
found that had strange wives, namely, of the sons of Joshua the son of
Jozadak.

Verse. 2. The hand of the princes and rulers has been chief in this
trespass.] That is, they which should have restrained the people from this
wickedness have had the chiefest hand in it, to wit, as having been boldest in
this transgression, and ringleaders to the rest of the people.

Verse. 3, I rent my garment, and my mantle, etc.] That is, both the coat that
was girded close to his body, and the loose mantle which he wore over that, and
this doubtless is thus expressed, to show how passionately grieved and
offended he was to hear that his brethren had thus grossly transgressed the
law of God. Concerning this custom of rending their garments, see Genesis 37.20.

Verse. 4. Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words of
the God of Israel, etc.] It seems the report being quickly carried about, how
mightily Ezra was afflicted and displeased, when he heard how his brethren had
taken wives of the idolatrous nations; so many of the godly inhabitants that
heard of it, being themselves afraid of the judgments of God threatened in his
word, came presently in to him, partly to comfort him, and partly to advise
with him what was fit to be done; which is the rather here inserted, to make
way to that which follows (which is added yet further, to set forth how
mightily he was troubled with these tidings) And I sat astonished until the
evening sacrifice: though the brethren came in, it is like to comfort him, yet
neither there presence nor any thing they could say, did any whit move him, but
till the evening sacrifice there he sat amongst them, like one that had
neither life nor soul in him; so overwhelmed he was with grief and
astonishment at that which had been told him.

Verse. 5. Having rent my garment, and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, etc.]
That is, having before rent my garments, verse. 3. in that sad plight I fell
down upon my knees before the people, and prayed unto the Lord.

Verse 6. Our iniquities are increased over our head, etc.] That is, they are
innumerable, we are even drowned over head and ears in sin; the expression
is much like that, Psalm 38.4. mine iniquities are gone over my head, and to
the same purpose is the next clause also, and our trespass is grown up unto
the heavens, that is, it is as great as may be, and such as must needs make a
loud cry in the heavens for judgment to be poured forth upon us.

Verse. 7. As it is this day.] Having said that they had been delivered to
captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face, he adds, as it is this
day, because some of them were still in captivity, and the rest that were
returned, were in a low and sad condition, and lay under a great deal of shame
and reproach.

Verse. 8. And now for a little space grace has been showed from the Lord our
God, etc.] This is added as an aggravation of their sin, that having been but
a while freed from those punishments which their former sins had brought upon
them, they should so soon venture to expose themselves to Gods displeasure.

To leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place,
etc.] In these words Ezra shows wherein grace had been showed them from the
Lord their God, to wit, first, in that he had left them a remnant to escape,
whereas he might justly have destroyed them all, he had preserved a seed a
remnant that were delivered out of their captivity, and brought back again into
their own country: Secondly, that he had given them a nail in his holy place,
whereby it meant either that God had given them a prince of their own nation,
to wit, Zerubbabel (for the princes and magistrates are compared to pinnes and
nails, because the safety of their kingdom depends upon them, and the good
success of their great affairs, rest much upon their wisdom and care; whence
is that which the Lord says of Eliakim, Isaiah 22.23, 24. And I will fasten
him as a nail in a sure place, etc. and they shall hang upon him all the glory
of his fathers house: or else that he had given them some prop and support of
their faith and hope, something that might encourage them to wait for some
better days then yet they had seen; or else rather that he had in some measure
settled them again, and given them a resting place in his holy land, city, and
Temple: the metaphor is taken from the pinnes and nails wherewith they used to
fasten the cords of their tents in the earth when they went to pitch their
tents, as intending to abide a while in that place; or else from those nails
wherewith we use to fasten any thing and which we strike into our walls to
hang, things upon.

That our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our
bondage.] To wit, by refreshing our hearts, according to that which is said of
Jonathan, when in his faintness he was refreshed with eating a little honey,
1. Sam. 14.29. See I pray you how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I
tasted a little of this honey: or by restoring us to life, who were in our
slavery and captivity in Babylon, as men dead and buried. Ezekiel. 37.12. Thus
says the Lord, Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to
come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

Verse. 9. To set up the house of our God, and to repair the desolations
thereof, etc.] Two particulars are here mentioned, wherein Ezra acknowledged
that God had intended mercy to them in the sight of the kings of Persia, and
wherewith he had thereupon revived their hearts, as it is said in the foregoing
words, to wit, First, that they had liberty given them to set up the house of
God, and to repair the desolations thereof; where, by repairing the desolations
of Gods house is meant, both the repairing of the Temples ruins, and also
principally, the renewing of the joyful assemblies of Gods people, and the
sacred employments of his worship and service there: And secondly, that there
was given them a wall in Judah and Jerusalem, that is some protection and
defense against their enemies, as a wall or pen to a flock of sheep. The
walls of Jerusalem were not yet built, and therefore it cannot be meant of
them, but by the wall given them, is meant the fencing of them from dangers,
partly by the king of Persias favor, who had granted them his royal
protection against those enemies that formerly would not suffer them to proceed
in building the house of their God, and partly by Gods awing their spirits,
that they durst not oppose what the king had commanded.

Verse. 10. And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? etc.] That is,
after this great goodness and mercy thou have showen unto us, what shall we
say, that notwithstanding all this we should again forsake thy commandments as
we have done?

Verse. 15. O Lord God of Israel thou art righteous, for we remained yet
escaped, as it is this day, etc.] Either the drift of these words is to show
that continuing in this condition they were now in, they could expect no other,
but to be utterly destroyed; and that because God was righteous though he had
spared them, and they stood guilty of a gross sin: or else, in this
conclusion of his prayer, Ezra justifies God, and lays all the blame upon
themselves; so intimating, that all their hope was in his goodness and mercy,
and readiness to forgive poor penitent sinners: as if he should have said, O
Lord thou art righteous in all thy dealing with us, what thou have inflicted
upon us has been justly inflicted; yea of thine own mercy, and according to
thy righteousness and faithfulness in performing thy gracious promises, thou
have reserved a remnant of us: But as for us we are here before thee, waiting
indeed for thy mercy, but in our sins, and so deserving to be destroyed; for
even because of this wickedness which lies upon us, if thou should enter
into judgment with us, we are not able to stand it out and to abide the trial.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. THere assembled unto him out of Israel, a very great congregation,
etc.] Ezra having in public before the Temple, to wit, in the outer court
manifested such wonderful affliction of mind, and sorrow for the sins of the
people by rending his garments, yea, the hair of his head and beard, casting
himself grovelling upon the ground, weeping and wailing, calling and crying upon
God for mercy, as a man astonished and distracted with grief, and that no
doubt purposely to discover to the people the grievousnesse of their sin, and
the danger they were in because thereof; the noise hereof was soon carried
throughout the city, and presently there came in to him of those that were
afraid of those judgments threatened in the word of God against them for this
sin, some few at first, chap. 9.4. but now at last a very great assembly of
them, who being affected with Ezraes grievous lamentation, did also weep very
sore with him.

Verse. 2. Yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.] That is,
there is hope that God may be reconciled to the people that are called by his
name, if we use the means that he has appointed; namely, if we believe, and
repent, and forsake our sins, and put away the strange wives that are amongst
us, and this too, there is great hope the people will be won to do.

Verse. 3. Let us make a covenant with our God, to put away all the wives, and
such as are born of them, etc.] This is the course which Shechaniah propounds
to Ezra for the pacifying of Gods wrath: namely, that they should put away
their strange wives and the children that were born of them; and two
particulars he adds concerning the manner of doing this, that Ezra might the
readily approve of it; to wit, first, that it should be commended to the people
by the advice of Ezra, and those other godly Israelites that were now assembled
to him, which we have in those words; according to the counsel of my Lord, and
those that tremble at the commandment of our God; and thus he intimates too for
Ezraes encouragement, that those that were religiously affected, and were
afraid of Gods judgments because of this sin, would willingly join in
promoting this work: and secondly, that they should manage this great
business, according to the warrant and direction of Gods Law; and let it be
done according to the Law: and hereby I conceive it is evident, that where the
Law did forbid the Jews to marry any infidel remaining an infidel, as Deuteronomy.
7.3. and Exodus 34.16. it did also by necessary consequence enjoin those that
had married such wives, to put them away, and in some sense their children
also. Indeed the judgment of Expositours is different conerning their way of
doing this: for some conceive that their wives were put away as no lawful
wives, because their marrying them was not warrantable by Gods Law: and again,
others think that they were put away by bills of divorce, which they say was
principally intended in that clause, and let it be done according to the Law.
But now for their children born of such wives, though some conceive that they
also were cast off as illegitimate, and born by unlawful copulation, and
turned out of their families, the rather that the sight of them might not by
degrees win them to receive back their mothers again; yet this I can by no
means approve, for though it should be granted that such children were to be
esteemed as bastards, yet surely their fathers were to provide for them; and
therefore by putting away the children born of such wives, nothing else is
meant, but that they were declared no true freeborn members of the people of
Israel; which may be confirmed by this, that in Nehemiahs reformation, that
place Deuteronomy. 23.3. An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter the congregation of
the Lord: is alleged as the ground why they separated from Israel all the
mixed multitude, Neh. 13.1.3. concerning which, see the notes there; and
questionless the parents of these children maintained and brought them up, and
took care that they might be instructed in the truth, to the end, that
afterward as Proselytes they might be joined to the people of God; but
however, that this at the most was but a part of Moses polity, a Law not in
force now, many gather from that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.12, 13. If any
brother has a wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him,
let him not put her away, etc. and again, 1. Pet. 3.1. Likewise, ye wives be in
subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey not the word, they also may
without the word be won by the conversation of the wives.

Verse. 6. Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the
chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib.] Eliashib was the son of Joiakim,
and grandchild of Jeshua the high priest, Neh. 12.10. And Jeshua begat Joiakim,
and Joiakim begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Joiada: and was himself high
priest in Nehemiahs time, Neh. 3.1. Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with
his brethren the priests, etc.] Johanan therefore his son, was doubtless of
chief account amongst the priests at this time; and for this cause it seems
Ezra went into his chamber, that there with the princes he might consult how to
effect that reformation to which the forementioned assembly had sworn to yield.

Verse. 8. All his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the
congregation, etc.] That is, excommunicated from the number of Gods people, and
this was the punishment denounced against those that would not come to the
assembly that Ezra had called.

Verse. 9. Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin, gathered themselves together,
etc.] That is, all that inhabited in the land of Judah and Benjamin, for there
were many of the ten tribes that were come from Babylon, chap. 1.5. who
doubtless came now to this meeting together with those of Judah and Benjamin.

It was the ninth month, and the twentieth day of the month, etc.] Which was
about the beginning of our December, a time usually of much cold and rain, and
thence is that which follows, And all the people sat in the streets of the
house of God: that is, in the place of the outer court, which was it may be not
yet walled in, trembling because of this matter, and for the great rain.

Verse. 12. Then all tht congregation answered, and said with a loud voice, As
thou have said, so must we do.] Yet within a few years they returned to this
there vomit again.

Verse. 14. Let now our rulers of all the congregation stand, etc.] That is, let
the supreme rulers of all Israel, to wit, the Sanhedrim be appointed to sit
daily here in Jerusalem, for the hearing of this business; namely, who they
were that had married strange wives that had not embraced the faith of Israel,
or that were since their marriage relapsed to idolatry, and let those that are
found guilty in every city, be brought hither in their turns to appear before
them, and with them the Elders and judges of every city to testify against
them, and to make affidavit, that upon diligent search and enquiry made, these
and these only have been found guilty, and so let the business be dispatched
first with the inhabitants of one city, and then with another until at length
all the strange wives be put away, and so the fierce wrath of our God may be
turned away from us.

Verse. 15. Only Jonathan the son of Asahel, and Jahaziah the son of
Tikvah, were employed about this matter, etc.] To wit, besides those mentioned,
verse. 14. the rulers of all the congregation, which is in Jerusalem to sit in
judgment, and the Elders and judges in every city, who used after diligent
search made, to bring those they found faulty before them, and the other rulers
in Jerusalem; these four here mentioned were it seems chosen for this
particular business in hand, either to join with that high Senate in
Jerusalem; or else as officers to give order and direction for the managing of
this matter in their several cities, or to prepare and fit business for the
hearing of the rulers, and two of these were Levites, that if any doubtful
case happened, they might inform them what the meaning of the Law in that case
was.

Verse. 17. And they made an end with all the men that had taken strange wives,
by the first day of the first month.] And so were three whole months employed
about it: for they begin to sit about this business the first day of the tenth
month, as it is said in the foregoing verse.

Verse. 18, And among the sons of the priests, there were found that had taken
strange wives; namely, of the sons of Jeshua the son of Jozadak.] Who was
the high priest.

Verse. 19. And being guilty, the offered a ram of their flock for the
trespass.] The like must be understood also of the rest, though of each it be
not expressed.

Verse. 20. And of the sons of Immer, etc.] These mentioned in the three
following verses were also priests.

Verse. 23. Also of the Levites; Jozabad, etc.] That is, the Levites that
ministered to the priests, for the singers and porters who were also Levites,
are named in the following verse.

Verse. 44. And some of them had wives by whom they had children.] As if he
should have said, and yet for all that they were put away.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the book of NEHEMIAH.
CHAP. I.
THe words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah.] That is, Nehemiahs relation of
those things which he did, to wit, for the city Jerusalem and for the people
of God: for as in the former book we have the relation of the building of the
Temple; so in this we have the relation of the building of the city: And that
Nehemiah penned this book is evident, as by this title, so also by this, that
throughout the book he speaks usually of himself in the first person, ( I
Nehemiah etc.) and not in the third.

In the month of Chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the
palace, etc.] Chisleu was their ninth month, containing part of our November
and December; which is therefore observable, because hereby it appears that
Hanani and his brethren, that were come now into Persia to Nehemiah, undertook
their journey upon some business, as is most likely, for the good of the
Church and people of God, even in the depth of winter: By the twentieth year
here mentioned, is meant the twentieth year of the reign of Artaxerxes, for
so much is expressed, chap. 2.1. And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in
the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king etc. and that it was Artaxerxes
Mnemon, or rather that Artaxerxes who is called Longimanus or Longhand, because
one of his hands was longer then the other, the same in whose seventh year
Ezra went down to Jerusalem, as is noted. Ezra 7.1. and not Xerxes as some
would have it; we may the rather think, because there is mention made of the
two and thirtieth year of this Artaxerxes, chap. 13.6. whereas no historians
reckon above one and twenty years of the reign of Xerxes. As for the palace of
Shushan, where Nehemiah was when Hanani and his brethren came to him, thereby
is meant the palace of the city Shushan, for Shushan was one of the chief
cities in Persia, Esther 3.15. The city Shushan was perplexed, and Hanani being
one of the kings officers lived with him in the palace; yet it may be the
palace was peculiarly called Shushan, as the city also was.

Verse. 3. The remnant that are left of the captivity there in the province,
are in great affliction and reproach, etc.] That is, their neighbors round
about them do exceedingly despise them and wrong them; to which these Jews add
as the reason of this, the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates
thereof are burnt with fire, that is, as Nebuchadnezzar left them long ago, so
they still continue; and this makes the enemies proudly to insult over them,
and disables them to defend themselves against them: Some conceive thas Ezra
had built the walls, and that the neighboring nations had since done this
mischief; but then it is likely they would have burnt the whole city, if not
the Temple too.

Verse. 4. I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and
prayed before the God of heaven. That is, as prostrating himself in Gods
presence and happily with his face toward the Temple the place of Gods
presence, according to that 1 Kings 8.44. If thy people go out to battle
against their enemy, whithersoever thou shall send them, and shall pray unto
the Lord toward the city which thou have chosen, and toward the house that I
have built for thy name, and Dan. 6.10. He went into his house, and his windows
being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three
times a day, and prayed.

Verse. 7. And have not kept the commandments nor the statutes nor the
judgments, etc.] That is, neither the moral, ceremonial, nor judicial laws.

Verse. 9. Though there were of you cast out into the uttermost part of the
heaven, yet will I gather them from thence.] The meaning of these words is,
that though they were scattercd to the remotest parts of the earth, yet God
would bring them back from thence; but because at the utmost extent of so much
of the earth as man's eye can at any time see, the heavens seem to touch the
earth, and to cover it round about, as with a half globe, hence is this
expression of being cast out unto the uttermost part of the heaven.

Verse. 11. Prosper I pray thee thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the
sight of this man.] That is, Artaxerxes, who was but a man though a king, and
therefore his heart was in Gods hand, as other men's are.

For I was the kings cup bearer.] This he adds, to show what interest he had
in the king, to encourage him to move the king in this business.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes the king, etc.] Nisan was their first month; this therefore was
some four months after he first hard by Hanani of the distress of his
brethren in Jerusalem, which was in the month of Chisleu, the ninth month,
chap. 1.1. all which time it seems, he continued weeping, and fasting, and
praying, waiting till his turn came of attending in the court, in his office of
cup bearer; for that this was the cause of his so long silence, is me thinks
evident: First, because had he all this while ministered to the king, it is
likely the king would have discerned his sadness and heaviness before this
time: And secondly, because he would doubtless before this have made known his
request to the king. This month Nisan contained part of our March and part of
April; whence it appears that Nehemiahs journey was in the spring of the year.

Verse. 2. Wherefore the king said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad? etc.]
And indeed if we consider that his sorrow and grief for the sad estate of his
brethren, had been so long a time accompanied with much watching and fasting
and prayer, it is no wonder thought the king presently discerned the alteration
of his countenance, from that it had formerly wont to be.

Then I was very sore afraid.] To wit, lest the king should suspect some evil
or treacherous purpose fostered in his heart, in which case guiltiness of
conscience does usually distract the mind, and make the countenance pale and
wan: (and therefore perhaps it was that he answered presently, verse. 3. Let the
king live for ever, not only because it was the usual form of salutation when
they were to speak to kings, but also because he desired to assure him of his
faithful intentions toward him) or else rather, lest being pressed to
discover the ground of his sorrow in such a public presence (for the queen was
by, verse. 6. and therefore many also of his princes and nobles) if he should
make no answer that might increase their jealousy of him, and if he should
make known the cause of his grief, he might well doubt how his request would be
taken, either by the king or his courtiers, or what inconveniences might follow
thereupon; for both the greatness of the request he had to make, and the
majesty of the king might in these regards be dreadful to him. To this some
add also, that he might fear the kings displeasure, because it was not lawful
for any mourner to come into the presence of the kings of Persia: and indeed it
is, said, Esther 4.2. That none might enter into the kings gates clothed with
sackeloth; but whether it can be hence inferred that none that were heavy and
sad might stand before the king, it may well be questioned.

Verse. 3. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the city the place of my
fathers sepulchers lies waste, etc.] That is, the city where they lived and
dyed: This argument taken from natural compassion, was most like to prevail
with an heathen king.

Verse. 5. If it please the king, and if thy servant has found favor in thy
sight, that thou would send me unto Judah, etc. Hereby he seeks to intimate
to the king, that it was his former favor to him that emboldened him to make
this request, and that he desired it with a resolution however to submit to his
will, and only sought it so far as he should like well of the motion, to
approve it as reasonable and fitting.

Verse. 6. And the king said unto me (the queen also sitting by him) For how
long, etc.] The queens sitting by is mentioned, not only because the relation
of such particular circumstances, are good proofs of the truth of that which is
related, but also happily to intimate that she was one that favored Nehemiah,
and did what she might to further his suit; which has made some Expositours
conceive that this was Esther the wife of Ahasuerus, but however in this
question which the king propounded to Nehemiah, For how long shall thy journey
be? and when will thou rerurn? he discovered his love to him, and that he was
loath he should be too long absent from him.

And I set him a time.] Some Expositours conceive that the time he prefixed for
his return was after twelve years, because it is evident that so long he was
governor of the province of Judea under Artaxerxes, to wit, chap. 5.14. From
the twentieth year even unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the
king, which is twelve years, etc. but first, because the king demanding when he
would return, as being loath he should be too long from him, it is not probable
he would prefixe so long a time: and secondly, because the building of the
walls of Jerusalem, the work for which chiefly he now went, was finished in
less then two months, chap. 6.15. in fifty and two days, more probable it is
that at present he set a shorter time, when accordingly he did return; but then
went again with commission of being governor there, and was their governor
twelve years, though happily in that time also he often went to Artaxerxes into
Persia.

Verse. 7. Let letters be given me to the governors beyond the river; that they
may convey me over till I come into Judah.] This Ezra would not desire when he
went to Jerusalem, because they had then occasionally spoken to the king of the
providence of their God over those that served him; and therefore if he had
desired a guard of soldiers, he suspected they would have derided his former
boasting in Gods defense and protection, Ezra 8.22. For I was ashamed to
require of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen, to help us against the
enemy in the way, because we had spoken unto the king, saying, The hand of our
God is upon all them for good that seek him. But now Nehemiah not suspecting
any such thing, nor having happily that cause to suspect it, required a safe
conduct, and that no doubt lawfully.

Verse. 8. And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the kings forest, that he may
give me timber, etc.] This forest of the kings out of which Nehemiah desired
timber, was doubtless the forest of Lebanon, out of which Solomon had
formerly his timber, 1. Kings 5.6. and this timber he desired was for beams;
first, for the gates of the palace which appertained to the house, that is, the
Temple; whereby either the building about the outward court is meant (for
though the Temple was finished before, yet happily the gates and towers that
belonged thereto were not set up,) or else rather, the palace, wherein formerly
the kings of Judah dwelt, which was in a manner joined to the Temple, and
therefore may here be called the palace that appertained to the house: and
secondly, for the wall of the city, that is, the gates in several parts of
the wall: and thirdly, for a dwelling house for himself, for the house, says
Nehemiah, that I shall enter into.

Verse. 9. Now the king had sent the captains of the army, and horsemen with me.]
To wit, to conduct him safe to the river Euphrates; from whence afterward he
was by the governors beyond the river, conveyed to Jerusalem.

Verse. 10. When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant heard of it,
etc.] Sanballat is called the Horonite, as it is thought, because he was the
deputy Lieutenant of the Moabites: for Horonaim was a chief city in the land of
Moab, Isaiah 15.5. My heart shall cry out for Moab, etc. for in the way of
Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction: and Jerem. 48.3, 4. A voice
of crying shall be from Horanaim, spoiling, and great destruction; Moab is
destroyed, etc. and Tobiah is called the servant the Ammonite, either because
he had been a servant, a slave, however now he was in high place and esteem; or
else, because now he was now the deputy Lieutenant, the kings vassal or
servant, amongst the Ammonites: Now this Tobiah because his wife was a Jewish,
had ever and anon advertisement of their affairs, and so wrought them great
trouble.

Verse. 11. So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.] That is, so long
he rested himself after his journey. The like is noted of Ezra, Ezra 8.31, 32.

Verse. 12. And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me, neither told I
any man, etc.] To wit, that he might view the ruins of the walls round about,
and the circuit of the city, and so might consider, what likelihood there was,
that they should go be able to go through with the work, what provision it was
fit should be made for the accomplishment thereof, and what places were most
necessary to be first, and with most speed repaired: all which he desired to be
informed of with all secrecy, before any body knew of his purpose, that he
might be the better able to answer any thing objected, when it was propounded;
and that there might be no talk of it till they were ready to set upon it, lest
the enemies should do any thing to hinder them.

Neither was there any beast with me save the beast that I rode upon.] To wit,
purposely to avoid noise.

Verse. 13. And I went out by night, by the gate of the valley, etc.] Here the
manner of Nehemiahs going about the city is described, to wit, that taking
advantage of the night for the greater secrecy, as is before said (and a
moonshinie night it must needs be; for else he could not have seen in what
condition the walls were) first he went out at the gate of the valley, which
was before the Dragon well (so called as we may probably conceive, because of
some statue of a Dragon there made, out of the mouth whereof the water came
running out) and this some take to be the gate on the east side of the city
that led to the valley of Jehoshaphat, mentioned Joel 3.2. and others the
western-gate, which was near to the valley of dead bodies, of which the Prophet
speaks Jer. 31.40. and secondly, that from thence he went to the dung-port,
that is, the gate through which they carried the dung out of the city.

Verse. 14. Then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the kings pool.]
That is, to the gate which led to the fountain of Gihon, that ran into the
kings pool, that is, the pool of Siloah, or Siloam, as it is called, John 9.11.
for the gate of the fountain and the pool of Siloah are joined together, chap.
3.15* But the gates of the fountain repaired Shallum, and the wall of the pool
of Siloah by the kings garden: and it was it seems called the kings pool,
either because it joined to the kings gardens, chap. 3.15. or rather because it
was made by Hezekiah when he turned the water course of Gihon thither, and so
from thence into the city, 2. Chron. 32.30. Hezekiah also stopped the water
course of Gihon, and brought it straight down on the west side of the city of
David.

Verse. 15. And turned back, and entered by the gate of the valley, and so
returned] Out of which he went first, verse. 13. so that he either went round
about the city; or else, not finding the way passable when he came to the
kings pool, he turned back the same way he came, and so went again into the
city to his lodgings.

Verse. 16. Nether had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to
the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work.] That is, the
workmen that were afterward employed in the work, he did not so much as carry
them with him to ask their advice.

Verse. 19. But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant the
Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian heard it, they laughed us to scorn, etc.] To
Sanballat and Tobiah, mentioned before, verse. 10. here is another added that
joined with them in opposing Nehemiah, to wit, Geshem the Arabian, that is, the
king of Persias deputy lieutenant amongst the Arabians; and though it be said
in the following words, that they charged them with an intent of rebelling
against the king of Persia: What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel
against the king? yet because it is also said here before, that they laughed
them to scorn and despised them; therefore some Expositours understand those
words as spoken in a scoffing manner, and as it were to imply that they had
undertaken a work, which poor wretches they would not be able to effect, and
wherein they should be able to hinder them well enough.

Verse. 20. But you have no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem.]
That is, you are appointed governors in other countries; and besides you have
no interest in us or in Jerusalem: neither is there any memorial of you or
your progenitors to be found among us, and why then do you intermeddle with
that which belongs not to you?

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. THen Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests,
and they built the sheep-gate, etc.] Eliashib was the son of Joiakim, and
grandchild of that Jeshua, who went up at first from Babylon with Zerubbabel;
and so being now high priest, with his brethren the priests he undertook the
building of the sheep-gate; and that because this gate either joined to the
Temple, or was near to it, and was so called from the sheep-market, which for
the convenience of the Temple was near to it; as was also the sheep-pool,
called Bethesda, John. 5.2. where the sheep were washed appointed for
sacrifices, before they were brought into the Temple. As for these following
words, they sanctified it, and set up the doors of it, the meaning is, that
first they cleared it from the rubbish and ruins wherein it lay: secondly,
that they repaired it, and raised it up again in its former beauty and
splendor: and thirdly, having finished it they did then by prayer dedicate it
to the Lord, and in it, as the first fruits, all the rest of the building,
desiring him to uphold and maintain it against all the adversaries of Judah and
Jerusalem. Indeed to this some add that it was also sanctified by the priests
working upon it, in regard whereof it gained the more respect: but though I
doubt not but some of the priests might put their hand to some part of the
work, out of their zeal to the service, and for the encouragement of the
people; yet I conceive both here and elsewhere in this chapter the building of
the gates and wall is ascribed to those that bore the charge of the work, that
did not work themselves, but at most did only oversee it, and take care that
it was done: and this the priests did not only for the sheep gate it self, but
also for a good part of the wall adjoining even to the tower of Meah they
sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananeel, where by the tower of Meah is meant
a tower not far from the sheep-gate, so called as is thought, because it had
an hundred pinacles, or was an hundred cubits high, or some such like reason
(for Meah signifies an hundred) and by the tower of Hananeel a tower further
northward, mentioned again Zach. 14.10.

Verse. 3. But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build] This was
doubtless on the northwest of Jerusalem in the city of David, toward the
sea, as appears also by that which is said of Manasseh, 2. Chron. 33.14. He
built a wall without the city of David, on the west side of Gihon in the
valley, even to the entering in of the fish gate, etc. It was called the fish
gate, because they brought in their fish from the sea coasts of Tire and Sydon
at that gate, according to that, chap. 13.16. There dwelt men of Tire therein
which also brought fish, etc. and had happily their market for the selling of
their fish not far from it: it is mentioned again, Zeph. 1.10, There shall be
the noise of a cry from the fish gate.

Verse. 5. And next unto them the Tekoites repaired, etc.] That is, some of the
inhabitants of Tekoa, for other of them also repaired in another place, as it
is expressed afterward, verse. 27. but yet it was only the common people
amongst them that did what was done; for concerning their nobles, there is a
clause of exception added, but the nobles put not their necks to the work of
the Lord, that is, the nobles would not do any service herein to their Lord the
God of Israel, because their arrogancy in regard of their greatness was the
cause of their refusing their help in this work, as pretending they would not
be taxed, nor have any such burden imposed upon them: their folly is noted
herein, that they refused to put their necks to his work, who is the nobles
Lord as well as the common peoples.

Verse. 6. Moreover, the old gate repaired Jehoiada.] So called happily because
it was the oldest of all the gates in Jerusalem; and this was also, as is
generally held, on the north-side of Jerusalem.

Verse. 7. And next unto them repaired Melatiah, etc. unto the throne of the
governor on this side the river.] It seems there was formerly in this part of
the wall a palace or place of judicature, where those that were appointed
governors under the Babylonian and Persian kings over all the country on this
side Euphrates, did use to sit in judgment; unto which place these men of
Gibeah and Mizpah and others here mentioned did repair the wall: and that
palace where had been the throne of the governor, some Expositours conceive,
was repaired by Nehemiah and his servants (he being now governor of Judea)
whence are those expressions, chap. 4.16. The half of my servants wrought in
the work, and the other half of them held both the spears, the shields, etc.
and 5.16. I continued in the work of this wall, etc.

Verse. 8. And they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall.] That is, they
repaired the wall unto that place where the wall was made much broader then in
other places, and therefore called the broad wall; and so having brought the
work so far, there they left off building, because here it was not ruined,
and therefore needed no repairing; in which sense it may be read according to
the translation noted in the margin, They left Jerusalem unto the broad wall.

Verse. 9. And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of
the half part of Jerusalem.] For Jerusalem, being part in Judah and part in
Benjamin, had accordingly two several rulers; and this Rephaiah was ruler of
one of them, and Shallum, verse. 12. was ruler of the other.

Verse. 11. And Hashub the son of Pahath-moab, repaired the other piece, and
the tower of the furnaces.] That is, the next portion of the wall set out to be
repaired, wherein also was the tower of the furnaces, so called happily,
because either in the tower it self, or in the street adjoining there were many
furnaces.

Verse. 12. Shallum the son of Haloesh the ruler of the half part of
Jerusalem.] See above, verse. 9.

Verse. 13. The valley gate repaired Hanun, etc.] See chap. 2.13.

Verse. 14. But the dung-gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab.] That is,
of the famous family of the Rechabites.

Verse. 15. But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun.] See chap. 2.14.

Unto the stairs that go down from the city of David.] That is, from mount
Sion (which was called the city of David) into the lower part of Jerusalem.

Verse. 16. After him repaired Nehemiah, etc.] Here begins the repairing of the
wall about mount Zion, wherein stood the Temple and the palace of the kings of
Judah; and the first part of this wall was repaired by one Nehemiah the son
of Azbuck the ruler of the half part of Bethzur, and so as far as to the pool
that was made, and unto the house of the mighty; and by the pool that was made,
is meant a pool not natural, but made by art, to wit, by Hezekiah, 2. Kings
20.20. yet this was not the pool of Siloah mentioned in the former verse (for
that was happily a natural pool, and was in the lower part of Jerusalem) but
another in mount Zion, called therefore the upper pool, 2. Kings 18.17. and by
the house of the mighty, is meant some house built for David's worthies, or some
house where the garrison soldiers for the city lay, or where youths were
taught to handle their arms.

Verse. 17. After him repaired the Levites.] It may be, because the wall here
was over against the Temple.

Verse. 19. The ruler of Mizpah, another piece over against the going up to the
armory at the turning of the wall.] To wit, the city armoury, to which that
place of Solomon's seems to allude, Cant. 4.4. Thy neck is like the tower of
David builded for an armoury: it is evident that the house of the forest of
Lebanon, which Solomon built, was for many generations a magazine of arms for
the kings of Judah (for thence is that, Isa. 22.8. Thou did look in that day
to the armor of the house of the forest) and therefore it may be it was that
house that is here meant; or if not so, it may be they had several arsenalls
or armouries, one for the city armoury, and another for the kings magazine; or
that this was some place where anciently there had been an armoury before the
house of Lebanon was built.

Verse. 22. And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain.] To wit,
the men that inhabited the plain country about Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 2.28. chap.
12.28.

Verse. 24. Binnui the son of Henadad, another piece from the house of
Azariah, unto the turning of the wall.] This is thought to be the turning of
the wall from the south to the east.

Verse. 25. Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall, and
the tower which lies out from the kings high house, that was by the court of
the prison.] Prisons have often courts and yards for the prisoners to walk in
and refresh themselves, and so it seems had this; we see there is often mention
of the court of the prison, whereinto they cast the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer.
38.7.13. and 32.2.

Verse. 26. The Nethinims dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over against the
watergate, etc.] By Ophel, or the tower, is meant that high tower spoken of in
the former verse; and the gate here mentioned was, I conceive, called the
watergate; either because all the waters that came by water courses or pipes
under ground into the city, came into one channel in some place near to this
gate; or else, because there was some passage thereabouts to convey away the
water that ran along in the several channells of the city. The work of the
Nethinims was to carry wood and water to the Temple; and therefore it was the
more convenient for them to dwell in Ophel, which was so nigh to the water gate.

Verse. 27. After them the Tekoites repaired.] See verse. 5. Some say they were
the priests that dwelt in Tekoah.

Verse. 28. From above the horse-gate repaired the priests.] This horse-gate,
which is said to have been toward the east, Jer. 31.40. was so called perhaps,
because there were in that place some chief stables for horses, or some place
where they practiced the art of horse riding, or because they went usually with
their horses out of that gate to water them in the brook Kidron, or to breath
them in the valley of Gehinnom: yet there was a gate also called by the same
name in the kings palace as we may see, 2. Chron. 23.15. when she was come to
the entering of the horse-gate by the kings house, etc. which is thus expressed,
2. Kings 11.16. and she went by the way by which the horses came into the kings
house.

Verse. 29. After him repaired also Shemaiah, the son of Shechaniah, the
keeper of the east gate.] To wit, of the Temple.

Verse. 32. And between the going up of the corner into the sheep-gate, repaired
the goldsmiths and the merchants.] Concerning this sheep-gate, see verse, 1.
there the description of this repairing the city wall began, and there it ends.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 2. ANd he spoke before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and said,
etc.] That is, wherever he came among his own countrymen and people, or
amongst his fellow governors of the neighboring countries, and the garrison
soldiers in Samaria, he inveighed against the attempt of the Jews, and that in
a scoffing manner; to wit, either thereby to make known, that they need not be
troubled about it, they should have time enough to hinder the work, unless
they could hope to finish it in a day, (and so by Gods providence the Jews were
not opposed at first,) or else to incense them to take up arms against them,
alleging that both their attempt was insufferably proud and dangerous, and
also that the men that undertook it were weak and beggarly, such as might
easily be resisted, What, says he, do these feeble Jews? will they fortify
themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? they would
never surely undertake this work, if they did not think both to begin and
finish it in a day, and so to offer up sacrifices, as they used to do at the
dedication of any great building, when it was completely finished: and that
because they may well assure themselves, if they be any longer while about it,
their neighbors will soon gather themselves together, and hinder their
fortifications; will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish
that are burnt? as if he should have said, They can never effect this work
(though there were nothing else to hinder them) even for want of materials, for
want of stones; unless they hope to glue together their old stones again,
which were knocked to pieces and burnt to powder, and so make stones of
rubbish; which he calls reviving the stones out of the rubbish, to intimate
that their attempt was as ridiculous and mad, as if they should undertake to
revive and raise up a dead man out of the grave, that was already turned to
dust and ashes.

Verse. 3. Even that which they built, if a fox go up, he shall even break down
their stone wall.] Because foxes use in the night to scrape through walls of
earth, that they may come to their prey; Tobiah in these words, to scoff at the
weakness of the walls which they could make in such haste, says, that when
they had done the most they could, if they did finish them, they would be so
slightly done, that a fox might make a way through them, or scrape them down.

Verse. 4. Hear, O God, for we are despised, etc.] Thus spoke Nehemiah when the
reports of the scoffs of these adversaries was brought unto him.

And give them for a prey in the land of captivity.] Let them be carried away
captives, and there made a prey to their enemies.

Verse. 5. And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out
from before thee.] That is, let not their iniquity pass unpunished: for he
does not pray against their conversion, but desires the Lord, that in case they
proceeded on in this their impiety, he would manifest his wrath by pouring his
judgments upon them.

For they have provoked thee to anger before the builders.] That is, in
reproaching the builders of thy city, employed by thy appointment, they have
reproached thee: so that we desire them to be punished, not out of any private
grudge or desire of revenge, but that thy glory may be vindicated.

Verse. 6. So built we the wall; and all the wail was joined together unto the
half thereof.] That is unto the half height thereof.

Verse. 10. And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed,
and there is much rubbish, etc.] That is, the men of Judah also began to
murmr and complain, that by reason there was still so much rubbish, and the
strength of the bearers of the burdens was so much decayed, they should never
be able to go through with the work, at least not make it defensible, ere the
enemies would set upon them; for if the trench about the wall, the chief help
to keep off the enemy were not cleared of the rubbish, all they had done would
be to no purpose.

Verse. 12. When the Jews that dwelt by them, came, they said unto us ten times,
etc.] That is, oftentimes: see the note, Genesis 31.7. Though these Jews, that
dwelt amongst the Samaritanes, and those other neighboring nations, that now
banded together against the building of Jerusalems walls, durst not join
themselves with their brethren to help them in their work; yet secretly it
seems some of them came to Jerusalem, to inform them of the conspiracy of their
enemies against them. As for the intelligence they brought them, some conceive
that the ways that led from Jerusalem to Samaria, are intended in those words:
from all places whence ye shall return unto us, they will be upon you. But
others, and I think more probably, understand it of all places about the city,
from whence the builders of the wall should return into the city, where the
Jews were when they gave them this intelligence, from all places whence ye
shall return unto us, they will be upon you; that is, they will on a sudden
beset the city, and assault it on every side; when you shall leave your work
and return to us into the city, either to eat or to rest and refresh your
selves from the several places round about the city, where you are now
employed in building the walls, on a sudden they will break in upon us.

Verse. 13. Therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall, and on the
higher places, etc.] That is, hearing by the consonant report of our brethren
that came from several places, that our adversaries had a purpose to assault
us, I caused the people to give over their work, and to arm themselves to keep
off the enemy; and to that end I set some of them beneath behind the wall, and
others above in the towers and other fortifications, to beat off the
adversaries, and keep them from entering the city.

Verse. 15. We returned all of us to the wall, every one unto his work.] That
is, when the enemies, hearing that their purpose was discovered, gave over
their intended invasion of the city, and so their counsel was brought to
naught, we having notice thereof returned to our work; which was a while given
over, that we might be in a readiness to withstand the enemies if they had
come against us.

Verse. 16. The half of my servants wrought in the work, etc.] That is, though
we returned to our work again, when we heard that the enemy had given over
their plot of coming suddenly upon us to fight against us; yet after this we
were the more careful to be in a readiness to resist them, lest they should
again at some other time renew their conspiracy; to which end, first, there
was never but half of my servants (that is my household servants and guard, or
trained bands, whose captain Nehemiah was) employed in building the wall; the
other half stood always ready armed to keep off the enemy if occasion should
be: and secondly, even those that were employed in building were also always
armed, as is expressed; verse. 17. They which builded on the wall, and they that
bare burdens with those that laded; every one with one of his hands wrought in
the work, and with the other hand held a weapon.

And the rulers were behind all the house of Judah.] To wit, to oversee them,
and encourage them in their work, and sometimes perhaps when need was to help
them too.

Verse. 17. Every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the
other hand held a weapon.] That is, even they also that wrought in the building
were also always armed, ready at all assayes to have joined with the rest in
resisting the enemy if he had set upon them: literally this cannot be
understood; for how could they build the wall or lay burdens upon the shoulders
of those that bare them, and yet all the while hold their weapons in one of
their hands? It is therefore a proverbiall kind of speech, signifying only
that whilst they were busiest in building, they had also their weapons ready
at hand, to fight against the enemy if need were; for so Nehemiah explains this
phrase in the following words. verse. 18. For the builders had every one his
sword girded by his side, etc.

Verse. 22. Likewise at the same time said I unto the people, Let every one with
his servant lodge within Jerusalem, etc.] That is, he gave charge to the people
that none of them should go out of the city to lodge, and that because he would
have them always in a readiness to keep their turns, both of watching by
night and of working by day.

Verse. 23. Saving that every one put them off for washing.] To wit, either
their garments or their bodies: for upon occasion of legal pollutions the Jews
did wash their bodies often.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. THere were that said, We, our sons and our daughters are many:
therefore we take up corn for them, etc.] That is, having a great charge of
children, that which we earn will not maintain us; and therefore we are
constrained, whilst we work for the public, to take up corn upon use of the
nobles, and rulers, and rich men amongst us, to keep us from starving, and that
by pawning or selline our children to them for servants, till we can redeem
them; which we are never like to do, as is expressed, verse. 5. We bring into
bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters
are brought unto bondage already, neither is it in our power to redeem them; so
that we are in as bad or worse a condition, then when we were bondslaves in
Babylon; and the having of many children, which is of it self a great blessing
of God, is turned to us as a bitter curse.

Verse. 3. We have morgaged our lands, vineyards, and houses, that we might buy
corn, because of the dearth.] Even those that had not so great a charge of
children were forced to morgage their estates, because of the dearth that was
amongst them.

Verse. 4. There were also that said, We have borrowed money for the kings
tribute, etc.] That is, though we had sufficient to sustain the charge of our
selves and families, yet not also to defray the tribute that was laid upon us;
but even to pay that, we have been constrained to morgage our lands and
vineyards: for though the Jews had liberty given them to return from Babylon
into their own country, yet they were to pay tribute there, as is evident,
Ezra 4.13. If this city be builded, and the walls set up again, then will they
not pay toll, tribute, and custom, and so thou shall endamage the revenue of
the king: and chap. 7.24. Also we certify you, that touching any of the
Priests, and Levites, singers, porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house
of God, it shall not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom upon them.

Verse. 5. Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as
their children.] That is, we are reasonable creatures, as well as they, not
beasts; yea Israelites of the seed and lineage of Abraham as well as they, not
heathens; though they use us as if we were not such.

Verse. 7. And I set a great assembly against them.] To wit, both of those that
were oppressed, and those of the better sort in the congregation, that were not
tainted with this sin: yea perhaps he called a general assembly of all the
elders of Israel, that the sight of the multitude of those that cried out
against them, and the hearing of so many of their brethren protesting against
this which they had done, and Nehemiahs reproof in this public assembly, all
this together might humble them the more, and make them even ashamed of the
evil they had done; which was according to that the Apostle advises concerning
public offenses, 1. Tim. 5.20. Them that sin rebuke before all, that others
also may fear.

Verse. 8. We, after our ability, have redeemed our brethren, etc.] That is, we
have done what in us lay to free our brethren from their bondage in Babylon,
and will you make them bondslaves again, only to pay your useries and unjust
exactions? even the bringing of the Jews out of Babylon, may be this redeeming
of the Jews, whereof Nehemiah here speaks: yet happily the liberty granted by
the Persian kings to the Jews, that who would might return to their own
country, did not extend to those that had been bought and sold; and therefore
perhaps both Nehemiah and others had with their money redeemed many of those
that were so sold, and so brought them also out of Babylon.

Verse. 10. I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might exact of them
money and corn.] To wit, for money we have lent them: or as a recompense of our
public employments.

Verse. 11. Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, etc.] To
wit, remitting the debt for which they were morgaged; for that he did require
them to remit the debt, as well as to restore the morgage, is evident by their
answer, verse. 12. We will restore them, and will require nothing of them.

Also the hundred part of the money and of the corn, etc.] To wit, which they
paid every month by way of use for the money, corn, etc. which they had
borrowed; as for instance, if they borrowed an hundred pounds, for a months
loan they paid one pound, and for a twelve-moneth twelve pound; all which since
they had unjustly exacted of their brethren, Nehemiah calls upon them to
restore it again.

Verse. 12. Then I called the priests, and took an oath of them, that they
should do according to this promise.] Some Expositours conceive, that some of
the priests being guilty of this sin of oppressing the people by taking usury
of them, out of respect to their office, Nehemiah called them to him by
themselves in private, and took an oath of them, that they should also do
according to that which the people had promised; but I rather think, that it
was the people of whom he took the oath, of whom it is said in the foregoing
words, that they promised to do all that Nehemiah had required of them, and
that the priests were called, either because it was the custom that the
priests did give the oath to those that were sworn, or at least, because being
sworn in the presence of the priests, who were the messengers of the Lord of
hosts, the adjuration might be the more solemn and sacred, and those that were
sworn, might be the more religiously affected with it.

Verse. 13. Also I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his
house, and from his labor, etc.] That is, may God so cast him out of his
house, lands, and estates, (which is here called his labor, because he means
that which he had gotten by his labor) that performs not this promise, as by
shaking of my lap, any thing that were therein would be now cast out of it; so
that this ceremony of shaking his lap, was much like that of Paul's shaking his
raiment, Acts 18.6. though that was to signify another thing, namely, that he
was clear of the blood of the Jews, that would not embrace the truth he had
taught them; he shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be upon your
own heads, I am clean: and that also when Christ appointed his disciples,
Matthew. 10.14. to shake off the dust from their feet, as a witness against
those that would not receive them.

Verse. 14. Moreover, from the time that I was appointed to be their governor,
etc.] To show, how unreasonable a thing it was in the richer sort to take usury
of their poor brethren, he puts them in mind, that merely because he would not
overburden the people, all the twelve years that he had been their governor,
he had lived wholly upon his own personal estate, and neither he nor his
brethren had eaten the bread of the governor, that is, the allowance of bread
and other necessaries, which had been always given by the people, for the
daily provision of their Governor and his family: As concerning the twelve
years here mentioned, wherein Nehemiah had been their governor, see chap. 2.6.

Verse. 15. But the former governors that had been before me, were chargeable
unto the people, etc.] To make it the more apparent, how loath he was to be
chargeable to the people in regard of their poverty, and so by consequence to
imply what an unmercifull act it was in the richer sort to oppress them with
usurie, he shows here, that though he might have challenged a yearly
allowance for his maintenance, because all the governors had it that were
before him, yet he required no such thing of them; The former governors had
taken of them bread and wine, that is, a certain quality of bread and wine, and
such other necessaries, besides forty shekels of silver, to wit, for every
day, or of the head of every family; but he durst do so. But now by the former
governors, I do not conceive that Zerubbabel and Ezra are meant; but rather
those governors, which after Zerubbabels death till Nehemiahs coming had the
chief sway of government amongst the Jews, for Ezra was not sent as a
governor, but as a scribe to teach them what they ought to do.

Yea, even their servants bear rule over the people.] That is, they also
exacted what they pleased of the people.

Verse. 16, Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall.] Though in the third
chapter, where it is fully expressed by whom the several parts of the wall
were repaired, there is no mention of any particular part thereof undertaken by
Nehemiah; yet he might well say, that he continued in the work of the wall,
because he was continually employed in the oversight of the work, and was still
with them, to direct and encourage the builders; yea, and because his servants
were employed too where most need was, to help in the work, as it follows in
this verse, and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work: though he
lived wholly upon his own private means, yet both he and his were still
employed in the public service.

Neither bought we any land.] Though the people being many of them much
indebted, he might have had great bargains of them: and this is alleged as a
proof, that neither he nor his sought to advance themselves; but only sought
the good of the people.

Verse. 17. Moreover, there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews
and rulers, etc.] The charge he was at in entertaining so many of the rulers,
people, and strangers daily at his table, is here alleged, (to wit, during the
time of his being in Jerusalem: for it is likely that he was often away in
Persia, and this charge constantly for twelve years together, would otherwise
have spent a kings estate,) first, because hereby the people were much eased;
for a heavy burden it would have been to them, if all this had been done at
the common charge: and secondly, because this circumstance did much commend his
not taking from the people that which the former governors had taken of them
for their maintenance, to wit, that he was put to so great charge, and yet he
defrayed it all of his own private means.

Verse. 18. Also fowl were prepared for me, and once in ten days store of all
sorts of wine.] That is, besides the ordinary provision prepared for every day,
every tenth day I feasted them more liberally, and gave them store of all sorts
of wine.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 2. SAnballat, and Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us meet
together in some one of the villages, in the plain of Ono, etc.] Which was in
the tribe of Benjamin, chap. 11.30, 35. 1. Chron. 8.12. It is likely therefore
that Sanballat appointed this place for their meeting, so near to Jerusalem,
that Nehemiah might be the more easily induced to come thither; but, says
Nehemiah, they thought to do me mischief; that is, to slay me, or at least, to
make me their prisoner.

Verse. 5. Then sent Sanballat his servants unto me, in like manner, the fifth
time, with an open letter.] He sent the letter open, either to imply that what
was written in that letter was no secret thing, but what was common in every
man's mouth; or else that the messenger might show it to others of the Jews
before he came to Nehemiah, and so with the contents thereof might discourage
them.

Verse. 6. It is reported among the heathen, and Gashmu says it, that thou and
the Jews think to rebel.] That is, that you may not think I pretend a rumor,
when there is no such thing; I will name you one in particular who will
confidently aver it, and that is Gashmu, or Geshem, verse. 2. the king of
Persia his deputy Lieutenant in Arabia; and that because hereby also you may
see how far the rumor is spread, and that their be some no mean men that
will maintain it.

Thou buildest the wall, that thou may be their king, according to these
words.] According to this report which is abroad of you.

Verse. 7. And thou have also appointed prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem,
saying, There is a king in Judah.] That is. we have now a king again of our own
nation, and shall not be in bondage any longer to foreign princes. I find some
Expositours of opinion, that such a rumor was indeed spread abroad concerning
Nehemiah, and that it was raised by occasion of the prophesies of Haggai and
Zachariah, concerning the near approach of Christ's kingdom; which were by some
perverted, as if they had been spoken of Nehemiah. But I think it may as well
be supposed that there were no such rumors; but that they were merely forged
by Sanballat to scare Nehemiah, and in hope he would thereupon come to them to
clear himself: for so Nehemiah answers, verse. 8. There are no such things done
as thou say, but thou faignest them out of thy own heart.

Come now therefore, and let us take counsel together.] That is, let us meet
and advise in a friendly manner, that we may see whether this report be true,
and if it be false, what course is to be taken to discover your innocence, and
to prevent the king of Persiaes displeasure against us.

Verse. 10. Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah,
etc. who was shut up.] It seems this Shemaiah was a priest of the course of
Delaiah, 1. Chron. 24.18. and therefore called here the son of Delaiah, and
that accordingly he had his house in the Temple: but withal it is evident,
that he was accounted a prophet, though he was indeed a false prophet, and was
hired at this time by Tobiah and Sanballat, to prophecy of the danger that was
coming upon Nehemiah, purposely that he might be terrified and be won to hide
himself, and so the hearts of all the people might be discouraged likewise,
and some advantage by this means might be taken against them: why it is here
said he was at this time shut up, the judgment of Expositours is diverse: the
most probable reasons that I find given for it, are, that he shut up himself,
either first, to make a show of a desire to retire himself that he might pray
with the greater liberty, and receive some revelation from God: or secondly,
out of a pretense of fearing some sudden attempt that would be made upon the
city, which caused him to shut up himself, that he might keep out the enemy: or
thirdly, that he did it as a prophetical sign that such dangers were coming
upon the city that men should be glad to shut up themselves, assaying thereby
to hide themselves from the enemy: whereof when Nehemiah heard, for this very
cause it was that he came to him.

And he said, Let us meet together in the house of God, within the Temple, and
let us shut the doors, etc.] And thus under a pretense of persuading Nehemiah
to shut up himself in the Temple that his enemies might not come at him, he
sought by Nehemiahs cowardice to discourage all the people, as is before noted,
and withal might have a purpose to deliver him up into their hands, having him
thus fast shut up, that he could not escape to hide himself.

Verse. 11. And I said, Should such a man as I flee? etc.] Being called of God
to do what I do, and being at present the chief magistrate and governor of
this city, who am therefore to take care for the defense of the people, and to
give them all possible encouragement both by word and deed, Should I flee, and
that into the Temple, like a malefactor that sought to take sanctuary there?
Surely this were the ready way utterly to discourage the people, and to bring a
reproach both upon my self and upon them, as if I did distrust the providence
and protection of God; and therefore were it to save my life, I would not do
it. This I conceive was the full meaning of these words of Nehemiah; yet some
think also that he refused to go into the Temple, because it was not lawful
for any but the priests to go in thither, Numb. 3.38.

Verse. 12. And lo, I perceived that God had not sent him, etc.] To wit, both by
the advice he gave, because it tended to the hurt of Gods people, and to beat
him off by terrifying him from the work, which God had given him in charge; and
likewise afterward by the event, because the enemies came not that night to
seize upon him, as Shemaiah had prophesied they would.

Verse. 15. So the wall was finished, in the twenty and fifth day of the month
Elul, etc.] The very doors of the gates being then also set up; which was not
done before verse. 1. The whole work was finished on the twenty fifth day of the
month Elul (which was their sixth month, agreeing most what with our August,
and shows that they undertook the work in the height of summer, when the
days were at the longest, and the season every way most seasonable for
building) and so all was dispatched in fifty and two days, to wit, from the
time that they first began the repairing of the wall. Indeed, because it seems
impossible that so great a work should be finished in so short a compass, to
wit, fifty two days, which was not full two months, therefore some
Expositours understand these fifty two days to be meant of the time after the
stone wall was finished, and that message was sent from Sanballat and Tobiah,
whereof mention is made verse. 2. but because no such thing is here expressed, I
rather understand it of the time wherein the whole work was finished. And
indeed if we consider, first, that the walls and towers were not wholly razed
to the ground, but only battered and broken, and had many breaches in them:
secondly, that there was a multitude of people who round about the city in
several places at one time were employed in the work, and did with much
earnestness follow it: and thirdly, that it was indeed finished to the
astonishment of the enemies, verse. 16. before they dreamed it could have been
done* And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and all
the heathen that was about us saw these things, they were much cast down in
their own eyes, for they perceived this work was wrought of our God: I say,
considering all these things, it needs not seem so incredible that the work was
begun and perfected in fifty two days.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. WHen the wall was built, and I had set up the doors; and the porters
and the singers, and the Levites were appointed] By the Levites, thus
distinguished from the porters and singers, are meant such of the Levites, as
were to attend upon the priests in their office: and the meaning of this clause
is, either that Nehemiah did choose out and appoint some of these to perform
some solemn service at the dedication of the walls by way of thanksgiving to
God; or else that such of the porters, singers, and Levites, as had been some
way employed about the building, were now appointed again to return to their
service in the Temple.

Verse. 2. I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the palace,
charge over Jerusalem.] To his brother or kinsman Hanani (who first brought him
word of the sad estate of Jerusalem, chap. 1.1, 2.) and to Hananiah the ruler
of the palace, he gave charge over Jerusalem; that is, to see that the gates
were carefully shut and opened in due time, and a sufficient watch for the
better guard of the city always maintained.

Verse. 3. And while they stand by, let them shut the doors, and bar them.]
That is, let not those that have the charge of shutting and barring the gates,
appoint or send others to do it for them; but let them at least stand by
themselves and see it done as it should be. Some indeed conceive that this is
spoken of Hanani and Hananiah, to wit, that they were to see the gates shut up
themselves: but the words seem more clearly to import, that it is spoken of
them that by Hanani and Hananiah should be appointed to this service.

And appoint watches of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch,
and every one to be over against his house.] That is, every one to watch in
that part which was nearest to his own dwelling; those that dwelt in the west
parts of the city were not to be called to watch on the walls on the east side,
etc.

Verse 4. Now the city was large and great, but the people were few therein and
the houses were not builded.] So that there was no proportion betwixt the walls
without, and the houses of the city within; nor were the inhabitants sufficient
for the defense of the walls in so large a circuit: which is alleged here as
the reason why Nehemiah undertook the numbering of the people, according to
their genealogies, as is related in the following verse. Some indeed of the
chief of the inhabitants were careful to build themselves stately and fair
houses, Haggai 1.4 Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses
etc. but the whilst it seems the most of the houses lay ruinated and unbuilt:
and though there came out of Babylon with Zerubbabel forty two thousand three
hundred and sixty, Ezra 2 64. yet the greatest number of these happily chose to
seat themselves in some other part of the country, rather then in Jerusalem:
either because of the misery that had befallen the inhabitants of this city
formerly, when it was taken by the Chaldees; or because they found the city
unfit to dwell in.

Verse. 5. And my God put into mine heart, to gather together the nobles and the
rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogies.] To wit,
that knowing the number of the people according to their several genealogies,
first, those families that belonged to Jerusalem might be appointed to dwell
there: secondly, that as need was found, others might be also called in to
inhabit Jerusalem, though their progenitors had not dwelt there: thirdly, that
according as men were found able they might be appointed to lend aid to the
rebuilding of those houses in Jerusalem that lay in the rubbish. This assembly
was gathered upon the first day of the seventh month, chap. 8.2. when they
were first prepared by the hearing of the law, that they might the more
willingly undertake what was imposed for the common good; and then order was
taken for these things, chap. 11.1. The rest of the people cast lots to bring
one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts to dwell in
other cities, etc.

And I found a register of the genealogy of them which came up at the first,
etc.] For their better proceeding a president was sought of their former
numbering the people in the days of Zerubbabel, and this register was found
that follows in the next verse, which in many things differs from that Ezra
2.1. and therefore it is thought that that in Ezra was taken and written when
they were preparing to come out of Babylon; this, when they were come into
Judea.

Verse. 6. These are the children of the province, etc.] What is to be noted for
the understanding of this register of the genealogy of them that returned out
of Babylon, we may see in the notes upon the second chapter of Ezra.

Verse. 70. And some of the chief of the fathers gave unto the work.] Some
conceive that this is still a continuation of the register that was found,
mentioned above verse. 5. containing a catalogue of what was given at their
first return out of Babylon toward the building of the Temple, etc. And
whereas it may be objected, that there is a great deal of difference betwixt
that which is said to be given there, Ezra 2.69. and that which here is said
was given; to this they answer, that all that was given by the encouragement of
Cyrus, both by Jews and Persians, is there set down; here, only that which was
given by the Jews. But I rather conceive with other Expositours, that the
register that was found, mentioned verse. 5. ended with the former verse, and
that here now is added what was collected after the people were numbered by
Nehemiah, according to the president of the register that was found: for as
there was a collection of money and other things made, when they were numbered
according to their genealogies in Zerubbabels time, at their first coming out
of Babylon, Ezra 2.68. so was it now also, only that was merely for the
building of the Temple, this was partly for the service of the Temple (for why
else were so many priests garments given, mentioned in the following words) but
in part also for the rebuilding of the city. See above, verse. 4.

The Tirshatha gave to the treasure.] That is, Nehemiah, chap. 10.1. and 8.9.
Now those that sealed were Nehemiah the Tirshatha, etc. See the note also Ezra
2.63.

Verse. 73. So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, etc.] See the
note, Ezra 2.70.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. ANd all the people gathered themselves together as one man, etc.] To
wit, on the first day of the seventh month, verse. 2. which was the feast of
trumpets, Levit. 23.24. and not many days after the wall was finished, which
was on the twenty fifth day of the sixth month, chap. 6.15. Some Expositours
conceive that this is but only a more full and large relation of those things
which were done long since at Zerubbabels first coming into Judea, and which
were before more briefly related by Ezra, Ezra 3.1. etc. and that, first,
because as the second chapter of Ezra ends, and the third begins, so with the
same words in effect does the seventh chapter of Nehemiah end and the eighth
begin: and secondly, because it is not likely that Ezra, being sent to instruct
the people in the Law of God, would suffer them so long, to wit, till Nehemiahs
coming, to be ignorant of the main duties of Gods worship and service, as it
seems now they were, verse. 14. And they found written in the Law which the Lord
had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in
the feast of the seventh month, etc. But these reasons are too weak to win
us to admit of such a confusion in the order of the history: rather therefore I
conceive, that what is here related was done in Nehemiahs time, after the wall
was finished, as is above related. The place where they met together was, as is
here added, the street that was before the watergate; a gate mentioned before,
chap. 3.26. and in the street hereof it seems the people were assembled,
because the court of the Temple could not contain such a multitude.

And they spoke unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the Law of Moses,
etc.] See the note Ezra 7.1. and 6.

Verse. 4. And beside him stood Mattithiah, etc.] To wit, as witnesses ready to
approve and maintain the truth of that which from the Law of God should be
delivered to them, and in their turn also to perform the work.

Verse. 7. Also Joshua, and Bani, etc.] That is, not only Ezra did thus expound
the Law unto the people, but others also of the priests and Levites caused the
people to understand the Law, because they could not all conveniently hear
Ezra, they were divided into several companies, and in each of them there were
pulpits or scaffolds erected, as may be gathered, chap 9.4, from whence they
read and expounded the Law unto them, there being several teachers in each
place that might successively discharge that work.

And the people stood in their place.] To wit, some in one company, and some in
another, according to their divisions.

So they read in the book, in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense,
and caused them to understand the reading.] It is a weak conceit of some popish
Expositours, that they did read only that in the Syriak tongue to the people,
which in the original book was written in Hebrew, and that because the people,
since their return out of Babylon, did neither speak, nor perfectly understand
the Hebrew tongue, but the Syriak only; for the words do plainly import that
they expounded that which they read to them.

Verse. 9. And Nehemiah which is the Tirshatha.] See Ezra 2.63.

This day is holy unto the Lord your God, mourn not nor weep.] That is, this
day the Lord has appointed to be consecrated to him, as a holy day of
spiritual rejoyceing and feasting together, Numb. 10.10. In the day of your
gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your months ye
shall blow the trumpet, etc. and therefore be comforted and cheer up your
hearts with the assurance of Gods mercy, and make not your selves unfit for the
service of this day by your excessive and unseasonable mourning.

For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the Law.] Because they
they perceived by that they had heard from their teachers, how many ways they
had broken the Law of their God, and had by that means provoked the Lord to
pour forth those judgments upon them, which they saw he had long since
threatened against those which did not obey his commandments.

Verse. 10. Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, etc.] This is meant of their feasting together with their
peace offerings, to which he adds, and send portions unto them, for whom
nothing is prepared, that is, to the poor, the fatherless, and widows; which
was according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 16.14. Thou shall rejoice in thy feast, thou,
and thy son, and thy daughter, etc. and the Levite, the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, etc.

For the joy of the Lord is your strength.] That is, your rejoicing in the Lord
his love and favor and manifold mercies, which he has of late conferred upon
you, and does still continue to you, is that whereby you must be strengthened
both in the outward and inward man.

Verse. 13. And on the secend day were gathered together the chief, etc. even to
understand the words of the Law.] That is, to advise with him concerning some
particular passages, which happily they had observed the day before in the
expounding of the Law; amongst which I conceive one main thing was, concerning
the keeping of the feast of Tabernacles, whereof happily Ezra the day before
had purposely spoken to instruct the people, because that feast was now nigh at
hand; for so much seems to be employed, verse. 14. And the found written in the
Law which the Lord had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should
dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh month.

Verse. 16. And in the street of the watergate, and in the street of the gate
of Ephraim.] That is, the gate whereat they went out that were to go to the
tribe of Ephraim, the meaning is, that they built them booths all over the
city, from the one end of the city to the other, or in all the streets that
were near to the Temple.

Verse. 17. For since the days of Joshua the son of Nun, unto that day, had
not the children of Israel done so.] That is, from Joshuas time till then they
had not kept this feast in such a solemn manner, with such celebration and
devotion, as it was kept now. Joshuas time is mentioned, not the time of Moses,
because happily till Joshua brought them into the land of Canaan they kept not
this feast: it was a memorial of their dwelling in booths, as they passed
through the wilderness out of Egypt. See Levit. 23.42, 43. and therefore till
they were come into Canaan, and had left dwelling in tabernacles and booths,
there needed no memorial of it: but now that this feast so expressly
commanded by God should be utterly disused and neglected from Joshua till then,
a matter of a thousand years, in the times of so many godly princes and
priests, is methinks altogether improbable; besides, it is manifest that in
Zerubbabels time at the peoples first coming out of Babylon, which was long
before this, they kept this feast, Ezra 3.4. They kept also the feast of
tabernacles, etc. and therefore the meaning of these words must needs be this
only; that from the days of Joshua till then they had not kept this feast so,
that is, with such devotion and solemnity. Wherein the difference was it is
hard to say, yet one particular seems to be that which is expressed in the
following verse; namely, that all the seven days, day after day, the prople
met together and had the Law read and expounded to them; whereas formerly,
because the first and last days were only appointed to be more solemn
convocations and great holy days, whereon they might do no work, Levit. 23.35,
36. their manner it seems had been to assemble the people, and read the word
only on the first and last days, which was now reformed and the word was
read all the seven days, though the first and last were kept more solemnly,
as the great holy days of the feast, as one of them is called, John 7.37. The
last and great day of the feast: so much seems employed, verse. 18. Also day by
day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in the book of the Law of
God: and they kept the feast seven days, etc. and to this some add also, that
they had never before built themselves booths upon the tops of their homes, as
now they had done, as is expressly noted before, verse. 16.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. NOw in the twenty and fourth day of this month, the children of
Israel were assembled with fasting, etc.] To wit, the next day but one after
the solemnity of the feast of tabernacles was ended: for the last and great day
of the feast was the two and twentieth day of this month: seeing they were so
careful according to the Law to keep the feast of trumpets on the first day of
this month, and the feast of tabernacles on the fifteenth day, chap. 8.1, 2.
-- 14. it is likely also that they omitted not to keep the day of atonement
enjoined by the same Law, which was a public fast day, whereon they were to
afflict their souls, and was to be kept on the 10. day of this month, Lev.
23.27. some five days before the feast of tabernacles began; but yet having
had the Law day by day all the feast of tabernacle-expounded to them, chap.
8.18. and finding thereby how grievously they had sinned, and how far short
they were still from that which God required them to be, they resolved to keep
a public fast, before the people now assembled at Jerusalem were departed
thence (only affording them one day to prepare themselves for it) wherein they
would bewail their sins, seek to God for mercy, and make a solemn covenant
with God, having first separated themselves from their strange wives and their
children, whereof it seems they were particularly convinced by the reading of
the Law, as is employed in the following words, verse. 2.

Verse. 2. And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers.] That
is, from their strange wives and the children they had by them. This is again
repeated, chap. 13.3. When they had heard the Law they separated from Israel
all the mixed multitude: yea, some conceive that that which is before related
concerning the Jews putting away their strange wives at the persuasion of Ezra,
was done now; Ezra being still living, as is noted in the former chapter, verse.
2. but of this see the note, Ezra 10,

Verse. 3. And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law,
etc.] That is, the whole congregations stood up in their several places, and
then the priests and Levites read in the law of God one fourth part of the day,
and prayed and praised God another fourth part. The day consisted among the
Jews of twelve hours, John 11.9. Are there not twelve hours in the day? the
first three hours were allotted to the morning sacrifice, the three last to
the evening sacrifice; and the other two fourth parts were allotted to these
duties of Gods worship and service.

Verse. 4. Then stood up upon the stairs of the Levites, Jeshua and Bani, etc.]
The people being divided it seems into eight several congregations,
accordingly these eight Levites stood up, each of them upon a scaffold or
pulpit, erected in their several assemblies, and prayed unto the Lord, and
stirred up the people to join with them in praising God, as is expressed in the
following verse: for those there mentioned, are the same that are here named,
though three of them are there called by other names: for Bunni Bani and
Chenani, are there called Hashabniah and Hodijah and Pethahiah.

Verse. 6. Thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, etc.] See 1. Kings 8.27.

And the host of heaven worshipeth thee.] Not the Angels only, but the sun,
moon, and stars, etc. are said to worship God, because in their kind they
honor him, by being subject to his will and command.

Verse. 20. Thou gave also thy good spirit, etc.] To wit, to their governors
and teachers; not Moses only, but the seventy Elders also, Numb. 11.17. by
whom they were accordingly instructed and governed in the right way.

Verse. 22. Thou gave them kingdoms and nations, and did divide them into
corners.] That is, thou did plant them in the several parts and corners of
the land of Canaan, some within Jordan and some without; yet some understand
this of the heathen that were driven out of their dwellings before the
Israelites.

So they possessed the land of Sihon, and the land of the king of Heshbon,
etc.] Which was also, at that time when the Israelites took it, in the
possession of Sihon, who had formerly taken it from the Moabites, Numb. 21.26.
For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought
against the king of Moab, etc.

Verse. 29. And hearkened not unto thy commandments, but sinned against thy
judgments, (which if a man do, he shall live in them.] See the note, Levit.
18.5.

And withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.] That
is, they refused to submit to Gods government, but were stubborn and rebellious
against him. It is a metaphorical expression taken from oxen and other
cattle, that will struggle and will not take yoke upon them; the like phrase
we have, Zach. 7.11. But they refused to hearken, and pulled away their
shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they would not hear; and so in many
other places.

Verse. 32. Let not all the trouble seem little before thee, that has come upon
us.] That is, take compassion on us, and put an end to the miseries that we
have a long time suffered, and resolve not to bring any more evil upon us, as
if we had not yet suffered enough.

Verse. 36. And for the land that thou gave unto our fathers, to eat the fruit
thereof, and the good thereof, behold, we are servants in it.] This is
mentioned as a great aggravation of their misery, that they were servants in
their own land, in the land which God had given their fathers for their
inheritance; so that we reap not (say they) the benefit of the lands
fruitfulness, but the kings that reign over us, as is expressed in the
following words, verse. 37. And it yields much increase unto the kings whom
thou have set over us, etc.

Verse. 38. We make a sure covenant, and write it, and our princes, Levites, and
priests, seal unto it.] To wit, in their own name, and in the name of all the
people.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. NOw those that sealed were Nehemiah the Tirshatha, etc.] To wit, in
the name of all the rest, both of the magistrates, priests, Levites, and people.

Verse. 8. These were the priests.] That is, all those above mentioned whose
names are added after Nehemiahs; for we cannot hence infer, as some do, that
Nehemiah was of the stock of the priests; his name being set in the first place
only, because he was at that time the governor of Judea.

Verse. 28. And the rest of the people, the priests, etc.] Here generally it is
added, that all the rest that did not seal the covenant, did yet consent to
that the others had sealed in their names, to wit, the rest of the people, the
Levites, the porters and singers, (and why the porters and singers are
mentioned severally from the Levites, see chap. 7.1.) The Nethinims and all
they that had separated themselves from the people of the lands, unto the law
of God; that is, all of other nations converted to the Jewish religion called
usually Proselytes, their wives, etc. they clave to their brethren their
nobles, verse. 29. that is, they consented to stand to this covenant, which the
others had sealed in their name as well as in their own.

Verse. 30. And that we would not give our daughters unto the people of the
land, etc.] Besides the general covenant, that they would carefully observe
all the commandments of God, these following heads they do particularly add,
because in these they had hitherto been exceeding faulty.

Verse. 31. And if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the
sabbath day, to sell, that we would not buy it, etc.] Though it were not in
their power to force the neighboring nations to observe the Jewish laws, yet
they bound themselves by covenant, that they would not buy any thing they
brought to sell on the sabbath day; which notwithstanding many of them brake
soon after, chap. 13.15, 16. In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine*
presses on the sabbath, etc. there dwelt men of Tire also therein, which
brought fish, and all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children
of Judah and in Jerusalem.

And that we would leave the seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.]
That is, that they would leave the land every seventh year to lie at rest, not
sowing their fields, nor dressing their vineyards, nor gathering that which
grew of it self, but leaving it free for others as for themselves; and that
they would not exact that year their debts of those that were indebted to
them, all which was enjoined by the law, Levit. 25.3* 4, 5. etc. and Deuteronomy. 5.2.
but had not been of later times observed by them.

Verse. 33. For the holy things, and for the sinne-offerings.] Hereby I conceive
is meant the peace offerings, which were offered in the name of the whole
congregation and people of Israel; which therefore were provided, as here it is
said, by a common contribution of all the people.

Verse. 34. And we cast the lots among the priests, the Levites, and the people,
for the wood-offering, etc.] That is, because there was much wood to be spent
in the service of the Temple, and there were not those treasures in the Temple,
as had been formerly, wherewith it seems the wood had been in those times
provided, both priests, Levites, and people, did unanimously at this time agree
to undertake the charge and care of providing and bringing in wood for the
service of the Temple; and so having equally divided the charge among them
according to their families, and assigned to each family what they should bring
in, the time assigned to every one when they should bring in that which they
were appointed to provide, was determined by lot.

Verse. 36. Also the first born of our sons and of our cattle, etc.] That is,
the price that was to be paid for their redemption, Numb. 18.15, 16. and
consequently also the redemption-money for the firstlings of all beasts that
were not fit for sacrifice, and all this was for the priests that minister in
the house of God, that is, for the priests that did at that time attend upon
the service of the Temple; for the priests did only attend there in their
courses.

Verse. 38. And the priests the sons of Aaron, shall be with the Levites, when
the Levites take tithes.] That is, the priests were also to have their share in
the tithes together with the Levites, to wit, the tenth of tithes, Numb. 18.26.
Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them when ye take of the children of
Israel tithes, which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye
shall offer up an heave offering of it for the Lord, even a tenth part of the
tithe: yea perhaps, one of the priests the sons of Aaron was always to be
present when the Levites received the tithes of the people, as a witness that
the priests portion was faithfully set out for them.

Verse. 39. And we will not forsake the house of our God.] That is, we will not
fail to frequent the Temple, to serve the Lord there, and we will not leave it
destitute of any requisite provision for the service there to be performed.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd the rulers of tbe people dwelt at Jerusalem, the rest of the
people also cast lots, etc.] Because there were not found enough in Jerusalem
for the inhabiting and defense of the city; and people were loath to dwell
there, because the neighbors round about did exceedingly envy the glory of
this city, and were continually plotting some mischief against it, to the great
peril of the inhabitants: and secondly, because withal as there was more
safety, so also there was more profit in dwelling elsewhere, therefore one
chief business that Nehemiah had to do at this assembly of the people was,
after he had numbered them, to choose out a sufficient number of the people to
dwell there, see chap. 7.3, 4, 5. which to avoid all exception was done by lot.
The chief rulers of the people of their own accord settled themselves to dwell
(as reason indeed required) in this chief city of the kingdom; but for the
people, the tenth part of them were chosen by lot, only there were some that
did voluntarily offer themselves to dwell there, verse. 2. and this taking of
one in ten to dwell in Jerusalem, some Expositours look upon also as a shadow
of the paucity of those that shall be received to dwell in the heavenly
Jerusalem, to wit, that scarce one in ten even of those that profess
themselves Gods people, shall dwell there; according to that Isaiah 6.13. But
yet in it shall be a tenth, etc. and Jerem. 3.14. I will take you one of a
city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion.

Verse. 2. And the people blessed all the men, that willingly offered themselves
to dwell at Jerusalem.] That is, they commended them for it, and desired the
Lord to bless and prosper them.

Verse. 3. Now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem.] To
wit, that were chosen now by lot to dwell there. In 1. Chron. 9. there is
another catalogue of them, wherein more are mentioned then are mentioned here.
But it seems in that both those that were chosen by lot, and those that
voluntarily offered themselves to dwell there, are set down; here only those
that were chosen by lot.

Verse. 4. And at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of the
children of Benjamin.] Because Jerusalem stood partly in Judah and partly in
Benjamin, therefore those that were chosen by lot to dwell there, were of those
two tribes: yet there were some also of Ephraim and Manasseh that dwelt there,
1. Chron. 9.3. which were doubtless of those that voluntarily proffered
themselves.

Verse. 5. And Maaseiah the son of Baruch, etc.] Concerning this catalogue of
those that dwelt at Jerusalem, see 1. Chron. 9.5, 6.

Verse. 9. Second over the city.] That is, next in place and government after
Joel aforementioned.

Verse. 16. And Shabbethai, and Jozabad of the chief of the Levites, had the
oversight of the outward business of the house of God.] That is, such
businesses as appertained to the Temple, but were to be done abroad not in the
Temple, as the providing of those things as were to be bought with the money
that was collected, etc. see 1. Chron. 26.29.

Verse. 17. The son of Asaph, was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in
prayer.] That is, the principal of the singers, that used to begin the Psalms
when they sung and praised God.

Verse. 19. Akkub, Talmon and their brethren that kept the gates, were an
hundred seventy two.] See 1. Chron. 9.17 22.

Verse. 23. For it was the kings commandment concerning them, that a certain
portion should be for the singers, etc.] That is, the king of Persia had
commanded, that a certain allowance should every day be given them out of the
kings treasure: this may have reference to the decree of Darius, Ezra 6.9, 10.
or that of Artaxerxes, Ezra 7.23, 24. or happily to some new directions given
by him to Nehemiah at his coming to Jerusalem. Some read these words thus,
that it was the kings commandment concerning them, that a sure ordinance should
be for the singers, and so they understand it, either of David that he had
established it as a sure ordinance that the singers should praise the Lord in
the Temple every day; or else of Artaxerxes, that he had ordained that
according to the ancient custom, the singers should every day perform this
service.

Verse. 24. And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, etc. was at the kings hand in
all matters concerning the people.] That is, the king of Persia made use of him
in all things he gave in charge concerning the people, as happily to gather the
kings allowance for the Temple, to receive the peoples petitions, and it may be
to assist the governor in matter of judgment.

Verse. 36. And of the Levites, were divisions in Judah, and in Benjamin.] That
is, besides the Levites that dwelt at Jerusalem, there were some of them also
allowed to dwell in several towns and cities of Judah, that they might teach
the people the law of God in their several divisions.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. NOw these are the priests and the Levites that went up with
Zerubbabel. etc.] Nehemiah intending here to relate with what solemnity they
kept the dedication of the new built walls of Jerusalem, and how the priests
and Levites were employed herein; first he sets down their ancestors, to wit,
who were the chief priests and Levites in the days of Jeshua the high priest,
and that came with Zerubbabel and Ezra, (or immediately after him) from Babylon
into the land of Judea: and then secondly, who were the chief priests and
Levites in the days of Joiakim the high priest the son of Jeshua, etc. verse.
12. Now by the chief of the priests is doubtless meant in both these
catalogues, the heads of the several divisions of the priests, that did in
their turns wait upon the service of the Temple, but then seeing there were
twenty four courses or orders of the priests, established by David, 1. Chron.
24.7. why there should be here but two and twenty mentioned in the first
catalogue, and but twenty in the second, verse. 12. I find not any probable
reason given by Expositours.

Verse. 9. Their brethren, were over against them in the watches.] That is, they
were also employed in other services of the Temple successively in their
several courses.

Verse. 10. And Jeshua begat Joiakim Joiakim also begat Eliashib.] The names of
the high priests from their coming out of Babylon, to the ruin of that Persian
Monarchy are here inserted, amongst other reasons, no doubt, because in those
days the years of the Hebrews commonwealth, were noted by the years of the
high priest; for kings they had none, as in former ages: and as for this
Joiakim the son of Jeshua and father of Eliashib, he was happily the same
that is often mentioned in the Apocryphal story of Judith, see Judith 4.6. and
was doubtless the high priest in or about the time when Artaxerxes sent Ezra
to Jerusalem Ezra 7.1. for Eliashib his son, who succeeded him, was high
priest when Nehemiah came first to Jerusalem with commission to build the walls
of Jerusalem; for he then built the sheep-gate, etc. chap. 3.1. Then Eliashib
the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests, and they built the
sheep-gate, etc. though afterward, Nehemiah being with Artaxerxes in Persia, he
did very grossly misdemean himself in his place, lodging Tobiah to whom he was
allied by marriage, (as also to Sanballat, chap. 13.28.) in the very chambers of
the Temple, chap. 13.4, 5. Before this Eliashib the priest having the oversight
of the chambers of the house of our God, was allied unto Tobiah, and he
prepared for him a great chamber, etc.

Verse. 11. And Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jaddua.] This Joiada,
Jonathan, and Jaddua, were doubtlosse high priests in the times of those kings
of Persia that succeeded Artaxerxes Longimanus (whose cup bearer Nehemiah was,)
to wit, Darius Nothus, Artaxerxes Mnemon, Artaxerxes Ochus, Arses, and Darius
the last called Codomanus, who lost the Empire to Alexander the great; for as
Josephus reports, this Jaddua it was that met Alexander the great in his
pontifical robes, when he came against Jerusalem; with the glory of whose
presence that great conqueror was so stricken, that he granted the Jews all,
and more than they desired. Nor needs it seem strange that Nehemiah should live
to see so many successions of high priests; for happily he was very young when
he was Artaxerxes cup bearer: and secondly, happily Jaddua (who lived in
Alexanders time) was not yet high priest when Nehemiah wrote this, but was
only added to the rest, because he was to succeed his father Jonathan: and
thirdly, God does usually grant long life to those whom he raises up to be
great instruments of good to his Church. But however it may well be which
others say, that this clause was inserted after Nehemiahs death by some other
holy man of God.

Verse. 12. And in the days of Joiakim, were priests, the chief of the fathers
of Seraiah, Meraiah, etc.] That is, Meraiah was the head or chief of that order
in the days of Jehoiakim, of which Seraiah was head or chief, verse. 1. in the
days of Jeshua: and so we must understand all the rest that are named in this
second catalogue.

Verse. 17. Of Miniamim, of Moadiah, Piltai.] The meaning of this clause is,
either that Piltai was the head of both these families; or else that he was the
head of the family of Miniamin, who was descended of Moadiah.

Verse. 22. The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and
Jaddua, were recorded, etc.] Having set down in the ten foregoing verses, who
were the chief priests in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua; here we are
told that both the chief Levites and priests in the days of the following high
priests, to wit, Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, (the same that is before called
Jonathan, verse. 11.) and Jaddua even to the reign of Darius the Persian, that
is, Darius Codomanus the last Persian king, who was vanquished by Alexander the
great were recorded; which is as if it had been said, being recorded elsewhere,
there is no need of repeating them here again. Now because Jaddua is here again
mentioned, it is thought by some, that this verse was also inserted after the
death of Nehemiah.

Verse. 23. The sons of Levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the
book of the Chronicles, etc.] Here we are told where the names of the chief
Levites before mentioned are recorded, until the days of Johanan, or Jonathan
the son, that is, the grandchild of Eliashib, verse. 11. (and because many of
them lived also in the days of Jaddua, in the foregoing verse he also is
mentioned) namely, in the book of the Chronicles, which whether it be meant of
the Scripture Chronicles or no, it is hard to say.

Verse. 24. And the chief of the Levites, etc.] To wit, in the days of Joiakim;
for so it is expressed, verse. 26. These were in the days of Joiakim the son
of Jeshua, etc.

Verse. 27. And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, they sought the
Levites, etc.] For as at their first taking possession of any new built house,
they used to dedicate it with feasting, prayer, and praising God (as it is
noted, Deuteronomy. 20.1.) whence is that title of Psalm 30. A Psalm and song at the
dedication of David's house, so now they resolved to keep a solemn festivity for
the dedication of the walls of Jerusalem; to wit, with praying to God that he
would bless them and make them a means of safety to his holy city, and with
praising God with Psalms of joy and thanksgiving, the rather because the walls
were so miraculously finished in so short a time, maugre all the opposition of
their enemies.

Verse. 30. And purified the people, and the gates, and the wall.] To wit, by
sprinkling upon them the water of purifying, as also by praying and praising
God, as in the former note.

Verse. 31. Then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall, etc.] Viz.
together with the Levites and many of the people, as is expressed, verse. 38.
and then being altogether in one place, Nehemiah appointed two great companies
of them that gave thanks, that is, he divided them into two companies; in the
one company was Ezra, who went foremost, verse. 36. with whom went those Levites
and priests mentioned, verse. 32. etc. to the end of the 36. verse, with half of
the princes, verse. 32. yea, and half of the people, verse. 38. in the other
company was Nehemiah, verse. 38. and the other half both of the princes and
people, verse. 38, 40. and likewise those priests and Levites mentioned, verse.
41.42. And then being thus divided, Ezra and his company turned on the right
hand toward the dung-gate; Nehemiah and his company to the left, toward the
tower of the furnaces, verse. 38. and so met both at last in the Temple, verse.
40. which was in the west of the city; whence it seems they began on the
east side, Concerning the several gates here mentioned, see the several notes
on the second and third chapters of this book.

Verse. 44. And at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the
treatreasures, for the offerings, for the first fruits, etc.] Which the people
had newly covenanted to bring in yearly according to the law for the priests
and Levites.

Verse. 47. And the Levites sanctified them unto the children of Aaron.] That
is, the tithe of their tithes the Levites set apart for the priests.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. ON that day they read in the book of Moses, etc.] This I conceive,
has not reference to that which is immediately before related, concerning the
dedication of the walls of Jerusalem, (for the walls were begun to be built
within a while after Nehemiahs first coming to Jerusalem, and were finished
within two months or less, chap. 6.15. nor is it likely, that it was long
after ere the walls were dedicated) but rather to the day whereon they sealed
the covenant, (whereof he had spoken before in the ninth and tenth chapters)
when upon reading of the law amongst other evils, this also concerning their
marriages with heathens, and the joining of their children to the congregation
of the Lord, was discovered and reformed, by separating all the mixed multitude
from the children of Israel, as is noted before, chap. 9.2. and here repeated
again, verse. 3. and this, (as it seems by that which follows, verse. 4, 5, 6.)
was about the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes, some twelve years after
Nehemiahs first coming to Jerusalem, when having been with Artaxerxes in
Persia, he returned again to Jerusalem, and reformed such abuses as in the time
of his absence were crept in amongst them, see the note, chap. 2.1. and chap.
5.14.

And therein was written that the Ammonite and Moabite should not come into the
congregation, etc.] No nor their children unto the tenth generation, Deuteronomy.
23.1.3. concerning which see the notes there. And though there were many
passages in Moses law, that were against the polluting of the seed of Israel by
marriages with the nations about them, yet this is here alleged concerning the
Ammonites and Moabites, rather then any other; because it did so expressly
discover the great sin of Eliashib, mentioned afterward, verse. 4.5. in
joining himself in affinity with Tobiah, who is often called the servant the
Ammonite: yea, and honoring him so far, as to allot him a chamber in the
very Temple.

Verse. 3. They separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.] This is added to
aggravate the sin of Eliashib the high priest, related in the following
verses, who was so far from a sincere desire to reform this abuse discovered
by the law, that notwithstanding the people did unanimously separate all the
mixed multitude from the children of Israel, yet he immediately after Nehemiah
was gone into Persia, (which was (verse. 6.) in the thirty second year of
Artaxerxes reign) received Tobiah amongst them, yea, and gave him a lodging in
the very Temple; howeuer he had happily dissembled these his purposes so long
as Nehemiah abode in Jerusalem.

Verse. 4. And before this, Eliashib the priest having the oversight of the
chamber of the house of our God, was allied unto Tobiah.] That is, before this
reading of the law, and the reformation thereupon following, mentioned in the
former verses.

Verse. 5. And he had prepared for him a great chamber, where before time they
laid the meat offerings, etc,] To wit, not when he was first allied to Tobiah,
but long after when Nehemiah was gone into Persia, verse. 6. However he carried
the matter when (Nehemiah being then present) upon the reading of the law, the
people separated from Israel all the mixed multitude, verse. 3. yet so soon as
Nehemiah was gone into Persia, in the thirty second year of Artaxerxes reign,
Eliashib discovered himself; preparing, that is, making ready and furnishing
for his friend and ally Tobiah the Ammonite a great chamber, even in the
chambers of the Temple: which was done it seems, by laying many chambers into
one, the partitions being taken down, as may be gathered from verse. 9. where it
is said that Nehemiah having cast out Tobiahs household stuff, caused the
chambers to be cleansed.

Verse. 6. For in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came
I unto the king, etc.] Twelve years after his first coming to Jerusalem, which
was in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, chap. 2.1.

Verse. 9. Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers.] To wit, by casting
out the household stuff of Tobiah; and happily, by sprinkling them with the
water of purifying, because they had been polluted and profaned by the lodging
of strangers therein, that were not of the seed of Israel.

Verse. 10. And I perceived that the portion of the Levites had not been given
them.] The people had not long since by covenant with God bound themselves to
the contrary, chap. 10.35. etc. but it seems out of indignation against
Eliashib, for lodging Tobiah in the treasuries of the Temple, and because they
feared thereupon, that what they brought thither was diverted some other way,
and not employed as it ought to be, they wholly forbear to bring in the Levites
portions as they had formerly done.

Verse. 11. Then contended I with the rulers, and said, Why is the house of God
forsaken?] They had said before when they made that solemn covenant with God,
We will not forsake the house of our God, chap. 10.39. and now therefore
Nehemiah upbraids them as it were with their own words, and condemns them out
of their own mouths, Why is the house of God forsaken?

Verse. 14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good
deeds, etc.] He brags not, but prays; not claiming any thing of merit as due
in justice, but producing the good which through the grace of God he had done,
he beggs of God to remember him in goodness and mercy, to accept of these his
endeavors, to serve him according to the sincerity of his heart, and not to
reject them because of his many failings, as is more fully expressed, verse. 22.
Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to the
greatness of thy mercy, yea, herein also he intimates, that he knew well
enough, that perhaps from men he should have no thanks, but he sought not the
praise of men; if it proved so, he beseeched the Lord however to remember him,
and then he had his desire.

Verse. 15. In those days, saw I in Judah, some treading winepresses on the
sabbath, etc.] Which was also contrary to their former promise, when they
solemnly renewed their covenant with God, chap. 10.31.

Verse. 16. There dwelt men of Tire also therein, which brought fish, and all
manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath, etc.] Keeping their very markets upon
the sabbath days; and this they did too (which is added in the last words as a
great aggravation of their sins) in Jerusalem, that is, even in the city
Jerusalem, which God had chosen to himself for his habitation.

Verse. 19. When the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark, etc.] That is, when
the sun was well nigh set: for then the mountains in Jerusalem intercepting
the light of the setting sun, the gates of Jerusalem began to be shadowed and
dark, and thus timely he commanded that the gates should be shut, that he might
be sure the whole sabbath should be kept holy; which began there at the sun
setting, and lasted till the sun setting of the following day, Levit. 23.32.
From even unto even shall ye celebrate your sabbath.

And some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should be no burden
brought in on the sabbath day.] Though he had charged that the gates should not
be opened, (that is, set wide open, that all might have free egresse and
regresse as on other days) till after the sabbath, as is expressed in the
foregoing words: yet there was a necessity of opening the doors to let in and
out those that had any necessary occasion, especially such as dwelt in the
suburbs, and were to come in to serve God in the Temple; therefore he set some
of his servants to be at the gates, to see that under that pretense none were
admitted that would bring in any burden.

Verse. 21. Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye
about the wall, etc.] To wit, first because those that dwelt without the walls
might still buy of them on the sabbath day: secondly, because their being there
with wares ready to sell, might be a dangerous temptation to move those within
the walls to try by some means to get out to them.

Verse. 22. And I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and
that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath day.] Some
understand this also of the city gates, to wit, that the Levites as men of
greatest fidelity, should see that the gates were duly kept shut. But because
his own servants were appointed to that service, and because it is said, that
the Levites should cleanse themselves, that they might be fit to keep these
gates, I conceive this is meant of the gates of the Temple, through which they
were to take care that no unclean person did enter, in that great concourse of
people that resorted thither on the sabbath day.

Remember, me O my God, concerning this also, and spare me, etc.] Because by
his stricktnesse in reforming these profanations of the sabbath, he knew that
many were highly displeased with him, he desires the Lord would accept of his
service, and then it was no great matter what men thought of him; but withal,
because he knew, that his best actions would not endure the exact trial of
Gods justice, therefore even herein he implores Gods mercy, and spare me
according to the greatness of thy mercy.

Verse. 29. And their children spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, etc.] So
likewise those of other nations; which besides that it was in it self
dishonorable to the people of God, it was also a dangerous sign that they had
a mixture of the manners, as well as of the language of their heathen mothers.

Verse. 25. And I contended with them, and cursed them, etc.] First, he curses,
that is, he pronounced them accursed, and accordingly excommunicated them, and
cast them out of the congregation of the Lord: secondly, He smote certain of
them; that is, those whom he found most obstinate, he caused to be beaten
according to that law, Deuteronomy. 25.2. If the wicked man be worthy to be beaten,
the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face,
according to his fault, by a certain number: and indeed we read that Paul was
so punished by the Jews, 2. Cor. 11.25. Thrice was I beaten with rods, etc.
yea, and happily also to be smitten with the fist; for so it seems the custom
was among the Jews to use those that were condemned for any great offense,
Isaiah 54.4. Ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness, Matthew. 26.67. They spit in his face, and buffetted him, and others
smote him with the palms of their hands, John 18.22. One of the officers that
stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, Acts 23.2. And the high
priest commanded them that stood by to smite him on the mouth: and thirdly, he
plucked off their hair: for it seems that amongst the Jews, those that were
found guilty of any foul offense, were delivered up to the reproaches either of
the people in general, or of those that were to punish them; who were
accordingly wont not only to buffet them, but also to pluck off their hair,
Isaiah 50.6. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that pulled
off the hair; and so were these men now used by Nehemiahs appointment.

Verse. 28. And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high
priest, was son in law to Sanballat.] That is, one of the grand children of
Joiada: for this was (according to Josephus) one Manasses the brother of Jaddua
the high priest, who was the son of Jonathan, and the grandchild of Joiada
the son of Eliashib: He having married the daughter of Sanballat, that he
might not turn away his wife (which either he must do or be turned out of the
priesthood) his father in law Sanballat undertook to build a Temple, every way
as stately and goodly as that at Jerusalem, wherein Manasses should be the
chief priest; which accordingly (having first obtained leave of Alexander) he
did perform, and built this new Temple, that it might have the greater honor,
in mount Gerizim, hard by the city Sichem: and from this beginning came that
famous schism, as touching the place where sacrifices were to be offered,
betwixt the Samaritanes and Jews, John 4.20. Our fathers worshipped in this
mount, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship;
but whether therefore this was that Sanballat that is so often mentioned in
this book, or another of his posterity of the same name, it is hard to say.

Therefore I chased him from me.] Because he would not put away his wife, I
caused him to be excommunicated, and banished from amongst us: and so he went
and became the chief priest in the Samaritanes temple, as is above mentioned in
the former note.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the book of ESTHER.
CHAP. I.
NOw it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus.] It is not expressed who was
the author of this book of Esther; but by the common consent of the Church in
all ages, it has been received as a part of those sacred Hebrew oracles of
God, which were committed to the Jews, and by them unto the coming of Christ
faithfully preserved; though the name of the Lord Jehovah be not mentioned in
it, and by a passage in this book, chap. 9.20.21. And Mordecai wrote these
things, and sent letters unto all the Jews that were in all the provinces, etc.
some Expositours have been induced to say, that either this book was written by
Mordecai, or at least that he wrote a relation of these things, from whence the
penman of this book, (whether Ezra or any other) did by the instinct of Gods
spirit, gather those remarkable passages that are here recorded. As for this
Ahasuerus in whose reign these things were done, doubtless it was not that
Ahasuerus mentioned Dan. 9.10. to wit, Astyages the father of Darius the Mede,
who with Cyrus first subdued the Babylonian Monarchy: for the Empire was not in
his days grown up to such a flourishing state; and purposely no doubt to
distinguish this Ahasuerus from former Persian kings of that name, the
largeness of his Empire is expressed in the following words, This is Ahasuerus
which reigned from India, etc. Nor was it Cambyses the son of Cyrus (who yet
according to the judgment of most Expositours is called Ahasuerus, and
Artaxerxes, Ezra 4.6, 7. of which see the note there) for he all his days was
a bitter enemy to the Jews, and hindered the building of the Temple, and
therefore surely was not the husband of Esther. And again, no Author holds that
he reigned above eight or nine years, whereas the twelfth year of the reign
of this Ahasuerus is expressly mentioned, chap. 3.7. The most probable opinion
therefore is, that either it was Darius the son of Hystaspes, because by
other Historians it is said, that his wife was called Atossa, which sounds in
part some what like Hadassah chap. 2.7. And he brought up Hadassah, that is
Esther; and because he greatly favored the Jews, as we see, Ezra 6.1. or else
Xerxes the son of Darius Hystaspes, whose wife other Historians call
Amestris, not much unlike Esther; or else Artaxerxes Longimanus Xerxes son,
in whose days Nehemiah was sent to Jerusalem, see the note Neh. 2.6.

This is Ahasuerus which reigned from India even unto Ethiopia, over an hundred
and seven and twenty provinces.] In the days of Darius the Mede (even after he
together with Cyrus had seized on the Babylonian Empire, there were but one
hundred and twenty provinces, Dan. 6.1. It pleased Darius to set over the
kingdom one hundred and twenty princes, which should rule over the whole
kingdom; but now it seems in the days of this Ahasuerus seven more provinces
were added to their Monarchy.

Verse. 2. In those days when the king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his
kingdom.] That is when his reign was quiet and peaceable: a like phrase is
used concerning David after there was an end of his troubles and wars with
the house of Saul, 2. Sam. 7.1. When the king sat in his house, and the Lord
had given him rest round about from all his enemies; and those that hold that
this Ahasuerus was Artaxerxes Longimanus say, that because the reign of his
father Xerzes, was so full of troubles, therefore it is noted of his son,
that he sat quietly and peaceably on the throne of his kingdom.

Verse. 4. When he showed the riches of his glorious kingdom. etc.] Though it
be said in the former verse, that the king made a feast, and then it is added
in this place When he showed the riches of his glorious kingdom, etc. even an
hundred and fourscore days, yet it is not probable that one continued feast
lasted one hundred and eighty days, that is, half a year together; but the
meaning is that so much time was spent in giving all royal entertainment unto
the several princes and nobles, whom he had called together from his one
hundred and twenty seven provinces; in which time some coming in one month and
some in another, there was as much done as might b^, bounty feasting and all
other pompeous solemnities, to show forth his great riches and glory, that they
might be rendered hereby the more ambitious to promote his service, who was so
abundantly able to reward any good service they should do him.

Verse. 5. And when these days were expired, the king made a feast unto all the
people. etc.] That is, after this royal entertainment given to his princes and
nobles, for half a year together, he made a feast for all the people, even for
all comers both small and great, for seven days together.

Verse. 6. The beds were of gold and silver.] Which they used in those east
countries in stead of tables, that so soon as they had eaten they might
presently go to sleep; whence it is that Amos 6.4. the prophet prophecieth
against those that lie upon beads of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their
couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, etc.

Verse. 7. And royal wine in abundance.] That is, the choicest and daintiest
wine, such as were provided for the kings own drinking.

Verse. 10. On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine.]
This was the last day of the feast, verse. 5. when with overmuch drinking, he
became so frolic, that in his mirth he forgot what was convenient, and was
more guided by his passions, then by reason, then he sent for Vashti; but by
this means God intended to advance Esther.

Verse. 13. Then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times.] That is,
to his wise counselors and Senators, who being men well read in the
histories the laws and decrees of former times, and that knew well the custom
of their ancestors besides the long experience they had had of all kind of
affairs in their own days, were the better able to advise how any thing ought
to be man^aged in the fittest time and season; yet some understand this of the
Magicians and Astrologians. See 1. Chron. 12.32.

For so was the kings manner toward all that knew law and judgment.] That is,
this heathen king used not to do any thing without the advice of his wise
counselors, that were skilled in giving judgment according to the laws.

Verse. 14. And the next unto him was Carshena, etc. the seven princes of Media
and Persia, which saw the kings face.] That is, which were his seven chief
counselors, and might at all times freely come into his presence: for the
Persian Monarchs were seldom seen of any without liberty granted them; only
these seven princes had always free access to him. Concerning these seven
princes of Persia, see the note also, Ezra 7.10.

Verse. 16. And Memucan answered before the king, etc.] As usually where
counselors of state are to give their advice, or to pass sentence, the last
always begins first; so happily it was here, for Memucan is last named, verse.
14. and when he had spoken, the rest concurred with him in judgment, verse. 21.
And the saying pleased the king and princes, and the king did according to the
word of Memucan.

Verse. 17. This deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women, so that
they shall despise their husbands, etc.] The meaning is, that from hence all
men's wives would infer, that if Vashti stuck not to disobey the command of
the king, they might better make bold with their husbands that were meaner men,
and not be so strictly tied to obey their commands.

Verse, 18. Likewise shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto all
the kings princes, etc.] The drift of these words is, that the ladies would
learn of the queen to despise their husbands, and then the meaner sort of wives
would learn of them, and so this would go through the whole kindgdome.

Thus shall there arise too much contempt and wrath.] That is, wives shall be
emboldened to contemn their husbands, and by this means great wrath and discord
shall grow betwixt husbands and wives.

Verse. 19. Let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, that
it be not altered, etc.] It was the custom of the Medes and Persians, that a
law once signed by the king, and registered among their statutes, could not be
altered, no not by the king himself, Daniel 6.8, 15, 16. and therefore they
desire that it might be written among the laws of the Persians and Medes, that
it be not altered, That Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus, that is,
that she be divorced, and cast off from being his wife and queen.

Verse. 22. For he sent letters into all the kings provinces, into every
province according to the writing thereof, etc.] That is, according to their
several characters and forms of writing; and the drift of the letter was, to
enjoin that every man should bear rule in his own house, to wit, upon the same
penalty on the wives part, if they did not obey, that Vashti the queen had
undergone, namely, that they should be divorced from their husbands.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. AFter these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was appeased, he
remembered Vashti, etc.] Vashti was put away from the king toward the latter
end of the third year of his reign, chap. 1.3. and Esther was married to him
in the seventh year of his reign, verse. 16. after two or happily three years
had been spent in gathering together young virgins for the king, in purifying
them a twelve month together, and in bringing them to the king one after
another in their several turns, that he might choose which he liked best to be
his queen; so that it seems it was not long after that Vashti was put away,
that is in some part of the fourth year of his reign, when these things were
done which are here next related; when the wrath of the king Ahasuerus was
appeased he remembered Vashti that is, he bethought himself what wrong he had
done her, how far that which she had done was from deserving so heavy a
punishment as was inflicted on her, and into what straits he had brought
himself by making a decree which could not be reversed; and all this no doubt
he remembered with much grief and anguish, being inwardly vexed for what he had
done, but not knowing how to help himself.

Verse. 2. Then said the kings servants, that ministered unto him, Let their be
fair young virgins sought for the king, etc.] To drive these melancholy and sad
thoughts out of his mind, and to make him forget his forsaken Vashti, and
withal lest in further discontent he should fall foul upon those that had
given him that counsel, they advised him to give order that out of the several
provinces of his kingdom there should be gathered a company of the most
beautiful virgins they should meet with, out of whom he might choose one whom
he liked best, and make her his queen.

Verse. 3. Gather together all the fair young virgins unto Shushan the palace,
to the house of the women, unto the custody of Hege the kings chamberlain,
keeper of the women.] The house of the women, was it seems divided into two
parts: in the one were the virgins kept, which was therefore called the house
under the custody of Hege, verse. 18. in the other were the concubines kept
under the custody of Shaashgaz another of the kings chamberlains; for after
they had once lain with the king, they went no more to the house of the
virgins, but were carried to the house of the concubines which was therefore
called the second house, verse. 14. In the evening she went, and on the morrow
she returned into the second house of the women: but yet it seems this Hege,
who had the special custody of the virgins, had also the supreme government
of the whole house, and Shaashbaz, was as it were under him; and therefore is
he called, as here in general, the keeper of the women.

Verse. 6, Who had been carried away from Jerusalem, with the captivity which
had been carried away with Jeconiah, etc.] This must be understood of Kish
Mordecaies great grandfather; for it cannot well be understood of Mordecai
himself, because the captivity lasted seventy years ere Zerubbabel returned in
the first year of Cyrus, and from Cyrus to Artaxerxes Longimanus, if he it be
that is called Ahasuerus, is accounted by the best Chronologers above seventy
years; so that by this computation Mordecai must needs be one hundred and fifty
year old at least; and how then was Esther his uncles daughter, a young
beautiful virgin, and therefore chosen by the king to be his wife?

Verse. 7. And he brought up Hadassah (that is Esther) his uncles daughter.]
Hadassah was her own Hebrew name; and after she was married to the king she was
called Esther, and she was Mordecaies cousin german, to wit, his uncles
daughter, whose name was Abihail, verse. 15.

Verse. 8. Esther was brought also unto the kings house.] Such was the tyrannous
government of these Persian kings, that whom his instruments would take away
for the king, neither their parents nor friends might or could withstand it;
and so was Esther among others carried away. See the note, verse. 15.

Verse. 9. And the maiden pleased him, etc.] That is, Hegai that had the keeping
of her; and therefore it follows that out of respect to her, to the end she
might the sooner be prepared for the king, he speedily gave her her things for
purification, with such things as belonged to her, to wit, both for her diet
and apparel.

Verse. 10. Esther had not showed her people, nor her kindred: for Mordecai had
charged her, etc.] To wit, because the Jews were in those times a despised
people; and therefore Mordecai feared she might some way fare the worse for
that, if it were known of what nation she was.

Verse. 13. Whatever she desired was given her, to go with her out of the house
of the women, unto the kings house.] That is, whatever any maiden that went to
the king desired, for the better adorning and tricking up of her self, that she
might please the king when she came to him, the order was that it must be given
her; whether it were rich garments, jewels, chains, or any other ornaments.

Verse. 14. In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the
second house of the women, etc.] See the note above, verse. 3.

Verse. 15. She required nothing, but what Hegai the kings chamberlain, the
keeper of the women appointed.] Herein appeared the modesty of Esther; yea,
and hereby also she testified that she was drawn against her will, and with a
discontented mind unto the bed of this impure and uncircumcised king. Others
desired to please, and therefore labored by all means to make themselves
delightful; but she desired it not, and therefore though happily she resisted
not so far as she ought to have done, yet she abhorred all endeavoring to
please; and so would only be a patient in this business, and accordingly
through Gods grace and favor this she obtained, that she was not made his
concubine but his wife.

Verse. 16. So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus, into his house-royall, in
the tenth month (which is the month Tebeth.] Which contains part of
December and part of January.

Verse. 18. And he made a release to the provinces.] To wit, of the tribute
which at that time was to have been paid: as princes at their great feasts,
such as was this at Esthers marriage, use to confer some special favors
upon their people.

Verse. 19. And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, etc.]
Some understand this of a second gathering of the virgins after that before
mentioned, either to attend at Esthers marriage, or to provide concubines for
the king. But it may as well I conceive, if not better, be understood of that
gathering of the virgins hitherto spoken of, out of all the provinces for the
choosing of a wife in the room of Vashti: it seems when Vashti was chosen queen
there was such a search made for many several beautiful virgins, of whom the
king might choose her whom he liked best, and because the same course was taken
now again, when Vashti was put away, therefore it is said here, When the
virgins were gathered together the second time, then Mordecai sat in the kings
gate, that is, he was one of the kings porters, or some other officer in the
kings court, who usually attended at the palace gate; or else it may be meant
only of his own voluntary attendance about the kings gate, that he might hear
still how it fared with Esther; as before for the same reason he had still
attended before the court of the women's house, verse. 11.

Verse. 20. Esther had not yet showed her kindred, etc.] See the note verse. 10.

Verse. 23. And it was written in the book of the Chronicles before the king.]
That is, the king seeing it done; or in the book which the king had continually
with him to read in.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. AFter these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of
Ammedatha the Agagite.] That is, of the stock and family of Agag: and because
we read of no other Agag in the Scriptures, but the kings of the Amalekites
(who were called Agags, as the kings of Egypt were called Pharaohs, and the
Roman Emperors Cesars, of which see 1. Sam. 15.8. Numb. 24.7.) therefore it is
probably conceived that this Haman was of the royal stock of those kings of
Amalek; yet happily born and brought up in Macedonia, and therefore in the
Apochryphall additions of Esther called a Macedonian, chap. 16.8.

Verse. 2. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence.] Two reasons are given
by Interpreters, why Mordecai refused to reverence Haman according to the kings
commandment, and to bow down unto him as the other servants of the king: first,
because it was a divine worship which was enjoined to be given him, which
Mordecai therefore could not afford him without manifest contempt of Gods Law;
and therefore Mordecai alleged that he was a Jew, verse. 4. he told them he was
a Jew. Manifest indeed it is by all that have written the ancient stories of
the Persians, that the Persian kings did exact divine worship from the people,
even to be worshipped as Gods, and so much is expressly noted of Darius, Dan.
6.7. Whosoever shall ask a petition of any, God or man, save of thee, O king,
he shall be cast into the den of lions: and hence they gather that this divine
worship which they required, the king out of his excessive love to Haman,
enjoined to be given to him also; and indeed, the Apocryphal additions of
Esther, so far as they deserve credit, do plainly make this the cause of
Mordecaies refusing to bow unto Haman, chap. 13. verse. 12, 13, 14. Thou know
all things, and thou know Lord, that it was neither in contempt, nor pride,
nor for any desire of glory, that I did not bow down to proud Aman: for I could
have been content with good will for the salvation of Israel to have kissed the
soles of his feet; but I did this that I might not prefer the glory of man
above the glory of God: secondly, because he would not seem to flatter and
magnify him whom he abhorred in his heart, because he was a proud ambitious,
wicked, unworthy wretch, and happily a professed enemy of Gods people, and
withal one of that accursed nation, against whom the Jews were by the law
bound to oppose themselves in perpetual enmity, Exodus 17, 16. The Lord has
sworn that he will have war with Amalek from generation to generation: Deuteronomy
25.17.19. Remember what Amalek did to thee by the way when thou came forth
out of Egypt, therefore it shall be when the Lord thy God has given thee rest,
etc. thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven, thou
shall not forget it: and indeed this seems the clearest reason: for though
Mordecai might have yielded reverence to Haman in civil respects upon the kings
decree without any offense against God, yet what wonder that a good man should
scruple more then needed, or be transported by zeal to an unnecessary
endangering of himself, especially if we consider that Mordecai, that was of
the tribe of Benjamin, might think how dear it cost Saul for showing favor to
Agag, of whose stock or nation Haman was: however doubtless Mordecai would
have scrupled as much the yielding of divine adoration to the king himself, as
to his minion Haman: nor is it credible that Mordecai, Nehemiah, and the rest
that lived in the Persian court, did never show any reverence to the king of
Persia, no not so much as to stand up to them when they passed by; which
Mordecai refused to do to Haman. See chap. 5.9.

Verse. 4. They told Haman, to see whether Mordecai his matters would stand,
etc.] That is, to see whether he would stand to that he had done, and whether
he could justify and bear himself out in so doing, and the reason of this is
given in the next words, for he had told them that he was a Jew; to wit, as
rendering that for a reason, why he might not or would not bow down unto Haman;
and that either because it was divine worship which was to be given to Haman,
which was directly contrary to the law God had given them; or because he was an
Amalekite, against whom the Jews were always to be sworn enemies, as is before
noted verse. 2. or because he had always been what he is called verse. 10. the
Jews enemy; and therefore he being a Jew, thought it not lawful by bowing to
him, to fawn upon him and flatter him.

Verse. 6. Wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews, etc.] Whereto he was
incited, both by his former hatred happily against that nation; and his present
indignation against Mordecai, for whose contempt no revenge seemed enough, and
the conceit he might have, that the like contempt he must expect from all that
nation, even because of their religion.

Verse. 7. In the first month (that is the month Nisan) in the twelfth year
of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, etc.] Which was above four years after
Esthers marriage with Ahasuerus; for she was married to him in the tenth
month, of the seventh year of his reign, chap. 2.16, after which Haman was
advanced by Ahasuerus favor. As for their casting Pur, that is, the lot, it
was by this lottery (which was a kind of Divination used in those times) to
find out what month or day would be lucky for the accomplishment of his
intended massacre of the Jews; and thus by the providence of God, overruling
the superstition of this wicked wretch, there was way made for the preservation
of Gods people; for he casting lots every day, day after day, and month after
month, the lot discovering the lucky day, fell not till they came to the
twelfth month, yea the thirteenth day of that month, verse. 13. And hereupon
though the decree he obtained from the king for the massacre of the Jews were
sealed on the thirteenth day of the first month, verse. 12. yet order was given
that the massacre should not be till the black-day (forsooth) came, to wit, the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, verse. 13. and before that day came,
Mordecai was advanced and Haman hanged.

Verse. 8. And Haman said unto Ahasuerus, There is a certain people scattered
abroad, etc.] Though the Jews were returned out of the captivity into the land
of Judah, yet many of the ten tribes especially did still remain dispersed here
and there in several countries, not embracing the liberty which was proffered
them; yea, what were the Jews in Judea but as a handful of a poor dispersed
people, in regard of the Samaritanes and others that dwelt round about them in
the province of Syria? and this Haman presses that he might intimate to the
king both the baseness of the people, and how easily they might be destroyed,
and withal what danger there was of their infecting others with this their
bold contempt of the kings laws, being a people scattered and dispersed abroad
in every country.

Verse. 9. Let it be written that they may be destroyed: and I will pay ten
thousand talents of silver, etc.] That is, whereas it may be thought that the
cutting off this people may be an empairing to the kings customs and tributes,
to make amends for that, I will undertake to pay ten thousand talents of silver
for the kings treasury, into the hands of those that have the charge of the
business, that is, the kings receivers, that have the charge of receiving the
kings treasure. Some understand that Haman meant that this great sum
proffered should be raised out of the confiscated state of the Jews, that were
to be slain; but I rather conceive it is meant of so much which should have
been paid out of his own state; first, because it is still said that Haman
engaged himself to pay it for the destruction of the Jews, chap. 4.7. Mordecai
told him of all that had happened unto him, and of the sum that Haman had
promised to pay to the kings treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them: and
secondly, because the spoil of the Jews is afterward proffered as a prey to
their neighbors in each place that should destroy them, to make them the more
willing to execute this cruel edict, verse. 13. Letters were sent by posts into
all the kings provinces, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish all Jews,
both young and old, etc.

Verse. 10. And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman,
etc.] To wit, that he might therewith seal what decree he was pleased to make
to this purpose; yea it may be that upon this occasion he honored him with the
constant keeping of this seal, for he kept it afterward till he was cashiered,
c. 8.2. The king took off his ring which he had taken from Haman, and gave it
unto Mordecai.

Verse. 11. And the king said unto Haman, The silver is given unto thee, etc.]
That is, the money thou have promised, keep it to thy self; I account it as
received, and do give it back to thee.

Verse. 12. Then were the kings scribes called on the thirteenth day of the
first month, and there was written according to all that Haman had commanded,
etc.] Though Haman intended that the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the
day that was chosen by lot, should be the day of the massacre, yet so soon as
ever the king had yielded to his motion, even upon the thirteenth day of the
first month, he was careful to have the decree written, sealed, and
published, lest the king by counsel of others, or by his own relenting heart
should alter his mind, and recall what over-rashly he had now granted.

Verse. 15. And the king and Haman sat down to drink but the city Shushan was
perplexed.] That is, the Jews in the city Shushan; and perhaps others also, as
it must needs be, if they had any spark of humanity left in them, even out of
pity and compassion, and withal too, for fear of the ordinary confusions which
are wont to happen in such popular executions.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 2. ANd came even before the kings gate, etc.] This Mordecai did, that he
might give notice to Esther what a decree was come forth concerning the Jews,
and might advise her to interpose her self for the preservation of Gods people.
But further then the kings gates he might not come, because none might enter
into the kings gate clothed with sackcloth; the ground of which custom we may
conceive was, either that the court pleasures might not be interrupted with any
thing that had an appearance of sorrow or sadness; or lest the king should be
won suddenly, by beholding any suppliant so sadly attired, to grant any thing
that was not just and right.

Verse. 4. So Esthers maids, and her chamberlains came and told it her.] To wit,
how Mordecai sat mourning before the kings gate in sackcloth and ashes and
with his clothes rent, verse. 1.2. for they could not tell her of that which is
related in the foregoing verse, to wit, what wailing there was amongst the Jews
in the provinces abroad.

And she sent raiment to cloth Mordecai, etc.] To wit, by way of comforting
him; or that he might come into the court, yea happily that he might come to
her and acquaint her with the cause of his sorrow.

Verse. 7. And Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him, etc.] That
is, he told Hatach, whom Esther had sent to him, how Haman had taken offense at
him for not bowing to him, and how in his rage he had procured a decree for the
destroying the whole nation of the Jews; which was doubtless the more grievous
to Mordecai, because it proceeded from the rage of that proud wretch against
him in particular.

Verse. 8. And to charge her that she should go in unto the king, etc.] To wit,
in the name of Mordecai, whom she still reverenced as her foster father, chap.
2.20. Esther did the commandment of Mordecai like as when she was brought up
with him: and for a public service of Gods Church, notwithstanding her
greatness, he doubted not to lay a charge upon her.

Verse. 11. Whosoever, whether man or woman, shall come unto the king into the
inner court, who is not called, there is one law of his to put him to death,
etc.] Thus the Persian kings provided for their own safety; and withal (as
they conceived) to work the more ^aw and reverence in the hearts of the people.

But I have not been called to come in unto the king, these thirty days.] This
she adds, as a ground of some fear lest the kings affection toward her should
by some means be abated; and if so, her attempting to go in to the kings
presence without a call must needs be perilous.

Verse. 16. I also and my maidens will fast likewise.] It is evident that on the
third of the three days appointed for the fast, chap. 5.1. Esther laid by her
mourning weeds, and put on her royal apparel, and feasted the same day, verse.
4, 5. both the king and Haman, and there is no doubt to be made, but that she
went in to the king ere the last of their fasting was ended, purposely that she
might then venture to go in to the king unsent for, when her brethren were
employed in fasting and prayer, to beg of God that the king might show her
favor. Either therefore this is meant only, that as they fasted so would the
likewise, and not that she meant to fast three entire nights and days as they
should; or else it must be said, that as they, so she likewise fasted three
days, night and day, because she fasted three nights (for the Jews began their
days at the evening) and part of the third day; much after the expression of
the time of Christ's being in the grave, Matthew. 12.40. Nor needs it seem strange
that she undertakes for her maids, that they should fast likewise: for first,
though they were before of an other religion, yet doubtless she did what she
might to instruct them in the knowledge of the true God: and secondly, partly
by her favor at first with Hegai the kings chamberlain, chap. 2.8, 9. and
partly by the respect afforded her by all when she was queen, she might well
have liberty to make choice of her own servants, and so might choose such as
were of the stock of the Jews.

And if I perish, I perish.] That is, I refer my self to Gods good
providence; not being unwilling to die, rather then shrink from my duty herein.
And indeed considering what had befallen Vashti the former queen, for
disobeying the kings command, she could not but think there was much danger to
attempt to go in to the king against the law.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. NOw it came to pass on the third day, etc.] To wit, of their
fasting, before that day was fully ended (of which see the note in the
foregoing chapter, verse. 16.) She put on her royal apparel, and stood in the
inner court of the kings house, over against the kings house. It seems at the
entrance of the kings house there was some large and stately porch (such as was
Solomon's porch of judgment, 1. Kings 7.7.) where the king sat upon his royal
throne (as it is here said) and so by this means, as soon as Esther was come
into the inner court, and stood before the kings house, he presently saw her,
etc.

Verse. 2. She obtained favor in his sight; and the king held out to Esther the
golden scepter, etc.] To wit, in token that he called her to come near to him,
and consequently had pardoned her coming in to the inner court, not being sent
for: and indeed considering what absolute obedience the Persian Monarchs
required of their subjects to all their decrees, and that Vashti his former
queen (whom happily he had formerly loved as well as Esther) was cast off for
as small an offense as this of Esthers, and withal that it was above thirty
days since Esther was called in to the king (which was hinted, chap. 4.11. as
some ground of fear, lest the heat of the king to her began to abate) we may
well think there was a special hand of God in moving the kings heart to show
her favor, which was the gracious answer returned to his peoples fasting and
prayer.

So Esther drew near, and touched the top of the scepter.] As happily the
custom was, and that as a sign of reverence and subjection, and of her
thankful apprehending and embracing that favor he had now afforded her, by
holding out that his scepter unto her.

Verse. 3. What is thy request? it shall be even given thee, to the half of the
kingdom.] This was it seems a proverbiall speech, whereby in those times
princes used liberally to promise what ever should be desired, though not
intending literally, that if they asked half of the kingdom it should be given
them. As we see in the promise of Herod to the daughter of Herodias, Mark 6.23.
And he swear unto her, whatsoever thou shall ask of me I will give it thee,
unto the half of my kingdom.

Verse. 4. Let the king and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have
prepared for him.] Esther showed much wisdom in desiring that this favor
might be done her, before she made known the petition she had to make unto the
king: first, because by her intended entertaining the king at a feast she hoped
his love might yet further be enflamed toward her: secondly, because she might
not hold it so safe to discover at this time either her parentage or petition,
when the king was attended with his nobles and courtiers, who out of their zeal
to have the decrees of the Persians preserved irrevocable, or in favor to
Haman, might oppose her request for the recalling of that decree concerning the
Jews, which the king had made; but judged it more seasonable to do this at a
private banquet, where only her own servants might be by to attend them:
thirdly, because Haman not being now present, what she alleged against him
might be presently carried to him, and then he might have slipped away and hid
himself: and fourthly, because when men are merry and frolic at feasts, they
used to be the freer to grant any boon to those they affect. And so likewise it
was politickly also done to invite Haman together with the king: first, that
she might to his face accuse him (a good evidence that she spoke nothing but
truth) of the plot he had to take away her life, together with the rest of her
people: and secondly, that he might not privately by false suggestions dissuade
the king from believing her complaint.

Verse. 6. And the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy
petition?] Anciently it seems, the meat being removed, they used to have a
second banquet of fruits and wines, which therefore they called the banquet of
wine: for with their meat they drank wine mixed with water.

Verse. 7. My petition, and my request is, etc.] That is, my petition and
request for the present is only this; that the king and Haman would yet once
more come to morrow to a banquet which I shall prepare for them, and then I
will do as the king has said, verse. 8. that is, make known that great suit
which I have unto the king. In this second deferring the propounding her
petition to the king, she might have an aim to get the better hold of the king,
by endearing him with so pleasant entertainments, and to ripen her hopes by
working in the mind of Ahasuerus a fore-conceit of the greatness and
difficulty of that suit that was so hardly drawn forth. But withal,
doubtless God did by his secret providence incline her heart hereto, that in
the interim he might advance Mordecai before her feast was prepared; and so she
might have the better assurance of obtaining her suit, both for the deliverance
of the Jews, and the ruin of Haman, and Gods hand in the business might be
the, more evidently seen.

Verse.. 9. When Haman saw Mordecai in the kings gate, that he stood not up, nor
moved for him, etc.] So far was Mordecai from adoring Haman, or bowing down
to him, as was enjoined, that he would not so much as move to him when he went
by. He might have heard how Esther had found favor with the king, which might
raise his courage to a more scornful contempt of this his professed adversary;
however, this makes it most probable that it was not divine adoration only
that he refused to yield him. See the note, chap. 3, 2.

Verse. 11. And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, etc.] To wit,
thereby to aggravate Mordecaies offense in daring for all this to despise him
as he did.

Verse. 14. Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou
unto the king, that Mordecai may be hanged thereon.] This in their pride and
rage and servile stooping to Haman they advised him to do, not considering nor
regarding the singular service which Mordecai had done for king Ahasuerus,
chap. 2.21. etc.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. ON that night could not the king sleep, etc.] The kings head might
perhaps be troubled with thinking what great request it should be that Esther
had to make, that was so hardly drawn from her; but doubtless beside, there
was a special hand of divine providence in keeping the king awake; for
Mordecai might have been hanged before Esther had known any thing of it. (Haman
being come early the next morning, verse. 4. to beg this of the king) had not
the Lord kept him from sleep, and directed him to read in that place of the
Chronicles where Mordecaies service was recorded, and so made way to his
advancement.

Verse. 3. Then said the kings servants that ministered unto him, There is
nothing done for him.] Here it is said expressly, that nothing had been done
for Mordecai; yet we see what is said in the Apocryphal additions, chap, 12.
verse. 5, 6. So the king commanded Mordocheus to serve in the court, and for
this he rewarded him. Howbeit, Aman the son of Amadatheus the Agagite, who was
in great honor with the king, sought to molest Mordocheus and his people,
because of the two Eunuchs of the kings.

Verse. 4. And the king said, Who is in the court, etc.] That is, in the outer
court: for it was death for any body to come into the court, except he were
called by name chap. 4.11.

Now Haman was come into the outward court of the kings house, to speak unto
the king, to hang Mordecai, etc.] Hereby it appears that it was toward day ere
that was read to the king which Mordecai had done, whereupon followed that
enquiry, what had been done for the honoring of the man that had done him such
good service.

Verse. 6. And the king said unto him. What shall be done unto the man whom the
king delights to honor?] Though the king knew of no difference betwixt Haman
and Mordecai, yet he suppressed Mordecaies name; and thus the Lord by his
providence brought it about, that even Haman himself should to his greater
vexation appoint the honors that should be done to Mordecai; and that at a
time when he was come to desire of the king that he might be hanged, and with
full assurance that he should have obtained his desire.

Verse. 10. Take the apparel and the horse, as thou have said, and do even so
to Mordecai. etc.] Though the crown royal whereof Haman spoke also, verse. 8.
be not here expressed by the king; yet it is employed in the following words,
where Haman is enjoined to do to Mordecai just as he had said, Let nothing fail
of all that thou have spoken, if afterward he wore a crown of gold, chap.
8.15. And Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal apparel of
blew and white, and with a great crown of gold, much more when he was carried
in such pomp through the city.

Verse. 11. And proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom
the king delights to honor.] That is, by Heralds he caused it to be
proclaimed.

Verse. 12. And Mordecai came again to the kings gate.] That is, having received
that honor related in the former verse, he returned to his ordinary office (as
it seems) and attendance at the kings gate, as not being puffed up herewith,
nor yet rid of his fears, concerning that cruel decree for the massacre of the
Jews, nor knowing how Esther had sped in her suit against Haman (though by this
sudden change he might hope that something was done) and therefore desirous
still to hearken what should be the event of Esthers petition to Ahasuerus.

But Haman hasted to his house mourning, and having his head covered.] To wit,
for shame and grief, because that honor, which he was so confident should have
been conferred upon himself, was conferred upon his enemy, and himself was
forced to be a chief actour therein. See 2. Sam. 15.30.

Verse. 13. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun
to fall, thou shall not prevail, etc.] This they conclude for certain, both
because they might well think, that Mordecai having thus gotten the start of
him, and being exalted above him, would be revenged on him (as favorites use
to seek the ruin of those that were favorites before them) because he had
plotted to destroy both him and all his people: and also because what they had
observed formerly concerning Gods miraculous pleading for his people against
all their enemies, they saw now confirmed in this unexpected advancement of
Mordecai, and might thence well guess that God was now making way to the mine
of Haman.

Verse. 14. And while they were yet talking with him, came the kings
chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman, etc.] If Harbonah mentioned, chap.
1.10, was one of these, no marvel though afterward he told Ahasuerus of the
gallows that Haman had set up for Mordecai, since he might perhaps then see
them at this his going to fetch Haman to Esthers banquet.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 2. ANd the king said again to Esther, on the second day, at the banquet
of wine, etc.] See the note, chap. 5.6.

Verse. 4. For we are sold, I, and my people, to be destroyed, etc.] She says
they were sold, because as those things that are sold are delivered over to the
will and pleasure of those to whom they were sold, so were they delivered over
to the power and pleasure of their enemies; and withal because there was a
sum of money proffered to the king, even ten thousand talents of silver, that
they might be thus delivered into the power of their enemies, that they might
have free liberty to kill and destroy them.

But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue, etc.]
To wit, because it would not have been so bad for them to be sold for bondmen,
as to have all their lives in an instant taken away without all hope of
recovery; and withal, because by their sale and bondage, some profit might
have redounded to the king (although indeed, as she adds in the following
words, the loss of the king in his tributes would have been so great, that
nothing the enemy could have effected, no not by selling us for bondslaves,
could possibly have countervailed the kings damage) but to be delivered up to
be slain to our utter vain, and without any show of profit to the king (for
the loss of so many useful and loyal subjects would have been an
irrecoverable loss) this was most insufferable.

Verse. 7. And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath, went into
the palace garden.] As not able to endure the sight of Haman, and therefore
flinging away in a chase, and so nettled with vexation and shame, that he had
so rashly suffered himself to be so abused, that he knew not where to rest nor
which way to turn himself, and withal that he might by himself deliberate what
was fit to be done in this case.

Verse. 8. And Haman was fallen upon the bed where Esther was, etc.] To wit, the
bed whereon she had sat at the feast (for on the beds they used then to eat,
as is noted before, chap. 1.6.) The king returning out of the garden, there was
Haman fallen prostrate at the feet of the queen, to make request for his life,
verse. 7. yea and some add that it was the custom of those times, that those
that came to fall down before great persons were wont to clasp their hands
about their feet or knees, as the good Shunamite did to the Prophet Elisha when
she came to beg for her sons life, 2. Kings 4.27. (concerning which see the
note there) whereupon it was that the king brake forth into these following
words of wrath and disdain, will he force the queen also before me in the
house? not that he could think that Haman meant any such thing, but only to
imply that he looked upon him as an impudent wretch that would almost dare to
do any thing, and that his servants might perceive that he meant they should
carry him away as a person loathsome and abominable in his sight; yea indeed it
was just with God that he that had falsely accused the people of God to the
king, should now by the king be charged with that he never intended.

As the word went out of the kings mouth, they covered Hamans face.] That is,
perceiving the kings mind, they apprehended him as a condemned man, and as the
custom it seems was amongst the Persians, they covered his face as one
unworthy to behold the kings face or the light of the sun, and therefore
sentenced to the darkness of death; whereto some conceive there is an
allusion, Job 9.24. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked, he covers
the faces of the judges thereof, etc. and Isa. 22.17. The Lord will carry thee
away with a mighty captivity, and will surely cover thee.

Verse. 9. And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king, etc.]
See the note chap. 6.14.

Verse. 10. So they hanged Haman on the gallows he had prepared for Mordecai.]
Which stood in Hamans house or court, as before; so verifying that Psalm. 7.15,
16. but besides, that we may judge the better of the Apochryphall additions of
Esther, it will be well to compare with this that which we find there, chap.
16.18. For he that was the worker of these things is hanged as the gates of
S^sa with all his family.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. ON that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the Jews
enemy unto Esther.] That is, his house together with all his estate and goods,
whereof ere while he had so much boasted, chap. 5.11. which being forfeited to
the king were at his disposing, to be bestowed on whomsoever it pleased him.

And Mordecai came before the king, etc.] That is, he was called and chosen to
be one of his continual household attendants, and taken into his especial
favor; yea happily one of those princes that saw the kings face, that is, that
had always free access into his presence, chap. 1.14. and that because he
acknowledged him now to be his kinsman by his queen Esther, as the words
following do plainly imply, for Esther had told what he was to her.

Verse. 2. And the king took off his ring which he had taken from Haman, and
gave it to Mordecai.] Some conceive that this was not that seal wherewith the
king used to seal the decrees which were sent forth in his name (which for that
only purpose, say they, he gave to Haman, chap. 3.10. etc. and therefore no
doubt had it again after that decree was sealed) and this they held, because
there was not any reason why that should be now given to Mordecai: rather they
judge that this was one of those rings which were usually given, as a mark of
honor, to those that were the chief princes and counselors of state about
the king; which having been formerly given to Haman was taken from him when he
was condemned to death, and given now to Mordecai: but because the text speaks
plainly of one special ring, the king took off his ring, etc. I rather think
that this was that very ring before spoken of, chap. 3.10. and that Mordecai
was now made keeper of the kings signet, as Haman had been; whence it was that
he wore those badges of honor* verse. 15. And Mordecai went out from the
presence of the king in royal apparel of blew and white, and with a crown of
gold, and with a garment of fine linen, and purple, etc. and that he is said to
have been great in the kings house, chap 9.4. and next unto him king Ahasuerus,
chap. 10.3.

And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman.] That is, she committed it,
and all he had to Mordecaies care and charge, to be by him disposed and ordered
as might be for her best advantage.

Verse. 5. Let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman, etc.]
Esther wisely, would not take any notice of the kings consenting to this bloody
decree, lest she should seem to cast the least blame upon him; and withal she
knew well that a decree established by the king, by the Laws of the Persians,
might not be reversed, Dan. 6. -- 15. The Law of the Medes and Persians is,
that no decree nor statute which the king establishes may be changed: and
therefore to give him a hint to reverse it, as a decree devised by Haman, and
surreptitiously written and sealed, and sent forth by him; she makes no mention
at all of the king, but calls them letters devised by Haman, which he wrote to
destroy the Jews.

Verse. 7. I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon
the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews.] That is, he intended and
endeavored so to do: having assigned a decree to have them all slain.

Verse. 8. Write ye also for the Jews, as it likes you, in the kings name, and
seal it with the kings ring, etc.] It seems the king would not pretend that the
former letters were devised by Haman without this direction, because he knew to
the contrary, nor could yield to the reversing of the former decree, which was
against the law and custom of the Medes and Persians; but let them write what
they could devise in favor of the Jews, and for their preservation, so the
former decree were not in express terms reversed, he consented freely to it:
and indeed that this was the meaning of this which the king here said, we may
the rather think, because in the new decree which Mordecai sent forth, verse.
11. no man is forbidden to offer violence to the Jews, nor is the magistrate
commanded to assist them, only the Jews are allowed to stand upon their guard;
which shows that Mordecai was restrained to this, that he might not in express
terms reverse what was published in the former decree.

Verse. 9. Then were the kings scribes called at that time in the third month
(that is, the month Sivan) etc.] Which contains part of May and part of
June. The decree for the slaying of the Jews was made on the thirteenth day of
the first month, chap. 3.12. so that this calling of the kings scribes to make
a new decree, was two months and ten days after the former decree was made;
all which time we may well imagine that the people of God were in a very sad
condition; but yet their being eight months and twenty days still behind, ere
the day at first appointed for the slaughter of the Jews should come, to wit,
the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, all this time they had to provide for
their own defense.

It was written (according to all that Mordecai commanded) unto the Jews, and
to the lieutenants, etc.] To the Jews, because it concerned their security;
and to the governors, that they might publish it, and not hinder the Jews in
their just defense. And whereas it is said that this decree was sent to every
province, according to the writing thereof, for this, see chap. 1.22.

Verse. 11. To gather themselves together, and to stand for their life, to
destroy, to slay, etc.] Thus by the former decree standing still in force, the
nations of each province were authorized to destroy the Jews; and by this
second edict the Jews were authorized to destroy those that should set upon
them, which the Jews, being but a few in comparison of those they lived
amongst, could have never done by their own strength, had not this discovery of
the change of the kings mind, and this intimation of his desire much abated the
malice of their enemies; yea, had not God miraculously prospered this weak
means for their preservation.

Verse. 14. And the decree was given at Shushan the palace.] That is, there it
was dated signed and sealed; and then afterward there, as in other places, it
was published and proclaimed.

Verse. 15. And the city of Shushan rejoiced and was glad.] See the note, chap.
3.15.

Verse. 16. The Jews had light and gladness, and joy and honor.] Light may be
here set against the darkness of affliction, as gladness against sorrow; or
else gladness joy and honor may be added to explain what was meant by light;
of which, see the note 2. Sam. 22.29.

Verse. 17. And many of the people of the land became Jews; for the fear of the
Jews fell upon them.] They became proselytes, and conformed themselves to the
Jewish religion: some perhaps seriously, as being wonderfully affected with
this miraculous manifestation of Gods watchful providence over this people,
whom they did now therefore fear and reverence, as the Lord of heavens darling
people; but others again fainedly, and with a dissembling heart, merely to
curry favor with Esther, Mordecai, and the rest of the Jews, and for fear they
should destroy them by warrant of that new decree which was now come forth.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. IN the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over
them, though it was turned to the contrary, etc.] This is noted to show how
false and deceitful the lots which Haman cast proved in the conclusion; that
day which was designed as the only lucky day for the massacre of the Jews
proved quite contrary, a happy day to them, and fatal to their enemies.

Verse. 2. And no man could withstand them: for the fear of them fell upon all
people.] Hereby it appears that on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month the
enemies of the Jews in several places, yea, even in the city of Shushan it
self, where Ahasuerus lived verse. 6. took up arms, and went about to massacre
the Jews, according to the sentence of the first decree, chap. 3.13.
notwithstanding the second decree that was sent out after it, chap. 8.10, 11.
wherein the Jews were allowed to gather themselves together and to destroy all
those that should set upon them. Esther therefore they took this second edict
to be a reversing of the first, which was against the laws of the Medes and
Persians chap. 8.8. and therefore they were enraged at it, and would not obey
it; or else, happily they did not believe that this second edict was indeed
sent forth by the king, but was only the device of Mordecai, or at least would
not believe it, as being loath to be beaten off from destroying the Jews, whom
they hated with a deadly hatred, and had long assured themselves that they
should now have liberty to wreak their teen upon them, and therefore were
resolved to put in execution the first decree: now herein was the wonder, that
the Jews being a few to speak of, should be able to stand against their
enemies; but the reason of this is given, that God struck their enemies with
such terrors and fears, that they were not able to withstand them. The rulers
for fear helped the Jews, verse. 3. many others no doubt durst not stir, and
those that had with great confidence armed themselves, when the Jews assembled
themselves and stood for their lives, were suddenly daunted, and so easily
slain by the Jews; and thus God did immediately, more for the preservation of
the Jews by making them terrible to their enemies, then all that Esther and
Mordecai had done.

Verse. 6. And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five hundred
men.] It is above all strange, that in Shushan the city royal, called here
Shushan the palace, where the kings favor to Mordecai and the rest of the Jews
could not be unknown, there should be so many found, that would obstinately
undertake the massacring of the Jews, in confidence of the first decree, chap.
3.13. notwithstanding by the second decree, chap. 8.10.11. the Jews were
allowed to kill and destroy all their enemies that should set upon them. But
for this we must consider, first, that when wicked men are hardened of God that
they may be destroyed, they do usually thus violently rush upon their own
ruin, the vengeance of God not suffering them to rest: and secondly, that in
likelihood there were many of the faction of Haman, that being enraged with the
death of their great lord, and the sudden preferment of Mordecai, were
mutinously inclined, and ready enough therefore to be stirred up to this
attempt by Hamans ten sons, that were ringleaders to the rest, as by their
death is evident.

Verse. 10. The ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the
Jews, slew they.] To wit, those before mentioned by name in the three foregoing
verses (for by Hamans boasting of the multitude of his children, chap. 5.11.
And Haman told them of the multitude of his children, it may seem he had more
beside these: how this agrees with the Apocryphal additions of Esther, we may
see, chap. 16.18. where it is said, that in the decree, by warrant whereof the
Jews did now slay their enemies, there was mention made that not Haman only,
but also all his family with him were then hanged already.

But on the spoil laid they not their hand.] Though by the kings decree they
might have done it, chap. 8.11. Take the spoil of them for a prey: and that
because they would hereby make it evident, that they aimed not at the enriching
of themselves with the spoils of those they had slain, but only at their own
necessary and just defense, and that it might not be said, that they had slain
any one causelessely only to get his estate.

Verse. 11. On that day, the number of those that were slain in Shushan the
palace, was brought before the king.] The report of this which had happened in
the city, was soon brought unto the king, perhaps by some that would willingly
have stirred up the kings wrath against the Jews.

Verse. 13. Let it be granted to the Jews which are in Shushan, to do to morrow
also according to this days decree.] To wit, by slaying those who this day set
upon the Jews, but escaped their hands and were not slain by them, as these
five hundred were. And this no doubt she desired, as aiming at Gods glory in
the revenge of his peoples enemies, and at the peace of the Church, which might
else afterward be disturbed by these that were now for the present escaped.

And let Hamans ten sons be hanged upon the gallows.] That is, let the dead
bodies of these sons of Haman, who were this day slain with others, be for
their greater reproach and the terror of others, hanged upon the gallows
whereon their father was before hanged.

Verse. 16. But they laid not their hands on the prey.] See above verse. 10.

Verse. 17. On the thirteenth day of the month Adar, etc.] The drift of the
words in the three following verses is to show, that the other Jews that lived
not at Shushan slew their enemies on the thirteenth day, and then rested and
kept a day of feasting on the fourteenth day, whereas the Jews at Shushan slew
their enemies both on the 13th. and 14th. days, and so kept not their day of
feasting till the fifteenth day.

Verse. 20. And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the Jews,
etc.] That is, in the writings and letters which he sent unto the Jews
concerning their keeping the feast of Purim, he wrote the relation of these
things before mentioned, as the ground of this annual festivity; or else it
may be meant more generally, that Mordecai was the penman of the holy ghost,
in writing this whole book of Esther.

Verse. 21. To stablish this among them, that they should keep the fourteenth
day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth, etc.] To wit, because on the
fourteenth day the country Jews rested from slaying their enemies, and those
in Shushan not till the fifteenth; and so they were taught to rejoice in one
another welfare. But was not this unlawful like that sin of Jeroboams, 1.
Kings 12.33. I answer, No, and that because it was a politic ordinance for
civil respects, and not any addition to the worship of God.

Verse. 22. Days of feasting and joy and of sending portions one to another,
and gifts to the poor.] As their custom was in all their solemn festivities,
Neh. 8.10. Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared, etc.

Verse. 26. Therefore for all the words of this letter, and of that which they
had seen concerning this matter, and which had come unto them etc.] This clause
is added, because of those things related in these letters, concerning the
danger the Jews were in, and their deliverance from that danger, which moved
them to take upon them to keep the feast of Purim: some of them they had seen
with their own eyes in their several dwellings (as the decree that was brought
from the king for the destroying of the Jews, and the preparations that were
made by the enemies, to put this decree in execution; and the second decree
likewise, wherein the Jews were allowed to defend themselves, and to slay their
enemies, and the slaughter which thereupon they had made amongst them) and
again some other things had been only brought unto them by relation from
others as Hamans casting of lots, and many others of the like nature.

Verse. 29. Then Esther the queen the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew,
wrote, etc.] the former letters whereby the Jews were in all places appointed
to keep yearly the feast of Purim, on the fourteenth and fifteenth day of the
month Adar, in memory of this great deliverance were written by Mordecai,
verse. 20. and therefore was that festival usually afterward amongst the Jews
called Mordecaies day, 2. Maccha. 15.36. but then afterward again perhaps the
next year, lest they should not hold on in the yearly observing this feast,
as fearing lest the celebration hereof should embitter the minds of the people
against them, amongst whom they lived, by renewing the memory of that great
slaughter which the Jews had made amongst them, Esther also now with Mordecai
wrote a second letter to enjoin the continuance of this anniversary feast, and
that with all authority; urging it by all means, and strictly enjoining it as
far as by their authority they might, the better to confirm this second
letter, and that there might be no question made of doing what was therein so
strictly and firmly enjoined.

Verse. 30. And he sent the letters unto all the Jews, etc. with words of peace
and truth.] The meaning of this clause is, either that in these letters he did
enjoin them to live peaceably amongst themselves, and with others also, and not
to insult over the nations because of their own present prosperity; or else
that he did comfort or encourage them, by giving them assurance that they
should enjoy peace and truth, and putting them out of doubt and fear.

Verse. 31. And as they had decreed for themselves and for their seed, the
matter of the fastings and their cry.] Several ways is this understood by
Expositours. For first, some understand it as in relation to their fasting and
praying three days together, when Esther was to go in to Ahasuerus to make
supplication for the Jews, chap. 4.16. to wit, that as then in their great
danger, Esther and Mordecai appointed them certain days for fasting and prayer
with strong cries and tears, so now they appointed certain days of yearly
praise and thanksgiving for their great deliverance. Secondly, some understand
it thus, that as they had decreed for themselves and their posterity, that the
thirteenth day of the month Adar should for ever be kept as a fasting day, in
remembrance of their fasting, when Haman had procured his bloody decree against
them, so they decreed likewise to keep the fourteenth and fifteenth days, as
days of feasting, in memory of their miraculous deliverance from that decree.
And thirdly, others take it thus, that as they had formerly decreed for
themselves and their posterity to keep certain days of public humiliation
with fasting and prayer, in remembrance of the desolation of Jerusalem, when
the city was taken, and the Temple burnt by the Babylonians, which were those
whereof the prophet Zachary speaks, Zach. 7.5. When ye fasted and mourned in
the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto
me, even unto me? so now it was decreed, that they should for ever keep this
feast of Purim in remembrance of their joyful deliverance from the plot of
Haman. And indeed, first, because the text here speaks of fasts decreed for all
the Jews and their posterity, and that fast desired by Esther, chap. 4.16. was
only kept in Shushan. And secondly, because we find it not in the story any
where, that there was a fast for ever kept on the thirteenth day in memorial
of that fast (and indeed, that they kept a fast in remembrance of a fast, or a
danger from which they were delivered, seems not probable) therefore the last
Exposition is I conceive most satisfactory.

Verse. 32. And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim, and it
was written in the book.] That is, in the book of their public acts, or the
book of their civil statutes and ordinances, besides those of Moses laws.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. KIng Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the isles of
the sea.] That is, both the continent and the isles under his dominion: perhaps
this is here inserted, as being intended only of the reimposing of the tribute
whereof there was granted a release for a time at Esthers marriage, chap. 2.18.
Then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his servants, even
Esthers feast, and he made a release to the provinces, etc. yet it may be also
added to show how God punished the nations for their late greedy gaping after
the lives and estates of Gods people; or to make way to that which follows,
verse. 3. how Mordecai sought the weal of his people, perhaps by procuring them
favor in regard of this tribute. And indeed some Expositours understand this
of the tribute imposed by Xerxes, for that great expedition of his against
Greece.

Verse. 3. Seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his
seed.] That is, to the Jews his country men; for whom he was always ready to
speak to the king, and to do what ever might be for their peace and welfare.

FINIS.

