portrait of Arthur Jackson Arthur Jackson
(...) pinx
^st fecit.


Annotations UPON THE WHOLE BOOK OF ISAIAH.

WHEREIN, First, all such Passages in the Text are explained, as were thought
likely to be questioned by any Reader of ordinary Capacity. Secondly, In many
Clauses those things are discovered, which are needful and useful to be known,
and not so easily at the first reading observed. And thirdly, many places that
might at first seem to contradict one another, are reconciled.

Intended chiefly for the Assistance and Information of those that use
constantly every day to read some part of the Bible, and would gladly always
understand what they read, if they had some man to help them.

By ARTHUR JACKSON, late Minister of St. FAITHS LONDON.

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me.

Psalm. 119.27. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts; so shall I talk
of thy wondrous works.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1682.

blazon of Cambridge University Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


TO THE VIRTUOUS and PIOUS, AND My very good Friend, Mrs Elizabeth Beale.
IT is Solomon's advice, Prove. 27.10. Thy friend, and thy fathers friend
forsake not; that is, use all good means to keep and preserve such a friend*
Such a friend have you always approved your self to the Author of these
Annotations, and all his Family: and on that account I am forced to think my
self obliged to take this opportunity of testifying my grateful sense of such
Friendship, by presenting to you these Annotations, tho I know they would
otherwise have been valued and made use of for the Authors, as well as your own
sake; toward whom, and all his, you have inherited a most kind and
affectionate Friendship from your Worthy and Pious Father deceased, and your
yet surviving eminently Holy Mother, who is as great an instance of a
religious, humble, uniform, persevering Christian, as any I know. I am sure I
need say nothing to inhance the value you have for the Authors Memory; whose
true, plain hearted, Cordial, affectionate Friendship, I have so often heard
you mention with a great resentment of his loss. But I may not forbear
gratefully to take notice of your constant and frequent Visits of the Authors
Widow, my most dear Mother, notwithstanding the infirmities of her age has
rendered her unable to be apprehensive of the greatness of your kindness. I am
never like to have any other way of returning your love and kindness, than by
hearty desires of the welfare of you and yours, and praying to the Lord to
return into your bosom full measure, pressed down, and running over. And
therefore I heartily pray the Lord to continue those earthly blessings which he
has bestowed on you, and to enable you so wisely to improve them, that they
may not hinder, but fit you for those better, most solid, and durable
blessings, which remain to be the portion of all that love and serve the Lord;
and that he himself may be a God and Father to you and yours, shall be the
Prayer of,

MADAM, Your much obliged Friend, and Servant in our Lord, John Jackson.

TO THE Christian Reader.
ONE main cause why these Annotations, which were by the Author in his
lifetime fairly transcribed with his own hand fit for the Press, do come
abroad so long after his decease, is because some quires of the Copy being
parted from the rest, were mislay'd, and not found again for many years. I
suppose the Authors Prefaces to the former Volumes, do discharge me from any
need of giving the Reader an account of them, or directions how they may be
made most useful to those of ordinary capacities, to serve whose spiritual
interest they were chiefly designed, and toward whom, especially the younger
and more bashful persons, he did always exercise a more than ordinary winning
and encouraging freedom in his whole converse, having no appearance of that
morose austerity and reservedness for which some good men have been blamed, and
which oft-times hinders those who most need it, from desiring and receiving
direction and assistance from their Spiritual Guides. And therefore I have only
to recommend them to the Christian Readers serious perusal, and humbly to beg
the blessing of the Lord upon them.

There is only one service which I find many good people judge I owe to the
Memory of my most endeared Father, and that is, to give some brief account of
some such passages of his life as may be thought worthy a remark; wherein I
shall be religiously careful to mention nothing but what I know, or have
abundant ground to be assured of its truth.

Mr. Arthur Jackson was born in Little Waldingfield in Suffolk, his Father Mr.
John Jackson a Spanish Merchant of London, dyed when he was young; his Mother
afterward married Sir Tho. Crook, Baronet, who carried her into Ireland,
where she dyed. He was by his Guardian Mr. Joseph Jackson of Broomfield in
Edmunton, carried to Cambridg, and placed in Trinity College, but under the
Tuition of one so little minding the faithful discharge of that great Work he
undertook, that I have often heard him say, He might have been half a year
absent, and his Tutor not known it. But by the Grace of God he was betimes
engaged in a way of serious, constant, and resolved studiousness, seldom
studying less than fourteen or sixteen hours in a day, for the first three or
four years, as I have heard him sometimes declare; and then I suppose he took
up that course of rising at three or four a clock summer and winter, which he
practiced ever since I can remember, and till his death; being scarce ever,
when well, in bed at six a clock, unless perusing his Notes; and indeed he was
at 73 as fit and willing for his work as at 40; his sight so good, that without
spectacles he could read the smallest Greek print in his study by Moon light;
but so short-sighted, that he could not distinguish his friends when he met
them in the streets; which occasioned many persons, who were not acquainted
with him, to think his not returning their civil salutes to be out of pride or
slighting, when 'twas only his not seeing them occasioned his passing by them
unsaluted. He continued some time in the College after he was Master of Arts,
till he married Mary the eldest Daughter of Mr. Tho. Bownert of Stoneberry in
Hertfordshire, with whom he lived 47 years in great endearment of mutual love,
by whom he had three sons and five daughters; and who, with two sons and two
daughters do yet survive him. He was married in the year 1619; not long after
he was chosen by the Inhabitants of Michael's Woodstreet to be their Lecturer,
and (after the death of Mr. Bragden) their Pastor. When the great Sickness
came in 1624. he sent his Wife and Children to her Father, and continued
himself in the City, discharging all the Offices and Duties of a faithful
Pastor to his flock, being content to hazard his own life to serve the
necessities of his peoples souls; often visiting persons infected with that sad
disease; in which good and holy work the Lord did wonderfully preserve him from
all infection, when thousands fell on either hand of him. I remember to have
heard him relate, how a Country Minister being to preach for him, desired he
might sit where he might not be near any that were or had been infected. To
whom he answered, Alas Sir! I wonder you will come to the City, if you be so
fearful of the Sickness; for you cannot walk the streets, nor come into any
company, but you meet those who are or have been infected. And the next tidings
he heard of him, was his death of the plague. He preached constantly twice on
the Lords day, and likewise catechized the children before Sermon, and repeated
the Sermon in his Family, to which many of his hearers did resort; and in Lent
always spent some hours in the Church two days every week in examining and
instructing the men and maidservants, and others, to fit and prepare them for
the Lords Supper; the benefit of which I know some yet alive that use to
mention with thankfulness to God and him; and indeed in Catechizing he had such
a particular faculty, that he did not only profit but please; so that some who
at first came with great unwillingness, were so affected with his serious,
loving, and familiar way, that afterward they were eagerly desirous to go; and
some have declared, they never went any whither with more pleasure, than to him
on that account. He likewise Preached every Holy Day for many years, being
desirous to help Servants, and others, to improve that Liberty which they then
had, for the best and highect purposes; in which courses the Lord was pleased
to give him many Seals to his Ministry, by the conversion of many from their
sin and folly unto the Lord, to whom he was a true spiritual Father. Not long
after his coming to London, the Company of Cloth-workers (of which Society his
Father and Uncle were Members and Governors) chose him for their Minister,
before whom he preached every Quarter-day, at the Chapel commonly called Lambs
Chapel, where was a turn-up Table used sometimes for the Communion, and at
other times for the Master to sit in, when the Governors had occasion to meet
for ordering the affairs of the Chapel and Alms-people; this was made known to
Bishop Laud then of London, who sent for Mr. Jackson, and declared his great
dislike of it; but understanding from him that he had no power to order any
thing there, nor other concern than to preach and pray at the desire of the
Company, he was satisfied; but in discourse concerning the Table, said, I know
not what you young Divines think, but for my part I know no other place of
residence that God has on earth, but the High Altar. He did not, I suppose,
then think of the good man's heart, where not only the Scripture, but the best
of the Heathen Theology assures us God most truly dwells; as also the Homily
which tells us, The chief and special Temples of God wherein he has greatest
pleasure, and most delights to dwell and continue in, Hom. of right use of
the Church.
are the bodies and minds of true Christians, and the chosen people of God.
Though he never read, but was fully resolved against reading the Book for
Sports on the Lords Day; yet Gods Providence preserved him from being disturbed
about it: It was told him, That some complaining of him to the A. B. L. he made
answer, Mr. Jackson is a quiet and peaceable man, and therefore I will not have
him meddled with, or words to that effect. The same Eulogy he has since had
from another in the same Place, Spoken to Dr. V. H.
viz. A. B. Sh. notwithstanding the known difference in his judgment concerning
Church Government and Ceremonies.

He continued in the Rectory of Michaels Woodstreet many years, notwithstanding
the maintenance was so small that he has been heard to declare, That he could
evidence that he had spent 2000 l. of his own Estate since he came among them.
Then he was chose to Wapping, and proffered Sixscore pound a year and an house;
but his old Neighbors prevailed with him to stay with them upon their
promising 100 l. a year; but in two years time they fell short so far, that his
Friends that most desired his stay, were forced to persuade him to accept of
any other Offer; which being known, he was soon after called to be their
Pastor, by the Inhabitants of Faiths under Paul's; where he continued preaching
twice every Lords day (except when about seventeen weeks in the Fleet for
refusing to swear before that which was then called An High Court of Justice)
till Aug. 44. 1662. Upon his Majesty's Return he was chosen by the Ministers of
London to present the Bible to Him in his first passage through the City; which
he performed with a short gratulatory speech; to which his Majesty made that
pious and gracious Answer, taking the Bible into his hands, This is the Book
which I shall make the Rule of my Government, and the Rule of my Life. In both
places of his fixed Ministry he had a great and special care of young persons,
using not only common and public, but private and peculiar means of engaging
their Souls to, and strengthening, and truly confirming them in real holiness,
goodness, and religion; and therefore did persuade, and prevail with several of
the most serious and considering young men, both married and unmarried, to meet
weekly together, and by prayer, and holy conference, to stir up, and provoke
one another to a good and holy life, he himself often meeting with them, and
praying with and for them, advising them how to manage the work for their Souls
best advantage, and cautioning them against those spiritual evils which are apt
to invade and creep into the most holy performances. And that their discourses
might be the more useful, he advised them at one meeting to propound a
question, of which at the next each of them gave such account as they were
enabled to do; the benefit of which, many of them have often, and still do with
great affection and thankfulness, remember and mention. And indeed I find the
Learned and Worthy Dr. Simon Patrick, at the close of his Sermon at the Funeral
of his indeared Friend, Mr. Samuel Jacombe, taking notice of this course, as a
singular remark of Mr. Jacomb's early piety, and a good means of promoting
Religion in the Souls of young persons: and I doubt not bat he spoke his own
experience, when he says of it, The benefit of which some can to this day
remember; which beneficial thing, I hope he does still continue to promote, in
those great advantages and opportunities which his present circumstances put
into his hands. After Mr. Jackson was discharged from public Service, he
retired into the Country, first to Hadly, near Barnet, and after to his eldest
Son, at Edmunton, Being at Hadly in the Sickness-year, some of his late
Neighbors of Faiths Parish gave him a Visit; and bewailing that their Minister
had left them, he readily proffered to come and preach among them, if they could
procure liberty for him; which they something confidently promised themselves,
but could by no means prevail. When the Oxford, or Five-mile-Act came forth, he
seemed troubled to leave London, where he had been above Forty years a
Minister; but upon prayer, and serious consideration of the terms required, he
could not satisfy his mind, and came to a resolution of patient bearing what
might befall him; after which, he was much unconcerned, using Luther's
Expression, I shall have a place either under Heaven, or in Heaven. In the
Country he spent most of his time in completing these Annotations. He had gone
as far as the third Chapter of Jeremiah, when the Providence of God called him
from his labor, to his eternal rest. His distemper was the Stone in the
Kidneys, of which bitter cup he had often tasted, by diverse sharp fits, with
voiding several Stones: His first fit was at Cambridge, whither he went to take
order for Printing the Annotations on the Pentateuch; his last fit surpised
him in his Study, as he reached down a Book from a Shelf; with which straining
himself, a Stone in his Kidney was dis-lodged, and at the entrance into the
Vritory, gave him great and sharp pains for Three or Four hours; but then it
stopped, and the violence of the pain went over, and could never, by all the
means were used, be brought again. I well remember when I came to see him, he
told me, he was in the condition of a travailing woman, whose pain was gone
from her; and putting his finger to the place, said, haeret lateris lethalis
arundo; and so indeed it proved. After about a weeks use of means in the
Country, he went to London, to his loving friend Mr. Thomas Major, who then
lived in Milkstreet, and did succeed his Father in a most loving and hearty
respect to him, who had been to them both a loving and faithful Friend and
Pastor. When he entered his house, he said to him, I am come now, not to preach
to you, but die with you. He entertained his Friends to the last with such
undisturbed discourse, that they hardly believed him so ill as indeed he was.
The day before his decease, he walked about the Room, and discoursed with
several Christian Friends, who came to pay him their last Respects, in outward
appearance, as if he ailed nothing, but reckoning himself a dying Man, and
declaring the same to them. When he perceived any weeping for him, he would
smilingly say, They were fools to weep to see an old man die. When his Wife
asked him, if he were willing to leave her, he said, he would not leave her for
all the World; but she could not expect but that after so long striving for a
Crown, he should be willing to receive^. All his friends observed a serene
composed temper of Spirit in him, during his illness. He much persuaded them to
practice what he had taught them, assuring them they were the Truths of God. To
some he expressed much satisfaction in his Spirit as to his Nonconformity;
professing he had many times asked God forgiveness on his knees, for his former
errors and mistakes in those things. He continued in London about a Week, in
the use of means; from which the Lord was pleased to withhold his blessing. The
night in which he died, he called for his Children which were then in the
house, and told them he was dying; and bid them see if their Mother were awake,
he desired to see her, but would not have her awakened, for fear of frighting
her; for he thought he should live till she waked: she coming soon to him, he
spoke cheerfully to her, thanking her for all her former kindness; showed them
how wet and cold his Stomach was, saying, it was an up-hill way; it is hard
work to die: but did not much bemoan himself. He found Death creeping on him by
degrees, and could tell those about him, Now this leg is dead, and then the
other. Having a Cordial offered him, he put it by, and smiling, said, he would
have no revivings now, tho before he had never refused any Medicine. Soon after
he said, Lord deliver, deliver me; for I cannot bear this: and the Lord heard,
and answered his prayer; for immediately he gasped out his last breath, and was
dead, before one could go cross the Room. He departed in the morning of the
Lords day, about Four of the Clock, Aug. 5. just that day month before the
dreadful Fire of London; whereby he was taken from the sight of that evil,
which would have been a very great affliction to him, in regard of the very
many Friends and Acquaintance he had in the City; the weight of whose
sufferings would have lain very much upon his heart, he being known to be of a
very tender and compassionate Spirit toward his Friends in any of their
sufferings; which he did on all occasions express, not only in words, but in
free and liberal assistance. In a word, He was a faithful and painful Pastor, a
plain-hearted, cordial, compassionate Friend, a tender and affectionate
Husband, a most loving and careful Father, full of natural affection, and very
indulgent to his Children in every thing but what was evil, and there strict
and severe; a great lover and promoter of peace and holiness, and so generally
well spoken of by all, tho of different Judgments and Opinions, that a stranger
once told him smiling, That he feared he was not good, because every body spoke
well of him; and indeed he was of so inoffensive a converse in the World, that
unless in the discharge of his Ministerial duty, where he was obliged to
reprove sin and sinners, he was hugely careful to give no man occasion to be
angry with him; and would rather suffer a great wrong, than but seem to do any.

Thus have I given thee, Christian Reader, a small rude draught of the Author
of these Annotations, my ever honored, and most endeared Father. All that
remains is, to recommend thee in the perusal of them, to the blessing of God,
and beg thy hearty prayers to our Heavenly Father for him, who is,

Tottenham High-Cross. April 26. 1682. Thine in all Christian Service, to his
power, JOHN JACKSON.

Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside.
A Hundred select Sermons on several Texts, by Tho. Horton, D. D. Sermons on
Four select Psalms, viz. 4th. 42, 51, 63. by Tho. Horton, D. D. Mr. Baxter's
Christian Directory. Sermons on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Colossians, by Mr. J. Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho.
Goodwins, and Dr. John Owen's Epistles Recommendatory. An Exposition of Christ's
Temptation on Mat. 4. and Peter's Sermon to Cornelius; and circumspect walking,
By Dr. Tho. Tailor. A Practical Exposition on the 3d. Chapter of the first
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's choice, on Psalm.
4. v. 6, 7, 8. by Anthony Burgess. Dr. Donn's 40 Sermons, being his 3 Volumes.
Par^us Exposition on the Revelations. A Narrative of the Horrid Popish Plot, by
Dr. Oats. -- The Witch of Endor. Mr. Tho Dangerfield's of the Sham
Presbyterian Plot. Smith's Account of the 14 Popish Malefactors in Newgate.
Animadversions on the 5 Jesuits Speeches. The Excommunicated Prince, a Tradegy
as it was acted by his Holinesses Servants, by Capt. William Bedlow. A
Conference between a Bensalian Bishop, and an English Doctor, concerning
Church Government.
Books 4 to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism, by Stephen Scandret. An Exposition of the
five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations thereupon, by William
Greenhil. The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkley Gods holy Mind, touching
matters Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments: Also an Exposition on the
Lords Prayer, by Edward Elton, B. D. The fiery Jesuit, or an Historical
Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines and Deeds of the Jesuits, exposed
to view for the sake of London. Horologiographia optica; Dyaling, universal and
particular, speculative and practical; together with a Description of the Court
of Arts, by a new Method, by Sylvanus Morgan. The Practical Divinity of the
Papists discovered to be destructive to true Religion, and men's Souls, by J.
Clarkson. The Creatures goodness as they came out of Gods hand, and the good
man's mercy to the Bruit-creatures, in two Sermons, by Thomas Hodges, B. D.
Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the Scripture
offers concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion^ of Election,
Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection, by John
Humphreys. Baxter's which is the true Church. Naked Truth, 4th part. Doolitle's
Protestants Answ. to a Popish Quest. Mr. Kidder's Charity directed. Humphry's
peaceable Disquisitions. An endeavor for Peace among Protestants. A conference
between a Papist and a Jew, and a Protestant and a Jew. An Essay for the
Education of Gentlewomen. A warning for Servants, or the case of Margret Clark.
An Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon by the peaceable design. A Discourse of
Pluralities. The middle way of Predetermination. Popery an Enemy to Truth, by
Mr. Sheldreck. Dr. Dumoulin's conformity of Independent Government to the
ancient primitive Christians. Excommunication Excommunicated, in a Dialogue
between a Dr. of both Laws. The case of the Protestants in England under a
Popish Prince, A modest Inquiry into Dr. Stillingfleet's Historical Mistakes.
The State of Blessedness. An Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Book, by J. H.
Liberty of Conscience, in order to universal peace. Phelps Innocencies reward.
Rosses Mestogogus Poaeticus. Phelps on the Revelations. Gilaspys Ark of the
Covenant. Present State of New England. Dr. Collings of Providence. Froysell's
Sermons of Grace and Temptations. Yarrington's Englands Improvement, first
part. -- Idem second part. Meaning of the Revelation, by John Hayter. The
Morning Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the Church of Rome
detected and confuted in a Morning Lecture, preached by several Ministers of
the Gospel in or near London. Four useful discourses: (1.) The art of improving
a full and prosperous condition for the glory of God; being an appendix to the
art of contentment in three Sermons, on Phil. 4.12. 2. Christian submission, on
1 Samuel 3.18. Phil. 1.21. 4. The Gospel of peace sent to the sons of peace, in
Six Sermons, on Luke 10.5, 6. by Jeremiah Buroughs. A new Copy-Book of all
sorts of useful Hands. The Unity and Essence of the Catholic Church visible,
by Mr. Hudson. The intercouse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or
the particular believing soul, in several Lectures on the whole second chap. of
Cant. by John Collings, D. D.
Large 8 vo.
The sure mercies of David, by Nath. Heywood. Heaven or Hell here in a good or
bad conscience, by Nathaniel Vincent. A practical discourse of Prayer; wherein
is handled the nature and duty of Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet. Of quenching the
Spirit; the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and effects, discovered;
by Theophilus Polwheile. Heaven taken by Storm, by Tho. Watson. Reading and
Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie. Aesop's Fables, with Morals thereupon in
English Verse.
ANNOTATIONS ON THE Prophecy OF ISAIAH.
CHAP. I.
Ver. 1. THE Vision of Isaiah, etc.] That is, the Prophecy which he received by
Revelation or Inspiration from God: see the Notes, Numb. 24.3. and 1 Samuel 3.1.
for Chapter 2.1. it is called [ The word which Isaiah saw,] or, The Epitome or Sum
of his Visions and Prophecies. Besides those of the Tribe of Levi, that were
set apart to be the ^ Israelites ordinary Teachers, Deuteronomy. 33.10. and Mal. 2.7.
God was often pleased, especially in those times when the Priests grew corrupt
and neglected their duty, to raise up out of any other of the Tribes, Prophets,
who were called and gifted, and acted by Gods Spirit, and sent forth to teach
the People, and to make known the Will of God unto them in an extraordinary
way; yea and some of these at the last God made use of as his Penmen for the
writing of part of the Canonical Scripture, to wit, the following Books of the
four greater, and the twelve lesser Prophets, as they are commonly called;
which are therefore frequently mentioned in the New Testament, as of equal
authority with the Books of the Law, as in Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. And Matthew. 5.17. Think not that I am come to
destroy the Law or the Prophets.

It is commonly said by Interpreters, that after the Prophets had prophesied or
preached unto the people, they used to write the Sum of their Prophecies or
Sermons, and affix them to the doors of the Temple, which after some time were
by the Priests removed from thence, and laid up in the Temple, as a part of the
sacred Canon. But of this there is no certainty, nor any great probability,
considering how ill affected the Priests were to the prophesying of the
Prophets in those days; only that they by divine appointment committed their
Prophecies to writing, for the use of the Church, is unquestionably clear. John
1.45. We have found him of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets did write;
to which some refer those passages, Isa. 30.8. and Hab. 2.2. where the Prophets
are enjoined to write their Visions. As for this our Prophet Isaiah, it is not
without cause that his Prophecy is set in the first place; for, 1* By that
which is noted afterward concerning the time of his Prophesying, it is evident
that he was one of the first of the Prophets, if not absolutely the first of
them all. And 2. Besides that Hezekiah, sending so many noble Persons to him,
to acquaint him with the Letters which Rabshekah had written to them, and to
desire his prayers for them, 2 Kings 19.2. is a clear evidence that he was a
Prophet of great Authority and Esteem in his time; even his Prophecy it self is
justly esteemed to be of greatest eminency, not only for the variety of his
Visions, and the incomparable Majesty of his Style, (which shows that he was a
man learned and eloquent, and that it was not without good effect that his lips
were touched by a Seraphim with a fiery coal taken from the Altar, Chap. 6.6,
7.) but especially because there are therein more clear and remarkable
Prophecies concerning Christ, than in all the Prophets besides; whence it is
that he is oftener cited by Christ and the Apostles, than any of the rest; and
that the first Text which we find that Christ preached upon, was taken out of
his Prophecy, Luke 4.17, 18. And the Fathers do usually upon this account call
him the Evangelical Prophet, yea and sometimes the fifth Evangelist; so that in
this regard his Name Isaiah, which signifies the Salvation of the Lord, did
notably suit with the Doctrine which he taught. As for that which is said 2 Chronicles. 26.22. that Isaiah did write the Acts of Uzziah first and last, see the
Note there.

The Son of Amoz.] This may seem to have been added purposely to distinguish
this our Prophet from some other Person or Persons that were in his time called
by the same Name; for that this Amoz the Father of Isaiah, was the Prophet
Amos, is altogether improbable; because the Name of Amos the Prophet is in the
Hebrew written with other Letters than this is; neither is there any good
ground for that which is laid down as a general Rule by the Rabbis, that where
any Prophet has his Father mentioned together with him, there both Father and
Son were Prophets. And as for that which the Jewish Doctors do also commonly
affirm, that this Amos, the Father of Isaiah, was the Son of J^ash King of
Judah, and Brother to Amaziah his Son, and Uncle to Azariah or Uzziah that
succeeded him, and so that Isaiah was of the Royal Stock of the Kings of Judah,
and Cousin-German to Uzziah, in whose days he began to Prophecy, and likewise
that he was the Father-in-Law of Manass^^, considering that they produce no
Authentic Proof for these things, I conceive we may well look upon them as
uncertain Traditions, that deserve no great credit.

Which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem] That is, the State and People of
the Kingdom of Judah, (under which the Tribe of Benjamin was comprehended) and
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; who are particularly mentioned, not only because
Jerusalem was the Metropolis of that Kingdom, but also because in bad times it
was most disordered, and from thence all wickedness did spread it self all the
Land over. It is true indeed, that there are many things spoken in this
Prophecy, concerning other Nations, yet it is called The Vision of Isaiah,
which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, because it chiefly concerns them,
and that which is inserted concerning other Nations, is mentioned with respect
to their instruction, Consolation and Benefit.

In the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah.]
Considering that Jotham Reigned sixteen years, 2 Kings 15.33. and Ahaz as many,
1 Kings 16.2. And that Isaiah prophesied all the time of both their Reigns, as
is here expressed; and considering that of the nine and twenty years of
Hezekiah's Reign, 2 Kings 18.2. he had Reigned at least fifteen years when
Isaiah was sent to reprove him for that vainglorious Act of his, in showing
his Treasures to the Babylonian Ambassadors, 2 Reg. 20.14. (for in his
foregoing Sickness, which occasioned the coming of these Ambassadors to him,
God had promised that he should live fifteen years longer, 2 Kings 20.6.) it is
clear that Isaiah prophesied under the Reign of these three Kings, at least
seven and forty years. And how many years longer he might prophecy, both in the
days of Hezekiah, after the coming of the Babylonian Ambassadors to him, and
before that under the Reign of Uzziah, in whose days it is here said he begun
to Prophecy, cannot be certainly concluded: For though some would conclude,
that Isaiah began not to Prophecy till the last year of Uzziah's Reign, because
there is a Vision mentioned, Chap. 6.1. which he saw in the Year that King
Uzziah died, at which time when God had said, Whom shall I send? etc. the
Prophet answered, Here am I, send me; yet the truth is, that this cannot be
justly gathered from thence, because that might not be intended of his first
Call to his Prophetical Office, but of that particular message which God
required him at that time to deliver to the Jews; concerning which, see the
Notes there.

The Jewish Doctors do indeed affirm, that Isaiah was put to death in the days
of Manasseh, being sawn asunder with a Wooden Saw; whereto some Expositors
conceive, the Apostle had respect in the mention that he makes, Heb. 11.37. of
some that were sawn asunder. And if this could be taken for granted, it would
be clear that he prophesied some considerable time, above threescore years; for
besides the time that he should have Prophesied under Uzziah and Manasseh, the
two and thirty years of Jotham's and Ahaz's Reigns, and the nine and twenty
years of Hezekiah's, do together make up sixty one years. But the truth is,
that this Tradition concerning the death of Isaiah is altogether groundless,
and not much to be regarded; for that this was not done in the days of
Manasseh, appears by this, that there is no mention here made of his
Prophesying in Manasseh's time; and how unlikely it was that he should be so
cruelly put to death in the days of good Hezekiah, we may easily conceive. That
which is most observable here is, that it is clear that he was contemporary
with Hosea, Amos, and Micah, who were of the first of the Prophets; and that
notwithstanding he did faithfully discharge his duty so long a time amongst
Gods people, yet it was with very little success, as is evident by that his
complaint, Chap. 53.1. Who has believed our Report? and to whom is the Arm of
the Lord revealed?

Ver. 2. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth.] It may well be, that the
Prophet begins thus in allusion to the same expression used by Moses, Deuteronomy.
32.1. for which see the Note there. The whole frame of the World, the Heavens
and the Earth, and all the Creatures therein, are summoned to hear the
following sad complaint which the Lord makes concerning his People; and that to
imply, 1. The stupidity of Gods People, that the senseless Creatures were more
like to hear him than they were: see the Note, 1 Kings 13.2. 2. That these
Creatures, by which he had done much good for his People, might well bear
witness on Gods behalf against their horrid ingratitude: see the Note, Deuteronomy.
4.26. And 3. How prodigious and stupendous a thing it was, whereof the Lord
complains in the following words, even such as the senseless Creatures might
well stand amazed to hear it, were they capable of hearing it, according to
that of the Prophet, Jer. 2.12. Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this, and be
horribly afraid, etc.

I have nourished and brought up Children, etc. As under this is comprehended
all that God had done for the Israelites from the time that they first became a
People in Egypt, unto the time that they were at last raised up to be a Kingdom
and Nation of great Note and Renown; so the following words, And they have
Rebelled against me, must be understood not only of their fore-passed
Rebellions, but also of their present persisting still therein.

Ver. 3. The Ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib, etc.] That is,
though these be in a manner the dullest and most stupid of all bruit beasts,
yet they will after their kind own and acknowledge their master that breeds them
up and feeds them, and makes much of them; they will at times follow after him,
submit to him, and be readily obsequious to him in any service he puts them to:
But Israel does not know, my people does not consider; as if he should have
said, They that call themselves Gods Israel, and whom I have indeed taken to be
my peculiar people, are more brutish than these bruit beasts are, they will
not own me, nor submit themselves to me, to serve me, and to be guided by me
their Lord and master, that have done every way as much or more for them, in
feeding them, and bringing them up, according to that, Hos. 11.4. I was to them
as they that take off the yoke, and I laid meat unto them. Nay they will not so
much as consider what I have done for them, that hereby they might be brought
to own and serve me. And thus the Lord makes oxen and asses both the teachers
and judges of his people.

Ver. 4. Ah sinful Nation! etc.] This particle (Ah) seems here added by way of
representing the general Apostasy and wickedness of his people, as a thing, 1.
he admired, and 2. bewailed, and 3. detested and abhorred, and 4. for which he
was highly offended with them. Ah sinful Nation! a people laden with iniquity;
to wit, in regard of the multitude, and the greatness, and heinousness of their
sins: a feed of evil d^ers, that is, a race of wicked wretches, as the Baptist
termed the Pharisees and Sadduces, Mat. 3.7. a generation of vipers. And so
inseems to imply, that they trod in the steps of their wicked Progenitors, that
by nature and descent they were corrupt, and so were likely to transmit their
wickedness to their Posterity: Children that are corrupters, that is, that are
degenerated from the piety of their holy Predecessors, and are become a sinful
corrupt people; such as did daily corrupt themselves, and grow worse and worse:
see the Note, Deuteronomy. 32.7. or that did corrupt their ways and doings, according
to those expressions, Genesis 6.12. All flesh had corrupted his way. And Zeph.
3.7. They rose early and corrupted all their doings; and so likewise were
instrumental in corrupting others. But however observable it is, that by these
names of rep^oach which the Lord here gives them, he does covertly upbraid them
for their vanity in assuming such glorious titles to themselves as they usually
did. Instead of a holy people, he calls them a sinful Nation; instead of the
seed of Abraham, he terms them a seed of evil doers; and instead of the
children of God, he names them, children that are transgressors.

They have forsaken the Lord, etc.] To wit, by a general disregard of his
commands, by serving other Gods, and by an open renouncing of the true
Religion. They have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, that is, they
have done exceeding wickedly, as if they purposely intended to provoke God to
anger; the Holy One of Israel, (a title which Isaiah frequently gives to the
Lord), that God who is infinitely holy, and that had manifested himself to be
such to the Israelites by his anger against them for their sins, and many other
ways, thereby making known that he expected that they whom he had chosen to be
his peculiar people, should be in that regard a holy people. They are gone away
backward, that is, they have absolutely turned away from the Lord like stubborn
children or servants, that disliking the commands of their Parents or Masters,
turn their backs in disdain upon them, and fling way; or like resty Jades, who
the more they are driven forward, the more they go backward.

Ver. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more, etc.] Here the Prophet proceeds to
show, that as Gods mercies had wrought no good upon them, so neither his
judgments; he found them an incorrigible people; for he had gone so far this
way by several judgments he had brought upon them, and all to no purpose, that
he might well say of them, that it was in vain to smite them any more. Ye will
revolt more and more: that is, instead of being amended by farther punishments,
ye will grow worse and worse; as it is indeed particularly noted of Ahaz (in
whose days Isaiah Prophesied) 2 Chronicles. 28.22. That in the time of his distress
he did trespass yet more against the Lord.

The whole head is sick, etc.] That is, say many Expositors, both the King and
his Princes, and subordinate Magistrates, or the whole Civil and Ecclesiastical
power, that are as the head for caring for and governing the whole body, are
exceedingly weakened and distempered, in a very sad and dangerous condition. And
the whole heart is faint; the Priests and Teachers of the people, or all the
strong and valiant men of the land, are in a languishing and dying condition.
And many there are that understand hereby the universal and excessive
wickedness and profaneness that was in the land, especially in those that were
as the head and heart of the state, that where the greatest strength should be,
there was nothing but weakness. But methinks it is very clear that this is
spoken with respect to the many dreadful plagues and punishments that God had
brought upon them, thereby to make good what he had said, that it would be to
no purpose to smite them any more; which may seem the more probable too,
because the mention that is made in the next verse of wounds and bruises, does
best suit with this Exposition; and because that which follows, Verse. 7. Your
Country is desolate, etc. seems to be added by way of explaining this Metaphor.
And accordingly I conceive, that comparing the people of Israel here to the
body of a man that is all over dangerously beaten and bruised, because the head
and the heart are principal and vital parts, upon which the health of the whole
body does chiefly depend, therefore they are particularly mentioned here. Yet
some expound it thus, The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint;
that is, every head in the whole Commonwealth is weak and sick, and every heart
amongst the people is ready to faint.

Ver. 6. From the sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in
it, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores, etc.] That is, the whole
land, and all the people therein from the lowest to the highest, are in a sad
condition, having been plagued with variety of judgments over and over, so that
in the whole body from top to toe there is no part free: they have not been
closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment; that is, there is no
means used for the removing of these judgments that are come upon them. See the
Note, Psalm. 147.3. As that their Neighbors and Confederates never minded to
afford them any relief, so neither had they power or skill to help themselves;
and as for that which was the only sure way to cure them of their evils,
namely, their turning to the Lord by unfeigned repentance, that was never
minded, but they obstinately ran on still in their sins, and that either
because they whose work it was to have administered these means of their cure,
neglected their duty, or else because the people would not follow their
direction. The drift of all is to show, that the condition of Israel was at
present in a manner hopeless and desperate.

Ver. 7. Your Country is desolate, etc.] What was before expressed
figuratively, is here repeated in plain terms. It is in the Original only, your
Country desolate, or a desolation; and therefore some render it in the future
tense, your Country shall be desolate, etc. and accordingly conceiving that he
spoke this in the days of Uzziah, because they find it in the beginning of his
Prophecy, they conceive it to be a Prediction of the desolation that was to
come upon the land of Judah in the days of Hezekiah, Ahaz, and others that
succeeded him, even unto the Babylonian Captivity. Yea and some that read it in
the present tense, Your Country is desolate, etc. do yet understand it of the
desolation which the Chaldeans should make in the land, and conceive that it is
expressed as done already, only to show how certainly it should be. But because
it seems far most probable that the Prophet still proceeds to show that God had
proceeded so far in a way of punishing them, that it was in vain to smite them
any more, therefore I conceive it is best rendered in the present tense, Your
Country is desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire; and that it must be
understood of desolations past or present, when the Prophet spoke this, to wit,
of the devastations made either by Tiglath-Pileser in the land of Israel in
Jothams days, 2 King. 15.29. or by R^zin King of Syria, and Pekah King of
Israel in the land of Judah in the days of Ahaz: see the Notes, 2 King. 16.5.
and by the Philistines, 2 Chronicles. 28.17. or by the Assyrians both in the land of
Israel and Judah in the days of Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.9, 13. Isaiah Prophesied
in those times when all these devastations were made both in the Kingdoms of
Judah and Israel; and therefore this might be spoken with respect to all or
either of them, there being no necessity why we should conclude that all his
Prophesies are set down in order, as he delivered them.

Your land, strangers devour it in your presence, etc.] That is, foreign
Nations, yea and some of them such as are of Countries very far off from you,
as were the Babylonians, Deuteronomy. 28.4, 5. having invaded your land, do eat up and
consume the fruit of it, and that to the great increase of your grief, before
your faces, you being no ways able to help your selves herein. And it is
desolate as overthrown by strangers, which is in the Hebrew, And it is
desolate, as the overthrow of strangers; and so some understand it thus, That
God had made their land desolate according to the destruction which he used to
bring upon Heathens, such as were mere strangers to God, as were those of Sodom
and Gomorrha mentioned in the next verse. But the meaning rather is, That the
desolation of their land was according to the overthrow which foreigners and
strangers are wont to make in a land, who because they expect no benefit from
the Country in future times, do therefore barbarously make all the havoc they
can, wasting and destroying all that is before them, where ever they come.

Ver. 8. And the Daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a Vineyard, etc.] The
Prophet having spoken of the misery of the land in general, here he sets forth
the misery of Jerusalem the chief City thereof in particular. Sometimes the
people or inhabitants of Jerusalem are called the Daughter of Zion, for which
see the Note, 2 King. 19.21. But here it is the City it self that is so called,
because the chief part of Jerusalem where the Temple stood, was built upon
Mount Zion, and so with respect to the former splendour and stateliness of that
City is compared to a fair and beautiful damsel standing by her mother; or with
respect to the tender respect that God bare to her. And in saying that she was
left as a cottage in a Vineyard, as a Lodge in a garden of cucumbers, he alludes
to the custom of that Country where they used to build little Cottages, Sheds
or Lodges in their Vineyards, and Fruit-gardens, that those who were appointed
to watch their Grapes and other Fruits, might lodge there by night, and by day
might shelter themselves from the rain, and from the heat; which after the
Vintage, and the ingathering of their Summer-fruit, were usually left ruinated,
tattered and defaced, or at least empty and desolate, no body then abiding in
them; and that because by reason of the wast and havoc that was made in the
Country round about Jerusalem, either by the Assyrians in the days of Hezekiah,
Chap. 7.17, 20. and 36.1, 2. or by the Syrians, and the Israelites and others
in the days of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28. and by reason the City it self had suffered
much, it was become a sad spectacle, base and contemptible, more like one of
those poor forlorn cottages and lodges, when all the Vines in the Vineyards,
and all the Fruit in the Gardens, were cut up and carried away, than such a
stately and glorious City as it had formerly been. To which purpose also that
eighth clause is added, as a besieged city, implying that the Country was
wasted and destroyed round about, and Jerusalem it self so exceedingly
straightened, that there was scarce any going in or out of it in safety, as
usually it is when the chief City of any Country is besieged.

Ver. 9. Except the Lord of Hosts, etc.] See the Note, Genesis 2.1. Having spoken
of the devastation of the land, and the low and contemptible estate whereinto
the City Jerusalem was brought in comparison of what it had been in former
times; Here the Prophet adds what mighty havoc had been made amongst the
inhabitants of the land, to wit, by the enemies that had invaded it. And this
he expresses so, as might best set forth the horrid wickedness of the Jews,
namely, that except the Lord of his own free grace had determined to preserve a
small remnant, they had been all utterly cut off and destroyed, as it was in
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, where all were consumed, and not one
left therein. The enemies had destroyed such multitudes of the people, that
there was but a very small remnant of them preserved; and it was merely of Gods
free grace and mercy that they were spared; not because the enemy were moved
out of pity to spare them, or that the people had any power to prevent a total
destruction of them, or had deserved that God should preserve them: Except the
Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as
Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah; which is much the same with
that of Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not. And now because this which the Prophet speaks of his
times may be truly said of the Church at all times with respect to their
provocations and Gods free grace; therefore the Apostle, Romans 9.29. applys this
to Gods free grace in calling a few of the Jews to believe in Christ, whilst
the generality of that Nation did despise him; and as Isaias said before,
Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, and been
made like unto Gomorrah. Only observable it is, that what the Prophet here
calls a very small remnant, the Apostle (following therein the Translation of
the Septuagint) terms a seed; which does more plainly imply the reason why God
did not now destroy the whole Nation of the Jews, nor afterward suffer them
all to reject Christ, namely, because God would with respect to his own glory,
reserve a seed for future times, that he might still have a Church upon earth
to serve him; even as the Husbandman, though he eats and sells the greatest
part of his crop, yet still reserves a remnant for seed to sow his land for
another harvest.

Ver. 10. Hear the word of the Lord ye rulers of Sodom, and give ear unto the
Law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.] That is, that which I am now from God
to make known to you; see the Note, Psalm. 78.1. And because the Jews might
think themselves blameless, in regard that they did so zealously give to God
that Ceremonial Worship enjoined there in his Law; therefore he terms that
which he had to say to them, the L^w of our God; thereby implying that it was
fully consonant to the Law, and that their formal Worship, wherein they
trusted, was far from the obedience which the Law of God required of them. As
for those tart expressions, in terming their Princes, Princes of Sodom,
(amongst whom even their King might be comprehended, if this were spoken in the
days of Ahaz) and the People, People of Gomorrah, that was occasioned by what
the Prophet had said in the foregoing Verse. Lest they should be offended with
him for comparing them with Sodom and Gomorrha, by saying that they were in
danger to have been utterly destroyed as Sodom and Gomorrha were, had not God
of his mercy spared them, and that because they were the seed of Abraham, and
did daily worship God in his Temple, according to what was enjoined them in his
Law; therefore by calling them in plain terms, Princes of Sodom, and people of
Gomorrah, he gives them to understand, that for all this, being every way as
vile and wicked as they were, they were fully as hateful to God, and as like to
be utterly destroyed as the other were. How harshly this sounded in their ears,
that thought so highly of themselves, we may easily conceive. The Jews commonly
say that this was one main thing objected against the Prophet, when the Princes
and People put him to death.

Ver. 11. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me, says the
Lord? etc.] As if he should have said, Be they never so many, yet being offered
by such as you are, they are no way pleasing to me, nor can be therefore any
way profitable to you; but all that you do therein is lost labor, and to no
purpose at all. Because they were not offered with faith and repentance, as God
required, he did not own them as the service that he required: and to imply
this, it may well be that he calls them their sacrifices, not his: To what
purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices? See the Note also Psalm. 40.6. I am
full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; that is, I am
cloyed with them, they are loathsome to me; and he particularly mentions the
fat, and in the following clause the blood: And I delight not in the blood of
bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats, because in all sacrifices the fat and
the blood were particularly set apart for God.

Ver. 12. When ye come to appear before me, etc.] Though this be the ordinary
phrase, whereby the Scripture is wont to express men's resorting to the Temple,
the place of Gods special presence; yet it may be here used to hint unto them
their base hypocrisy, that they came only thither to be seen there; that they
did only in a formal manner appear before God; and that was all. Who has
required this at your hand? that is, at the hand of such vile wicked wretches
as you are? To tread my Courts? implying, that whilst they had no farther aim
than merely to come into that holy place, this was an act of profane contempt,
rather than devotion; they fouled and wore away the pavements of his Courts
with treading on them; and that was all the good they did by coming thither.
And by Gods Courts here, are meant the two Courts without the Temple; the one
was for the Priests, and the other for the people. See the Notes, 2 Kings 21.5.
Psalm. 84. and 135.2. So that the Priests are charged with this profaneness, as
well as the people.

Ver. 13. Bring no more vain oblations, etc.] By Oblations here, are meant
their meat offerings, which were sometimes offered alone, and sometimes as
additionals to their sacrifices. See the Note, Lev. 2.1. but being not offered
with a right end, nor by persons qualified as God required, they were in vain,
and to no purpose: Incense is an abomination unto me: as if he should have
said, As sweet a savor as it yields, I abhor it: the new Moons and Sabbaths,
the calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with; to wit, those assemblies of the
people which were for the keeping of those holy days which God had appointed
for his worship and service; such as were the yearly feasts of the Passover,
Pentecost and Tabernacles, and others, and likewise those which themselves
appointed upon special occasions; as for the keeping of public fasts, and such
like, of which the Prophet seems to speak, Joel 1.14. Sanctify a fast, call a
solemn assembly; and which because they were proclaimed by the sound of
trumpets, that the people might thereby be put in mind of their meeting, and
might prepare themselves to meet together in a holy manner, were therefore
called holy Convocations, Lev. 23.2. it is iniquity (or, it is a grief, as it
is in the margin of our Bibles), even the solemn meeting; to wit, because the
more show they made of devotion herein, and the more confidence they had in
such formalities, the more abominable their hypocrisy was, and the more
grievous and irksome it was to God. And by the solemn meeting, many do
particularly understand those days of their holy festivals, wherein they were
restrained from all servile work (as the word in the Original signifies); such
as were the seventh day after the Passover, and the eighth day after the feast
of Tabernacles, Levit. 23.36.

Ver. 15. And when you spread forth your hands, etc.] That is, though you pray
to me never so earnestly: see the Note, Job 11.13. I will hide mine eyes from
you; that is, I will not mind, nor take any notice of the stretching forth of
your hands; or, I will not vouchsafe to hear you, no^ so much as to look
toward you, but will turn away my face from you, as men are wont to do from
some hateful person, whom they cannot endure to see; or some loathsome,
abominable thing, the sight whereof they cannot away with: Yea, when ye make
many prayers, I will not hear: though with never so much importunity you follow
me with many and many prayers, I will not grant your desires, or I will not so
much as give you the hearing. Your hands are full of blood: that is, you are
openly and notoriously guilty of the blood of your brethren; and therefore I
abhor your prayers: only because he had before spoken of their praying to him,
under that expression of spreading forth their hands to him: When you spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; therefore in reference
thereto, he also sets forth their wickedness by this expression, Your hands are
full of blood; as if he should have said, And therefore it goes against me to
look upon them. But then we must know also, that by blood here, is meant not
only murder, but also all other sinful courses, whereby men are deprived of
their livelihoods, whether by violence or fraud, as oppression, extortion,
tyranny, cruelty, injustice, and such like; and that because such sins are no
other than murder and blood-guiltiness in Gods account, 1 John 3.15. Whosoever
hates his brother, is a murderer. And thence is that complaint ver. 25. of
this Chapter, concerning the oppression that did abound in Jerusalem, It was
full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers. See also Mic.
3.1, 2, 3. and Matthew. 5.21, 22.

Ver. 16. Wash ye, make you clean, etc.] This is spoken with respect to the
reason he had immediately before given, why their sacrifices and prayers were
rejected, Your hands are full of blood, and there is an allusion therein also
to their legal washing both of their persons and sacrifices: See the Notes,
Psalm. 26.6. and 51.2. What God intended thereby, is more plainly expressed in
the following words, Put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes;
that is, cleanse your selves from all the evil which mine eyes see in you: If
you would not that I should turn away mine eyes from your sacrifices and
prayers, which is that he had threatened to do, ver. 15. let me not see that
evil in you, which will make both your persons and services loathsome in mine
eyes: Cease to do evil: see the Note, Psalm. 34.14.

Ver. 17. Learn to do well, etc.] That is, he now instructed, and ^^ure your
selves to all ways of well-doing, whereto you have hitherto been strangers:
Seek judgment; that is, let your study and endeavor be to judge righteously,
or that in all causes right judgment be given: so that though this was spoken
chiefly to Magistrates, yet in some regard it did concern all the people:
Relieve (or righten) the oppressed, to wit, either by private persons, or in
Courts of Justice: Judge the fatherless; that is, do them justice: plead for the
widow, that is, do what you can to defend widows against those that wrong them.
And under these are comprehended all that are friendless and helpless.

Ver. 18. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, etc.] To wit,
Either, 1. that it may be made evident upon a fair debate, whether you have
done that, which in the foregoing words I have required of you; and if so,
whether there be any cause for you to question, but that I will approve my self
gracious and merciful to you, and that your former sins, though never so
heinous, shall be absolutely forgiven you: Or else rather, 2. that it may be
seen, whether the terms that I have propounded to you be not equal and
reasonable; and consequently whether I have not just cause, if you yield not to
these conditions, to complain of you, and threaten as I have done. And thus by
the Lords condescending to argue the matter (as it were in a friendly manner)
with such poor vile wretches, he gives them to understand, That if upon these
terms they did not carry themselves toward him, as they ought to do, they
would have nothing to say for themselves, though they should have full liberty
given them to say what they could. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool;
that is, if you be convinced by me, and do what I have before required, though
your sins were never so heinous, yet they shall be so absolutely forgiven you,
and the guilt thereof shall be thereby so wholly taken away, that you shall be
as pure in Gods sight as if you had never sinned. By sins that are as scarlet,
and red as crimson, he means bloody sins, (alluding to that which he had said
ver. 15. Your hands are full of blood), and consequently all other gross and
abominable sins. And though it be said, that their sins should be as white as
snow, and like wool, that is, like pure white wool, before it be any way
discolored (for they had black and brown wool in those Countries, as well as
white, as it is with us, Genesis 30.32.) yet every one knows that this is a
figurative expression; and that the meaning is only this, That though their souls
were defiled with the foulest sins, sins of the deepest dye, sins in grain, as
we use to say; yet upon their unfeigned repentance they should be so perfectly
acquitted and cleared from their sins, that they should be in Gods sight as
pure, and white as snow, and as the purest whitest wool. It is an expression
much like that, Hebr. 1.3. where Christ is said to have purged our sins; and
yet the meaning is only that he has by his blood purged us from our sins,
Hebr. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your consciences from
dead works, to serve the living God?

Ver. 19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land.]
That is, the good fruits, even the best of them, which that good land yield,
which I have given you; it shall not be devoured by strangers, as he had told
them before, ver. 7. it had lately been with them, but you your selves shall
enjoy it. And observable it is, that in the condition annexed he does nor say,
If you obey these my commands, but if ye be willing and obedient; implying,
that if they were really willing and desirous to obey God in all that he
required of them, though they came short in many things of doing what they
desired, yet God would accept of them; and that the cause of all that they had
suffered hitherto, was their wilful disobeying of Gods commands, according to
that, My people would not hearken to my voice, Psalm. 81.11.

Ver. 20. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword.] As
if he should have said, Instead of your eating the good of the land, the sword
of your enemies shall eat up and devour you.

Ver. 21. How is the faithful City become an harlot! etc.] This is spoken by
way of astonishment, as being amazed to consider, that Jerusalem, a City that
had been so faithful in keeping covenant with God, even as a chaste and loyal
Wife does with her Lord and Husband, should now carry her self so disloyally
toward him, even as an harlot or common strumpet; that a City that had been so
famous for Piety, should be so far fallen from her former purity. And though
this may be extended to all the wickedness of Jerusalem, whereby she had broken
covenant with God: see the Note, Psalm. 73.27. Yet I conceive that it is
principally meant of her Idolatry, whereby she had apparently, as it were,
forsaken God, her Lord and Husband, and joined her self to Idols; for this is
most frequently in the Scriptures called spiritual harlotry and whoredom: see
the Notes, Numb. 15.39. Judge. 2.17. and Psalm. 106.39. She had been in these
regards faithful in the days of David, and the greatest part of Solomon's reign;
yea and after the Apostasy of the ten Tribes, Jerusalem had the true worship of
God continued there: see 2 Chronicles. 13.9, 10, 11. and some good kings there were
in Judah, that renewed their covenant with God, and reformed many abuses that
were crept in amongst them, as it was in the days of Asa and Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 15.12-15. and 17.3, 4. whence was that of the Prophet, Hos. 11.12.
Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: but
Judah rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints. Well, but now it seems
in the days of the Prophet, even in the City of Jerusalem, Idolatry and all
kind of wickedness did abound: It was full of judgment, that is, there was
nothing else to be seen in it; so constantly was justice and judgment exercised
and executed under her good kings: see 2 Chronicles. 19.5, etc. Righteousness lodged
in it; as if he had said, that all things both in places of judicature, and
private commerce, were carried so justly and equally, as if justice had taken
up her abode there: but now murderers, for which see the Note above, ver. 15.

Ver. 22. Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water.] Some
understand this passage literally, as a complaint of the injustice of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, in that they did counterfeit or embase their coin, or
sell silver mixed with a great deal of dross for pure silver, and wine mingled
with water for pure wine; and so likewise in all other merchandises did defraud
those that traded with them. But by the consent of almost all Expositors, the
words are rather to be taken figuratively; and so the meaning is, That they
were quite degenerated from their former purity and goodness, and that there
was nothing left either in Church or State, but it was some way or other grossly
corrupted: Their doctrine, that should have been agreeable to the Word of God,
which is as pure Silver, Psalm. 12.6. was corrupted with Errors; their Worship
with Superstition and Idolatry; and their Life and Conversation with all kind
of Wickedness: Though they still made a show of Religion in their outward
Worship, and of Justice in their Forms of Judicature; yet all was but a show,
and therefore they were but as dross, which is like to Silver, but yet is not
Silver, and as Wine mixed with Water, which has the color, but not the taste
of pure Wine.

V. 23. Thy Princes are Rebellious, etc.] Because the wickedness of the Princes
in a Land is usually the main cause of all the Lewdness that is amongst the
People, therefore the Prophet here lays all the blame upon them; and having
said of Jerusalem, v. 25. that now Murderers lodged in it, he now shows who the
Murderers were that he intended, Thy Princes are Rebellious, and Companions of
Thieves; to wit, because by their pilling and polling, their oppressing and
impoverishing of the people, they were in Gods Account as very Thieves as those
Cutthroats were that Robbed by the Highway. Or by Thieves here may be meant
all such as by any way of fraud or violence did wrong their Brethren, and
bereave them of their Livelihoods, according to what our Savior said of those
that were found buying and Selling in the Temple, Matthew. 25.13. It is written,
My House shall be called the House of Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of
Thieves. And so the Princes are charged to be Companions of these Thieves,
because by not punishing them, and much more by countenancing and justifying
them, and taking their parts in the Seat of Judgment, they did encourage them
in their Extortions and Rapines; but especially because by doing these things
for Bribes, which they received from such men, they made a gain of their Sins,
and became Sharers and Partakers with them in their Thefts: see the Notes also,
Psalm. 50.18. and Prove. 29.24. Every one loves Gifts, and follows after
Rewards; that is, they all generally covet Bribes, and seek only the enriching
of themselves thereby: So that I conceive the same thing is meant by Gifts and
Rewards; yet some by Gifts understand Bribes given beforehand to Judges,
directly therewith to hire them to judge unjustly: and by Rewards, Gifts given
by way of Retribution after an unjust Sentence is pronounced: Yea some under
these Rewards include that injustice of Judges, when they gratify a
Fellow-Judge with an unjust Sentence, in expectation that he at another time
shall do the same for him: They Judge not the Fatherless, that is, they will not
judge justly for them; or they refuse to hear them, because they are not able to
bribe them; which agrees best with the following clause, neither does the Cause
of the Widow come unto them.

Ver. 24. Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the mighty One of (...),
etc.] That is, The mighty God or Lord Protector of Israel, as before he was
called, v. 4. The Holy One of Israel, and Genesis 49.24. the mighty God of Jacob.
By which Title he seeks to beat them off from their vain confidence in God, by
giving them to understand, that he that had formerly been the mighty Defense of
Israel, would now manifest the same Almighty power in punishing and destroying
them, which he had formerly manifested in preserving them and destroying their
Enemies; and so to make the following Vengeance threatened, the more dreadful
and terrible to them, since it must needs be a fearful thing to fall under the
wrath of an Almighty God; and they might be well assured that were they never
so mighty and great, he would be easily able to crush and destroy them: Ah, I
will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies. This is spoken
after the manner of men, to whom Revenge is sweet and pleasing; for as vexation
and indignation is a burden to men's Spirits, and puts them into a restless
condition; so when men have satisfied their minds, by revenging themselves upon
those that have so injured and provoked them, that is an ease to them, and
quiets their spirits. And hence are the like expressions used concerning the
Lord, when he speaks of punishing wicked men, as in Ezekiel. 5.13. I will cause my
fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: And Chap. 16.42. So will I
make my fury toward thee to rest, and I will be quiet, and will be no more
angry. And therefore though this Particle (Ah) be sometimes used as an
expression of Grief, as Jer. 22.18. and 34.5. (and it is true which several
Expositors do note from hence, that when God punishes his People, he does it
with grief, as being constrained to do it by their Obstinacy) yet here, I
conceive, it is rather an Expression of the Lords Indignation, and of his
Triumphing in the ruin of his people, that were now turned to be his enemies;
and so it likewise implies the soreness of the Judgments he meant to bring upon
them; but see the foregoing Note, v. 4. and that also Deuteronomy. 28.63.

Ver. 25. And I will turn my hand upon thee, etc.] If we consider how much good
God promises here to do for his Church, by purging her, and restoring her to a
far better condition than at present she was in, it will be evident that the
Lord adds this, as by way of mitigating, or at least moderating the severity of
the former threatening, ver. 24. And therefore, though otherwise by turning his
hand upon her might be meant (as some have thought) that his hand which had
wont to be stretched forth in her defense for the ruin of her Enemies, should
now be stretched forth upon her, to be avenged on her for her Rebellion against
him; yet I rather conceive, that here it is spoken in a way of mercy, agreeably
to that which follows, to wit, that he would once again set himself, by the
Judgments he would bring upon her, to endeavor the Purging and Reforming of
her. He had said before, ver. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will
revolt more and more: But now he resolves to turn his hand to this work again,
And I will turn my hand upon thee; and accordingly he adds, and purely purge
away thy Dross, and take away all thy Tinn; which is spoken with relation to
what he had said, v. 22. Thy Silver is become Dross; and that which is intended
thereby is, that by those calamities he would bring upon them, he meant to
purge and refine them, partly by destroying those that were incorrigibly wicked
from amongst them, which are as the refuse of a Stat^* see the Note, Psalm.
119.119. and partly by Reforming the rest, by purging (...) from the wickedness
of their hearts, and from the Idolatry, and other corruptions that were in
their Lives: Yet by Tinn here, which looks like Silver, may be meant their
Hypocrisy, or the Hypocrites that were amongst them, whom he would destroy as
well as those that were openly profane. As for those words, purely and all, I
will purely purge away all thy Dross, and take away all thy Tinn; it must not
be understood so, as if the Church were to have no ungodly ones or Hypocrites
left in her, or that the godly should have no dross of corruption and sin left
in them; the Church is never thus purely purged here in this world. All that is
intended hereby is, that God would bring them to such a degree of Purity, as
that he might again delight in them, as in his people, that they should no more
content themselves with hypocritical shows of Piety, but should sincerely shine
forth in all holiness of Conversation.

Ver. 26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as
at the beginning, etc.] That is, thou shall have Magistrates, and Governors,
and Counselors to be assistant to them, by giving them advice in their way of
Government, that are faithful, and just, and incorrrupt; not such as they are
now, and have been of late, loving Gifts, and following after Rewards, as was
said before, v. 2.3. but such as thou had in the first constitution of thy
State and Commonwealth, to wit, such as thine ancient Judges were, Moses,
Joshua, and Samuel, etc. and thy former good Kings, David, Solomon,
Jehoshaphat, and Asa. And some hold that this was fulfilled in the Reformation
that was made in the days of Hezekiah and Josiah; but I conceive it is spoken,
rather, with relation to the times after the Captivity, when they were Governed
by Joshua and Zorobabel, Ezra and Nehemiah, and other good Rulers: Yea some
say, that this was principally accomplished in the days of the Gospel.
Afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the faithful City;
that is, when God has thus purged thee, then the faithful City that was become
a Harlot (as was said before, v. 21.) shall again become eminently righteous,
in regard of her just dealing with men; and faithful, in regard of her steadfast
piety toward God, insomuch that she shall be famous in this regard, and
commonly magnified as a City of Righteousness, a faithful City.

Ver. 27. Zion shall be Redeemed with Judgment, and her Converts with
Righteousness.] By Zion here is meant the people that dwelt in or about
Jerusalem; or more generally, that worshipped God in Zion: By their being
Redeemed is meant, that they should be delivered from the Judgments before
threatened, or particularly from the Babylonian Captivity; and therefore to that
word which we translate her Converts (meaning thereby those that should be
converted to God in those troubles, being Reformed from their former Evil
courses) others translate, they that return of her, to wit, from Babylon: And
then that Phrase of their being Redeemed with Judgment, may be thus taken:
Either, 1. That they should be delivered by the Judgments which God would
execute upon their Enemies, to wit, the Babylonians and others: Or, 2. That
they should be delivered in such a manner, as became a just and righteous God,
to wit, in that having punished or destroyed the wicked that were amongst them,
by the Judgments he had brought upon them, he should withal take care of
performing that promise which he had made to his Church and People, reserving a
remnant from the common destruction, and so tempering his Judgments with Mercy,
that they should purge and refine his Church, and not ruin her; they should cut
off the wicked from amongst them, and they that were reserved should be only
refined and reformed thereby. And the like may be said of the last clause, and
her Converts with Righteousness; the meaning being only this, that they should
be Redeemed by the faithfulness of God in performing his promises: see the
Note, Psalm. 51.4. because it might be doubted how so great a work should be
effected, as was before mentioned, therefore it is here said, that it should be
brought about by the power of God, who judges righteously, and who is faithful
to perform all his promises made to his people.

Ver. 28. And the destruction of the Transgressors and of the Sinners shall be
together, etc.] That is, They shall none of them escape, but shall all be
destroyed, even the mightiest of them, that thought themselves in the surest
condition, as well as the meanest: Yet some by Transgressors do understand,
more particularly, such as were openly profane; and by Sinners, such as made
more show of Religion, and yet sheltered themselves in some sinful lewd ways;
and so understand this threatening thus, that both these should be destroyed,
the one as well as the other: And they that forsake the Lord, that is, that
abandon the true Religion, and follow after the Gods of the Heathens, shall be
consumed, that is, utterly destroyed, and cut off from his people.

Ver. 29. For they shall be ashamed of the Oaks which ye have desired, etc.]
That is, which ye have so eagerly affected and esteemed, as certainly doting on
that way of your Idol-worship: And ye shall be confounded for the Gardens which
ye have chosen, that is, of your own heads, without any command from God, yea
without his consent or approbation. Now by the Oaks are meant, the Groves which
they did set apart for the Worship of their Idol-gods; concerning which, see
the Note, Genesis 21.33. and Deuteronomy. 16.21. And so likewise the same is meant by the
Gardens, to wit, Gardens which they dedicated to their false gods; of which
there is frequent mention, as in Chap. 65.3. and 66.17. where it is said, that
they sacrificed in Gardens, and that they sanctified themselves, and purified
themselves in Gardens. And of both these it is said, they should be ashamed and
confounded, because they should find, that these Idol-gods whom they had there
worshipped, and in whom they had put such confidence, were no way able to help
them; but that God was by that their Idol-worship, provoked to destroy them;
see also the Note, Psalm. 97.7.

Ver. 30. For ye shall be as an Oak whose leaf fades, and as a Garden that
has no Water.] As if he should have said, ye shall be as one of those Oaks and
Gardens, wherein you did so exceedingly please your selves with your
Idol-service, but not as when they were green and flourishing, which made you
take such delight in them, but as when they are withered, and bereaved of all
their Bravery and Beauty. And this is all you shall get by your Idolatrous
Devices; you have provoked me to wrath with your goodly Oaks and Gardens, and
you shall be as a withered Oak and parched Garden; to wit, in that you shall be
stripped of all your Wealth and glory, and thereby shall be as an Oak whose
leaf fades, and in that God shall withhold his blessing from you, and by means
hereof ye shall be as a Garden that having no water, must needs be withered.

Ver. 31. And the Strong shall be as Tow, and the Maker of it is a Spark, etc.]
That is, your Idols, on whom you relied, as the great strength of the Land,
shall be suddenly destroyed, even as tow, that is in a moment set on fire with
the least spark, and then is therewith presently consumed; and the Workmen that
made them, or the owners of them that caused them to be made, shall be as a
spark, to set the Tow on fire, to wit, by kindling Gods wrath against them,
whereby they shall be consumed. But if we read the second clause, as it is in
the Margin of our Bibles, And the Strong shall be as Tow, and his work as a
Spark; then the meaning may be, that the strong and mighty ones amongst them,
even those that were of greatest power and eminency, should be suddenly burnt
up and destroyed as Tow, and that their work, that is, their sins, and
especially their Idolatry, their Groves, and Altars, and Idols, should be as a
spark to set them on fire; and so they shall both burn together, to wit, the
Spark and the Tow, the Idols and the Idolaters, and none shall quench them.
Having in the foregoing verse compared them to dry withered oaks that are soon
burnt, in allusion thereto it may well be that here he adds that they should be
as Tow, that is quickly burnt up; and so they and their Idols, with all their
strong Cities and Castles, should be utterly consumed together.

CHAP. II.
VEr. 1. The word that Isaiah the Son of Amos saw, etc.] That is, the Prophecy
which was revealed to him by way of Vision. This is the Title prefixed before
this particular Prophecy, contained in this, and the two following Chapters;
concerning which see the Notes, Chap. 1.1. and likewise 1 Samuel 3.1. and 4.1.

Ver. 2. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the
Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be
exalted above the hills, etc.] See the Note, Jer. 49.1. By the last days in the
Scripture, the days of the Gospel are usually meant, the last age of the world,
comprehending the whole time from the Incarnation of Christ to the last
judgment, as we may see Heb. 1.1, 2. God has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son; and so also 2 Timothy 3.1. and 2 Pet. 3.3. Some conceive they are so
called, because these times began under the last Monarchy of the World, to wit,
the Roman. But rather they are so called, because the Church should be then
settled in such a state and Religion, ordered in such a way, as should never be
changed. In former times the state of the Church was often changed, and God did
several ways reveal himself to his people, Heb. 1.1. but then a new form of the
Church was established by Christ and his Apostles, which was to last unto the
end of the world; all Types and Prophesies of the Old Testament were at an end,
and the Doctrine of the Church was settled in an unchangeable way: and thence
are those expressions which the Apostles used, 1 John 2.18. Little children, it
is the last time; and, 1 Cor. 10.11. These things are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Again, by the mountain of
the Lords house, some understand Christ, that stone which became a great
mountain, Dan. 2.34, 35. and upon whom the Church is built as a house upon a
hill. But far more probably the Church is meant hereby, being called the
mountain of the Lords house, in allusion to Mount Zion, whereon the Temple, the
house of the Lord, was built, and which was a type of the Church, and truly
resembled to a mountain, as is noted, Psalm. 2.6. And of this mountain of the
Lords house, it is said, That it should be established (or prepared, as it is
in the Margent) in the top of the mountains, and exalted above the hills, not
only because the Church should be conspicuous to all the World, as a city that
is set on a hill, which cannot be hid, Mat. 5.14. the light of the Gospel
shining from thence to the enlightening of all Nations; but also because it
should in regard of Spiritual privileges and glory, excel all the Kingdoms
and Estates that were in the world; see the Note, Psalm. 68.15. and should be
settled in this condition unchangeably, all Nations submitting themselves to the
Church; which is expressed more fully in the next words, which contain a clear
Prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles. And all Nations shall flow unto it;
that is, they shall come in and join themselves to the Church in great numbers
voluntarily of their own accord, and with great vehemence and fervency of
desires, like so many rivers running into some one greater stream, which is
that our Savior speaks of the Kingdom of Heavens suffering violence, Mat.
11.12. See the Notes, Psalm. 34.5. and 110.3.

Ver. 3. And many people shall go and say, come ye and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, etc.] This is added as
a farther explanation of the last clause in the foregoing verse, and all
Nations shall flow unto it; for this, that multitudes of all Nations should
thus encourage one another to join themselves to the Church, implys how readily
and voluntarily they should flow into it. As for this phrase, let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, etc. it is suited to the situation of the Temple, to
which they went up on every side; but yet withal it very fitly expresses men's
joining themselves to the Church, which is the Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22.
The Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4.26. to which when men do join themselves,
they ascend thereby to greater and better things than the greatest do here
enjoy* and therefore accordingly must take off their hearts from the low and
base things of the world, and ascend in their affections, desires and
endeavors to those that are in Heaven prepared for them, Phil. 3.20. and Col.
3.2. And withal observable it is, that in this prediction of the calling of the
Gentiles it is clearly hinted, that they should join themselves to the Church
of the Jews, according to that, Mat. 8.11. Many shall come from the East and
West, and shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven. 2. What a great change there should be betwixt the state of the Church
under the Gospel, and that under the Law, in that the people that might not
come near to Sinai, have here free access given them to come into Sion. And,
3ly, that the great thing that should encourage the Gentiles to come in, should
be that they should be there taught of God effectually, which is expressed in
those words, And he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.] That is, the Doctrine of the Gospel. Some take this to be also the
words of the people encouraging one another to go up to the house of God, as
was before expressed, to wit, because the word of God was there only to be
found. But rather they are the words of the Prophet, showing by what means the
Nations should be brought thus to join themselves to the Church, namely, that
it should be by the Preaching of the Gospel, which should be first published in
Jerusalem, and should from thence afterward spread abroad into all the world,
Luke 24.47. Act. 1.8. See the Note also, Psalm. 110.2. Now this is mentioned as
that whereby Zion should be exalted to a high degree of eminency, that now the
Doctrine of Salvation should go, not out of Sinai, but out of Zion. And it
implys some change that should then be in the Doctrine of the Church, though in
regard of the substance of it, it should still be the same.

Ver. 4. And he shall judge amongst the Nations, etc.] That is, the Lord Christ,
(the very God of Jacob, to whose house it was said in the foregoing verse the
Gentiles should go up), God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. shall have
the supreme power of Royal authority given him of the Father, (which is that
Christ said, Mat. 11.27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father. And
Joh. 5.22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto his
Son), and accordingly he shall reign as King, judging, and governing, and
protecting his people, and punishing their enemies. See the Notes, Deuteronomy. 32.36.
But now especially this is meant of that Spiritual jurisdiction and dominion he
should exercise in the Consciences of his people, to wit, that by the Scepter
of his Gospel, (that Law and Word of the Lord mentioned in the foregoing verse,
that was to go forth out of Zion), he should rule and govern as a just King,
not amongst the Jews only, but amongst the Gentiles also, and should subdue
their hearts to the obedience of his Kingdom, and then acquit and absolve them
from all their sins. See the Notes, Psalm. 2.8. and 110.2, 3, 6. And therefore
it is added, and shall rebuke many people; which I conceive is also principally
meant of his convincing them of their sins, and the truth of the Gospel, Joh.
16.8. whereby they should be brought to give up their names to Christ.

And they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruninghooks, etc.] The meaning is, that the converted Nations living as is
before said, under the Government of Christ, though formerly warring
continually one against another, and seeking to devour and destroy one another,
should live peaceably together, and laying by all thoughts and desires of being
hurtful and injurious one to another, should only betake themselves to such
employments as tended to the public good, and whereby they should rather
promote the welfare, than the hurt one of another. For as by way of foretelling
times of War it is said, Joel 3.10. Beat your Plow-shares into swords, and your
pruning hooks into spears, so here on the contrary by way of foretelling the
concord and peace which the Gospel of Christ should work amongst men, it is
said, that they should beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears
into pruning hooks. And this is also more fully expressed in the following words,
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any
more. All the difficulty indeed is how to reconcile this Prophecy with the
bitter Wars that have been in most times, even amongst those that have
professed themselves the Church of Christ, with respect whereto our Savior
gave that warning to his Disciples, Mat. 10.34. Think not that I am come to
send peace on the earth, I came not to send peace but a sword. Some to avoid
this difficulty hold this to be only a Prophecy of that Universal Peace which
should be in the reign of Augustus amongst the Nations throughout the whole
Roman Empire, who had then the greatest part of the World under their Dominion,
just about the time of our Saviors birth; the truth whereof, as it is evident
in the Roman Histories, so it may be probably gathered from that Tax, or Muster
mentioned, Luke 2.1. Then went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the
world should be taxed; which could not well be, but in a time of a general
Peace. And again, others would have it to be only a figurative expression of
that true, inward, spiritual peace, which is the effect of Christ's Kingdom in
the Consciences of Believers, begun here, but perfected hereafter in Heavenly
glory. But questionless the words are clearly a Prediction of that concord and
peace, which should be the proper effect of the Gospel amongst those Nations,
and particular persons, that should sincerely submit themselves to the
Government of Christ. The Doctrine of the Gospel does upon many grounds press
Christians to live peaceably, as far as they are able, with all men whatsoever,
Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
men: and, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men. And especially that they
should live lovingly and peaceably amongst themselves, Mark 9.50. Endeavoring
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. And
accordingly we find that where people are thoroughly brought to that frame and
disposition of spirit which the Law of the Gospel does require in Christians,
they are so harmless and meek, that they are careful not to wrong any with whom
they converse, but are content rather quietly to suffer wrong from others, and
will live as brethren lovingly and peaceably together, without any jars and
variance; as it is noted of those that were added to the Church in the first
days of the Gospel, who were at least five thousand, if not eight thousand,
that the multitude of those that believed were of one heart, and of one soul.
And this is that which is here foretold concerning ths days of the Gospel. It
cannot therefore be inferred from hence, that it is altogether unlawful for
Christians to make war, whether offensive or defensive; for the people of God
have gone out to war by Gods own appointment. And when the Soldiers that were
converted to the faith of Christ by the Baptists Ministry, propounded the
question to him, Luke 3.14. And what shall we do? He did not enjoin them to
leave their calling, but only instructed them how to behave themselves therein,
Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely, and be content with your
wages. Just wars are rather executions of Justice, than any breach of Christian
charity. Nor must we think that the discord and wars that have been in all
ages, even in the days of the Gospel, and that too amongst those that profess
themselves Christians, do any way weaken the truth of this Prophecy; for the
drift of these expressions of the Prophet is only to show, first, how much the
Gospel should tend to the establishing of a happy Peace amongst the Nations of
the World, that had been before so barbarously ready to devour one another, by
bringing them to be united together in one faith, as fellow members of one and
the same body under Christ their head, the Prince of Peace, as he is called,
Chap. 9.6. And, 2. what entire affection and union of spirit, and so what a
peaceable disposition one toward another, there should be amongst those that
were true Christians, that did sincerely submit to the Law of Christ, the
Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6.15. and that were effectually guided by the Spirit of
Christ. All which notwithstanding it needs not seem strange to us, that the
Church is still so much embroiled with war: 1. Because when the Church is for
peace, her enemies will still be for persecution and war. 2. Because there will
be still in the Church so many that profess Christ, but in their works deny
him, not being Christians indeed. And, 3ly, because even those that are
true-hearted Christians, by reason of the remainders of corruption in them, are
over-ready too often to swerve from the temper and way of peace which Christ
has prescribed them.

V. 5. O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord.] As
in imitation of that expression wherewith ver. 3. he had said the converted
Gentiles should encourage one another, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, etc. the Prophet does here exhort the Jews, that they that were
Gods firstborn peculiar people, would not come behind them, but would rather
prevent them, and lead them the way. Since the whole world should be
enlightened, it were a shame if they should still walk in darkness; O house of
Jacob come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord, that is, in the light
of Gods word, which shines amongst you now, or in the light of the Gospel,
which shall hereafter break forth from you, and shine amongst all Nations. So
that this may be taken as spoken both to the Jews that were then living in the
days of the Prophet, and to their posterity in the days of the Gospel; and it
is all one in effect as if he should have said, Let us believe in Christ, and
love him and all Christians for his sake.

Ver. 6. Therefore thou have forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because
they be replenished from the East, etc.] That is, they are full of the rites
and customs, and vices of the people inhabiting the Eastern Countries; amongst
which though the Ammonites and Moabites may be numbered, because they lay
Eastward of Judea, yet I conceive the Syrians and Chaldeans are here chiefly
intended, because they were amongst the Jews most usually termed the Children
of the East, or the people of the East, (See the Notes, 1 King. 4.30. and 2
King. 13.17.) and because though it might not be unfitly said, that it was from
these Eastern Nations that they had learnt their Idolatry, and other gross
sins; yet the corrupt customs and rites here meant, wherewith they had been
replenished from the East, seem to be their Magic Arts, Sorceries,
Divinations, and such like superstitious practices, for which the Arabians, the
Syrians and Chaldeans, were famous in those times; as we see amongst others, in
Balaam, that egregious Sorcerer, who was of Pethor of Mesopotamia, Deuteronomy. 23.4.
and brought by Balak out of the mountains of the East, Numb. 23. and herewith
that suits well which follows, and are soothsayers like the Philistines,
(only withal observable it is, that because the Philistines who were also much
addicted to these Superstitions, see 1 Samuel 6.2. bordered on the west of the
Jews, as the Syrians and Chaldeans did on the East, this is all one in effect,
as if the Prophet had complained, that they had filled their land with these
Heathenish practices from all the Nations that were round about them), and they
please themselves in the children of strangers, that is, they follow the rites
and customs of outlandish people with much delight, and are pleased to be like
to them; for though some Expositors understand this of their abusing themselves
with the children of strangers in the horrid sin of Sodomy, (a vice too common
even amongst the Jews in those times, 2 King. 23.7.) and others of their
priding themselves in having many servants to attend them that were of foreign
Nations; yet it is far more probable that the Prophet intended hereby, that
they were much affected with conforming themselves to those their wicked rites
and customs, or perhaps that they were pleased with having commerce, and
joining themselves to them by Covenants and Marriages. But now for the
dependence of these words upon that which went before. Some conceive that this
sad complaint which the Prophet here enters into of the woeful condition
whereinto the Jews had brought themselves by their great sins, tends to show
the reason, why in the foregoing verse he had invited them to turn unto the
Lord by unfeigned repentance, namely, because God had in a manner forsaken them
for their horrid wickedness, and exposed them to the fury of their cruel
enemies, and so they were in danger to be utterly cast off and destroyed, if
they did not prevent it, by a serious and timely returning to their God. And
some add too, that herein a reason is hinted why he had inserted the foregoing
Prophecy of the Calling of the Gentiles. But I rather conceive that this is
added as by way of correcting what he had said in the foregoing verse, O house
of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord; as if he had said,
But alas! to what end do I invite this people to repentance, seeing for their
manifold horrid sins God has rejected them, and so they are in a hopeless
condition. Therefore thou have forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob,
because, etc. He the rather directs his speech to God, to imply the stupidity
of the people, and what little likelihood there was of prevailing with them.

Ver. 7. Their land also is full of silver and gold, etc.] As if he should have
said, In this also they carry themselves more like the Heathens that are round
about them, than as becomes the Israel of God. Instead of seeking Gods favor,
they are all for heaping up riches, and filling their houses and land with
silver and gold; this they set their hearts upon, as putting all their
confidence for their safety herein, and in this they pride themselves,
lavishing it out upon themselves, and upon all that belongs to them, yea even
upon their Idols, see Hos. 2.8. It is not therefore their having such abundance
of silver and gold, but their insatiable covetouss, and priding themselves, and
trusting in their riches, that is here taxed. And accordingly the following
Clause may also imply this, Neither is there any end of their treasures; that
is, their covetous desire after these things is insatiable, they never think
they have enough of them; though I think that is chiefly intended to set forth
the uncountable abundance of their wealth. And the like we must conceive of
that which is added concerning their horses, Their land is also full of horses,
neither is their any end of their chariots; to wit, that they gloried and
trusted in these, and minded not Gods favor. But see the Notes, Deuteronomy. 17.16,
17.

Ver. 8. Their land also is full of Idols, etc.] This expression is used to
imply, both how openly this sin was practiced amongst them, and likewise how
violently they were addicted to it; every corner of their land was full of
these vanities; They worship the work of their own hands, that which their own
fingers have made; an high degree of blindness and madness, that they that were
the workmanship of God, should adore an Image, which their own hands had made,
instead of God their Creator.

Ver. 9. And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbles himself,
etc.] That is, all sorts of men, high and low do basely prostrate themselves to
these Idol-gods; therefore forgive them not; that is, let that vengeance which
thou have threatened fall upon the body of this people, that those that are not
incurable may be reclaimed. But for such imprecations, see the Notes, Psalm.
28.4. and Neh. 4.5.

Ver. 10. Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord,
and for the glory of his Majesty.] Hereby the Prophet foreshews that a day of
vengeance was nigh at hand, wherein though their land were full of Horses and
Chariots, as he had said before, verse. 7. neither that, nor any thing else
should do them any good; all the poor refuge that should be left them would be,
that as desperate men, that had no hope in God, nor no outward power, whereby
to resist their enemies; they should endeavor to hide themselves in rocks and
caves in the earth (a poor refuge) by reason of the dread that should fall upon
them, when the Lord should appear in such dreadful Majesty to punish them by
the Chaldeans for all their wickedness.

Ver. 11. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men
shall be bowed down, etc.] That is, he shall pull down the pride of those that
have exalted themselves against God. The chief thing intended is, that they
that basely bowed down before their Idols, should now be justly humbled and
laid low by the just judgments of God. And the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day; that is, the Lord before whom such base Idols are now preferred,
shall then be alone exalted, because he shall then be known to be the only true
God, and all the power and pride of man shall be found to be nothing before
him; they all confessing that it is he that has brought these judgments upon
them, and admiring his infinite justice and power therein.

Ver. 12. For the day of the Lord of hasts shall be upon every one that is
proud and lofty, etc.] That is, upon all the proud and great ones amongst them.
See the foregoing Note.

Ver. 13. And upon all the cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and
upon all the oaks of Bashan.] Lebanon was famous for goodly tall Cedars. See
the Note, 1 King. 5.4. and so was Bashan for mighty strong oaks, Ezekiel. 27.6. Of
the oaks of Bashan have they made thine Oars. Now though the most of Expositors
do here by these cedars and oaks, understand figuratively the great and weighty
and lofty ones that were amongst them, their Princes and Nobles, their rich and
potent men that exalted themselves against God (as indeed the Scripture does
elsewhere frequently speak thus of such men, as Ezekiel. 31.3. Behold the Assyrian
was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, etc.
See also the Note, Judge. 9.15.) and others do understand hereby their stately
buildings made of the timber of these trees, (as indeed the Prophet Zachary
speaks after this manner of the destruction of the gallant houses in Jerusalem,
Zach. 11.1, 2. Open thy doers, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.
Howl firr-tree, for the cedar is fallen; because the mighty are spoiled; Howl,
O ye oaks of Bashan.] Yet because it seems apparent that the Prophets design
in this part of the Chapter is, first to foreshew the destruction of the
Inhabitants, even the greatest amongst them, (which he has already done in the
three foregoing verses), and then afterward the ruin of all things that were
of greatest note and excellency in their land, whereof they did most glory, and
wherein they put the greatest confidence, therefore I do not see why this
should not be understood literally of the havoc the enemy should make in
burning up and hewing down the Cedars and Oaks, and other stately Trees that
grew there in abundance; and that the rather with respect to the Idolatry that
was daily committed in their Groves, where these Trees grew, wherewith God was
highly offended; for which see the Notes, Chap. 1.29, 30.

Ver. 14. And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are
lifted up.] Hereby also some understand great and rich men, such as were of
great eminency, and did overlook and overtop the meaner fort, as mountains do
the plains. And indeed the Scripture does often speak thus of the great ones of
the world figuratively, as in Zach. 4.7. Who art thou, O great mountain? before
Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain. And, Isa. 41.15. Thou shall thresh the
mountains, and beat them small, and make the hills as chaff. But here I rather
conceive it is meant of the hilly and mountainous parts of the land, upon which
the Prophet threatens that vengeance should come, the rather because their high
places were usually there, and to let them know that these places which they
deemed of impregnable strength, and wherein they did so exceedingly glory and
trust, as places of sure retreat in times of danger, should be no refuge to
them at all.

Ver. 15. And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall.] Even this
also some understand figuratively of men of great strength and power, alleging
for the proof hereof another place in our Prophet, where the same figurative
expression is used, to wit, Chap. 30.25. And there shall be upon every high
mountain, and upon every high hill, rivers and streams of waters, in the day of
the great slaughter, when the towers fall. But I conceive the meaning of these
words is only this, that no fortifications or place of strength should be any
defense to them.

Ver. 16. And upon all the ships of Tarshish, etc.] See the Note, 1 King.
10.22. and Psalm. 48.7. Because they prided themselves much in these their ships
of great bulk and burden, the defense they were to the Kingdom, and the
exceeding wealth they brought into them by way of merchandising, the Prophet
foretells, that these should be also taken or destroyed by the enemy. And upon
all pleasant Pictures; that is, all the curious Pictures, wherein they so much
delighted; under which may also be comprehended their Tapistry and Arras
Hangings of Image-work, their curious wrought Plate, and all other the bravery
of their houses. Some indeed, because this is joined here with the ships of
Tarshish, do particularly restrain this to the goodly Pictures and carved
Images wherewith they adorned their ships, (and that this custom of beautifying
their ships was very ancient, we may see by that of the Poet, -- Pictasque
innare carinas), or else to the choice rarities which in their ships they
brought from the remote Ports of the world. But I think it may better be
understood of all their pleasant houshold-ornament; or that if any particular
be intended, it may be their Idolatrous Pictures.

Ver. 17. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, etc.] As if he had
said, And by this universal destruction which God shall bring upon these things
before mentioned, wherein ye have gloried so much, and put so much confidence,
that shall be accomplished, which was before foretold, ver. 11. The lofty locks
of man shall be humbled, etc. of which see the Note there.

Ver. 18. And the Idols he shall utterly abolish.] As if he had said, Both you
and your Idols, before which you have humbled your selves, shall be destroyed
together; so far they shall be from helping you, that they shall not be able to
secure themselves; yet it may be meant of their being destroyed, not only by
the enemies, but also by those that made and worshipped their Idols, where they
should see with shame how little good they had done them. See the Note, Chap.
1.31.

Ver. 19. And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, etc.] See the Note
above, ver. 10. And from thence that expression seems to have been taken, which
our Savior uses, Luke 23.30. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains,
fall on us, and to the hills, cover us. The meaning is, that being affrighted
with the dreadfulness of Gods Judgments, they should be glad to creep into any
hole to hide themselves in. When he arises to shake terribly the earth; that
is, to break in upon them with such fury that their State shall be in a manner
shattered to pieces, and the hearts of the people shall tremble and shake as it
were with an Earthquake. Yea because we read of a dreadful Earthquake that was
in the days of Uzziah, Amos 1.1. and Zach. 14.5. we may well think that hereby
God did foreshew that terrible concussion of the land, whereof the Prophet here
speaks.

Ver. 20. In that day a man shall cast his Idols of silver, and his Idols of
gold, which they made, each man for himself to worship, to the moles, and to
the bats.] To wit, as being gods blinder than moles, and fitter to lie in
darkness, and not to come abroad into the light, than bats are. The meaning is,
that they should of their own accord cast away their most precious Idols which
they had before most highly esteemed, into any sordid secret hole or corner as
into some hole of the earth, where moles use to be, or into some dark and dusty
corners of their houses, where bats are wont to roost. And the reason intended
why they should do this, may be either first their astonishment and fear in
that day of trouble and terror; though happily at first they might desire to
keep them for the worth of the materials whereof they were made, yet afterward
that they might not be encumbred with them in their flight, they should cast
them aside into any secret obscure place. Or, 2ly, rather, their disregard and
contempt of them; finding how unprofitable and vain they were, and being
ashamed of their former confidence in them, they should throw them away with
indignation and disdain, as thinking any vile neglected place good enough for
such gods to lie in.

Ver. 21. They go into the clefts of the rocks, etc.] This is repeated to show
why they should cast away their Idols, as he had said in the foregoing verse,
to wit, either that being rid of them, they might flee the more freely, or
because they hoped for that shelter from the rocks which they could not afford
them.

Ver. 22. Cease from man, etc.] That is, give over your confidence in man,
whose breath is in his nostrils, and so he may be taken away in a moment;
though he may puff and seem to breathe forth wrath, yet alas his breath may be
soon gone; for wherein is he to be accounted of? to wit, in and of himself,
when God is not with him, and especially when God is against him. The Prophet
having threatened them with the ruin that was coming upon them, does hereupon
infer this warning, not to slight the foregoing threatenings out of a vain
confidence in the strength of their present estate. And withal, this makes way
to that which follows in the next Chapter, where God threatens to destroy all
in whom they might think they had most cause to trust.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. FOr behold, etc.] The Prophet having closed the foregoing Chapter
with an exhortation not to trust on man, Cease from man whose breath is in his
nostrils, etc. here he adds this as a reason of that exhortation, to wit, that
God would destroy all the power of man, and of all humane helps and supports,
whereon they did with so much confidence rely. And observable it is, that he
speaks of this destruction, as of a thing which they might see immediately and
suddenly coming upon them: For behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts does take
away from Jerusalem, and from Judah; that is, it shall be as certainly done,
yea, and that suddenly too, as if it were doing already: the stay and staff;
that is, all things wherewith your state is supported, and whereon you do for
your preservation and safety rest and rely (and so under this general
expression may be comprehended all those stays of their state, which in this
and the two following Verses are particularly mentioned), or all things
requisite for the support of man's life; and if we understand the words so, then
the following words are added to show what he meant here by the stay and the
staff, to wit, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water, that is,
all meat and drink necessary for the preservation of man's life; for the phrase
here used, the stay of bread and water, see the Notes, Levit. 26.26. And how
this was accomplished, we may see, 2 King. 25.3. where it is said of Jerusalem
when it was besieged, That the famine prevailed in the city, and there was no
bread for the people of the land. See also Jer. 38.9. and Lam. 5.4.

Ver. 2. The mighty man, and the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, and the
prudent and the ancient.] By the mighty man may be meant such as were great men
amongst the people for power of command; see the Note, Genesis 10.8. or rather men
of great strength, valor and courage; as indeed we find it expressly mentioned
that at the taking of Jerusalem, the King of Babylon carried away all the
Princes, and all the mighty men of valor, 2 King. 24.14. Again by the Prophet
may be meant all their Teachers, or more particularly those that had the spirit
of Prophecy to foretell future things; which how it was accomplished, you may
see in the Note, Psalm. 74.10. when the Eyes of a Nation, those which are the
Rulers and Teachers are put out, that Nation must needs be in a sad condition.
And then by the prudent is meant men of a piercing judgment, able to bolt out
the truth of things in the most difficult cases, and to give a shrewd guess at
things that should afterward come to pass. But for this see the Notes, Prove.
16.10. and 1 Chronicles. 12.32.

Ver. 3. The captain of fifty, etc.] By mentioning this, which was one of the
most inferior places of command, the Prophet implies that there should scarce
be a man left, that was fit to undertake the meanest and the lowest charge for
the leading forth and governing of their armies. As for the following words,
and the honorable man and the counselor, that which is translated in our
Bibles, the honorable man, is in the Hebrew, a man eminent in countenance, and
thereby is meant men that for their birth and place, their gravity, parts and
virtue, were so reverenced, and of so great esteem amongst the people, that the
very sight of them caused an awe in the hearts of those that came before them;
they carried authority with them in their very countenance. See the Note,
Eccles. 8.1. And then the cunning artificer is mentioned amongst others,
because those that were more than ordinary skilful in such arts, were of great
use in a State, as for the fortifying of their Cities, and making engines of
war, and many other things both in civil and warlike employments, that did
contribute much to the upholding of the State, yea, and to the preservation of
men's lives; and the cutting off such therefore must needs be a great invenience
and loss to a people. And accordingly indeed we read that when the Babylonians
had taken Jerusalem, amongst others they carried away all the Craftsmen and
Smiths, 2 King. 24.14. As for the last here named, and the eloquent Orator, or,
the man of speech, as it is in the margent, (which is in the Original, skilled
in charms), the taking of these is mentioned, because such are very able to
dissuade from evil, and to persuade to good, to restrain, to still and
suppress, and (as I may say) to charm the seditious, (as Abigal by her good
language charmed David, and as the woman of Abel charmed Joab first, and
afterward the whole City) and to bow the minds of men to those things that may
be for public good.

Ver. 4. And I will give children to be their Princes, etc.] As if he had said,
Instead of those men of worth that shall be taken away, silly and childish men
shall be brought to rule over them. And this might be spoken with respect to
Ahaz and Manasseh, or rather to the four last Kings of Judah, that did indeed
manage their affairs very weakly. But see the Note, Eccles. 10.16.

Ver. 5. And the people shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one
by his neighbor, etc.] This is added to set forth what tumults, disorder and
confusion there should be in the land amongst people of all ranks, without any
respect of age or state, of neighborhood or friendship, when those that were
the stay of the State were taken away, and men so unfit to rule should have the
reins of Government put into their hands, when there should be no Governor, or
such as should be as bad as none.

Ver. 6. When a man shall take hold of his brother, etc.] The drift of this
passage is to show, that in that confusion described in the foregoing verse,
the state of things should be so miserable, and in such a desperate condition,
that no man should be willing to undertake the Government, (a thing which at
other times men are wont most ambitiously to affect), though he were never so
earnestly pressed to do it. When a man shall take hold of his brother of the
house of his father; as if he had said, In that confusion men shall be ready to
tender the Government to some one of their fathers family and kindred. And so
too it may imply, that this should be done factiously in several places, to the
disturbance of the common peace, some choosing one, and some another, every one
seeking to advance one of his own family, without any respect to the public
good. However this expression of taking hold, a man shall take hold of his
brother, does clearly imply, how earnestly they should urge and press, and
importune him, as those that would have no denial, but would in a manner force
him to undertake that Government, saying, Thou have clothing, that is, thou
have better apparel than any of us have; an expression which may imply, that
they should be brought to such a low and poor condition, that if any man was
but a little better clothed than the common sort were, they should proffer to
make him their ruler: Or clothing may be mentioned figuratively, to imply an
estate fit for a chief Magistrate, Thou have clothing, as if they should have
said, Thou art well bred, and have been generously brought up, thou have an
estate convenient for a Governor; at least thou art not so low brought as we
are, but have somewhat left to maintain thy state. Be thou our ruler, as if
they should have said, We choose thee to be our ruler, and therefore without any
delay undertake this charge, and let this ruin be under thy hand, that is,
undertake thou the charge and support of this ruinous and declining state. The
meaning is, that they should endeavor to affect him, to compassionate them in
their misery, saying, Thou see we are like to be utterly ruined, put to thy
helping hand to prevent it; by thy power do what thou can to bear us up and
to uphold us from that ruin that is apparently coming upon us.

Ver. 7. In that day, etc.] That is, in that day of Gods vengeance before
mentioned; or in that very day, when the supreme Government shall be tendered
to men, as was said in the foregoing verse, the man to whom it is tendered
shall presently, so soon as the motion is made to him, without taking any time
to deliberate or consult about the business, refuse the tender that is made to
him, he shall swear, saying, I will not be an healer; that is, he shall not
only refuse the Government, but to show how resolved he was herein, he shall
refuse it with an Oath. It is in the Original, In that day shall he lift up, to
wit, his hand; but thereby is meant, In that day shall he swear, for which see
the Notes, Jer. 14.22. and Deuteronomy. 32.40, saying, I will not be a healer, in the
Hebrew it is, a binder up, but for that see the Note, Psalm. 147.3. the meaning
is, that to make them know, that he would never be drawn to take the Government
upon him, he should tell them plainly, that he was no way able to heal the
breaches that were in their ruined State; I will not be a healer; as if he had
said, These wounds and breaches in your State exceed my skill, and are too hard
for me to cure, I am no way fit to undertake such a dangerous and difficult
charge. For in my house is neither bread nor clothing; make me not a ruler of
the people; that is, Whatsoever you may think, I have not an estate fit for
such a charge; which tends much to set forth the low and desperate condition of
the State at that time, whether it were a false oath, merely out of fear, that
he might decline the danger of accepting the Government tendered, or whether he
spoke truly, and so those should be found to want necessaries for the support
of their own families, that were thought fit to be chosen to the highest places
of Magistracy amongst them.

Ver. 8. For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen, etc.] This may be taken
as the continued speech of the party spoken of in the foregoing verse, that
should refuse the supreme Government tendered to him: wherein he gives this as
the reason of his refusal, that the state of the land was so far ruined, that
it was not in his power to uphold it. Or rather as the words of the Prophet,
foretelling the certainty of the^r ruin by speaking of it, as if it were done
already; and withal giving reason why it must need be so, Because their tongue
and their doings are against the Lord to provoke the eyes of his glory; that
is, his glorious eyes, the eyes of his glorious Majesty, and who has
manifested himself amongst them to be a God of infinite glory. See the Notes,
Chap. 1.4.

Ver. 9. The show of their countenance does witness against them, etc.] As if
he had said, Not only their words and deeds, but even their very countenance,
their Whores forehead, as it is called, Jer. 3.3. the open profession which
they made of their impiety, did sufficiently discover what impudent and vile
wretches they were; there needs no other witnesses to convince them. And they
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not; that is, they are no way ashamed
of it, but openly avow it, boasting of it, and glorying in it, as the Sodomites
did. Woe unto their soul; that is, woe to them. See the Note, Psalm. 3.2. For they
have rewarded evil to themselves. See the Note, Prove. 11.17.

Ver. 10. Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him, etc.] That
is, let this be said to those that are righteous, and therefore live
righteously; or let them assure themselves of this. The drift of inserting this
may be to comfort those few that were righteous amongst them, by assuring them
that notwithstanding those sad calamities which he had threatened should come
upon the land, it should certainly go well with them; it should fare well with
them, however things went; or, by way of reproving the false Prophets, that
sadded the hearts of the righteous, and flattered the wicked; affirming, that
it was not the wicked but the righteous only, with whom it should go well,
which is therefore more expressly added in the following verse, Woe unto the
wicked, it shall be ill with him, etc.

Ver. 12. As for my people, children are their oppressors, etc.] See the Note
above, Verse. 4. and Eccles. 10.16. And women rule over them; and according to
the former branch, I conceive that hereby is meant effeminate and womanish men,
foolish, vain, light, etc. though I know some think it is spoken of the wives
and mothers of their Princes, women of a proud imperious spirit, such as
Jezebel, and Athaliah were, and that their intermedling in, and overruling of
State Affairs, should be the cause of much mischief in the land. But withal
observable is the express mention that is made, that all this should be amongst
those that were Gods peculiar people, As for my people, children are their
oppressors, etc. there being much in this, that there should be such disorder
amongst those that had enjoyed such special means to teach them better, and
that such worthless men, boys and women, should rule and domineer over a people
that God had separated to himself in so special a manner. And the rather is
this to be observed, because it is again expressed in the next clause, O my
people, they which lead thee, cause thee to err; that is, thy Rulers and
Princes mislead thee; for of these he seems to be principally here speaking,
though indeed their Priests and Prophets may well be included too. This last
clause may be read from the Original, as it is in the Margent, They which call
thee blessed, cause thee to err; which also may be meant, both of their
flattering Teachers and Magistrates, who though they ruined the people by their
evil Government, yet were wont to applaud their happiness herein, and to assure
them that all things did and should go on happily with them. And destroy the
way of thy paths; that is, they undo thee in regard of thy conversation and
course of life; or they corrupt and mar thy ways, to wit, by seducing and
misleading them into evil ways, through their ill Government, corrupt teaching
and bad example, and by confirming and encouraging them in their wickedness,
and making them incorrigible and incurable through their base flatteries, and
groundless promises. In this phrase of destroying the way of their paths, there
seems to be an allusion to those that so mar the paths wherein men have been
wont to go, that they that would go in them, cannot discern them. However clear
it is, that all this is added as a dreadful effect of Gods anger in bringing
such to rule over them, and as an apparent discovery of the wickedness of the
people in being so ready to obey their commands, and follow their examples,
though never so bad.

Ver. 13. The Lord stands up to plead, and stands to judge the people.] That
is, he is prepared, and just in a readiness to do it, namely, to plead his own
cause against a rebellious Nation, and the cause of his people against their
cruel oppressors, and to punish them, and to deliver those that are oppressed
by them.

Ver. 14. The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people,
etc.] That is, with the Judges and Magistrates, who were commonly chosen of
those that were old men, and therefore called, some of them at least, Elders.
See the Note, Numb. 11.16. and it is again expressed, that they were the rulers
of Gods peculiar people, the ancients of his people, purposely to hint unto
them that they should escape never a whit the more for that. For ye have eaten
up (or burnt) the Vineyard, that is, say the most of Interpreters, Gods darling
people, according to that Chap. 5.7. The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the
house of Israel; and so taking it, the word ye is very Emphatical; as if he had
said, ye that I appointed to be keepers of my Vineyard, that should have
secured it from the spoil of beasts and thieves, ye have been the thieves and
the beasts that have eaten it up, that have devoured it, and laid it waste; but
yet by the Vineyard may be meant the lands and inheritances of Gods poor
people, which these great ones by their extortions and oppressions had eaten up
and destroyed. And this indeed suits best with that which follows, The spoil of
the poor is in your houses, which is an evidence of your oppressions, that
cannot be denied; and that of those who so oppress, must needs be deemed the
greatest cruelty; your houses that should have been as Sanctuaries to the poor,
are the very dens where you store up all your spoil.

Ver. 15. What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, etc.] That is, that ye
utterly undo and destroy them, and exercise all manner of cruelty upon them.
And grind the faces of the poor: that is, cause them by your crushing and hard
using of them, to pine away. So that in their poor lean faces it may be seen
how cruelly ye have dealt with them. Or else by grinding their faces, may be
meant their battering and beating their faces with their hands and fists, as we
see it was usual with that people to do, by what they did to Micajah, 1 King.
22.24. to our Savior, Joh. 18.22. and to the Apostle Paul, Act. 23.3. As for
the form of Expostulation here used, What mean ye that ye beat my people, etc.
that is all one as if he had said, Why do ye use them so? what cause or reason
can you give for it? who gave you any authority to do thus? what a boldness and
barbarous fury is it in you to use my people thus? But see the Note, Psalm. 14.4.

Ver. 16. Because the Daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with
stretched-forth necks, and wanton eyes, etc.] It is not improbable, which some
Expositors have observed, that having in the foregoing verses condemned men's
oppressing and spoiling of the poor, here he adds this against the pride of
women, and the vanity of their attire, because it was very much for the
maintaining of the bravery and gallantry of their wives and daughters, that the
men did so oppress the poor. That which is rendered in our Translation, wanton
eyes, is in the Original, deceiving with their eyes, because by their lewd and
wanton, enticing looks, they did deceive and ensnare men, and draw them to lust
after them. As for that which follows, Walking and mincing, (or, tripping
nicely) as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet; the meaning is, that
out of pride and wantonness they went with an affected kind of pace, taking
little steps, and seeming rather to swim than to go; and that they made a
tinkling noise as they went, and that either by reason of some tinkling
ornaments which they wore about their legs or feet, of which there is mention
made, ver. 18. as namely garters or strings and roses on their shoos, with
spangled lace, or chains, or rings, or bells fastened to their shoos or buskins;
or because they shuffled or stamped with their feet, as if they had danced as
they went, or because they had Pantofles, that at every step they took, made a
noise.

Ver. 17. Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of
the Daughters of Zion, etc.] And so those heads of theirs which they so proudly
lifted up, should not only be made bald, stripped of their hair, which women
esteem their chiefest ornament, and do most pride themselves in, and are
therefore most careful to cherish it, and to keep it fair and clear, but should
also become so loathsome, as being overspread with this scab or scall, that they
should now be ashamed to have it seen, and others should turn away their eyes
from seeing it. And the Lord will discover their secret parts, which might be
done by the rage of the Soldiers that should take them captives, and out of
greediness to get spoil, should strip them to their very skin; whereto agrees
that, Ezekiel. 23.26. They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away
thy fair jewels; or else by bringing them to such a poor and low condition,
that they who did formerly exceed in variety and change of raiment, and in the
bravery of many foolish superfluities, should then scarce have clothes or rags
enough to cover their nakedness. But yet some understand the meaning of this to
be, that the Lord should suffer the women to be deflowred or ravished by their
enemies; or at least that in a way of scorn and lust they should be thus basely
and immodestly abused by the ruder sort of people, into whose hands they should
fall.

Ver. 18. In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling
ornaments about their feet, etc.] Which was done when they were carried away
captives into Babylon barefooted, and bare-leg'd. See the Note before, ver.
16. And their cauls, (or, net-works), whereby may be meant any attire, made so
that their skin might be seen through it; though some understand it
particularly of such kind of stockins, because the Prophet is here speaking of
the ornaments of their feet. And their round tires like the Moon; that is,
shaped like a Crissent, a half or full Moon; of which all that can be said is,
that Judge. 8.21* it is said that the Midianitish Princes had such Jewels on
their Camels necks And observable it is, what a multitude of the toys and
vanities the Prophet here mentions, wherewith the women in those days did trick
out themselves purposely the better thereby to set forth their pride and folly,
and excessive luxury.

Ver. 20. And the Bonnets, etc.] Hereby is meant some kind of Hoods, or other
Head-tires. And therefore the same word is translated, Ezekiel. 24.17. The tire of
thine head. And 44.18. Linen Bonnets. And so likewise by the next words, and
the ornaments of the legs, may be meant their brave stockins or garters, or
some other such like ornament; for the same word is rendered, 2 Samuel 1.10. The
bracelet that was on his arm. And by their head-bands, some curious fillets or
ribbons wherewith they tied their hair, or fastened their head-tires to their
heads. The greatest difficulty is in the next words, and the Tablets, which
being in the Original, houses of the soul, I cannot conceive why their Tablets,
which were certain flat Jewels were so called, unless it be because they were
the desire of their souls, (in regard they were so exceeding curious and rich),
or because they wore them upon their breasts, right over their hearts, which is
esteemed the chief seat of the soul.

Ver. 21. The Rings and Nose-jewels.] Some think that in those Eastern parts
the women used to wear Jewels hanging down from their noses, as well as from
their ears; and that it was in allusion to this custom that Solomon says,
Prove. 11.22. That as a jewel of gold in a swines snout, so is a fair woman
which is without discretion. But I rather think that these were Jewels which
they used to wear hanging from their foreheads down to their noses, and were
therefore called Nose-jewels.

Ver. 22. The changeable suits of apparel.] That is, suits of apparel provided
for change. But see the Note, Genesis 45.22.

Ver. 23. The glasses and the fine linen, etc.] Hereby some understand their
fine handkerchiefs; and others, their fine shifts. But it may be understood in
general of all the fine thin linen which they used much to wear in those hot
Countries, especially in summertime: And then by the Hoods next mentioned, is
meant some attire which they wore on their heads, different from those ver. 20.
which are there called Bonnets.

Ver. 24. Instead of sweet smell, etc.] This is added to set forth how sad the
change should be, when their delicate women that flaunted it now with so much
bravery, should be carried away captives into Babylon. Instead of sweet smell;
to wit, by reason of the odoriferous ointment wherewith they used to anoint
themselves, and the sweet spices and powders, and perfumes they were wont to
wear about them, there shall be a stink, which should be caused by the sores
and ulcers that in their hard usage should grow upon them by the putrefying of
their bodies after they had been beaten and scourged by their enemies, by their
lying in prisons and dungeons, by their nasty attire in their extreme poverty,
and those base services wherein they should be employed. And instead of a
girdle, a rent; that is, instead of those brave girdles which used to be
adorned with gold and precious gems, wherewith they were wont to girt their
garments about them, there shall be nothing but tattered rags, hanging loose
about them in a slatternly manner, so that their nakedness shall not be covered
thereby. And instead of well-set hair; that is, hair curiously curled, smooth
combed, and laid neatly; Baldness, see the Note above, ver. 17. And instead of
a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, the usual attire of people in great
misery and mourning. And burning instead of beauty; that is, they that were
formerly so proud of their beauty, and so chary to preserve it, shall be then
tanned and Sunburned.

Ver. 25. Thy men shall fall by the sword, etc.] This is spoken to Jerusalem,
or to the whole Kingdom or Nation of Judah, being collectively considered as
one body. Having shown how God would avenge himself on their proud women, here
he adds likewise how he would deal with the men; and that too does further
imply the misery of the women, who having lost their husbands and friends,
should be stripped of all their bravery, and be brought into a mourning
condition. Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war; which is
in the Original, and thy might in the war, where thy might is put for thy
mighty ones, as it is usual with us, when we speak of the Nobles and Gentlemen
of a Country, to call them the Nobility and the Gentry. However the meaning is,
that God would cut off those in whose multitude and valor they had put so much
confidence.

Ver. 26. And her gates shall lament and mourn, etc.] That is, the gates of
Zion shall seem to mourn, because whilst Jerusalem was in a flourishing
condition, the people used to pass in and out through the gates continually;
and because the Magistrates used to fit in judgment (see the Notes Ruth 4.1, 2.
and Psa. 127.5.) and so there the greatest glory of their State was seen; and
there was still the fullest Assemblies, and greatest concourse of the people;
whereas after the taking of Jerusalem, the gates were ruined, and lay
unfrequented; therefore it is said here, Her gates shall lament and mourn; and
the meaning is, that they should look sadly, or that they should be a very
lamentable spectacle to all that should behold them. We have the like
expressions Jer. 14.2. Judah mourns, and the gates thereof languish; they are
black unto the ground. And Lam. 1.4. The ways of Zion do mourn, because none
come to the solemn feast: all her gates are desolate: as it follows here also,
and she being desolate (or emptied) that is cleared of her Inhabitants and
riches, shall sit upon the ground; to wit, as a sad widow bereaved of her
husband and children; for this sitting on the ground was the usual custom of
mourners, Ezekiel. 8.14. And behold there sat women weeping for Tammuz. And Lam.
2.10. The Elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground and keep silence.
See also Job 2, 10. yet it is likely there is an allusion also in the words to
the ruinous state of a City, that being battered down and burnt with fire, may
be well said to lie in the dust, according to that Chap. 25.12. The fortress of
the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, and bring to the
ground, even to the dust.

CHAP. IV.
VERSE 1. ANd in that day, etc.) That is, in the day when God shall have
brought all the evil forementioned upon you, seven women, that is, many women
(see the Note, 1 Samuel 2.5.) shall take hold of one man; that is, whereas it
stands not with the modesty usually found in that sex to woo those whom they
desire to make their husbands, but rather they expect to be sued to by them,
and much less can they endure a husband that has more wives than themselves;
yet such shall be the extreme scarcity of men in those times by reason of the
havoc which the sword of the Chaldeans shall have made amongst them, that many
women shall of their own accord desire this, and with so much importunity press
their request upon one man, as if they would extort a consent from him, and
would take no denial; for this is implied in that which is here said, that they
should take hold of him, even that they should prosecute their suit with so
much vehemence, as if they would force themselves upon him. I know the words
may be understood of many women contending for one man, each one intending to
have him to her self alone. But because Polygamy was usual amongst that people
in those times, and because this does best set forth what a scarcity there
should be then of men, I do rather understand it of many desiring to be his
wives jointly together. And lest he should deny them, as being loath to bring
such a charge of wives and children upon him, especially in such a time of
penury and want, therefore they are said to add that which follows, We will eat
our own bread, and wear our own apparel; that is, we will no way be any charge
to thee, but will our selves maintain both us and ours, only let us be called
by thy name; that is, accept us to be thy wives, that it may be said that thou
art our husband, and we are thy wives, see Genesis 48.16. and Joh. 19.25. and Jer.
14.9. There is in this expression an allusion to that ancient custom of calling
the wife by the name of her husband, to take away our reproach; to wit, the
reproach of not having husbands, or not having children; for because God had
promised fruitfulness in childbearing as a great blessing unto that people,
Deuteronomy. 7.14. There shall not be male or female barren among you; therefore they
looked upon barrenness as a great curse and reproach to them; whence it was
that Rachel said upon the birth of her son Joseph, God has taken away my
reproach; see the Note, 1 Samuel 1.6. Yea, and the younger sort living without
husbands, as if no man regarded them, was counted a dishonor; and therefore we
find it mentioned as one of the sad effects of Gods judgments upon his people,
that their maidens were not given in marriage, Psalm. 78.63.

Ver. 2. In that day, etc.] Lest the foregoing threatenings concerning the
destruction and desolation that was to come upon the people of God, should
quite discourage the faithful that were amongst them, and cause them to
question, how then the Covenant which God had made with his Church should be
ratified, and how the Promises which he had made to them concerning the
stability and increase of his Church should be accomplished; to cheer them up
is this promise here inserted, as the like was before done, Chap. 1.25, 26.
concerning which see the Notes there. In that day, to wit, when God shall have
brought all the forementioned judgments upon them, and thereby shall have swept
away those that were incorrigibly wicked, and shall have exceedingly purged
those that shall be left, though then the people shall be brought to so low a
condition, that their estate shall seem to be hopeless, yet even then in that
day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious. And this is three
several ways expounded by Interpreters, though indeed they are all much to one
and the same effect. 1. The most of Expositors do by this Branch of the Lord
understand the Lord Jesus Christ, the promised Messiah, and that especially
because the same, or the like Title, is so often given to him elsewhere in the
Scripture, as Chap. 11.1. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jess, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. And Jer. 23.5. I will raise
unto David a righteous Branch. And 33.15. At that time will I cause the Branch
of Righteousness to grow up unto David. And Zach. 3.8. Behold I will bring
forth my servant the BRANCH. And Chap. 6.12. Behold the man whose name is the
BRANCH. And accordingly they understand this Prophecy thus, that after those
forementioned calamities, when the stock of David's family seemed in a manner
quite withered and dead, the Lord should suddenly and unexpectedly cause a
Branch to sprout forth from that stem, that should be beautiful and glorious;
which is all one as if he had said, that from that family thus decayed, and in
a manner quite dead, God would raise up to his people a Captain and Commander
that should turn their sorrow into joy, and bring them into a happy condition
again; for by this Branches being beautiful and glorious to the remnant of
Israel, may be meant, the amiableness, and the glory and majesty of Christ, as
well in regard of the transcendent dignity of his person, being the only
begotten Son of God, that thought it not robbery to be equal with God, and
every way replenished abundantly for the discharge of his work; as likewise in
regard of the eminency of his office, and the wonderful bliss which thereby
redounded to his people, he being their head; and so the fountain from whence
all grace, life and salvation was derived to them; and so the meaning in effect
is this, that Christ should restore the remainder of his spiritual Israel to
glory and honor by his salvation and grace.

Again, 2ly. others understand this place thus, That the grace and favor of
God, or the gifts and benefits, and graces which God should bestow upon his
people, should spring up and be visible amongst them, though before in such a
desolate condition, as a branch beautiful and glorious. And indeed we find an
expression much to this purpose, Psalm. 85.11. concerning which see the Note
there.

But, 3ly, very many of our best Expositors do by the branch of the Lord,
understand the Church and people of God; which agrees with that Chap. 5.7. The
Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his
pleasant plant. And 44.3, 4. I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring, and they shall spring up as among the grass, as
willows by the watercourse. And so they take the meaning of that which is
here foretold to be this, that whereas the people of God after the calamities
before threatened, and especially after the Babylonian Captivity, should be as a
piece of ground wasted and dried, and parched, never likely to become a people
any more, much less to recover their ancient splendour and glory; yet after
that, out of these poor remainder of Israel, a branch of the Lord should spring
forth beautiful and glorious; that is, this poor despised people should as a
new Church sprout out afresh, and be restored to as glorious a condition as
ever. And however this was partly accomplished in the rebuilding of the City
and Temple of Jerusalem at their return out of Babylon, and more especially in
their spiritual glory, because they that should be preserved out of the
profane rabble that were destroyed, should be purged from their Idolatry and
other wickedness, and so should become glorious in Gods sight; yet doubtless it
was principally fulfilled in the glory they attained, when they became the
people and Kingdom of Christ. So that (as is said before) it is much at one,
whether we understand this of Christ, who was the glory of his Church, or of
the Church in whom Christ was glorified. And to be sure very fit it was that
Gods people should for their comfort be put upon the expectation of those
glorious days of the Gospel, because even after their return from Babylon the
state of the Church should be still in many regards so mean and contemptible.
As for the following clause, And the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and
comely for them that are escaped of Israel; some understand this also of the
excellency and loveliness of Christ, and that he is called the fruit of the
earth with respect to his manhood. See the Note, Psalm. 85.11. And others by the
fruit of the earth, as before by the branch of the Lord, understand the Church
and people of God, to wit, that those poor remainders of Gods Israel that
should be left in the land after their return out of Babylon, should again grow
up to an estate of great excellency and glory, like some fruit-bearing plant
that should suddenly spring out of a dry parched ground, and bring forth rich
and goodly fruit, which they chiefly apply to that spiritual glory which they
should attain by Christ their promised Messiah in the days of the Gospel. But
the most of Expositors do by the fruit of the earth here understand the rich
and plenteous gifts of Gods bounty and grace, which after that time the people
of God should enjoy, as namely,

1. That the land should yield her fruit in wonderful plenty, excellent and
goodly (under which all other things tending to their outward happiness and
glory may be comprehended), which whether it were occasioned by the lands lying
fallow in most places so many years together, during the Babylonian Captivity,
or by the extraordinary blessing of God upon it, did tend much to their bliss
and glory in outward respects; whence is that Ezekiel. 36.35. And they shall say,
This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden, etc. See the
Note also, Psalm. 72.16.

And, 2ly, that they should excel and become most amiable and lovely for the
manifold graces of God in them, the fruits of the Spirit, wherewith they should
be most richly adorned; for thus the Scripture is wont to speak of the holiness
and righteousness of Gods people, as of a spiritual fruit, springing from an
inward principle of grace in the heart, and appearing gloriously in their lives
and conversation; and thence is that Chap. 45.8. Drop down ye heavens from
above, and let the skies pour down righteousness; let the earth open, and let
them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together. And that
Chap. 61.3. where the people of God are called the trees of righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. See also again the Note,
Psalm. 85.11.

Ver. 3. And it shall come to pass, etc.] Here the Prophet sets forth what that
glory chiefly was, which God should confer upon his Church, to wit, that he
that is left in Zion, and he that remains in Jerusalem; that is, those that
were left alive, not in Babylon (for many of those did choose to continue there,
despising the liberty that was tendered then for their return into their own
land) but in Zion and Jerusalem, being returned thither from their Captivity in
Babylon (under which may be comprehended even those that after their return
dwelt elsewhere in the land, because they also went up yearly to Zion to
worship there), shall be called holy, that is, shall be a holy people, see the
Note, Chap. 1.26. when God had destroyed the wicked that were amongst them, and
purified those that were left, by his spirit, these should now be a holy
Nation, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem; that is,
every one whom God had fore-appointed to survive the calamities of those times,
and to be found living amongst those that should return from Babylon to
Jerusalem. Now if it be objected against this Exposition, That it was not thus
with the Jews when they returned out of Babylon to Jerusalem. It is evident by
the story of those times, that even amongst the little remnant of Gods people,
there were many wicked ones; and therefore they were far from being all holy.
To this I answer, That there was a great Reformation then wrought in the whole
body of the people, in that they were greatly purged from their Idolatry, and
other gross sins, that were formerly rife amongst them, which was a kind of
shadow of that through Reformation which God intended to work in his Church. And
2. That so far as this Prophecy has respect to that real work of Reformation
and Sanctification, which is here also promised, it must be intended to the
entire holy change that was to be wrought in the Church in all succeeding ages;
which as it was began at that time of the purifying of the people of God, when
they were delivered out of the Babylonian Captivity, and brought home to their
own Country; for it was to be further carried on in the days of the Gospel,
till at last it should be perfected at Christ's second coming. And if thus we
understand this Prophecy, then by that remnant in Zion and in Jerusalem, that
shall be called holy, we must understand all the members of the Mystical
Church, who are all truly sanctified by the spirit of Christ; and accordingly
then the following clause, even every one that is written among the living in
Jerusalem, may be meant of such as God had decreed unto holiness here, and so
unto life eternal in Heaven; concerning which see the Notes, Exodus 32.32. Psalm.
69.28. and 87.6.

Ver. 4. When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of
Zion, etc.] That is of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and spiritually, the
visible Members of the Church. Yet it may well be, that the Prophet does the
rather use this expression, with respect to that which he had said, chap. 3.16.
concerning the women daughters of Zion, which had a great stroke in bringing
those sad judgments upon Zion, whereof he had before spoken. And should this be
so, observable it were, that the bravery and vanity wherein they had so prided
themselves, is here turned into filth. Having before said, that the remnant of
Gods people should be pure and holy, beautiful and glorious, excellent and
comely; here the Prophet shows when, and how this should be done, when the
Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion; that is, their
manifold sins and wickedness, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from
the midst thereof; where, by blood, may be meant, the same that was before
called filth, namely their vile and loathsome sins (for indeed we look upon
nothing as a fouler defilement, than when a thing is besmeared with blood,
therefore the filthiness of sin is sometimes termed blood, as Ezekiel. 16.6. I
passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood); or else rather, the
blood of Gods Prophets, and other innocent men, which they had shed in
Jerusalem: or more generally, their bloody oppressions and cruelties, which is
the more probable, because this seems to be spoken with relation to the
Prophets foregoing complaints, concerning their bloody sins, chap. 1.15, 21.
concerning which see the Notes there. As for the following words, thereby is
shown, how their filth and blood should be washed and purged away, namely, by
the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning; for the understanding
whereof, we must know, that by this word, spirit, where it is attributed to
God, is frequently meant in the Scripture, the virtue, or the fervent and
vehement efficacy of every operation of God, much the same that is called
elsewhere the zeal of God, as chap. 9.7. the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this: So that in saying, that their filth and blood should be washed
and purged away by the spirit of judgment, the Prophet means, that it should be
done by Gods severe judgments, executed upon them, whereby Idolaters, and other
wicked ones should be cut off and destroyed from amongst them. And 2. By Gods
preserving and reforming the better sort, and bringing things aagain into good
order in the Church; and so likewise in saying, it should be done by the spirit
of burning, he means, that it should be done by a vehement zeal, hot and
burning like fire, both for the destroying of the wicked that were amongst
them, and burning them up like stubble (which some think also is spoken with
relation to the burning of the Temple and City of Jerusalem) and for the
purging away of the sins of his chosen ones, even as the dross is purged away
by the Refiners fire. But see the Notes, chap. 1.25, 26, 27.

Ver. 5. And the Lord will create upon every dewlling place of Mount-Zion, and
upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night, etc.] As if the Prophet should have said, When the Lord shall
have purged his Church and people, and shall have brought them into that
glorious condition here before promised, he will then as wonderfully and
miraculously guide and protect them in every dewlling place where any of them
shall have their abode, and in their public assemblies where they shall meet
together for the worship and service of God, as he did the Israelites when he
led them through the wilderness by a cloud and smoke by day, that is, by a
cloud black and thick like smoke, and the shining of a flaming fire by night;
concerning which, see the Note, Exodus 13.21. Even when there should be no
appearance of any means for their preservation, yet that should not hinder
their protection, because the Lord, as he did then for the Israelites, would
create means for the sheltring and securing of them. And indeed because God did
discover such riches of grace to his Israel in the many wonders that he wrought
for them in delivering them out of Egypt, and in carrying them into the Land of
Canaan; therefore the Prophets do usually set forth all the great things that
God has promised to do for his Church, by expressions that do allude to that
great work. And to the same purpose is that following clause, for upon all the
glory shall be a defense: that is, there shall be a sure defense over that
remnant of his people, of whom it was before said, ver. 2. that they should be
brought into such a glorious condition; or, that the glory, or glorious
condition whereto God would advance his people, should be secured and
maintained by means of a divine protection overshadowing every part of it: for
herein also that Prophet seems to allude to that clouds covering the
Tabernacle, which was in it self a glorious representation of the Church, as it
was Gods dewlling place, as usually at all times where the people rested, Numb.
9.16. So it was always: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of fire
by night: or else especially at that time when the Tabernacle was first set up,
when it was in a miraculous manner filled with the glory of God, Exodus 40.34.
Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord
filled the tabernacle.

Ver. 6. And there shall be a tabernacle, etc.] This may be added with
reference to, and as an explication of that foregoing verse, as if it had been
said, And that cloud which the Lord shall create, or that defense which shall
be upon all the glory, shall be a tabernacle to shelter them from all danger.
Or this may be another figurative expression to set forth how safely they
should be protected, And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the
daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a cover from storm
and from rain: wherein there seems to be an allusion to the tents or
tabernacles which shepherds were wont to provide to keep them and their flocks
from the heat of the Sun by day, and to shelter them from storms, and from rain
both by day and by night: yet some conceive that there is an allusion herein to
God's Tabernacle; and that the drift hereof is to signify, either that Gods
people should be under the defense before promised, as safe as they that fled
for shelter to the sanctuary; whereto agrees that promise, Ezekiel. 11.16. I will
be to them as a little sanctuary: see the Note Psalm. 27.5. or else, that as the
Tabernacle was, by the covering that was thereon, defended from all annoyances
of wind and weather, both storms and rain; so should the Church be defended by
the provident care of God over rhem, from all evils whatsoever, both greater
and lesser evils: for which see also the Notes, Psalm. 121.5, 6.

CHAP. V.
VERSE 1. NOw will I sing, etc.] This is another Prophecy, distinct from that
which went before: and it is composed in the way of a mournful ditty, setting
forth the great care and cost that God had bestowed upon his people, the Church
of the Jews, and how ill they had requited him for all that good that he had
done for them. And why God would have such like passages as this, expressed in
songs, may be seen in the Note upon Deuteronomy. 31.19. Now will I sing to my
well-beloved, etc. Some Expositors hold that this is spoken in the person of
God the Father, the Lord of the Vineyard; and consequently that it is Christ,
his well-beloved Son, his dear Son, the Son of his love, Col. 1.13. of whom he
speaks here, Now will I sing to my well-beloved, see the Note, 2 Samuel 12.25.
But I see no reason at all, why we should not take these words as spoken by the
Prophet in his own name. Now will I sing, that is, I will compose, recite and
publish in the way of a Song, to my well-beloved, that is, to the Lord Christ,
whom with my soul I love. For the Prophets and Apostles are in a special
manner, with respect to their office, termed the friends of the Bridegroom,
Joh. 3.29. and 15.15. And in saying, Now will I sing to my well-beloved, his
purpose is to show that he composed this Song for his sake, that it might be to
his praise and glory, (according to that expression of David's, Psalm. 101.1. To
thee, O Lord, will I sing), that he had not done it out of a desire to cast any
aspersions thereby upon the Jews, but out of love to God in Christ, and zeal to
his glory, as grieving to see him dishonored and despised by a people for whom
he had done such great things, and that he might bring them to repentance, or
at least leave them inexcusable, and might however vindicate Gods justice in
punishing such an unworthy and ungrateful people. And then for the words that
follow, A Song of my beloved touching his Vineyard, they are added to set forth
the subject matter of the Song, to wit, that though it were written in the way
of an elegant Parable, yet it was intended concerning his beloved, the Lord
Christ, and touching his Vineyard, the Church of the Jews, it was written in
his name, and by the inspiration of his Spirit, and that to show what he had
done for his people, and how ill they had requited the care that he had taken
of them, and the abundant means that he had used to do them good. And indeed
the Church of God is frequently in the Scripture compared to a Vineyard, (see
the Notes, Psalm. 80.8, etc. and Cant. 8.11, 12.) 1. Because the Church are in
themselves a weak and feeble people, as the Vine in comparison of other Trees,
is a poor weak plant, not able to bear up it self. 2. Because God does so
highly prize, and dearly love his Church above all people, even as men are wont
to esteem and delight in their Vineyards more than all their possessions
besides. 3. Because no part of men's husbandry do stand in need of so much care
and cost, as the Vineyards do. And, 4. because the fruit of the Vine is so
precious, and the stem thereof so useless, if it bear no fruit; in regard
whereof, as in sundry other respects, the Church may well be compared to the
Vine. And very probable it is, that hence Christ took those Parables concerning
Vineyards, Mat. 20.1. and 21.28, and 33, etc.

My beloved has a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill.] Here the Song begins,
where there is in the first place mention made of the Vineyards being planted
in a very fruitful hill, because indeed Vines thrive best in hills, if they be
of a good soil, Bacchus amat colles, whence is that expression, Psalm. 80.10.
The hills were covered with the shadow of it; and herein it seems he alludes,
either to the exceeding great fruitfulness of the land of Canaan, Psalm. 80.8,
9. or rather to that eminent and happy estate whereinto God had brought that
people.

Ver. 2. And he fenced it, etc.] To wit, both with a hedge, and with a wall
without that, as is evident by that which is said afterward, ver. 5. I will
take away the hedge thereof, and break down the wall thereof; for which see the
Note, Psalm. 80.12. And gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the
choicest Vine, and built a tower in the midst of it; to wit, as a watchtower,
from whence the keepers of the Vineyard might overlook the whole ground round
about it, and watch that no thieves or beasts did break into it; and also made
a winepress therein, to wit, as making no question but that he should in time
reap the fruit of his Vineyard, as a recompense of all his cost and pains. Many
several ways Expositors do unfold the mystical sense of the several branches of
this Parable, as in that particular of the watchtower, that thereby Jerusalem
is meant, wherein the Priests and Judges were to reside, as keepers of Gods
Vineyard. But it is too much curiosity in expounding this Parable thus to
determine of every particular. The drift of all in general is to set forth,
that nothing was omitted that might promote the fruitfulness of the Vineyard;
whereupon that complaint is inferred in the next words; and he looked, to wit,
with a longing desire and hope, that it should bring forth grapes, that is,
good grapes, namely, when the Vines were grown up, and the time of vintage
came, and it brought forth wild grapes, that is, naughty unsavory grapes, like
those that grow on wild vines, that are usually found in hedges. The meaning
is, that the Jews did not return to God that service and obedience which might
justly have been expected from them; but were most wicked in their lives, more
like Heathens than like Gods peculiar people. See ver. 7.

Ver. 3. And now, O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge I pray
you, between me and my Vineyard.] And thus the Lord does unquestionably
evidence how unexcusable the Jews were, and how just cause he had to destroy
them, because these inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, were those whom
he had termed the Lords Vineyard; and therefore they being called to judge in
his case of the Vineyard, yea any man amongst them, this must needs imply, that
if God should appeal to their own consciences, or to the decision of any
reasonable man amongst them, they must needs acquit him, and condemn
themselves. And thus our Savior dealt with those whom he intended by the
husbandmen to whom the Vineyard was let out, Mat. 21.40, 41.

Ver. 4. What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in
it? etc.] To wit, In regard of outward means; for the Lord holds himself here
to the former Allegory of the Lord of a Vineyard, who can only take care that
no outward means be neglected, that are like to be helpful to make his Vineyard
to bring forth good fruit, but cannot command a blessing from Heaven upon it to
make it yield its increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. In applying therefore this expression
to God, we must not say that God could do no more than he did to make the Jews
a holy people. There is no question but that God could by the mighty working of
his Spirit have changed their hearts, and have made them brought forth fruit
meet for repentance. But this God was not bound to do. And therefore the drift
of this expression is only to show, that no outward means had been wanting to
make them bring forth good fruit, and that therefore they had nothing to plead
for themselves, they were altogether inexcusable, he had done enough to bring
them to live holily, as became Gods people, if they had not been a perverse
stubborn people. And to this purpose also tends that following Expostulation,
Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes? as if he had said, was there any reason it should be thus? But see
the foregoing Note, ver. 2.

Ver. 5. And now go to, I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, etc.]
Thus God is wont to forewarn men of the judgments that are coming upon them,
before he inflicts them: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be
eaten up: and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down, see
the Note above v. 2. and Psalm. 80.12, 13.

Ver. 6. And I will lay it wast, etc.] The drift of this, and the following
expressions is to show that God would no longer show so much care, nor be at
such cost for the good of this people, as formerly; yet many Expositors do
apply these expressions severally in a mystical sense, I will lay it wast; that
is, I will deprive them of all those privileges which they enjoyed as my
peculiar people, and they shall be left in the same condition with other
Nations; or their land shall be left wast and desolate, which agrees with that
of our Savior, Behold your house is left unto you desolate, Mat. 23.38. It
shall not be pruned nor dug; that is, there shall not be that care taken of
them by their teachers to reprove them, and reform them, and make them fruitful
in good, as there has been. (In the word (dug) there is an allusion to the
custom of digging about their vines, to get out the weeds, and to loosen the
earth, that the water wherewith they were watered, might the better come to the
roots, see Luke 13.8.) but there shall come up briers and thorns, that is,
Idolatry and all kind of wickedness shall abound amongst them, and overspread
the land. I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it; that
is, they shall have no teachers to instruct them; see the Note, Psalm. 74.9.
(for the instruction of Gods Prophets is often in the Scripture compared to the
rain, see the Notes, Deuteronomy. 32.2. and Job 29.23.) or if they have teachers,
there shall be no blessing from Heaven to make their teaching effectual for
their good.

Ver. 7. For the Vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the
men of Judah his pleasant plant, etc.] Here the foregoing Parable is explained.
And the men of the Tribe of Judah are more particularly termed the Lords
pleasant plant (alluding therein to that which was usual, that in Vineyards men
had ordinarily some vines, which they esteemed and delighted in above the rest)
because the Lord had done more for them, than for all the other Tribes, see the
Notes, Psalm. 78.68, and 87.2. and that especially because God had appointed
that out of their Tribe the Messiah should spring; and the more God had done
for them, the more abominable was their ingratitude. And then in the next words
is shown what the wild grapes were, which this Vineyard brought forth instead
of good grapes; and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry; to wit, sins that cried to God for vengeance:
see the Note, Genesis 4.10. or rather the cry of the oppressed, complaining both
to God and man of the injuries done them.

Ver. 8. Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, etc.]
The Parable being ended and explained, here the Prophet proceeds to an
enumeration of some principal heads of their grievous sins, the wild grapes,
which Gods Vineyard brought forth. And having in the foregoing verse mentioned
oppression, as one of their great crying sins, here in the first place he
inveighs against their covetousness, as that which was the root of all their
oppressions. It is not absolutely unlawful for men to join one house to
another, or to lay one field to another, that is, to purchase several houses,
and several fields. That which the Prophet condemns, is their insatiable
covetousness, that they never had enough, but were still seeking to enlarge
their possessions, not caring how unjustly they did it, by fraud or violence
wresting other men's possessions from them. And because by the Law of God it was
unlawful for the Jews to alienate their lands from one Tribe to another, (see
Levit. 25.23. and Numb. 36.7.) it may well be that this encroaching upon other
men's possessions is here amongst others intended, see the Note, 1 King. 21.3.
Till there be no place; that is, say some Expositors, till there be no place
left which they have not gotten into their possession; or rather, till there be
no place left for their poor neighbors to dwell near them; as if the land had
been given only for them to dwell in, which is implied in those last words,
That they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth.

Ver. 9. In mine ears, said the Lord of hosts, etc.] That is, the Lord spoke
this which I shall now tell you, in my hearing; which agrees with that
expression of our Saviors, Luke 4.21. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in
your ears; or, The Lord revealed it secretly to me by the inspiration of his
Spirit. Yet many translate it, as it is in the Margent of our Bibles, This is
in mine ears, says the Lord of hosts; and then the meaning must needs be, that
the cry of their oppressions in joining house to house, etc. as he had said in
the foregoing verse, or the cry of those that were oppressed by them, was gone
up into the ears of the Lord, though they thought he regarded it not. And it
may well be that from hence the Apostle James borrowed that expression of his,
Chap. 5.4. Behold the hire of your laborers which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries; and the cries of them which
have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, that is, the Lord
of hosts. See also the Note, Ezra 9.6. Of a truth many houses shall be
desolate, even great and fair without inhabitant; to wit, because their owners
should be slain or carried into captivity; which was fully accomplished at the
Chaldeans taking of Jerusalem, when after a great slaughter amongst all sorts
of people, the Princes, Nobles, and rich men were carried captive into Babylon,
and so no body was left to dwell in their stately houses. And this is mentioned
as a punishment proportioned to their sin in joining house to house, as was
before said. All the benefit they should reap by the multiplying and enlarging
their houses in such a way, was, that they should be taken away from the
enjoying of them, and their houses should be left desolate and without an
inhabitant. It is expressed in the Hebrew with a conditional particle, If many
houses shall not be desolate, etc. But this is an Emphatical form of swearing
usual in the Scriptures, wherein somewhat is left to be understood by those
that hear it, which is not expressed. It is as if the Lord had said, If this
comes not to pass, as I have said, let not me be owned for the true God; or,
let me not be deemed a just God, a God of truth, etc. And therefore it is well
rendered in our Translation, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, etc.

Ver. 10. Yea ten acres of Vineyard shall yield one bath, etc.] Which was about
eight gallons, see the Note, 1 King. 7.26. so that an acre of ground planted
with vines should not yield to the owner one whole gallon of wine. And the seed
of an homer, which was much about our bushel, shall yield an ephah, and that
was, Ezekiel. 45.11. the tenth part of an homer; and therefore consequently the
meaning must needs be, that their land should not yield them above the tenth
part of the seed that was sown in it. Indeed Exodus 16.36. it is said expressly,
that an homer is the tenth part of an ephah. But therefore I conceive the Omer,
and the Homer were two different measures, as indeed they are differently also
written in the Hebrew. The Omer was a smaller measure, the tenth part of an
Ephah, but the Homer was a far greater measure, the same with the Bath, Ezekiel.
45.11. containing ten Ephahs; and therefore it was a very heavy curse of God
upon their land, when they should reap but one Ephah where they had sown an
Homer, which was ten Ephahs. As in the foregoing verse the desolation of their
houses was allotted as the punishment of their joining house to house; so here
the barrenness of their land is threatened as a just and fit reward of their
laying field to field; yet it may be also added, as the cause why their houses
should be left desolate. And besides this is inferred fitly upon the foregoing
Parable. Because God had lost his cost and labor bestowed upon them that were
his Vineyard, therefore they should lose the cost and labor they bestowed upon
their lands and Vineyards.

Ver. 11. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning to follow strong
drink, etc.] To wit, as pursuing it with all eagerness, being never well till
they be at it, see the Note, Eccles. 10.16. That continue until night, which is
in the Original until twilight; and so the meaning may be, that they sat at
it, either from morning to evening, or from morning to morning; till wine
inflame them, to wit, with unnatural heat, and so instead of quenching,
increases their thirst, and so they many times fall into burning fevers, and
are as it were set on fire with anger and fury, and inflamed with burning
lusts. See Prove. 23.29-33.

Ver. 12. And the harp, and the viol, the tabret and pipe, and wine, are in
their feasts, etc.] That is, they give up themselves wholly to these carnal
delights, not minding the Lord, nor their duty to him. The things here named
were not mentioned as evil in themselves, but it is their excess herein, and
their abuse of them that is here condemned. And therefore it follows, but they
regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands;
that is, his judgments, to wit, either those which God had already brought upon
their land; (for it is most probable that this was spoken when in the days of
Ahaz the Syrians, Pekah and the Philistims, had made great havoc in Judea, yea
when the Ten Tribes were already carried away captives into Assyria. And we see
the Prophet Amos condemns the same jollity upon this very ground, of their not
laying to heart the sad calamities that were befallen the Ten Tribes, But they
are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6.6.) Or else those which
did at this time hang over their heads, which God had threatened by his
Prophets, and to which he had already begun to make way: which seems most
probable, because afterward he speaks of these, ver. 19. under this
expression, Let him make speed and hasten his work. Yet I see not but that this
may also be extended to their not considering Gods works of Creation and
Providence in general, concerning which see the Notes, Psalm. 28.5. and 92.5, 6.
so that this may be added to imply the reason why they did so wholly give up
themselves to pleasure, as if they had nothing else to do in the world, to wit,
because they did not by a due consideration of his work, lay to heart how great
the Lord was whom they provoked by their sins. Or, because they did not
consider that God, the work of whose hands they were, and who had made, and by
his Providence brought in to them all those necessary Provisions wherewith they
were sustained, had therefore done this, that they might fear and serve him,
and not live as brutishly as the beasts do: And indeed well might such men be
charged with disregarding the works of God, because gluttony and drunkenness do
so overwhelm men, and even drown reason in them, that they mind nothing but
their bellies; whence is that of our Savior, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your
selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness -- and so that day come upon you unawares.

Ver. 13. Therefore my people are gone into captivity, etc.] That is, they
shall certainly go into captivity; it is as sure as if it were done already. It
may be indeed the Ten Tribes were already carried away; but it is the
Babylonian captivity that is here threatened as the punishment of those sins
which the Prophet had now reproved; because they have no knowledge, to wit, to
take notice of the danger they are in, by a due consideration of the judgments,
either incumbent on them, or impendent over them; and so this may be spoken
with respect to what he had said in the foregoing verse, they regard not the
work of the Lord, etc. or because they are such a sensual, senseless, and
brutishly ignorant people; and therefore it is that by way of aggravating this
their wilful ignorance from the special means which God had afforded them to
make them an understanding people, they are here called Gods peculiar people,
Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge; as
if he had said, Though I have given them my Law to enlighten them, and sent my
Prophets to teach them, yet through their profaneness and sensuality, they are
as brutish as the very bruit beasts, Wine and new wine take away the heart,
says the Prophet, Hos. 4.11. and therefore they shall be carried away for
slaves into a strange land. And their honorable men are famished; it is in the
Original, their glory are men of famine; but the meaning is, That the great
ones amongst them that were in greatest esteem, and lived in all pomp and
plenty, being generally accounted the glory of their Nation, should be starved
for want of necessary food. Because in times of scarcity, such men might hope
by their wealth and greatness to secure themselves, therefore the famishing of
these is particularly expressed. And their multitude, that is, the common
people, dried up with thirst, which I conceive is meant of the streights they
should be brought into both for meat and drink, when Jerusalem should be
besieged by the Babylonians. And this is threatened as a just reward of their
sin. They that had wasted and abused Gods good Creatures, when they had them in
abundance, by luxury, gluttony and drunkenness, should come at last not to have
bread to eat, or water to drink.

Ver. 14. Therefore, etc.] That is, say some Expositors, because of the
mortality that shall be amongst the people by reason of the famine mentioned in
the close of the foregoing verse; or rather, because of their drunkenness and
luxury before taxed, and their not considering the work of the Lord, Hell, that
is, the grave, or the place of the damned, see the Notes, Psalm. 55.15. and
86.13. has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure, that is,
has swallowed up innumerable multitudes of people, men and women that died by
sword, famine and pestilence; and their glory, that is, their great ones, and
their multitudes (for both which see the foregoing Note) and their pomp, that
is, the pomp and jollity of their great ones in their feasting and triumphs
(for the meaning is, that all their state and glory should perish together with
them); and he that rejoiceth shall descend into it; that is, the whole crew of
those that spent their days in such revelling, mirth and jollity, drowning all
fears and cares in rioting and carnal pleasures. Some conceive that the drift
of this place is to show, that because they had with such unsatiable greediness
swallowed up the houses, lands and estates of their neighbors, therefore the
Grave or Hell should as greedily swallow up them. But I rather think that this
is spoken with reference to the sin last mentioned, ver. 11. and so the drift
of the place to be this, that because they had been so insatiable in their
gluttony and drunkenness, and had opened their mouths and throats without
measure to gusle down wine and strong drink, therefore the Grave or Hell should
open her mouth without measure, to swallow them down in huge multitudes
together, with all their pomp and glory.

Ver. 15. And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be
humbled, etc.] Before, the same words in a manner are used to set forth their
base crouching and bowing before their Idols, Chap. 2.9. The mean man boweth
down, and the great man humbles himself, that are here used to set forth the
Lords bringing them down and laying them low by his judgments, whereby we may
see how God is wont to suit his judgments upon men according to their sins; and
the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled, see the Note, Chap. 2.11.

Ver. 16. But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, etc.] That is, by
the judgments which he shall execute upon them, see the Note again, Chap. 2.11.
and Psalm. 58.11. And God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness,
that is, by his just proceedings against them in punishing them for their
wickedness, he shall be declared and acknowledged to be a just and holy God,
and men shall thereby be brought to fear and serve him. See the note, Levit.
10.3.

Ver. 17. Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, etc.] I see not but
that this might be understood literally, and that as an illustration of the
judgments before threatened, ver. 13, 14. to wit, that when the inhabitants of
the land were slain or carried away captive, then cattle, sheep and lambs
should after their manner graze freely where ever they pleased, all lands lying
now open without any Enclosures, and there being no body left to restrain them,
or keep them out. Yea, and some add too, that they should feed even in those
places where their houses formerly stood, grass growing there as in the open
fields, when they were left desolate and without an inhabitant, according to
that which is said concerning the Syrians also, Chap. 17.2. The cities of Aroer
are forsaken, they shall be for stocks which shall lie down, and none shall
make them afraid. And so also we may understand the following clause, and the
wast places of the fat ones shall strangers ea^, to wit, that foreigners of the
Nations round about them should break in upon and devour those places, being
now laid waste, where fat cattle, wherewith the inhabitants pampered
themselves, had wont to be kept in full pastures, or where their great and rich
men had wont to abide; for indeed men of great wealth are usually set forth by
their fatness in the Scripture, see the Notes, Job 15.27. and Psalm. 22.29. and
78.31. And see also the Note before, Chap. 1.7. But I confess the stream, and
that especially of the best Expositors, does run another way; for they
understand it figuratively of Gods faithful people, who for their meekness and
harmlesness, and other reasons, and especially to set forth the tender care
that God has over them as their shepherd, are usually in the Scripture termed
his sheep, (see the Notes, Psalm. 23.1, 2. and 77.20. and 80.1.) and his lambs,
as Chap. 40.11. He shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom. And accordingly they conceive that in the midst of the denunciation we
have here of Judgments threatened against the wicked inhabitants of the land,
this verse is inserted for the comfort of those that feared God amongst them,
Then shall the lambs feed after their manner; as if he should have said, Though
the generality of the people be destroyed, yet God will still approve himself a
faithful shepherd in taking care for his poor lambs; when the wicked oppressors
of his people, (who boasted themselves indeed to be the sheep of his flock, but
were not so) shall be destroyed, then shall those that are his lambs indeed
feed after their manner, that is, they shall enjoy the good of the land freely
and quietly, after the manner as they had wont to do before those troubles came
upon the land, or before they were driven out of their possessions; or after
the manner as God has been always wont to provide for his people. And this
Expositors hold was accomplished, partly in those that were godly of the poor
left in the land, when the rest were carried away captives into Babylon, 2
King. 25.12. and partly in those that at last returned out of Babylon; at which
times it is most probable that many poor people that had been as so many
helpless lambs driven out of their possessions, (or at least their posterity)
did recover their own again, their mighty oppressors being destroyed, and so
did live open in their inheritances after the manner as in former times they
had done. And so likewise they understand the following Clause, and the waste
places of the fat ones shall strangers eat; for the strangers here meant may be
those poor righteous servants of God, that being cast out of their Estates by
oppressors, were glad to fly their Country, and so wandered up and down as
strangers in other Countries, till hearing how their proud oppressors were
destroyed by the Babylonians, they should then return again, and enter upon
their ancient possessions, and so should be nourished in those places that were
now laid waste by the enemy, but formerly were enjoyed by their rich and mighty
enemies, that had lived there in ease and plenty: Or else by these strangers
may be meant those poor people of God, that being freed from their Captivity in
Babylon, where they had lived as strangers for many years togethers, had
liberty at last given them to return again into their own Country, and so did
not only enter upon their own possessions, to which they had been a long time
strangers, but also enjoyed the estates of those great ones that had been slain
or carried away captives, and so had lain waste ever since.

Ver. 18. Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it
were with a-cart-rope.] Because by iniquity and sin, in the Scripture sometimes
the punishment of sin is meant, (see the Note, Psalm. 31.10.) therefore some
understand this place of those that by their impenitency and obstinacy in
adding sin to sin do hasten judgments upon themselves. And others understand it
of the wickedness of those that use all possible means to urge and draw others
to sin. But it is far better understood of the obstinacy of wicked men in the
pursuit of sin: They that sin of infirmity being overborn by the strength of
temptations, or by the violent inclinations of their own corrupt lusts and
affections, may be said to be hereby drawn away to sin, and that against the
sin^^redesire and purpose of their hearts, according to that, Jam. 1.14. Every
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lusts and enticed: and that of
the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.15. What I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that
do I. But those the Prophet here speaks of, are such as being desperately bent
upon, and abandoned to sin, do wittingly and purposely pursue the doing of evil
with all greediness, even where there is very little or no inticement, or
temptation, or provocation to carry them away thereto; so that it may be truly
said, that whilst others are drawn away to sin, they draw sin upon themselves.
And accordingly by the cords of vanity, and the cart-ropes whereby they draw
sin upon themselves, may be meant, either 1. all those vain encouragements
whereby they embolden themselves in sin, when conscience, it may be, began to
check them, and to stop them in their evil courses, such are men's presumptuous
despising the Judgments of God, or those vain conceits that God regards not,
nor minds the ways of men, or those hopes of impunity and finding favor with
God, which they suggest to themselves, or the excuses they devise for the
justifying or extenuating of the evil they desire to do; all which arguings,
though weak in themselves, yet through man's corruption, and the instigation of
Satan, do work strongly upon men's hearts, and are as so many cart-ropes to draw
on sin, and are therefore called the snares of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26. and 3.7.
Or, 2. rather those strong plots and projects, which they study and devise in
contriving several ways and means for the effecting of the evil they desire to
do, and the great pains they take, their toilsome endeavors with all possible
eagerness to accomplish what they have so contrived; which may be called cords
of vanity, because they are sinful and wicked, and do provoke God to destroy
men; and because when men are once entangled in such desperate courses, custom
becomes a cart-rope to draw the guilt of all abominable sins upon them.

Ver. 19. That say, Let him make speed, and hasten his work, etc.] That is, say
some Expositors, that by adding sin to sin, and by running into all extremities
of desperate wickedness, do in a manner hasten, or provoke God to hasten
judgment upon themselves. But I conceive the Prophet does plainly set forth the
manner how these profane wretches did deride and jeer the threatenings of Gods
Prophets, Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it. As if
they should have said, You Prophets talk much of some great thing which God is
about to do suddenly by way of punishing us for our sins, why is it not done?
let him do it; we care not though he hasten his work, as you say he will: or,
these words of scorn might be used to imply how little they believed what they
said, and how confident they were that no such thing should be, Let him make
speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it: you have threatened these things
again and again with many terrible words, we wonder when we shall see it done;
and to the same purpose is the following clause, and let the counsel of the
Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it, that is, that we
may by the event see and know that God has indeed determined of what you say,
and so may sensibly feel and know it is so. I take it to be all one as if they
had said, you have talked long enough of what God in his counsel has
determined to do; why is the execution delayed so long? Let us see it at last
speedily brought to effect. And indeed the often repeating of the same thing,
Let him make speed, and let him hasten his work, and let the counsel of the
Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, and that we may see it, and that we may
know it, does plainly show that this is mentioned, as spoken in a flouting
manner; and the same I judge of their terming God, the Holy One of Israel. Some
indeed think that they might use this expression seriously, to imply that the
Holy One of Israel was not so changeable as utterly to cast off and destroy
that people to whom he had obliged himself by an everlasting Covenant. But
because the whole is spoken in a way of a derision, and because we find that
our Prophet speaking of God, was frequently wont to use this expression of the
Holy One of Israel, (as we may see Chap. 1.4. and in many other places),
therefore it is most probable that even this expression they used also by way
of jeering the Prophet. And this we may the rather think, because the other
Prophets do often complain of wicked men's mocking them for the words they spoke
in their Preaching to the people, as Jer. 20.8. The word of the Lord was made a
reproach unto me, and a derision daily; and Chap. 17.15. a place much like
this, Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word of the Lord? let it come now.

Ver. 20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, etc.] This may be
applied, I confess, to those that by the wickedness of their lives do
contradict that which they know in their judgment, and so do by their practice
seem to call that good, which in their Consciences they know to be evil, and
that evil which they know is good. But certainly the Prophet did hereby intend
those that did expressly say that evil was good, and good was evil, (which must
needs argue a high degree of bold profaneness) and so did not only confound
good and evil, virtue and vice, truth and error, making both alike approvable
or disapprovable; but also quite contrary to that which was just right, did
prefer evil before good, approving of evil as fit to be loved and embraced, and
condemning good as fit to be hated and rejected. And besides, this is not meant
of those that merely out of simple ignorance do err and mistake in some smaller
matters, but of those that do in the generality judge perversely of the whole way
of good and evil; which if it be done out of judgment, is a high degree of
brutishness, even that of being given up to a reprobate mind, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 1.28. and must needs cause them to run out into an unbridled
licentiousness of doing evil; and if it be done against judgment and knowledge,
argues desperate obstinacy and perverseness of spirit. And yet this may be
several ways, as when men call evil men, or their evil actions good by way of
flattery, (see the Note, Prove. 24.24.) or when men speak evil of good men, or
the good they do, or the good that is in them, by way of calumny; or by way of
excusing, or justifying, or indulging and encouraging themselves in any way of
wickedness, as when they shall call prodigality, bounty; or covetousness,
frugality; or on the other hand, zeal, madness; and patience, stupidity and
cowardice, and such like. As for the following words, That put darkness for
light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter;
the same is expressed again in Metaphorical expressions; for by darkness is
meant the evil of error and sin which are usually termed darkness in the
Scripture, because they proceed from the ignorance and blindness of men's minds,
Ephesians. 4.18. which is farthered much by the cunning of Satan, and power which
he has over them, who is therefore called the ruler of the darkness of this
world, Ephesians. 6.12. because they affect secrecy and darkness, Ephesians. 5.11, 12.
and cannot endure the light of the word, lest the evil of their ways should
thereby be discovered, Joh. 3.19, 20. as likewise because they make men liable
to the over-clouding darkness of Gods displeasure here, and that utter eternal
darkness which is provided to be the portion of the damned hereafter, Mat.
8.12. And on the contrary, goodness and truth it is that is here called light,
as most frequently else where in the Scripture, because they proceed from God,
and are wrought in us by the enlightening of his word and spirit, Jam. 1.17.
because they enable men to judge rightly of things, and to order their
conversation aright, and makes them to be as so many bright shining lights in
the world, Phil. 2.15. and because they procure to men the light of Gods favor
here, Psalm. 89.15, 16. and fit men for heavenly glory, the inheritance of the
Saints in light, Col. 1.12. And so by bitter here is meant those ways of sin
and wickedness, which though they may seem pleasant for a time, yet they have
no real sweetness and delight in them, and will be sure to prove most bitter in
the end, Prove. 5.3, 4. and by sweet, the ways of truth and holiness, which are
ever ways of pleasantness, yielding us peace of Conscience, and much sweet
refreshing from the assurance of Gods favor, see Prove. 3.17. Only withal it
seems apparent that these Metaphorical expressions are added on purpose to
imply, that this miscalling of things in the persons here threatened, did not
proceed from natural ignorance and infirmity, but from obstinacy and malice,
they did it against Conscience in things that were manifest, evident and clear
to the judgment of all men, as if they should say that light were darkness, or
bitter were sweet; and so on the contrary, a man may be deceived in judging of
things that are somewhat like one another; but who can mistake in judging
between light and darkness, and bitter and sweet? A blind man cannot through
mistake say in the night that he sees it light, and a sick man cannot think
that is sweet which is bitter, though through the distemper of his palate^ he
may judge that to be bitter which is sweet.

Ver. 21. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their
own sigh^.] Some limit this to those that out of an high conceit of their own
wisdom refuse the instruction of their teachers, or that despise Gods
threatenings, thinking by their great wisdom to prevent the judgment threatened,
or at least to secure themselves. But I think it is best to extend it to all,
that out of an overweening concern ^^ their own wisdom, do in any thing
otherwise, than as God in his word has directed them. See the Note, Prove. 3.7.

Ver. 22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, etc.] As if he should
have said, That are only men of might for drinking great quantities of wine;
stout fellows at the board, but cowards in the field; very able and mighty men
for gusling down huge measures of wine, but such as if they should be called
out to appear in the field for the defense of their Country would be found
feeble and faint-hearted enough. And to the same purpose is the following
clause, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; that is, to drink strong
drink. Because they used in those Countries to prepare and make ready the wine
and other strong liquors they were to drink, by mingling of them, (see the
Note, Prove. 9.2.) and so when they were once thus prepared and mixed, then they
drank them up; therefore in the Scripture by mingling wine or strong drink, is
meant the pouring it out; as upon the same ground, Isa. 19.14. God is said to
have mingled, that is, to have poured out upon, or into the Egyptians, a
perverse spirit, that made them err and stagger like a drunken man. And to be
sure the mingling here mentioned is not meant of mingling their wine or other
strong liquor with water, for that tended to allay the strength and heat of it;
whereas the strength of these men the Prophet here speaks of, consisted in
their being able to swallow down and bear the strongest drinks. There was a woe
denounced before against this sin of drunkenness in this very Chapter, ver. 11.
but that seems to be intended against their sensuality and excessive jollity in
their drinkings and revellings; but this seems to be particularly directed
against those that gloried in their being able to drink abundance, and carry it
away without sinking under it; that vaunted in this as a matter of great
strength and valor, and labored to outstrip others. Yet I confess, because by
mingling of strong drink may be meant the preparing and making it ready for
others, therefore some Expositors would have the first clause understood of
their might in drinking excessively themselves, and the second of their
pressing it upon others, and their contending to overcome others in drinking.

Ver. 23. Which justify the wicked for reward, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 1.23.
This seems to be spoken of those drunkards mentioned in the foregoing verse,
that were mighty to drink wine, etc. because having there spoken of such men,
he immediately here adds, which justify the wicked for reward, etc. and
there is not a particular woe here prefixed; and indeed if their Judges were
given to drunkenness, it were no wonder though they should do any thing that
were most unjust. But yet I rather think that another woe is here left to be
understood, as if it had been thus expressed, Woe unto them also, which justify
the wicked for reward; that is, that pronounce him just, and give sentence for
him, as if his cause were just, (see the Note, Job 13.18.) or that undertake
any way to plead for, assert or maintain his cause to be just.

Ver. 24. Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes
the chaff, etc.] It is in the Original, as the tongue of fire devoureth the
stubble, the ground of which expression is, because the flame of fire, both in
the red color, and likewise in the shape of it, has much of the resemblance
of a tongue when it ascends up, and this is the very reason why it is said,
Act. 2.3. that the Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles in the appearance of
tongues of fire; and why the fire is usually said to lick up those things that
are consumed by it, as 1 King. 18. 38. Then the fire of the Lord fell and
consumed the burnt-sacrifice, and the wood and the stones, and the dust, and
licked up the water that was in the trench. But however the main thing intended
by this similitude is, that as stubble and chaff do suddenly take fire, and
being once set on fire are easily, soon and utterly consumed; so the wrath of
God should break forth suddenly and unexpectedly upon this people, that had
provoked God so exceedingly, and should easily, suddenly, utterly and
irrecoverably destroy them, (see the Notes, Exodus 15.7. Job 21.18.) whereby
also the Prophet does covertly tax and deride their foolish security and
confidence in thinking themselves to be in such a safe and sure condition, so
their root shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust, that is,
they shall be destroyed root and branch. Having in the beginning of this
Chapter compared the people of Israel to a vine, in allusion thereto he speaks
here accordingly of their destruction; some by the root understand the parents,
and by the blossom their children, according to that, Hos. 9.16. Ephraim is
smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit; yea, though they
bring forth, yet will I slay even the beloved fruit of their womb. Others by
the root understand the strong ones amongst them, that were well rooted, and by
the blossom the weak ones, that as a blossom were easily blown away. Again
others say, that by their root and blossom is meant both their open and surest
strength; or by their root, the strength of their Nation, that which did bear
them up as the root does the tree; and by the blossom all wherein the pomp and
beauty, and glory of the Nation did consist. But that which I conceive is
intended by these expressions is, that they should be utterly destroyed, that
as when the root of a fruit-tree is rotted in the earth, the whole tree
presently dies and withers, so that the very blossoms are immediately
parched, and blow away like so much dust into the air, and there is no
possibility that ever it should bear fruit again, so should it be with this
Nation, their root shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust;
see the Note, Job 18.16. But yet we must not understand this so as if the whole
Nation should be destroyed, (for a root of them were reserved that returned out
of Babylon, besides those that were left alive in the land) but either it must
be meant of the wicked multitude, or rather of the state of Israel in general,
which in the Babylonian Captivity was indeed for a time so ruined, dissipated
and scattered, that in an ordinary way there seemed to be no hope of their
recovery. And the reason of this is given in the following words, because they
have cast away the Law of the Lord, and despised the word of the Holy One of
Israel, that is, they did not only in some few things through ignorance and
infirmity transgress Gods commands, but they did maliciously cast off all
respect to his Law.

Ver. 25. Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, etc.]
See the Note, Chap. 3.14. And he has stretched forth his hand against them,
and has smitten them; the Prophet intending here to foretell that dreadful
judgment wherewith God had determined to accomplish that utter ruin threatened
in the foregoing verse, he first begins with putting them in mind how terribly
God had already of late years discovered his great indignation against them.
Some indeed would have it, that the Prophet speaks here of that dreadful
judgment that was coming upon them, and that he expresses it as if it were
done already, He has stretched forth his hand and has smitten them, only to
imply how certainly it should be, see the Note, Chap. 3.1. But the Context
seems clearly to carry it, (which is also the judgment of the most and best
Expositors) that first the Prophet speaks here of the judgments he had brought
upon them already, and then afterward of that utter desolation which God had
determined ere long to bring upon them; and that because by the mention of what
they had suffered lately, he might best hint unto them, both their desperate
obstinacy, in that they were not at all reformed by the sad judgments that had
already befallen them, and likewise their folly and madness in those speeches
mentioned before, ver. 19. Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may
see it, etc. And though some refer that which is here said of the strokes
wherewith God had smitten them already, to the great havoc which the Syrians
had made in Judah in the days of Joash, see the Notes, 2 King. 12.12, 17. and
ver. 20. and which the Israelites had made in the days of Amaziah, 2 King.
14.13, 14. yet it is better referred by others to those grievous devastations
and butcheries which had been made amongst them of later times in the days of
Ahaz by the Syrians; and Israelites, by the Philistims and Edomites, and by the
Assyrians also, 2 King. 16.5, 6, etc. And the hills did tremble; as if he
should have said, so dreadful were the strokes of his displeasure, that they
might have made the hills to tremble. It is an Hyperbolical expression, the
better to set forth the stupidity of the people, that were not at all moved
with these terrible Judgments; and their carcases were torn in the midst of the
streets, to wit, with the wounds they received, when they were hacked and
slain, or when they were hewed in pieces by their enraged enemies after they
were dead. But the chief thing intended in these words, is to set forth, that
the multitude of those that were slain was so great, that they were not able to
bury them, but they were left mangled in a pitiful manner, putrefying and
rotting in their very streets; and therefore some do translate this passage
thus, and their carcases were as dung in the midst of the streets; and then it
follows to make way to the judgment threatened in the following verse, for all
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, that
is, he is again ready to fall upon them with a more dreadful judgment.

Ver. 26. And he will lift up an ensign to the Nations from far, etc.] Having
in the foregoing verse put them in mind how God had punished them already, here
now the Prophet makes known what that more terrible judgment was, which ver.
24. he had told them that God had determined farther ere long to bring upon
them, and for the inflicting whereof he had said in the foregoing verse, that
his hand was stretched out still. And because this judgment intended was to be
by an invasion of foreign enemies from a very remote Country, as God had long
before threatened by Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.49. (for which see the Notes there),
therefore he uses this military word, that God would lift up an ensign (or a
standard) to the Nations from far; meaning that as some Prince or great
Commander does by setting up his standard invite Soldiers to come in and list
themselves for his service, and by lifting up an ensign does call or lead out
his Soldiers to march along, or to make an assault upon the enemy, so the Lord
would by his secret Providence cause an army to be raised among the Nations
that were afar off, and cause them to march out against the land of Israel, and
to execute his Judgments upon his people. And to the same purpose are the next
words, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth; only this expression,
and will hiss (or, whistle) to them, is used, I conceive, to imply how easily
and quickly he could gather them together, and bring them upon his people;
there would be no need of giving them an alarm by the sounding of trumpets; if
he did but hiss or whistle for them, that would be enough. In the word (hiss or
whistle) there seems to be an allusion to those that have any so at their beck,
as we use to say, that upon the least notice given they are presently ready to
come in to them, (as to a master of a ship, who is thus by a whistle wont to
call the Mariners about him to do what he commands them; or a shepherd that
does thus call in his straggling sheep) or to those that are wont by this way to
call in those that are out of sight, they know not where or how far off, or at
least that are so far off that they cannot hear what they would say to them.
And accordingly this expression, And he will hiss (or, whistle) unto them from
the end of the earth, may be used, either with respect to the remoteness of the
Nations that God should call in (because a hiss, or whistle, is heard far off)
or with respect to the secret working of Gods Providence in fetching in these
Nations to destroy the Jews (because hissing or whistling is a watchword or
warning covertly given to those only that understand the meaning of it) or
rather to imply how easily God could bring these Nations upon his people. It is
a great Question amongst Expositors who this enemy was that God here threatens
to raise up against his people. Some understand it of the Romans under Titus
Vespasian, who indeed utterly ruined the State of the Jews; and indeed these
might most properly be said to be called from the end of the earth. But because
the Prophet speaks of a destruction that should suddenly come upon them, and
that of the Romans was so long after, even many years after the death of
Christ, it is no way probable that this was here intended. Others think that it
is the Assyrians that are here meant, who under Sennacherib in the days of
Hezekiah did utterly waste the land of Israel, and carried the people into
captivity, and made great havoc in the land of Judah, besieging the very City
Jerusalem, though they took it not; and indeed observable it is, that Chap.
7.17, etc. where it is clear the Prophet speaks of the Invasion of the
Assyrians, he speaks much after the same manner as he does here. But yet
because he speaks here, ver. 24. of the utter ruining of the State of Judah,
root and branch, I should conceive it is rather meant of the Chaldeans under
Nebuchadnezzar, who in the days of Zedekiah did waste the land of Judah, take
and burn the City Jerusalem, and carried the people captives into Babylon; or
at least that it may be meant of both these jointly together, the one as the
beginning, the other as the consummation of that extreme ruin that was brought
upon them. However it is clear that the reason why he speaks of Nations in the
Plural Number, was because there were many several Nations, Parthian^, M^^es,
Persians and others, that served under both the Assyrians and Chaldeans; and
the reason why they were so expressly told that he would call in Nations from
far, and from the end of the earth, was both to make the threatening the more
dreadful (the farther they were carried away captives, the sadder and the more
hopeless their condition would be) and likewise to prevent the peoples
incredulity, lest they should think that there was no likelihood o^ any such
destruction that was coming upon them, because all the Nations round about them
were quiet, and at peace with them, not meaning them any hurt; therefore the
Prophet tells them, that the Lord could easily, and would certainly bring in
enemies upon them from the farthest part of the earth, that is, the farthest
part known commonly to the people in those times; and behold they shall come
with speed, swiftly, which is added by way of answering and upbraiding them for
that scornful speech of theirs, v. 19. Let him make speed, and hasten his work,
etc.

Ver. 27. None shall be weary, etc.] To wit, notwithstanding the length of
their journey: And hereby is implied, both what lusty able men they should be,
and likewise, how willingly and cheerfully they should undertake, and go on in
this their expedition; nor shall stumble amongst them, to wit, through
weariness, or faintness, or by reason of any thing lying in their way, against
which they might casually dash their foot. The meaning is, that nothing should
in the least hinder or retard them in their jurney; none shall slumber nor
sleep, that is, they shall be so far from sleeping, that they shall not so much
as slumber, according as the same expression is used, Psalm. 121.4. Behold, he
that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. It could not be, but they
must sleep sometimes, but all is expressed here Hyperbolically. That which is
intended, is, that they should not go on in their journey, or do their business
slugglishly, and drowsily, but with much liveliness, and prudent watchfulness,
and intentive minding their work in hand. If there were need, they should not
refuse to watch all night in their Sieges; or rather, to travel by night, as
well as by day, as we find it expressed, Arise, and let us go by night, and let
us destroy her Palaces, Jer. 6.5. neither shall the girdle of their loins be
loosed; that is, they shall be still in a readiness to march, or to perform any
other service of War; because the girding of the loins helps to the
strengthening of men, and so is often used by them that undertake any journey,
or service, whereto strength is required. See 1 Kings 18.46. Therefore some
would have it, that this Phrase, of not loosing the girdle of their loins, is
used to imply their constant strength. But questionless, the meaning rather is,
that they should not pull off their clothes to go into a bed, no, nor so much
as disarm themselves; nor shall the latchet of their shoes be broken, to wit,
as usually it will be, when men in have pull off their shoes; and if so we
take it, the meaning may be, that they should not so much as pull off their
shoes when they laid themselves down, but because a loose shoo must needs be a
great hinderance to men in traveling, and put them to some stay for the
mending of it, I rather thus understand this expression, that nothing should
befall them, to stay, or hinder them in their way, not so much as the breaking
of a shooe-latchet. So that the whole scope of the place is to imply, that they
should go on in their journey so prosperously, that they should meet with no
impediment that should considerably be any hinderance to them. But see the Note
also, Deuteronomy. 8.4.

Ver. 28. Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent, etc.] They shall be
well armed, and always in a readiness to destroy: And indeed this also some
would have implied, in saying, their arrows were sharp; because this implies,
that they should not need to stay to whet them: their horses h^fs shall be
^^unted like flint, that is, they shall be ^^ hard, that they shall not be worn
out with travel, nor in danger (...) cunning, or galloping, or to be hurt with
any thing they shall casually tread upon: and their wheels like a whirlwind,
that is, the wheels of their Chariots, in regard of their swiftness, the
dreadful noise they will make, and their strong over-bearing power and
violence, shall come upon the Jews like a terrible tempest from Heaven,
carrying all before them; because the Jews might think, that in so long a
journey many things might intervene, to cross, and hinder their design;
therefore these things are added, to show how prosperously they shall go on in
their enterprise.

Ver. 29. Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions,
etc.] See the Note, Psalm. 104.21. Yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the
prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it; all which is to
set forth, how strong, and fierce, and cruel, and greedy after the prey, like
so many hungry Lions, that Nation should be, that God would bring upon them;
and with what dreadful fury, and rage, and hideous clamours they shall fall
upon the Jews, as particularly, when they came to join battle with them, or to
undertake the storming of any place, and with what unresistable violence they
should seize upon, and carry away both the people and wealth of the Kingdom, no
body either doing, or being able to resist them. But see the Notes also, Psalm.
74.4. and Job 4.10.

Ver. 30. And in that day they shall roar against them, like the roaring of the
sea, etc.] That is, they shall break in upon them with a noise, like that of
the roaring Sea, when in a storm it beats upon a Ship, or when over-bearing the
banks it breaks in, and over-flows the land, and carries all before it, like a
mighty deluge; and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow (or
distress), that is, says some Expositors, if one of this savage Nation shall
but look toward them, the very terror of his countenance shall over-whelm them
with the darkness of extreme dread and fear, and threaten no less than the
bringing of the whole land under most extreme misery and sorrow. But indeed
this is far more generally understood by Expositors, of the Inhabitants of the
land: and if one look to the land, behold darkness, etc. that is, so miserable
shall be the condition of the whole land, by reason of the irruption of so
potent and cruel an enemy, that if any of the people did look toward any part
of the land, as it were to view and consider the sad condition whereinto they
were brought, they should see nothing but darkness over-spreading the whole
Country; which way soever they should look round about them, they should no
where discover the least likelihood of help, there should not be any light of
hope and comfort to be seen. And because in the first words of the Verse it was
said, that the enemy should rear against them like the roaring of the sea,
therefore some conceive, that in these words, and if one look to the land, etc.
there is an allusion to a Ship in a great storm at Sea, from whence the
Mariners look to the land, as wishing themselves there, but see no hope of
escape thereby, and to the Heavens (of which there was mention indeed in the
following words), but there is no appearance of the least clearing in the sky.
But I see not, but that without any such allusion, the following words, and the
light is darkened in the Heavens thereof, that is, in the Heavens over the land
of Judea, may be added to imply, that even from thence they should have no hope
of help or comfort, but all should be darkness there, as well as on the land;
whithersoever they looked, upward or downward, they should find themselves in a
sad and hopeless condition: Or else the meaning may be, that if any light of
hope did appear, raising in them any expectation of help and deliverance, that
should end in nothing but misery, and so should only prove a vexation to them:
or that their misery should be so great, that they should take no comfort in
the light of Heaven, no more than if it were overspread with darkness; yea, it
should be irksome and displeasing to them. And indeed this must, I conceive, be
intended, if we read this last clause as it is in the Margin of our Bibles, And
when it is light it shall be dark in the destructions thereof. But see the Note
Job 18.6. That affliction and sorrow are termed darkness in the Scripture, and
prosperity and joy and comfort, light, is apparent in many places. See the
Notes, 2 Samuel 22.29. Job 18.18. Psa. 112.4. and Esth. 8.16.

CHAP. VI.
VERSE 1. IN the year that King Uzziah died, etc.] It is not expressly said
whether Isaiah saw this Vision immediately before Uzziah died, or presently
after his death. But yet it seems most probable that it was immediately after
the death of Uzziah; and that this, In the year that King Uzziah died, is all
one as if he said, In the very beginning of the reign of Jothan, the son of
Uzziah, presently after the death of his Father Uzziah; 1. Because the death of
Uzziah seems purposely to be mentioned, to note, that it was upon that great
change that was made by this Kings death, that God did now again confirm the
Prophet Isaiah in his Prophetical Office. The coming in of new Kings does many
times cause great changes and commotions in Kingdoms; and therefore to
encourage the Prophet against any fears caused by this change, the Lord was
pleased by this Vision to confirm him again in his Prophetical Office. And 2.
Because the Prophet seems all along to divide his Prophecy according to the
Reigns of the Kings in whose days he prophesied. In chap. 11. he names Uzziah
as the first of the Kings under whom he prophesied; and accordingly it may be
probably thought that from thence unto this place we have had the sum of his
Prophecies in the reign of Uzziah. Then 2. he tells us the Vision he saw, and
the charge which God gave him in the year that King Uzziah died; that is, in
the very beginning of the reign of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, who upon the
death of Uzziah succeeded him in the throne. Again, 3. Chap. 7.1. He begins his
Prophecy under the Reign of Ahaz the son of Jotham. And it came to pass in the
days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, etc. And then 4. in chap.
14.28. he adds his Prophecies under Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz, using the same
expression he uses here, In the year that King Ahaz died was this burden. But
may some say, If the Prophet intended to show that this Vision was seen after
the death of Uzziah, why did he not rather say, that it was in that reign, or
in the beginning of the reign of Jotham? I answer, Because if he had expressed
it so, it would have been questionable whether it had been in the beginning of
Jothams reign, when he reigned together with his father, and as his Viceroy
during all the time of his leprosy, or in the beginning of his reign when he
came to be King in his own right, after the death of his father Uzziah, for
which see the Notes, 2 King. 15.5, 32. Indeed because we have here a relation
of Isaiahs call to his Prophetical Office, and because he speaks here of his
seeing the Lord, ( ver. 5.) as a thing he had not been acquainted with,
therefore there are some that think that this was his first Vision, and should
therefore have been placed in the beginning of his Prophecy. But, 1. it is most
improbable that he should begin to Prophecy in the year that Uzziah died,
concerning whom it is noted, that he did write the acts of Uzziah first and
last, 2 Chronicles. 26.22. 2ly. Because the Prophet was here enjoined to denounce
that judgment that God had past against the Jews, that they should be given up
to blindness of mind and hardness of heart, ( ver. 9.) it may be clearly from
hence gathered, that he had Prophesied to them many years under Uzziah; and had
experienced their obstinacy, for which this sentence was pronounced against
them. And, 3ly, this Vision therefore was not his first call to his Prophetical
Office, but to confirm and encourage him herein, against all the opposition he
had met with, or might meet with therein; as we see the Apostles Commission was
again and again renewed to them for their greater encouragement. And indeed
considering with what Majesty and Glory God presented himself to the Prophet in
this Vision, it is no wonder though he were more than ordinarily astonished,
and it may be he became hereby more sensible of the great weight of his Office;
than he had been before. But it does not follow that God never revealed himself
to him as a Prophet before.

I saw also, etc.] To wit, in a spiritual ecstasy; or rather waking, in an
outward corporeal apparition; whence is that which the Prophet afterward says,
ver. 5. Mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts, see the Notes, Genesis
15.1. Exodus 3.2. and 24.10, 11. and Numb. 12.7. the Lord, that is, the Lord
Jehovah, one God in three persons; whence is that afterward, ver. 8. Whom shall
I send? and who will go for us? see the Note, Genesis 1.26. And therefore the
Evangelist St. John does expressly affirm that it was the Lord Christ that
appeared to our Prophet in this Vision, Joh. 12.41. where having alleged that
very sentence which is here pronounced by the Lord, ver. 9, 10. concerning the
blinding of the Jews, he adds, These things said Isaias, when he saw his glory,
and spoke of him. And the Apostle Paul, alleging the very same passage, says,
Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet. It was therefore the only true
God, who is Father, Son and Holy Ghost, that now appeared to Isaiah, sitting
upon a throne, as the great King and Judge of the world, and ready now to
pronounce a judicial sentence against the Jews his peculiar people. High and
lifted up, that is, exceeding high, as before to express the exceeding height
of the cedars of Lebanon, it was said they were high and lifted up; or high may
have respect to the great height of the Throne in regard of the frame and
making of it; and lifted up, to the situation of it, in that it was seen aloft
in the air very high above the earth; both being to set forth the
incomprehensible Majesty of God, and how transcendently far this Heavenly judge
is above all the Kings and Monarchs of the earth. And his train, that is, the
skirts of his royal robes, or the skirts thereof, (as it is in the Margent)
that is, the utmost parts of the Throne whereon he sat, or, that which hang
down of the covering which lay upon the Throne, filled the Temple, that is, the
lower parts of the Temple. It seems clear by this, that this vision was seen in
the Temple, or in a representation of the Temple, as likewise by that which
follows, ver. 4. where it is said that the posts of the door moved at the cry
of the Seraphim, and that the house was filled with smoke; and ver. 6. that one
of the Seraphims had a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs
from off the altar; and that this was to signify, that it was that holy God
whom they served in the Temple, that now appeared to the Prophet; and that the
Jews might see how vainly they boasted so much in the Temple, whereas in this
very Temple that dreadful sentence mentioned ver. 9, 10. was now pronounced
against them. As for that which is said of his Trains filling the Temple, that
might be to signify that the least ray of the Majesty of God was greater than
all the glory of man; or that the glory of God is spread throughout the Church;
or that the benefits of Christ's Mediatorship do redound from him to the
replenishing of the whole Church.

Ver. 2. Above it stood the Seraphims, etc.] That is, above the Throne, right
over against the Lord, whose head and upper parts, in that humane shape wherein
he appeared, were lifted up far above the Throne. And these were Angels, who
appeared also in humane shape, as is evident by the mention that is made of
their face and feet, and ver. 3. of their humane voice; and therefore also it
is said that they stood, to wit, before the Lord, in a way of reverence, as
attending upon him, as Nobles are wont to stand about a King, and as ministering
spirits, always ready to do whatever he shall enjoin them; all being intended
to set forth the astonishing glory of the Majesty of God. As for the name that
is here given them, Seraphims, which signifies burning, it is probable that
they are so called either from their ardent love to God, or zeal for God, (see
the Note, 2 King. 2.11.) or from their purity, the swiftness and agility of
their motion, and their unresistable power, see the Note, Psalm. 104.4. or
rather, because they appeared like flaming fire, as was suitable for the
discovery of Gods fiery indignation against the Jews, which is afterward set
forth in that dreadful judgment, which ver. 9, 10. is pronounced against them.
We cannot therefore say, as some boldly do, that these Seraphims were a
peculiar order of Angels, the highest and nearest to God of all; for though it
may be probably gathered from some other places of Scripture, that there is
some order amongst the Angels; yet this word Seraphims setting forth the
nature, qualities, and employments of the Angels in general, it cannot be
concluded from hence, that the Seraphims were an order of Angels, distinguished
from the rest of the Angels by that name. Concerning their number, there is
nothing expressed. That there were but two of them (as some say) answerable to
the Cherubims upon and before the Mercy-seat in the Tabernacle and Temple,
Exodus 37.7, 10. and 1 King. 6.27. cannot be concluded from that which is said,
ver. 3. that one cried to another, see the Note; rather we may probably think
there were great multitudes of them, this tending most to set forth the
infinite Majesty of God.

Each one had six wings, etc.] And this also was, as was the four wings of the
Cherubims in Ezekiels Vision, Ezekiel. 1.6. to set forth the agility of their
nature, and the swiftness of their motions; as likewise it may signify their
mounting aloft in the knowledge of God, and their conversing on high. With twain
he covered his face, not as if the holy Angels do not at all see God, (for our
Savior says expressly, Mat. 18.10. That in Heaven the Angels do always behold
the face of his Father), but to imply how unable they were, and how unworthy
fully to behold the resplendent brightness of Gods glory; and with twain he
covered his feet, which might be to imply either, 1. That the nature and
motions of the Angels is hidden from men below; and that as the Angels are
unable to behold the glory of God, so neither are men able to behold the glory
of the Angels. And, 2. that they do not satisfy themselves in their Ministry,
and in the service which they perform to God, as being conscious to themselves,
and ashamed of their imperfection and infirmity, in comparison of the infinite
purity and perfection of God; concerning which see the Notes, Job 4.18. and
15.15. and with twain he did fly, that is, they stood with their wings
stretched forth, and perhaps fluttering continually, as ready to fly, (for it
is not probable that the Prophet saw them flying to and fro) and hereby was
signified their readiness to do, and their swiftness in doing whatsoever God
enjoins them.

Ver. 3. And one cried unto another, etc.] That is, say some Expositors, they
cried together with one consent, or they cried out by turns, as two Quires of
Singers are wont to do, thereby exciting as it were, and stirring up one
another; as it is said the men and women did in that Song of Thanksgiving
wherewith they blessed God, after their miraculous passage through the Red Sea,
see the Note, Exodus 15.21. And said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts. Now
this threefold repetition of the word holy, is commonly said to imply the
Trinity of the Persons in the unity of the Godhead. But I rather conceive that
the intent thereof was to signify, 1. The superlative and transcendent
eminency of Gods Holiness, both in himself (see the Note, 1 Samuel 2.2.) and in
all his ways and works, yea and particularly in the judgment which was now to
be pronounced against the Jews. It is as if they had said, Holy, yea,
thrice-holy, infinitely, and unchangeably holy unto all eternity is the Lord of
Hosts. 2. The zeal and unwearied diligence of the Angels in setting forth the
Praises of God. And, 3. how base a thing it was in the Jews to forsake this
holy God, and to follow after Idols. The whole earth is full of thy glory, see
the Notes, Psalm. 8.1. Yet some conceive that by this Clause the folly of the
Jews is covertly taxed, who carried themselves as if the glory of the Lord had
been shut up, and were only to be seen in the Temple at Jerusalem.

Ver. 4. And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, etc.]
That is, at the voice of every one of the Seraphims, as they cried, (which
expression I conceive is proper enough, though many of them cried out jointly
together, see the Note above, ver. 3. Or, at the voice of God that cried, to
wit, either by a voice that came immediately from him, or by the voice of the
Seraphims singing his Praise; for though it be meant of the cry of the Angels,
yet this may be called the voice of God crying by them, because it was by his
power, and not theirs, that this was effected, as it was Gods power that caused
the walls of Jericho to fall down at the sound of the Rams-horns, Josh. 6.20.
It is in the Hebrew, And the posts of the Transomes, or, the Thresholds moved,
that is, those pieces above and beneath the door, whereto the side-posts were
fastened. But the meaning is, that all the posts, together with the door of the
Temple that hung thereon, did shake and tremble. And this was questionless to
signify the terribleness of Gods anger now discovered, and the dreadfulness of
the judgment now to be denounced against the Jews, (see the Note above, Chap.
5.25.) and the fearful commotion and trembling it should, when it was
accomplished, bring upon the people. Yea, and some add too, that it was a sign
of the overthrow of the Temple, together with the ceasing of the Ceremonies
that were used therein. And the like may be said concerning the following
Clause, and the house was filled with smoke; for this smoke filling the Temple,
might be to signify the wrath of God against the Jews, (as in Psalm. 8.8. There
went up a smoke out of his nostrils, etc.) and that in the burning of Jerusalem
and the Temple by the Chaldeans; yet as the Cloud that filled the Temple, 1
King. 8.10. so this smoke filling the Temple might be to signify Gods presence
there, and so to assure the Prophet that it was the Lord that pronounced the
following dreadful sentence against the Jews; yea, and some add, that the smoke
signified the blinding of them.

Ver. 5. Then said I, woe is me, for I am undone, etc.] The meaning of this is,
that upon the sight of that glorious apparition, wherein the Lord had presented
himself to him, and the hearing of that dreadful voice of the Angels, owning
and admiring the infinite purity and holiness of God, and the discovery that
was made of Gods indignation, mentioned in the foregoing verse, the Prophet was
astonished and terrified, as apprehending his very life to be endangered
thereby, (concerning which see the Notes, Genesis 16.13. and Judge. 6.22. and Exodus
33.20.) and that the rather because these things did cause him presently to
reflect upon his own baseness and impurity, as rendering him unworthy to stand
before so glorious and so pure a God; as he expresses it in the following
words, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips: But why
does he complain only of the uncleanness of his lips? I answer, 1. Because he
was a Prophet; and so might apprehend that he had been too remiss in reproving
the sins both of Princes and people, and consequently might fear that he had
been in part the cause of the peoples not being reclaimed from their sins, and
so of the Lords breaking forth now in such high displeasure against them. Or,
2. to imply generally that he was all over a poor unclean wretch, and one
therefore that might justly fear, lest the wrath of so holy a God might consume
and destroy him. In confessing the pollution of his lips, he does withal imply
that corruption of his nature which had tainted his tongue, (for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34.) and so likewise the
whole man; and it is therefore all one in effect, as if he had said, I am all
over unclean, and therefore unable as to speak any thing from God or to God, as
I ought to do; so also to perform any service to him or for him, for which he
might not justly be offended with me. But wherefore does he add that, and I
dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips? I answer, It may be only to
imply, first that he was naturally no better than they, and that both he and
they were a company of unclean creatures, whom God might justly destroy. Or, 2.
that besides his own pollution, he might justly fear, that his very dwelling
amongst a people so horribly wicked and profane, might bring him to be
involved in the same punishments together with them. Or rather, 3ly, that he
might well think that he had contracted some contagion by living in the midst
of such a wicked people, it being very hard for a man to converse amongst such,
and not to be defiled by them, but to be as the fish that are fresh and sweet,
though they live constantly in the salt-sea; and happily the contagion which he
feared he had contracted in his lips, might be, that their contumacy had made
him, either out of a cowardly fear of them, or out of despair of doing any good
upon them, more remiss in contending with them, than he should have been.

For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts,] See the Note above ver.
1. But why was the Prophet thus affrighted? I answer, considering the exceeding
glory and dread of the Vision, it was no wonder though he were for a time thus
startled. And besides it was one chief end of the Vision, by the discovery of
Gods Majesty and glory, both to humble the Prophet that he might the more
reverently attend upon him and receive his commands, and likewise to strengthen
and encourage him to go on courageously in his office, notwithstanding all the
opposition he might meet with, in the confidence of the greatness of his Lord,
that had given him his Commission.

Ver. 6. Then flow one of the Seraphims unto me, etc.] To wit, by the command
of God, before whom the Seraphims stood, waiting still in a readiness to
receive his commands; having a live c^al in his hand, which he had taken with
the tongs from off the altar, that is, from the altar of burnt-offerings,
whereon there was fire continually burning, that did at first come down from
Heaven, see the Note, Levit. 6.12. Here begins the relation of that which God
had ordered to be done, to quiet the troubled mind of the Prophet, to free him
from his fears, and to confirm and encourage him in his Prophetical office, and
particularly in that service that was now to be imposed on him of making known
Gods decree concerning the blinding of the ^ews. Accordingly this live-^oal
taken from off the altar, was intended to be a sign of the purging away his
sins, (as it is explained in the following verse) to wit, in a way of expiation
or remission, or in a way of Sanctification or cleansing; that as fire does
purge away the dross of metals, so by Christ (who is our sacrifice of
Propitiation, and likewise our altar, Heb. 13.10.) the sin of the Prophet
should be pardoned, and by the Spirit of Christ and the graces of his Spirit,
(out of whose fullness we all receive, Joh. 1.16.) he should be enlightened,
sanctified and cleansed. Because the sign was fire from the altar, and so fire
from Heaven, it was the fitter to signify that no purity of man is from
himself, but from God in Christ, the expiatory sacrifice of Christ, and from
the sanctify my spirit of Christ, which is therefore often compared to fire, as
Mat. ^ 11. He shall (...) the Holy Ghost and with fire.

Ver. ^. (...) my mouth, and said, etc.] Had not the Angel informed the Prophet
why he had touched his lips with a fiery coal from the altar, he might have
understood the meaning of it, and so have been more terrified, rather than
^^motted by what was done; he might have apprehended that it had been done in
wrath for the fearing rather than the purging of his lips. And therefore
together with the sign he added a word of information, L^, this has touched
thy lips, and th^^ (...) is taken away, and thy sin is purged; as surely as t^^
coal from Gods altar has touched thy mouth, so surely are all thy sins
forgiven thee, and particularly the pollution of thy lips, whereof thou did
complain; and thou shall be furnished with gifts fitting for the service which
shall be enjoined thee. See the two foregoing Notes. There is no question to be
made, but that the Prophets sins were pardoned before, and that he had been
sanctified, and set apart and fitted for his holy function, and that with his
tongue he had already done much holy service for God; only by this which was
now done, he was confirmed in his Prophetical office, and assured of a further
supply of grace, and that in a greater measure than formerly, that so he might
go on courageously, and might not faint or fear because of the difficulty of
the service enjoined him. And observable it is, that the coal is only said to
have touched, his lips; the grace signified thereby is promised as from God.

Ver. 8. Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, etc.] To wit, the Lord
Jehovah, whom he then in a Vision saw sitting as a King upon his Throne; who
now spoke not to him as before by one of the Seraphims, but immediately by
himself, Whom shall I send? and who will go for us? that is, in our name and
stead upon our service, and for our glory? We have the like expression, Genesis
1.26. for which see the Note there. It is spoken after the manner of men; and
that to imply, both what singular abilities are requisite for those whom God
sends forth as his messengers to teach a people, and how few there are that are
fit for that employment; as likewise with what wonderful wisdom and care God
does cull out choice and fit men for the work of the Ministry, and particularly
that it was thus in his sending the Prophet Isaiah. And hereby also he was
confirmed and assured that he was sent of God, that so he might not stagger at
that seeming incredible message he was now to carry concerning the blinding of
the Jews. Whereupon is the following answer, which he presently returned, Then
said I, here am I, send me, to wit, because he was now encouraged, and willing
to undertake any service which God should impose upon him, though never so
dangerous and difficult.

Ver. 9. And he said, Go and tell this people, etc.] It is not, Go and tell my
people, but this people; which is spoken by way of great indignation. See the
Notes upon a like expression, Exodus 32.7. Hear ye indeed, or, hear ye without
ceasing (as it is in the Margent) but understand not. It is as if he had said,
Ye shall have Prophets enough, who shall boldly and faithfully make known my
will to you, whether you will or no, and shall be constantly teaching and
exhorting you; but all shall do you no more good, than if they had not spoken
at all to you; ye shall not effectually understand, nor mind, nor lay to heart
what they say. And the like may be said of the following Clause, and see ye
indeed, but perceive not; which may be meant of the signs or the miracles which
their teachers should work in their sight, and of the wonderful works of God
which they should see, and the judgments which God should bring upon them, to
wit, that they should not understand nor be affected with, either the one or
the other. There is therefore in the words, 1. A prediction of their blindness
and obstinacy, as if it had been expressed in the future tense, Ye shall hear
and yet not understand, and ye shall see and yet not perceive; as it is indeed
expressed by the Evangelist, Mat. 13.14. And in them is fulfilled the prophe^y
of Isaias, which says, By ^^^ng ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and
seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive And so also by the Apostle, Act.
28.25, 26. And, 2. a commination, that they should be judicially given up to
blindness and hardness of heart; as if it had been said, seeing you are thus
obstinately bent to stop your ears, and close your eyes, and harden your
hearts, so that you will not be bettered by any thing that can be spoken or
done to you, go on therefore still in this your wilful stubbornness, till you
be utterly destroyed. It is the will of God by withdrawing or withholding his
spirit, thus to leave you to your own perverse and stubborn hearts, that so
nothing you hear or see may do you any good. And so indeed in other places this
passage of the Prophets is cited, as importing Gods punishing their wilful
refusing to receive good by the means of grace, by giving them up to farther
blindness and obstinacy, as we may see, Luke 8.10. Joh. 12.40. and Romans 11.8.
All which was intended concerning the Jews, not only in the days of Isaiah, but
also in the days of the Gospel, even unto this time, as is evident by the
frequent applying of this Prophecy to them in the New Testament. And it was the
will of God to make known that he would thus punish them by withholding his
Spirit and Grace, and leaving them to the power of Satan, and the perverseness
of their own hearts: 1. That he might teach the Prophet not to startle at it,
but to stoop to the will of God herein, if he found that he labored in vain in
seeking to reclaim a rebellious people; (for when he was to tell them thus of
their obstinacy, Hear ye indeed, but understand not, etc. it was all one in
effect as if he had said, I know I shall do no good amongst you; but for that I
must submit to the will of God.) And, 2ly, withal that the people might be
warned to take heed that by their obstinacy they did not bring this spiritual
judgment upon themselves. But why would God send the Prophet to them, if he
foresaw that he would not obey him, and intended therefore to punish them by
giving them over to greater blindness and hardness of heart? I answer, 1.
Because however hereby the patience and mercy of God was magnified in using
this means to reclaim such an obstinate people. 2. Because hereby the people
were left the more inexcusable. And, 3. Because some might be converted by the
Prophets teaching, though the generality of the people continued blind and
incorrigible; for this judgment was denounced against the body of the people
jointly considered, and not against every particular person amongst them.

Ver. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, etc.] See the Notes, Job 15.27.
and Psalm. 119.7. In this expression there seems to be an allusion to that fat
we call suet, which when it is cold will grow stiffer and harder than other fat
uses to be; and so the fatness of the heart here intended may be such a frame
and temper of heart and spirit, as renders men not only dull and unteachable,
but also stiff, obstinate, and untractable. And make their ears heavy, that is,
make them deaf, or thick or dull of hearing; for as we use to say of those that
hear well, that they are light of hearing; so of those that hear ill, that they
are heavy and dull of hearing; and the heaviness of hearing here intended is,
when men take no delight in Gods word, when they are stupid and blockish, or
are no more affected with what is spoken to them, than if they heard not what
was said. And shut their eyes, that is, close them up and make them dim. But
now all this must not be so understood, as if the Prophet were enjoined to
intend, desire, or endeavor to do what is here spoken. Only the Lord does
hereby give him to understand that even his teaching should be an occasion and
means of their greatest blindness and obstinacy, making them more stupid and
hard, and b^a wo^^ hearted than they were before and that yet notwithstanding
he must go on in his work. Make the heart of this people fat, etc. as if he had
said, I know that whatever thou do by way of seeking to reclaim them, will
but make them more stubborn, they will be the worse for that, whereby they
might have been bettered. But yet go on courageously; since they will harden
their hearts, hardened let them be; and go thou on in doing that which belongs
to thee, though they become thereby the more stupid and stubborn. See the
Notes, 1 Samuel 2.25. It is true indeed that it is not the natural effect of the
word thus to blind and harden men's hearts. Only God foretells that accidentally
this should come to pass, by reason of the obstinacy of the Jews, and that God
in his just wrath would suffer it to be so, by withholding his grace and
leaving them to the base perverseness of their own spirits; that as sore and
weak eyes are dazzled and blinded with any great light, and tender ears are
stunned and deafned with any great noise, and as lime burns by the pouring of
water upon it, so the Preaching of the Prophet should make them more blind and
sottish, more hard-hearted and stubborn than they were before, according to
that of our Savior, Job. 9.39. For judgment I am come into this world; that
they which see not might see; and that they which see, might be made blind. And
indeed this message here commended to the Prophet concerning the peoples
obstinacy, Make the heart of this people fat; and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes, seems to be expressed in these terms purposely to imply how
strange a thing this was, that his holy endeavors should bring forth an effect
so contrary to what he desired, and that God in his just wrath should design
him hereto; which is fully expressed in the following words, lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
convert and be healed, to wit, 1. by the pardoning of their sins, according to
that expression, Isa. 53.5. With his stripes we are healed; and so the
Evangelist Mark expresses it, Mark 4.12. Lest at any time they should be
converted, and their sins should be forgiven them. 2. By the healing of their
corruptions, and reforming their lives. And, 3ly, by removing his judgments,
and making up all the breaches which God by his judgments had made in their
state.

Ver. 11. Then said I, Lord, how long? etc.] That is, how long shall this
people continue in this sad condition, being blinded and hardened, yea, and
made more and more rebellious and refractory by the Preaching of thy servants
the Prophets, whom thou sendest unto them? as if he had said, is there no end
or period set to this their rejection? And this it seems the Prophet spoke,
both by way of wondering at this judgment denounced, out of a sollicitous care
for this people, and out of pity and compassion toward them; and likewise as
being carried thereto by a secret instinct from God, that in the answer which
God returned, it might be made known with what great severity he meant to
proceed against them. Until the cities, to wit, of Judah, be wasted without
inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate; that
is, until by the incursion of several enemies under the reign of the several
Kings that shall successively sit in the Throne of Judah, the inhabitants of
the land shall be exceedingly wasted and destroyed, so that at last both
cities, and particular houses standing by themselves, shall be in a manner left
desolate without any to inhabit them. And this extreme desolation and havoc
that was made amongst them might be intended concerning that great destruction
which was brought upon them, by the Babylonians; and yet it may be extended
also to that extreme devastation that was made in that land by the Romans,
namely by Titus and Vespasian first, and afterward by Hadrian the Emperor.
But see the Notes, Chap. 1.7. and 5.9.

Ver. 12. And the Lord have removed men far away, etc.] To wit, the inhabitants
of the land, whom the Lord in his wrath shall cause to be carried away captives
into Assyria and Babylon, Countries far remote from the land which God had
given them. (The same expression is again afterward used concerning the
Captivity of the Jews in Babylon, Chap. 26.15. Thou had removed it far unto
all the ends of the earth), and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the
land, that is, and by this means the land shall be in a great measure totally,
in a manner, forsaken of her inhabitants, and so shall be left desolate. It is
not therefore Gods forsaking of this people (as some think) but the lands being
forsaken of the people, which the Prophet here intends, and that was when the
people were forcibly carried away into Babylon. Yet some I know extend this, as
is said in the foregoing Note, to that great desolation that was made in the
land by the Romans, when they that were left were dispersed and scattered all
the world over.

Ver. 13. But yet in it shall be a tenth.] Some learned Expositors do
understand this of a tenth King that should sit in the Throne of Judah, or of a
Decade of Kings that should successively reign in the Kingdom of Judah, before
that desolation was to come upon the land that was threatened in the foregoing
verses. And indeed from the time when this was prophesied, (which was in the
days of Jotham, the Son of Uzziah, (see the Note above, ver. 1.) unto the time
when the people were carried captives into Babylon by the Chaldeans, there were
just ten Kings, that swayed the Scepter of Judah, to wit, Jotham, Ahaz,
Hezekiah, Manasseh, Amon, Josiah, Jehoahaz, Jehojakim, Jehojachin, and
Zedekiah. But by the general current of Expositors it is far better understood
of a small remnant of the people, as it were one in ten, that should be left in
the land, according to a like expression, Amos 5.3. The city that went out by a
thousand, shall leave an hundred; and that which went forth by a hundred, shall
leave ten to the house of Israel. Lest the faithful should be too much dejected
at the mention of that utter devastation that should be made in the land, this
promise is annexed for their comfort, that the people should not be so
universally destroyed and rooted out, but that there should be a small remnant
of them left; which may be meant both of those few that were left in the land,
when the generality of the people were carried away captives into Babylon; or
of that remnant that should be brought back out of Babylon, and settled again in
their own land. And it may well be, that these are the rather called a tenth,
with respect to the reformation that should be wrought in those that were
reserved, or to Gods preserving the faithful amongst them from the common
destruction, thereby to imply that they should be, as indeed the tithes of the
land was, holy to the Lord, see the Notes, Chap. 4.2, 3.

And it shall return, and shall be eaten, etc.] Some read this, as it is in the
Margent of our Bibles, When it is returned and has been broused; and they take
the meaning of the words to be, that when that remnant should return out of
Babylon, that had been so miserably eaten and broused, cropped and destroyed,
both before and in the captivity, there should be but a tenth of them in
comparison of what they formerly were. But if we read the words as they are in
our Translation, then either no more is intended by this, It shall return, and
shall be eaten, then if it had been said, it shall be eaten again; meaning,
that this remnant should be again wasted. For this is an Hebraism frequent in
the Scripture, as in Dan. 9.25. the street shall return and be built, for the
street shall be built again.) Or else the meaning must needs be, that after the
return of this remnant, this tenth, out of Babylon, even they should be much
wasted and consumed; which was often done by the rage of their enemies against
them after their return from the Babylonian captivity. As a teil-tree, and as
an oak whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves; so the holy
seed shall be the substance thereof: That is, as when these trees do cast their
leaves in winter, and so seem to be in a manner quite dead for the time, yet
there is a lively sap remaining in the root or body of the trees, which keeps
them alive, and so is the substance or subsistence of them, by reason whereof
in the spring they sprout out again; so when my people shall seem to be utterly
wasted and destroyed, yet there shall be a small remnant left, a holy seed (see
the Note, Chap. 1.9.) a seed of Saints, which shall be as the life, and the
substance and subsistence of this people, by reason of whom this my Church and
people shall be continued in all succeeding times, so that they shall never be
utterly raced out and destroyed. Some think the teil-tree (or, line-tree) and
the oak, are here particularly instanced in, because these trees, buding forth
later in the spring than other trees, are longer ere they lose their leaves in
the Autumn, and so were fitter to represent the Kingdom of Judah, which
continued in a safe condition after the people of the Ten Tribes were carried
away. But I rather think, that because the teil-tree, by reason of its
spreading branches, and exceeding florid beauty, and the oak being a strong
tree, deeply rooted in the earth, and usually very long lived, seem most unlike
to become as dead in winter, therefore they are chosen to set forth the ruin of
the State and Kingdom of Judah, which by reason of her prosperous and
flourishing condition, seemed most unlike to be brought so low. Or rather,
because the Church and people of God, when they came to spring up again, should
like these trees spread forth their boughs and branches very far. But see the
Note also, Chap. 1.30.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of
Uzziah, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 6.1. This Ahaz (whose father and grandfather
Jotham and Uzziah are here mentioned, because under these, and these only
Isaiah had hitherto Prophesied) was one of the most wicked Kings of Judah; yet
in his reign the Prophet Isaiah was sent with many comfortable Prophesies to
him, and to the people, for the support and eneouragement of the faithful (as
we may well think) in those evil times; amongst which this is one which is here
related; the occasion whereof is said to be, that Rezin King of Syria, and
Pekah the son of Remaliah, King of Israel, (Nations that were usually at great
enmity one against another) went up toward Jerusalem to war against it; for
being encouraged by the successful invasions they had already made upon the
land of Judah, each of them severally by their own forces, wherein they had
slain many of their great ones that were a chief stay and support of their
State, and huge multitudes of the flower of the people besides, they assured
themselves, that if they now joined their forces together, they should easily
subdue this disheartened broken people, and thereupon resolved to go up
together and besiege Jerusalem; which accordingly they did, chuckering
themselves no doubt with hope of a full conquest, and the huge spoil they
should carry away from Jerusalem; (concerning all which see the Notes, 2 King.
16.5.) but could not prevail against it; which is premised beforehand, to hint
how causless those their fears were, which are here afterward related, and how
base their incredulity was, and neglect of God.

Ver. 2. And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with
Ephraim, etc. That is, tidings were brought to the Court of Judah, to Ahaz the
King, who was of the lineage of David, and to the other Princes and Officers of
his Court and State, that the Syrians and the Israelites of the Ten Tribes, who
are here called Ephraim, (for which see the Note, Psalm. 78.9.) had made a
confederacy together against Jerusalem. But why is this expressed thus, that it
was told the house of David, and not that tidings were brought to Ahaz, or to
the House or Court of Ahaz? I answer, that probably we may think it was, either
1. To hint the reason why this confederacy against Ahaz should come to nothing,
namely, because he was the lawful heir of the Crown, being descended from
David, and God would make good his promise to David concerning the perpetuity
of his Kingdom, see the Note, 2 Samuel 7.16. Or else, (as some think) to imply
how far Ahaz was degenerated from the courage of David, and other his holy
ancestors, as was discovered in that base fear of his at this time, which is
related in the following words, and his heart was moved, and the heart of his
people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind; that is, as the
leaves of trees will quiver and shake with the first breathing of the wind,
when a tempest is rising, so did their hearts tremble and shake (as we use to
say, like an aspin leaf), at the first breath of that report that was brought
to them, concerning the preparations that were made against them by these two
Kings; all which is expressed, to show that the deliverance of this people at
this time was only of God, or to set forth the wonder of the deliverance, where
both Princes and people were so faint-hearted that they were no way able to
make any resistance against the mighty forces that were breaking in upon them.

Ver. 3. Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, etc.] Though Ahaz sought not to God or
his Prophets for help or counsel, yet he sent his Prophet to him, with a
message that he would deliver him and his people from the danger they were in,
1. To magnify the riches of his long-suffering and mercy toward the worst of
men. 2. To render Ahab and his people the more inexcusable. And, 3. for the
support and comfort of the faithful that were amongst them. Go forth now, to
wit, out of the city, as appears by that which follows, to meet Ahaz; he was
sent to Ahaz, both in regard of the greatness of his terrors, and in regard the
care of providing for the public safety lay chiefly upon him. Nor was he to
stay till the King came back to the City, but to go forth to meet him, both to
express that respect and reverence which was due to him as King, and because
this was suitable for him that had such good tidings to carry to the King. And
as for that command that is given the Prophet for carrying his Son along with
him, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou and Shear-jashab thy Son, we must know, 1.
That Shear-jashab is, being interpreted, the remnant shall return. 2. That this
name had been before given to this Son of the Prophet, either by the express
command of God, or by the secret instinct of Gods Spirit, purposely as a sign,
either, 1. of a remnant that should return from the Babylonian captivity, which
the Prophets did often foretell. (See the Notes before, Chap. 6.13.) Or, 2. of
a remnant that should repent and return unto God, from whom they had departed,
after Sennacheribs army was destroyed before Jerusalem, according to that
express place, Chap. 10.21. The remnant shall return, even the remnant of
Jacob, unto the mighty God, for which see the Note there. And indeed many of
those that returned out of Babylon, were such as had been purged and reformed
by their afflictions, and brought home unto God. See the Notes, Chap. 4.2, 3.
and 6.13. And 3ly, that the Prophet was enjoined to take this his Son
Shear-jashab along with him, that he might stand by as a visible sign of the
deliverance now promised, and of the ground of it, to wit, Gods purpose still
to preserve a remnant in this people, that, should be as a holy seed for the
perpetuating of the Church in future times. See the Notes, Chap. 1.9. and 6.13.
and upon the 15 and 16 verses of this Chapter. And hence it seems probable,
that the reason why this name Shear-jashab was given to this Prophets Son, was
commonly known; for else his going along with his father to the King would have
been to no purpose at all. And then for the place whither the Prophet is sent
to meet Ahaz, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway (or,
causey-way) of the fullers field; this is thus particularly expressed both to
clear the certainty of the story, and to assure the Prophet of the certainty of
this Prophecy. We read of two Pools that were in Jerusalem, the one called the
lower Pool, we find mentioned, Chap. 22.9. Ye gathered together the waters of
the lower pool, because it lay on the west side of the lower City; and another
called the upper pool, made for the receiving and retaining of the waters that
came from the fountain of Gihon, and situate on the south side of the upper
City, the same as some think, that is elsewhere called the pool of Sil^ah,
Joh. 9.8. and which is said to have been nigh to the Kings garden, Neh. 3.15.
And this is that Pool which is here meant; from whence (it seems) there was a
fair way that led to the fullers field, (which no doubt they had chosen,
because the waters of this Pool lay conveniently for the washing and whiting of
their linen) and here it was that the Prophet was directed to meet with Ahaz;
and observable it is, that it was the very same place where afterward
Sennachenibs Captains that were sent by him to besiege Jerusalem, made a stand,
and summoned Hezekiah to deliver up the City; for so it is said, 2 King. 18.17.
They came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is in the highway
of the fullers field. What the cause was of Ahaz his being in this place, is
not expressed. Some think that hearing of these sad tidings in some place,
whither he had removed his Court out of the City, he was now coming to shelter
and secure himself in this his chief City; and so the Prophet was sent forth to
meet him there, and to comfort him with a promise from God concerning the
deliverance of Jerusalem, that he might not farther dishearten the people by
coming in such a fright into the City. But then again others conceive, that he
was gone thither, or come thither from some place abroad, that he might consult
about the fortifying of that place, either because they feared it might be a
place of advantage for the enemy whereby to enter the City, or because it was a
matter of so great consequence to secure the waters of this Pool for the use of
the City when it should be besieged, and so the Prophet was sent thither, as it
were, to tell them in the midst of these their consultations, that the Lord
whom they minded not, would be instead of fortifications to the City, and would
secure it from the enemy, though they were not able to do it. And this indeed
seems most probable, because Rabshakeh, when he went to besiege Jerusalem, did
make his first approaches to the City at this place, 2 King. 18.17. and at that
time Hezekiah had taken all the care he could to secure these waters, 2 Chronicles.
32.3, 4.

Ver. 4. And say unto him, take heed and be quiet, etc.] That is, take heed of
being thus unquiet and restless in thy mind as thou art; beware of all
distrust, and distrustful fears; be not disturbed and distracted, but be of a
quiet composed mind, trusting in God; look not after help from the Assyrian, or
any other foreign aid, but rely wholly upon Gods protection, and his blessing
upon thine own forces. And this last we may the more probably think was here
intended, because it is expressly said, 2 King. 16.7. that Ahaz did immediately
after the invasion of these two Kings, send to Tiglath-pileser King of Assyria
for aid, and therefore it may well be that he had this already in his thoughts,
Fear not, neither be faint-hearted (it is in the Hebrew, Let not thine heart be
tender, that is, soft and apt to take an impression of fear) for the two tails
of these smoking firebrarnds; so he calls these two Kings and their forces, of
whom Ahaz and his people were so exceedingly afraid, by way of contempt and
scorn. He terms them firebrarnds, because indeed they were coming out against
him with such fury and seeming terror, as if they meant to set all the land on
a light flame, and with fire and sword to consume all before them. But withal
he calls them only tails of firebrarnds; which might well be both with respect
to what had formerly befallen these Kings (for indeed their power had been of
late already much wasted, the Syrians by three great victories which Joash the
King of Israel obtained over them, 2 King. 13.25. and the Israelites by their
own Civil Wars and Conspiracies, 2 King. 15.10) and likewise with respect to
the approaching ruin of both their Kingdoms; for it was not long e're Pekah was
slain by Hoshea, 2 King. 15.30. and both the Kingdoms of Syria and Israel were
utterly destroyed by the Assyrians, so that in this regard they might well be
compared to the ends or tails of two firebrarnds, their dominion and tyranny
not being like to last long. Yea, he terms them not burning, but smoking
firebrarnds, and that to imply, that though they might be a great vexation to
them (as smoke is to the eyes), and a great terror and affrightment, yet there
should be more pride and terror in them, than strength and power for the
effecting of the mischief they intended; which yet must be understood with
respect to their great design of taking Jerusalem, and the utter subverting of
the Kingdom of Judah; for otherwise we find, that when they raised the siege of
Jerusalem, and went away, the Syrians did make much spoil in other parts of the
land. And to the same purpose is the following Clause, where he calls Pekah (by
way also of contempt, because his father was an obscure private person) the son
of Remaliah; for the fierce anger of Rezin, with Syria, and of the son of
Remaliah.

Ver. 5. Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, etc.] Even this also
is spoken by way of contempt: He vouchsafes not so much as to name these two
Kings, by the report of whose confederacy they were so exceedingly terrified,
but terms them the Syrian, and the son of Remaliah (See the foregoing Note)
have taken evil counsel against thee, that is, most unjust, wicked and
mischievous counsel, tending to the utter ruin of Gods people, and the utter
extirpation of the Kingdom of Judah, the race and Royal power of David's family;
which is the rather mentioned (together with that confident resolution of
theirs related in the following verse), because all this tended the more to set
forth their great danger, and so the mercy of the now promised deliverance.

Ver. 6. Let us go up against Judah, etc.] That is, against the Land or Kingdom
of Judah. And vex it, to wit, by invading and spoiling the land, and by
besieging their chief City, Jerusalem. And let us make a breach therein for us,
that is, let us violently break in upon it, or thorough it, and surprise it,
and make it ours. Yet some think, that because the great design which they had
in their thoughts, was the besieging of Jerusalem, therefore the breach here
intended was the making a breach in the walls thereof, at which they might
enter and take the City; and others understand it of making a breach or
division amongst the inhabitants of the land or City; that being likely to tend
much to their advantage; and others of dividing the land betwixt them, each of
them taking that part which lay most convenient for them. But the first
Exposition I conceive is the best, and most agreeable to that which follows,
Let us make a breach therein for us, and set a King in the midst of it, even
the son of Tabeal; for this man they intended doubtless to set up as a Viceroy,
or a Tributary-King over the land, and one that should hold the Kingdom of
them, and be wholly at their disposing. But now who this son of Tabeal was, is
altogether uncertain; that which is said by some of his being a Syrian, and by
others of being some eminent man of the Israelites, that was a known enemy to
the house of David, are but mere conjectures. But see the foregoing Note.

Ver. 7. Thus says the Lord God, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to
pass.] That is, Though they have with such proud and bold confidence resolved
before hand, that they will thus dispose the Kingdom of Judah, and subject it
to themselves, yet this which they have thus determined shall not take effect
and be established, as they have determined it shall be. So far shall they be
from making the Kingdom of Judah theirs, as they have resolved, that they shall
not be able to effect that which they have determined concerning their taking
of the City Jerusalem; all they attempt herein, shall come to nothing.

Ver. 8. For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin.]
As if he had said, Damascus is the Metropolis or head-city of Syria, and Rezin
is the King and Head of Damascus; these are the bounds which God has set them,
and beyond these bounds they shall not extend their power. The design they have
in hand for the enlarging of their Dominions shall not prosper. Neither shall
Damascus become the head of Judea, by having dominion over that land; nor shall
Rezin become King of Jerusalem, as he makes account to be; but Judah and
Jerusalem shall continue under the Government under which God has set them.
And indeed most fully was this made good within a short time, when the
Assyrian, called into the help of Ahaz, took Damascus, and carried the people
of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin, 2 King. 16.9.

And within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken; that it be not a
people.] That is, And the people of Ephraim, the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes,
shall be within threescore and five years so broken in pieces, notwithstanding
their great confidence in their present confederacy with Rezin, and his
Syrians, that they shall no longer be a people, that is, a distinct State and
people, living apart by themselves, in their own land, and under their own Laws
and Princes, and Government. But now the great question is, how these
threescore and five years must be reckoned, after which the Israelites were to
cease to be a people; and that because the taking of Samaria by Shalmaneser
King of Assyria, and his carrying away of the Ten Tribes out of their native
Country into his own dominions, was in the ninth year of Hoshea, which was the
sixth of Hezekiah. See the Notes, 2 King. 17.5, 6. Now if we account from the
beginning of Ahaz his reign to that Captivity of the Israelites, that makes in
all but two and twenty years; for Ahaz reigned in all but sixteen years, 2
King. 16.2. to which adding the six years of Hezekiah his son (in whose sixth
year this great calamity befell the Ten Tribes) the whole amounts (I say) to no
more than two and twenty years. And yet because the Kings of Syria and Israel
had before this severally invaded the land of Judah in Ahaz his time (as is
noted before, ver. 1.) therefore it is most probable that Isaiah Prophesied
this in the third year of Ahaz; and then from thence to Shalmanesers carrying
away the Israelites captive, there could be no more than about twenty years.
The most ordinary answer that is given by Expositors for the resolving of this
hard question is, that these threescore and five years are to be numbered, not
from the time when Isaiah spoke these words, but from the time when the Prophet
Amos did first foretell this utter destruction of the land and people of
Israel, which that he did very expressly is evident in many places of his
Prophecy. And indeed it is clear that Amos began to Prophecy two years before
the Earthquake in the days of Uzziah, Amos 1.1. (of which there is also mention
made, Zach. 14.5. Ye shall flee like as ye fled from before the Earthquake in
the days of Uzziah.) Now if this Earthquake was in the seven and twentieth year
of Uzziah's reign, as the Jewish Writers affirm it was, just about the time
when Uzziah was smitten with a leprosy; then it follows that Amos began to
Prophecy in the five and twentieth year of Uzziah; from whence if we begin the
account of the time prefixed by Amos for the utter ruin of Israel, there will
be seven and twenty years left behind of the reign of Uzziah (for he reigned in
all two and fifty years, 2 King. 15.2.) To which if we add the sixteen years of
his Son Jothams reign, 2 King. 15.33. and the sixteen of Ahaz, 2 King. 16.2.
and six of Hezekiah (in the sixth year of whose reign Samaria was taken by the
Assyrians, 2 King. 18.10.) these make in all just threescore and five years.
Yea, and the same account of years they make up also by reckoning the years of
the Kings of Israel; for Amos, they say, began to Prophecy in the seventeenth
year of Jeroboam the second, who reigned in all forty and one years, 2 King.
14.23. and if so, then he reigned four and twenty years after Amos Prophesied
the Captivity of Israel; to which adding the ten years of Menahems reign, 2
King. 15.17. (not accounting the short reigns of Zachariah and Shallum, which
made up together but seven months) and the two years of Pekahiah, 2 King.
15.23. and the twenty years of Pekah, 2 King. 15.27. and the nine years of
Hoshea, in whose ninth year Samaria was taken by the Assyrians, 2 King. 17.6.
this also makes just threescore and five years.

And whereas it may seem strange that Isaiah should speak of the destruction of
the Israelites after threescore and five years, only because Amos Prophesied of
their destruction so many years before it came to pass; to this it is answered,
that Amos did not only foretell this ruin that should come upon the Kingdom and
people of the Ten Tribes, but did also prefix the time when it should be,
namely after threescore and five years, which hereupon passing by tradition
from one to another, was common in men's mouths, and was often mentioned by the
succeeding Prophets, as the period appointed by God to the Kingdom of Israel,
and that so it is mentioned here by the Prophet Isaiah, as if he had said, that
within that threescore and five years, which were so long since foretold, and
were so commonly spoken of, Ephraim should be so broken that they should no
longer be a people. And indeed could this be made out, a very observable
aggravation this would have been of Pekah, and his Israelites bold profaneness
and contempt of Gods Prophets, that after so fair a warning given so long
before, wherein the time was expressly mentioned when they should cease to be a
people, they should be so far from fearing the threatened ruin, that they should
with so much confidence undertake a design for the swallowing up of the Kingdom
of Judah. But the truth is, that this computation of the threescore and five
years here mentioned, is built upon mere uncertain conjectures: as, 1. That
Amos did foretell that the Israelites should be carried away captives within
threescore and five years, of which there is no mention at all in his Prophecy.
And, 2. that the great Earthquake, two years before which Amos begun to
Prophecy, was in the seven and twentieth year of Uzziahs reign, which can be no
way made out from the Scripture. Or, 3ly, that this was just at the time when
Uzziah was smitten with a leprosy. And, 4. that Amos began to Prophecy in the
seventeenth year of Jerobeam the second. And indeed neither of these two last
assertions can agree with the Chronology of the Scripture. For, 1. if Uzziah
reigned but five and twenty (or seven and twenty) years, after he was smitten
with leprosy, then was Jotham his son born about the time when he was so
smitten (for he was five and twenty years when his father died, 2 King. 15.32,
33.) and how could that be, seeing it is expressly said, that Uzziah being upon
this occasion sequestered from the Government, Jotham the Kings son was over the
house, judging the people of the land. See the Note, 2 King. 15.5. And for the
second, of Amos beginning to Prophecy in the seventeenth year of Jeroboam the
second, if Uzziah began to reign in the seven and twentieth year of Jeroboam,
as it is said, 2 King. 15.11. then by that acccount Amos should have begun to
Prophecy ten years before Uzziah began to reign, which is contrary to what is
expressly said, Amos 1.1. whereby it is apparent that this way of accounting
these sixty and five years, cannot be justified. There is therefore another
answer given by others to this great question, which is, that this breaking of
the Israelites, whereof the Prophet here speaks, was not that when the main
body of the Israelites were carried away captives by Shalmaneser, in the ninth
year of Hoshea, 2 King. 17.6. which was indeed but two and twenty years after
this Prophecy of Isaiah (for there were then many of the Israelites left behind
in the land of Israel, who continued still to be a people by themselves, though
very much weakened and broken) but that when Ezar-hadden, the son of
Shalmaneser, 2 King. 19.37. did sweep away all those whom his father had left
behind, and carried them away captives into his own Countries, placing a fuller
Colony of other Nations in their room. See Ezra 4.2. at which time they were
indeed utterly broken from being a people. Now that this was threescore and
five years after this Prophecy of Isaiah they make out thus. Taking it for
granted that Isaiah Prophesied this about the third year of Ahaz, there were
thirteen years after this of Ahaz his reign, 2 King 10.2. to which if we add
the twenty and nine years of Hezekiahs reign, 2 King. 18.2. then if the
remainder of the Israelites were carried away by Ezar-b^^don in the three and
twentieth year of Manasseh (as it may be probably thought, because about that
time the Assyrians did invade the land of Israel, and carried away Manasseh
himself captive into Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 33.11.) this makes up just threescore
and five years. And indeed this computation of these years, and exposition of
this place, is by latest Expositors best approved.

Ver. 9. And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is
Remaliahs son.] This must be understood, as the like expression was in the
foregoing verse concerning Damascus and Rezin; to wit, that Samaria (concerning
which see the Note, 1 King. 16.24.) was the head-city of the kingdom of Israel,
but should never come to be the Metropolis of Judea, and that Pekah was the
King of Samaria, but should never be the King of Jerusalem, or have power to
dispose of the Kingdom of Judea, as they had designed. Yet by subjoining this
to that which was said immediately before in the close of the foregoing verse
concerning the destruction of the Israelites, it may seem to imply, that
Samaria and Pekah, Remaliahs son, should be so far from having any dominion
over Jerusalem, that they both should, together with the people of Israel, be
ruined and destroyed, which indeed came accordingly to pass; for within a year,
or there-about, Pekah was slain by Hoshea. See the Note, 2 King. 15.30. and in
Hoshea's reign Samaria was taken by the Assyrians, 2 King. 18.9, 10.

If ye will not believe, etc.] Some read it, as it is in the Margent, Do ye not
believe? It is because ye are not stable, to wit, in the faith, or in the
Covenant, whereof you make profession, in that you profess your selves to be
Gods peculiar people. As if he had said, If you believe not this promise
concerning your deliverance from these two Kings that have conspired against
you, and thereupon will seek to secure your selves elsewhere, by sending to the
Assyrian for help (as it is clear Ahaz at this time did, 2 King. 16.7.) this is
because you are not steadfast and stable in resting and relying upon God, as you
ought to do, and so are overborn with these distrustful fears. You have cast
off God, and so do not put confidence in his help, and this is the reason why
you regard not this promise. But I conceive the words are best translated as
they are in our Bibles, If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established; that is, If you will not give credit to this message which I have
brought you, and rely upon this deliverance, which from God I have promised
you, you shall never be settled in your minds against these terrors and fears,
or rather you shall not prosper in any design you take in hand for the securing
and establishing of your selves; you shall not be settled in your present state
and condition, but shall e're long be ruined and destroyed. It seems the
Prophet perceived Ahaz, and his Nobles, and servants with him, still to
continue in great perplexity and fear, and thereupon he added these words, If
ye will not believe, sur^ly ye shall not be established; which are fully to the
same effect with that which Jehoshaphat said to the people, 2 Chronicles. 20.20.
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established; believe his
Prophets, so shall ye prosper.

Ver. 10. Moreover the Lord spoke again unto Ahaz, saying.] To wit, by the
Prophet Isaiah; who, when he saw that Ahaz answered nothing, as not regarding
the promise he had made him, and that he and those that were him, were still in
as great an afrightment as they were, he thereupon no doubt by the special
guidance of Gods Spirit, takes occasion to add that which follows.

Ver. 11. Ask thee a sign, etc.] As if he had said, I perceive thou believe
not that which I have said to thee, concerning the deliverance of Jerusalem
from these two Kings that are combined against it; but that thou may know
that I have spoken nothing without a Commission from God, ask thee a sign of
the Lord thy God; that is, I leave it to thy free choice for thy farther
satisfaction, to demand any thing to be done, which thou know none but God
Almighty can do, as a sign to bear witness to the truth of that which I have
spoken, and it shall be done for thee; ask it, either in the depth, or in the
height above; that is, either on the earth beneath, or in the Heaven above. And
observable it is, that in proffering this to Ahaz, he added those words (thy
God), Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God, that is, who by external Covenant is
the only God of Israel, and whom thou do indeed profess to be thy God; for he
did hereby covertly tax him for his Apostasy to his Idol-gods. But indeed that
which is most considerable is, 1. The wonderful indulgence of God to this
wicked wretch, in making him such a proffer for the strengthening of his faith,
(concerning which see the foregoing Note, ver. 3.) And, 2. how clearly the
Prophet did hereby discover that he spoke nothing to him, but by sure and
unquestionable warrant from God Almighty.

Ver. 12. But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.] Some
take this as spoken by way of indignation; as if Ahaz had said, I do not
believe the promise which you have made me, as you pretend from God; nor will I
be so foolish as to rely upon any such promise in so great a danger as this is;
but am resolved to provide for my safety, and the safety of my Kingdom and
people some other way, and therefore I will not make any trial what God will
do, by asking any such sign, as you advise me to ask. To what end should I do
so, being resolved not to rely on God, or any miracle that can be wrought? And
indeed it is clear, that at this time he was contriving to call in the King of
Assyria to his help. See the Note, 2 King. 16.7. But we do not usually call
this making a trial whether God will work such a wonder, a tempting of God; and
it is hardly to be thought that Ahaz would so openly renounce God. Others
therefore do better understand it, as a refusal to ask any sign, either one or
other, under a pretense that he was content and satisfied with the promise
which God had made, and was afraid to sin by tempting God, (concerning which
see the Notes, Deuteronomy. 6.16. and Exodus 17.2.) whereby he did covertly also cast
an imputation upon the Prophet, in that he had advised him to do that which was
contrary to Gods express command. But yet doubtless he did but hypocritically
make this a pretense; and the true reason why he refused the sign proffered
him, was not any religious fear of offending God, but because he believed not
the Prophet, and was however determined to seek help elsewhere. Or perhaps,
because he was not willing that God and the true Religion should be honored
(to the reproach of his Idol-gods) by any such miracle, if it should come to
pass as the Prophet had promised; or else merely because he would to the
Prophet in this his danger make a show of fearing God; whereby he did only add
to his sin, seeking hypocritically to cover his disobedience and ingratitude,
by pretending that which was not in his heart.

Ver. 13. And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David, etc.] See the Note above,
ver. 2. By this Preface the Prophet rouzeth up Ahaz and all that were with him,
seriously to weigh the weightiness of that which he intended now to say to
them. But withal by terming them the house of David, he did covertly upbraid
them for their being so far degenerated as they were, from the faith and piety
of him, of whose family they boasted themselves to be: Is it a small thing for
you to weary men? but will you weary my God also? that is, Is it not enough for
you that you vex and disquiet men, to wit, the people of God in general, by
your oppressions and persecutions; or rather more particularly me and other the
Prophets of God, by slighting what we say, by injuring and persecuting us as
poor contemptible men, but that you will needs also vex and disquiet God, to
wit, by despising the grace proffered in the sign tendered you, whereby he
intended to glorify himself (and that the more wickedly too by doing it under
a pretense of piety), and so consequently by distrusting whether God will do,
or be able to do what he has prossered and promised to do? Some understand
these words as only implying this aggravation of their sin in despising the
sign tendered them by the Prophet, to wit, that the dishonor herein cast upon
the Prophet, redounded to the dishonor and reproach of God himself, whose
servant he was; for which see the Note, Numb. 16.11. But I rather think that
this is not spoken of their despising God by despising his servant the Prophet,
but of an affront offered immediately to God himself (above that which was
offered him in his servant the Prophet), to wit, that they resolved not to rest
upon Gods help, but to seek to secure themselves by craving aid from the
Assyrians. But however observable it is, that in pressing this, he uses that
expression of my God, Will ye weary my God also? for hereby he implied that he
had spoken nothing but as Gods messenger or Minister, and by commission from
him, and that it was upon account of that special relation which he had to God,
that he was so tenderly sensible of the great wrong they had now done to him.

Ver. 14. Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, etc.] That is,
seeing you despise, or because you despise and reject this great mercy and
grace which God was pleased to tender you, of giving you whatever sign you
would ask, for the confirming of the promise he had made you, therefore the
Lord himself will of his own accord, notwithstanding this your infidelity and
contempt, and without your will or desire, give you a sign (see the foregoing
Note, ver. 3.) and that indeed far more strange, wonderful and miraculous than
any you could have asked, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son; which
doubtless was meant of our Savior Jesus Christ, as is clearly affirmed by the
Evangelist St. Matthew, Chap. 1.22, 23. where having related how the Angel made
known to Joseph, that the Virgin Mary his espoused Wife was conceived with
child by the Holy Ghost, and should bring forth a Son, whose name should be
Jesus, he adds, Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Behold a Virgin shall be with child,
and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call (or, his name shall be called)
Emmanuel; which no way differs from that which is said here, that he should be
called so by his Virgin Mother, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son,
and shall call his name Immanuel. Or, Thou, O Virgin, shall call his name
Immanuel. For the Prophets meaning was not, that this name should be given unto
Christ, either by his Mother, or any body else, as a name whereby he should be
ordinarily called, (for at his Circumcision by the foreappointment of the
Angel, his name was called Jesus, Luke 2.21.) but that he should be, and should
both by his Mother and others be owned to be Immanuel, that is, God with us,
Mat. 1.23. and that not only because he was both God and Man, the Godhead and
Manhood being in him Personally united together, according to that of the
Apostle, Col. 2.9. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; but
also because by him there was a perfect reconcilement made between God and us,
2 Cor. 5.19. And indeed frequently in the Scripture it is said of Persons and
places, that they should be called by such or such a name, when the meaning is
not, that men in speaking to them, or of them, should give them that name, but
only that that which was signified by those names, should be in them so exactly
accomplished, that they might be in that regard most fitly and deservedly
called by those names. See the Note, Chap. 1.26. so we find it said upon this
account concerning Solomon, that his name should be Jedidiah, 2 Samuel 12.25. and
yet we do not read that he was ever ordinarily called by that name. And the
like may be said concerning those names given to Pashur, Jer. 20.3. and to
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 48.35. and to our Savior himself, Chap. 9.6. and Jer. 23.6.
And therefore I conceive it is not to be questioned but that the same is
intended here, in saying that the Son of the Virgin Mary should be called
Immanuel, namely, that he should be true Immanuel, God with us. And yet
notwithstanding I would not deny what I find affirmed by many learned men, that
by expressing this in those words, that his Virgin Mother should call his name
Immanuel, there might be a covert intimation of that great mystery, that
because he had no father upon earth, therefore it is said that he should be so
called by his Virgin Mother. But now the great question is, How this
supernatural conception and birth of our Savior Christ, can be fairly
maintained to be indeed that sign which is here foretold by the Prophet? The
Jews deny this with much confidence, but with little or no color of truth:
For, 1. whereas they say, that the Hebrew word which we translate a Virgin,
does properly signify any young Damsel, Virgin or other, married or unmarried,
of this they are not able to give us any one instance, where the word is so
used in the whole Scripture. And besides, what an absurdity is it to think,
that the birth of any child conceived and born in an ordinary way, should be
here foretold by the Prophet as such a strange miraculous sign? And, 2. whereas
they affirm, that this Son, whose conception and birth is here foretold, was
Hezekiah the son of Ahaz, (for so some of them say) and that of him it is said
that his name should be called Immanuel, because in his days God was with them
indeed in an eminent manner, when he delivered them so miraculously from the
mighty army of the Assyrians, that had besieged Jerusalem; or else a Son which
the Prophets wife bare him, whose name was indeed called Immanuel, as by way of
prediction, that God would be with them to deliver them from the intended
Invasion of the Israelites, and Syrians; neither of these can be maintained
with any probability of reason. For, 1. If Hezekiah was twenty and five years
old when he began to reign, as it is said he was, 2 King. 18.2. then sixteen
years before that, which was in the beginning of his father Ahaz his reign,
(for he reigned in all but sixteen years, 2 King. 16.2.) he must needs be about
nine years old; and how then could he be the Son, whose conception and birth
was here foretold to Ahaz? And, 2. for that which they say that the Prophets
wife had three Sons, who had all names given them by Gods appointment, as by
way of Prophetical foretelling things to come, as namely, 1. Shear-jashab,
mentioned above, ver. 3. And, 2. Mahershalal-hash-baz, mentioned, Chap. 8.3.
And, 3. This Immanuel of whom the Prophet here speaks; for this last, that he
was to be conceived and born by the Prophets wife, (besides that they have no
Scripture-warrant for it, but merely their own conjecture) can no way consist
with that which is said, Chap. 8.8. for were this Immanuel to have been of no
higher descent, why should the Prophet there call the land of Judah his land,
in regard of his special interest in it, and dominion over it? and the
stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.
And, 3. however, neither any Son of the King, or of the Prophet, can be that
Immanuel that is here foretold, unless it can be maintained that his mother
was, both before and after his conception and birth, a pure Virgin. The most
plausible objection indeed that is made by the Jews against this great truth,
that this is a Prophecy of the conception and birth of out Savior Jesus Christ
of the Virgin Mary, is this: How that which was to come to pass so many ages
after, could be now given as a sign to those to whom the Prophet here spoke, to
confirm the promise made them of the deliverance of them, and the City
Jerusalem from the surprisal of those two potent Kings that were coming against
them, which the words indeed do plainly import? But to this it may be justly
answered, 1. That strange and wonderful things that are long after to come to
pass, may be foretold as signs for the confirming of some present promise
given, because the confident prediction of such things may be of force to raise
men's minds to the more hopeful expectation of that which is at present
promised. Two notable instances we have of this, Exodus 3.12. and 2 King. 19.29.
concerning which see the Notes there. It is indeed no more than as if he had
said, You question whether God can effect that deliverance which I have
promised you; but I will tell you therefore of a greater wonder that God will
certainly do, and that is a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Son,
without the knowledge or help of man, by whom there shall be a reconciliation
made betwixt God and men. 2. That the prediction of the miraculous conception
and birth of the Lord Christ, their promised Messiah, was the more proper and
seasonable at this time, because the certainty of the accomplishment of this
did imply the unquestionable preservation of David's Royal family, (from whence
this Son of the Virgin was to spring), which was the thing that Ahaz now
refused to believe. If Rezin and Pekah, or any other enemies, should be able to
cut off the family of David, what would then become of the promise of the
Messiah, that was to descend from that Royal stem? By giving him therefore this
sign of the supernatural conception and birth of their promised Messiah, the
seed of the woman, the Prophet did not only tell him that which was an
unquestionable ground whereon he might rely, against all fear of the ruin of
David's family; but he did also discover the root of his distrustful fears,
namely, that he did not indeed believe that fundamental promise concerning the
Messiah, nor that Covenant of Grace which God had made with his people, which
was established thereon, and that therefore it was no wonder though he were
continually shaken with such unbelieving fears. 3. That it is usual with the
Prophets upon this ground, when they are speaking of temporal deliverances and
mercies promised to Gods people, to pass on a sudden, as by a Prophetic
rapture, to make mention of the Messiah, in whom all the promises of God are
yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. who is therefore the foundation of all the hope and
consolation of Gods people, in regard of any mercy that God has promised them.
And, 4. that together with this prediction of the wonder of the conception and
birth of their promised Messiah, there seems to be another sign joined, ver.
16. (concerning which see the Note there), both tending to give them assurance,
that God would be with his people, in delivering them from those two Kings that
were coming against them, as he had before promised them.

Ver. 15. Butter and honey shall he eat, etc.] That is, this Immanuel before
mentioned, the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary, shall be fed with butter and
honey, such meats as young children do affect, and wherewith in this Country,
by reason of their plenty, they are usually much fed. That he may know to
refuse the evil and choose the good; that is, that he may grow up till he comes
to those years of discretion, that he will be able to discern between good and
evil; to wit, that which is naturally or morally good and evil, and so to choose
that which is desirable and commendable, and reject that which is hurtful and
blameworthy; which yet must be restrained to that weaker measure of knowledge
and discretion, which is usually found in little children, when first the
exercise of their reason and understanding begins to discover it self in them,
as we see where the same phrase is used, Deuteronomy. 1.39. Your children which in
that day had no knowledge between good and evil, they shall go in thither. So
that the drift of this verse is clearly to imply, that the Lord Christ, the Son
of the Virgin Mary, should be true and very man, nourished and brought up from
his infancy as other children are; and that he should be subject to the same
infirmities and weakness both of body and mind, that other children are subject
to; and should therefore grow up in strength and understanding by little and
little, as other children do, as it is expressly said that Christ did, Luke
2.52. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor both with God
and man. I know there are several learned men that understand this verse, not
of the Son of the Virgin mentioned in the foregoing verse, but of the Prophets
Son Shear-jashab, mentioned before ver. 3. and so they conceive this is added
to confirm the foregoing Prophecy, ver. 7, 8. concerning the deliverance of
Jerusalem, and David's house, from the combined forces of Rezin and Pekah, that
were joining together against them; as if the Prophet had said, Whereas these
two Kings have resolved to besiege and to take Jerusalem, so far shall they be
from effecting what they have designed, that this my child Shear-jashab (whom
by Gods command I have brought along with me as a sign to assure you of the
mercy promised, see the Note above, ver. 3.) shall be, notwithstanding this
their siege, fed and nourished, and brought up as safely and tenderly as other
young children use to be in times of greatest peace and plenty. But the words,
Butter and honey shall he eat, etc. do so plainly refer to that which went
before, ver. 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call
his name Immanuel, that I cannot see how it can, without manifest wresting the
words, be understood of any other than that Immanuel mentioned in the foregoing
verse.

Ver. 16. For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the
good, etc.] See the foregoing Note, The land that thou abhorrest, that is, the
land of Israel, against which thou bear such a deadly enmity for the
mischief they have done thee, and the great evil which they are now conspiring
to bring upon thee (or it may be meant both of the land of Israel, and the land
of Syria, collectively taken) shall be forsaken of both her Kings; that is, it
shall be bereaved of both her Kings, to wit, of Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah
King of Israel, that were now joined in a strict Confederacy against Judah,
both of them being cut off and destroyed; so that the meaning is, that these
Kings should be so far from effecting what they had designed, to wit, the
surprisal of Jerusalem, and the cutting off the Royal family of David, that
they themselves should be each of them slain and destroyed; concerning which
see the foregoing Notes, ver. 4, 7, 8, 9. But now the great question again is,
What child is here meant, concerning which it is said, Before the child shall
know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall
be forsaken of both her Kings? Many learned men that understand not only the
14. v. but the 15. also, Butter and honey shall he eat, etc. of the Lord
Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary, do yet understand this of any newborn
child; as if the Prophet had said, Before the child that is now newly born, or
is shortly to be born, shall grow up to years of discretion, both these Kings
that have now combined against thee, shall be destroyed. Now to prove that
these words (the child) may be understood indefinitely of any child, they
alledg another place, Chap. 3.5. where the Prophet uses the like indefinite
expression, The child shall be have himself proudly against the ancient. And
because it may justly seem strange that the Prophet having spoken in the
foregoing verses of the conception and birth, and education of Christ; and of
the last, with the very words here used, that he should eat butter and honey,
that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, and yet should now
presently speak of any child in general, now newly born, or shortly to be born,
and that under the same expression, For before the child shall know to refuse
the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of
both her Kings. To this they answer, that having in the foregoing verses
grounded the hope of their promised deliverance from Rezin and Pekah, upon a
promise of the supernatural conception, and birth, and education of their
Messiah, that was to spring from that Royal family of David, which these Kings
sought to destroy, he now shows the time when they should be delivered, to
wit, very shortly, before the child now newly born should grow up to have any
use of his reason and understanding. Again others, yea indeed the most of our
late and best Expositors understand this not of any child in general, but of
some particular child there present, or whose mother was present; and the most
pitch upon Shear-jashab, mentioned before, ver. 3. And so they say, that
whereas in the foregoing verses the Prophet had spoken of the conception and
birth of the Lord Christ the Messiah, here now he adds that sign which was
before tendered to Ahaz, to assure them of their present deliverance from the
Invasion of Rezin or Pekah. Because (say they) Ahaz might think that they might
happily be all destroyed before the birth of this Immanuel, which was now given
them as a sign of their approaching deliverance. To prevent this objection of
his, the Prophet assures him that they should be so far from preventing the
birth of this their Messiah, the Savior of his Church, long after to be bore,
by cutting off the house and family of David, the stock from whence he was to
spring, that before the child that was now newly born (suppose Shear-jashab,
that was there before him, or any other), should attain to any years of
discretion, both these Kings that were now combined to cut off the House of
David, should be destroyed; to wit, within three or four years. Which indeed
came to pass accordingly; for Rezin was slain by the Assyrians that came to
help Ahaz, 2 King. 16.9. and Pekah was slain not long after by Hoshea, as is
evident, because Pekah began his reign the two and fiftieth, the last year of
Uzziah, or Azariah, and reigned but twenty years, 2 King. 15.27. and
considering that sixteen of these twenty years he reigned together with Jotham
the Son of Uzziah, it must needs be that he was slain about the fourth year of
Ahaz the Son of Jotham. So that if Shear-jashab were at this time one or two
years old, it must needs be that Rezin and Pekah were slain before he attained
any great ability of discerning between good and evil. And the same may be said
of any other newborn child, or shortly to be born, that should be here
particularly intended.

But indeed, 1. Because it may well be thought, that if the Prophet had spoken
this of Shear-jashab, or any other particular child, he would have said, Before
(this) child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, etc.

And, 2ly, because the words do so clearly seem to have respect to that child
already spoken of in the two foregoing verses, and more especially to that v.
16. Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil and
choose the good, I cannot but think that this also is to be understood of the
Lord Christ, the Son of the Virgin, as well as the two foregoing verses. The
great objection against this is, how the Prophet could intend this to comfort
Ahaz against his fears concerning Rezin and Pekah, if his meaning had been,
that before Christ, that was to be conceived and born so many hundred years
after, should be able to discern between good and evil, the land which he
abhorred should be forsaken of both her Kings. But to this three answers are
given: first, (which indeed seems to me of all most improbable) that the
Prophet does not speak this of the death of Rezin and Pekah, but of the death
of one Obodas, King of Damascus, and of Herod King of Samaria, which was not
long after the birth of Christ. Secondly, that the drift of the Prophet is not
to show how suddenly, but how certainly Rezin and Pekah should be destroyed. As
fully resolved as they were to destroy the House of David from whence the
promised Messiah, the true Immanuel, was to spring, before this his miraculous
conception, and birth, and education, both these Kings should be destroyed. And
thirdly, That the meaning is only this, that within as short a space of time as
should be between the birth of this Immanuel, the child Jesus, and his being
grown up to the usual years of discretion, both these Kings that were now
preparing to make war against Ahaz should be cut off and destroyed. This I find
mentioned by the Dutch Annotations; and it seems to me the most satisfying
answer.

Ver. 17. The Lord shall bring upon thee and upon thy people, etc.] See the
Notes, Exodus 32.7. And upon thy fathers house; that is, the Royal family of
David, and especially his own posterity, days that have not come, from the day
that Ephraim departed from Judah; that is, such sad and evil times as never
befell the Kingdom of Judah since the first revolt of the Ten Tribes from them
in the days of Rehoboam, which is mentioned here as the saddest blow that ever
was given to the Kingdom of Judah, as being indeed a most deadly wound to that
people, and that which was the original cause of all their following wars and
miseries. Even the King of Assyria; as if he should have said, And these evil
days shall come upon you by the King of Assyria, by whom thou hopest to defend
thy self against these two Kings that are combined against thee; which I
conceive is meant of the successive Invasions of the Kings of Assyria, first
Tiglath-pileser, who sorely distressed Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.20. 2ly, Sennacherib,
who invaded the land of Judah in the days of Hezekiah, and brought them into
great straits, 2 King. 19.3. 3ly, Ezar-haddon, whose Captains took Manasseh and
carried him away into captivity, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. But, 4ly, and especially
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and of Assyria too, who utterly ruined the
State of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 36.17. The Prophet having hitherto sought to appease
the fears of Ahaz by assuring him of the approaching ruin of Rezin and Pekah,
here now he begins to threaten him with far greater evils, which should
notwithstanding come at last upon him, his family and people, for his great
wickedness, and particularly for his contempt of Gods grace at this time, his
infidelity, and calling in the King of Assyria to his help; telling him, that
though God would make good his promise for the deliverance of Jerusalem, and
the House of David, from these two Kings, yet he should have no great cause
long to triumph herein, and that because within a while for greater miseries
should befall him and his people, and that by those very (...) whom he intended
to call into his aid. And yet withal this might be foretold too, to fore-arm
the faithful, that their hearts might not sink, when they should see such
dreadful evils come upon the Nation.

Ver. 18. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall hiss,
etc.] See the Note, Chap. 5.26. for the fly that is in the utmost parts of the
rivers of Egypt; whereby some understand the Egyptians themselves, (and those
too in the farthest parts of it) that had their dwelling by those several
watercourse which were cut out of the river Nilus, for the watering of their
land; who they say are termed flies, not only with respect to their invading
the land of Judah with such huge multitudes of people like so many swarms of
flies; but also with respect to the situation of their Country, which lying
low, full of ponds and ditches, and being withal a very hot Country, was
usually much pestered with flies. And indeed we find that the land of Judah was
sorely oppressed by Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt, who flew Josiah their good
King, and afterward deposed his Son Jehoahaz, and carried him prisoner into
Egypt, and set up his brother in his stead, etc. See the Notes, 2 King. 23.29,
33. And again others understand those Nations that bordered upon Egypt, either
toward the Sea, where Nilus brancheth forth it self into several Channels,
(See Chap. 11.15.) or near the head of Nilus, which at its first entrance into
Egypt is cut out into many Channels, as namely, the Philistines, the Edomites,
the Lybians and Ethiopians; which they say was accomplished when the Edomites
and Philistines invaded Judah in the days of Ahaz; for which see the Note, 2
King. 16.7. Or when the Assyrian or Babylonian King did subdue the land,
because it is most probable that he having at that time vanquished Egypt, and
all those adjacent parts, did bring with him bands of all these Nations that
served in his army, for which see the Notes, 2 King. 24.2, 7. And then for the
following words, And for the Be that is in the land of Assyria; we must know
that the Assyrians, and Chaldeans (who are both here intended, as serving both
under one King), are compared to Bees, not only with respect to their
multitudes and fury (for which see the Notes, Deuteronomy. 1.44. and Psalm. 118.12.)
and to Chaldea's abounding with Bees, as being a woody Country, as much as
Egypt with flies, but also especially because these were far the more dreadful
Nations for their military power and discipline, and the exceeding great
cruelty they should show to the Jews, when they subdued their Country. Yea, and
some think that their arrows, and darts, and javelins, are particularly here
intended by the stings wherewith the Be is armed.

Ver. 19. And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate
valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all
bushes.] Or, as it is in the Margent, commendable trees, that is, goodly fair
trees. The Prophet proceeds in the foregoing metaphor, ver. 18. And because
flies and gnats do usually love to be, and are found in greatest abundance in
low moist grounds, and to rest upon trees, and bushes, and shrubs; and because
Bees love to harbor and nestle themselves in holes and clefts of rocks (see
the Notes, Deuteronomy. 32.19.) therefore in allusion hereto, he says of the
Assyrians, that they should rest in the desolate valleys, etc. And some
conceive that those words (all of them) are purposely inserted, And they shall
come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, to imply, that the
number of their army should not be diminished by the length of their march, or
any distress that should befall them by the way. See the Note, Chap. 5.27. But
however the meaning is, that the Assyrians being entered the land, should
overspread the whole Country, by reason of the multitude of their army, and
should seize upon and possess themselves of all places, high and low, fruitful
and barren, eating up and consuming all they could meet with in every corner of
the land, yea in the most desolate and uninhabited places; by reason whereof
too, there would be no place of shelter for the inhabitants; though they should
fly to the caves and most desolate valleys to hide themselves, it would be in
vain; for every where they should find the enemy ready to surprise them. Some
Expositors I know there are, that by the desolate valleys understand the Cities
in the valleys, which the inhabitants had out of fear forsaken; and by the
holes of the rocks, the Cities built on the rocky mountains; and by thorns and
bushes, the villages, wherein the Country People dwelt. But the foregoing
Exposition is, I conceive, far more clear and easy.

Ver. 20. In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired,
namely, by them beyond the river, etc.] To wit, Euphrates; see the Notes, Exodus
23.31. and Psalm. 72.8. by the King of Assyria; See the Note above, ver. 17. the
head, that is, the King; and the hair of the feet, that is, of the secret and
lower part of the body, (according to the like expression, Judge. 3.25. for
which see the Notes there, and 2 King. 18.27. where men's urine is in the
Original termed, the water of the feet), meaning the meaner sort of people; and
it shall also consume, that is, quite take away the beard; whereby some
understand the strong men in the land, (with respect to the beards being a sign
of virility); others the Nobles that usually are about the King; and others the
Priests, or the wise men and elders of the people. The devastation which the
Assyrians, and the Chaldeans especially, should make in the land of Judea, is
here expressed by shaving with a razor, 1. To imply that these enemies should
be only as an instrument in Gods hand for the executing of his just vengeance
upon that people, not able to move one jot any farther than God was pleased to
make use of them. 2. To imply the clean riddance they should make in the land,
both by cutting off the inhabitants, and the several ranks of men amongst them;
and likewise by their striping them of all the good of the land, every thing
that was of any worth or use, especially all that was the beauty and glory of
the State, and wherein the comeliness of the land lay. A razor makes quick and
clear dispatch where it comes, taking away all the hair to the very skin, and
not leaving any stumps behind, as it will be where the hair is cut with
scizzers. And so should the land of Judah on a sudden be le^t bare and naked by
these shavers the Assyrians. 3. To hint the hope that should be still left of
this peoples sprouting forth again in aftertimes, even as the roots of the hair
which are not plucked up in shaving, will in time grow forth again. And, 4.
perhaps also to imply the servitude whereinto they should be brought, because
slaves in those times used to be shaven, according to that which is said of the
Tyrians, with respect to Nebuchadnezzars carrying them into captivity, Every
head was made bald, Ezekiel. 29.18. Again, by a razor that is hired, some think
that nothing else is meant but a very sharp razor, and that because commonly
when men hire any thing for their money, they will have the best; and others
hold that this epethite is used to imply what thorough use God would make of
the Assyrians in wasting Judea, and destroying the people, (to wit, that they
should do it with all possible easiness and fury) even as men are wont not to
spare those things which they hire for their money. But methinks it is most
clear that the Assyrians are here compared to a razor that is hired, either
with respect to the Lords drawing them on to the invasion of that wealthy
Kingdom with the hope of the great spoil they should get there, as elsewhere it
is said that God gave the spoil of Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar, as his hire for the
great service he had done for God in destroying Tyrus, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19. or else
simply with respect to that rich present, or great sum of money wherewith Ahaz
hired Tiglath-pileser to come into his aid, 2 King. 16.7, 8. which seems the
more probable, because then the words imply a sharp intimation of Ahaz his
folly, in that the land it is said should be thus shaven with a razor, which
himself had hired. And if this be so, observable it is too, that the great
desolation that is here threatened must take in all the waste that was made by
the Assyrians in that land by Tiglath-pileser and others, as is noted before,
ver. 17. and not be limited only to that utter destruction, which was at last
brought upon them by the Chaldeans; though indeed the utter desolation here
threatened was never consummated till then, when they were indeed shaven from
top to toe; whence it is said, Lam. 1.10. The adversary has spread out his
hand upon all her pleasant things. And Jer. 8.16. They have devoured the land
and all that is in it. And Isa. 39.6. All shall be carried to Babylon, nothing
shall be left.

Ver. 21. And it shall come to pass in that day, etc.] In the remainder of this
Chapter the Prophet sets forth in what a sad desolate manner the land of Judea
should lie, after the Assyrians had made such havoc amongst the inhabitants,
partly by slaying them, and partly by carrying them into captivity, and after
they had so extremely plundered and pillaged the whole Country; and in what a
poor condition those should live that were left behind in the land. And it
shall come to pass in that day, that a man (that is, any man of those that are
left), shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep; the meaning is, that there
should be only a few here and there left in the land, and that those that were
left should live very meanly; they should not then join field to field as
formerly; even that man perhaps that had formerly kept great herds of kine and
oxen, and flocks of sheep, should now keep only one young heifer, and two
sheep, the whole substance he had reserved to himself, and glad he should be of
these too, to keep him and his alive in that miserable condition wherein they
were lest. And see the Note, 2 King. 25.12.

Ver. 22. And it shall come to pass for the abundance of milk they shall give,
he shall eat butter, etc.] The meaning is, that because there should be such
plenty of Pasture, there being so few cattle left in the land to eat it up,
this one cow and two sheep, should yield store and plenty of milk; and that
because the poor man that kept them should have so few in his family; and
besides there should be none in a manner about him to buy it of him, (so great
should be the desolation of the land by reason of the general depopulation
which the Assyrians had made therein) they should therefore have not only milk
enough and enough, but they should be able also to make plenty of Butter,
whereon they should feed also without sparing.

For butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land.] As if he
should have said, And indeed this ordinary common Country-fare, milk, and
butter, and honey, (to wit, such as was commonly found in the woods), shall be
the sole provision wherewith that poor remainder of people that are left in the
land should sustain themselves, and that because the land shall be so wasted
that flesh and corn, and wine and oil, which were formerly in great plenty
amongst them, should not be then to be had; a just punishment of their former
luxury. Yea, and because it is in the Original, every one that is left in the
midst of the land; some would have this to imply, that this scarcity and penury
should be in the best and most fruitful parts of the land, because all should
lie waste and desolate there, as well as in the barren mountains.

Ver. 23. And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place, etc.] In
these words we have a farther description how waste and desolate the land
should lie, and so also a reason why every one left in the land should live
upon such poor Country-fare, as was said in the foregoing verse, namely,
because the richest and most pleasant places in the land should lie desolate
and unfrequented, wholly overgrown with briers and thorns, every place shall be
where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall be even
for briers and thorns; that is, those places which were formerly esteemed the
most fruitful and delightful places in the land, where they had rich
corn-grounds, or rather gardens and olive-yards, and vineyards, shall then lie
like so many thickets of briers and thorns for want of Husbandmen to till, and
plant, and dress them. He instanceth therefore in vineyards only, because
therein they chiefly delighted; as if he had said, Those places (for instance)
where they had formerly the goodliest and most precious vineyards, vineyards
planted with the rarest and choicest vines, (a thousand such vines being worth
a thousand silverlings or pieces of silver; that is, as most interpreters take
it, a thousand shekels. See the Note, Cant. 8.11.) shall then become very
forests and deserts. And thus those spiritual briers and thorns which were
found in the people, Gods vineyard (see the Notes, Chap. 5.6.) were punished
with that horrid desolation, whereto their Country was exposed.

Ver. 24. With arrows and with bows shall men come thither, etc.] That is, If
the inhabitants have any occasion to go into those places where formerly they
had such rich vineyards, being now become like so many woods and thickets, they
must go armed with bow and arrows, to wit, to defend themselves from robbers
and wild beasts, that use to lie lurking in such places. And indeed the
overrunning of the land with wild beasts, when it should be laid desolate, is
a judgment wherewith Moses did long before threaten this people, Levit. 26.22.
Some, I know, understand this of men's going thither with bow and arrows to hunt
those wild beasts, that use for covert to haunt such places. But in describing
the sad condition of the land, it seems not so probable that such a passage
concerning hunting, which is an exercise of pleasure, should be inserted; the
drift of adding this passage is clearly, I conceive, to set forth how many
years the land should lie thus desolate, even till the briers in such places
were grown up to such a height, that they should become like so many woods and
forests for wild beasts to lurk in; which accordingly came to pass in the
Babylonian Captivity, by reason of the small number of the inhabitants that
were left in the land.

Because all the land shall become briers and thorns.] And so even their
Vineyards, and other the choicest and most pleasant places in the land, shall
lie desolate, and be turned into very wildernesses; the Lord hereby depriving
them of the plenty which they had formerly abused to drunkenness and luxury.

Ver. 25. And on all hills that shall be dug with the mattock, there shall
not come thither the fear of briers and thorns, etc.] This place is several
ways expounded by Interpreters. But there are only two Expositions that seem to
me to have any great probability in them, if we read the words, as they are
rendered in our Translation. The first is, that on all those hilly places that
should be curiously kept and dug for Vineyards, or Orchards and Gardens, by
the richer sort, either for their profit or pleasure, and fenced about with
hedges of thorns and briers, that so they might be secured from the breaking in
and biting of cattle, those thorny fences should be on every side so trodden
and broken down, and taken away, that there should be no fear of them to keep
beasts from entering in. But it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for
the treading of lesser cattle; that is, these curious grounds being thus laid
open, there shall be free entrance for all kind of cattle, as well great as
small, to feed and graze there at pleasure. And then the second is, (which to
me seems far the most probable) that whereas the lower grounds should be
overgrown with briers and thorns, as thick and as high as so many woods and
forests, as was said in the foregoing verses; on the contrary, upon the hills
and mountains, that formerly used to lie desolate, wholly overgrown with
briers and thorns, there should then be no fear of briers and thorns, and that
because those inhabitants that were left in the land should fly to these hills
and mountains for refuge, as being steep and high, and inaccessible places
(according to that Luke 21.21. Then let them which are in Judea flee to the
mountains), and so being there, should clear those places of briers and thorns
by stubbing them up with the mattock, and turn them into Pasture-ground for
their cattle to feed in; and so then the very treading of the cattle would
prevent the fear of the growing up of those thorns and briers any more.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. MOreover the Lord said unto me, etc.] Because the Prophecy in the
foregoing Chapter concerning the utter subversion of the Kingdoms of Syria and
Samaria might seem incredible, and was, as it is likely, but little regarded;
the Lord appeared again to the Prophet, and gave him this Prophecy in charge,
contained in the five following Chapters, in the beginning whereof the same
thing, though in other words, and by other ways, is again foretold; and that
too in a more public way; that which was before more privately made known to
Ahaz and his Courtiers, being here appointed to be written by the Prophet in a
great roll, and that no doubt purposely that it might be affixed on some Gate
of the Temple, or set up in some other public place, that so it might be
published abroad, and exposed to every man's view. And indeed observable it is,
that the particular direction here given for the setting forth of this Prophecy
thus to public view, is an argument that the Prophets were not wont to fix all
their Prophecies on the Temple-gate, as some have thought, (see the Note, Chap.
1.1.) but only when this was expressly enjoined them. Take thee a great roll,
and write in it with a man's pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz; which is the
very name that the Prophet was afterward enjoined to give to his newborn Son,
verse. 3. which is, being interpreted, as it is rendered in the Margent of our
Bibles, In making speed to the spoil, he hasteneth the prey; or, Make speed to
the spoil, hasten the prey; and the drift of it was questionless to signify,
that the Assyrian should by the secret all-ruling Providence of God be speedily
called into the spoil of the two Kingdoms Syria and Samaria, that were now
combined together against Judah; that so the faithful might hereby be comforted
in their present fears, and might be assured, that though the Assyrian was
hired by Ahaz, yet it was not without the determinate counsel and providence of
God that it was so done. Some think that this name of his Son
Maher-shalal-hash-baz, was all that the Prophet was appointed to write in the
roll; and that this Prophecy concerning the destruction that was coming upon
the Syrians and the Israelites, was purposely expressed in so few words, that
every one that read it, might the more easily remember it, and carry it home
with them, and that so it might be frequent in the months of men, as a a token
given them from God of the ruin that should suddenly come upon their great
enemies, that were making such mighty preparation against them. But why then
should there be so great a roll provided to write it in? It was, say they,
because these words were to be written in it with great Capital Letters, that
every one that should cast their eyes upon it might read it, yea though they
stood afar off; according to a like command given, Habbak. 2.2. Write the
Vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that reads it. But
then others hold, that the Prophet was enjoined to take a great roll; because
the Prophecy was great that was to be written in it, all (say some) that is
expressed in the four first verses of this Chapter, tending to show what was
signified by this strange name that was to be imposed on the Prophets Son; yea,
the whole following Prophecy, say others; which may be justly thought the more
probable, both because that which was to be written in the roll is said to be,
not Maher-shalal-hash-baz, but concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz; and because it
cannot well be thought that the people when they come to read the writing,
would have understood the meaning of it, if the whole Prophecy had not been
engrossed in it. And for the same end is that added, that the Prophet was to
write that which was to be written in this roll with a man's pen; that is, with
such a pen, and with such letters as were ordinarily used by men in writing;
not with any strange unusual characters, such as secret mysteries were
sometimes expressed with, which none but Gods Prophets could read, (as we see
in that writing which Belshazzar saw written on the wall, Dan. 5.7, 8.) but
such plain familiar letters as were commonly used by all sorts of men in
writing, that so the simplest amongst the people might easily read it. Very
many I know there are that do quite otherwise understand this whole Prophecy;
for they conceive that this Maher-shalal-hash-baz, was a Prophetic name given
to Christ, to signify that he should speedily come, and should then
victoriously rescue poor sinners out of the power of Satan, and so should spoil
these Principalities and Powers, and should disarm them, and dispossess them of
their prey; and accordingly they hold that this was written in a great roll,
only to imply the greatness of the mystery signified thereby. But I find
nothing here in the Prophet, that should induce me to think that any such
mystery was hereby intended.

Ver. 2. And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, etc.] That is,
credible witnesses, against whose testimony no exception could be justly taken,
Uriah the Priest, the same no doubt that is mentioned 2 King. 16.10. in the
story of Ahaz; And Zachariah the son of Jeberichiah, the same, as is most
probably thought, that is in 2 King. 18.2. said to have been the father of Abi,
or Abijah, the wife of Ahaz, and mother of Hezekiah; and therefore a man no
doubt of great note in the State. Indeed we read in the Sacred story of several
others that were called by this name: As, 1. Zechariah the Son of Jehojada the
Priest, who was slain by the Jews in the days of Joash, 2 Chronicles. 24.20, 21.
And, 2. Zechariah that was a Prophet in the days of Uzziah, see the Note, 2 Chronicles. 26.5. And, 3. Zechariah the Son of Barachiah, who Prophesied in the days
of Darius. See the Note, Ezra 5.1. But neither of these lived in the days of
Ahaz, when this was done. And though there was indeed a Levite of that name in
the days of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.13. who therefore might also be living at
this time; yet because that Zechariah mentioned 2 King. 18.2. was a man of far
greater eminency, as being the father in law of Ahaz, and the grandfather of
Hezekiah by the mother side, it is far more probable that it was he that was
taken together with Urijah the high Priest to be the Prophets Witnesses, for by
this means he had two Witnesses of greatest note, the one in the
Ecclesiastical, the other in the Civil State. But what was it that these were
to witness? I answer, only that which in the foregoing verse it is said God had
enjoined the Prophet to do, as the order of the words do clearly import. They
were to witness that the Prophet had according to Gods commandment taken a
great roll, and had written in it Maher-shalal-hash-baz, and had set it up,
either on the Temple-gate, or in some other public place, that so it might be
exposed to the view and reading of all the people; (and it may well be, which
some think, that they did also subscribe the roll as witnesses hereto); and
that to this end, that when that which by this writing God did foretell
concerning utter subversion of the Kingdoms of Syria and Samaria, did
accordingly come to pass, it might be certainly known by the testimony of these
men, that God had beforehand foretold that it should so be; which might also
render them the more fearful of those other judgments against Judah, which the
Prophet had likewise foretold at the same time. I know that very many add too,
that they were to witness the Prophets imposing of this name upon his child,
which is related in the following verse. But it is clear, I conceive, that they
were called only to witness that which God had enjoined the Prophet to do in
the foregoing verse. And indeed the absurdity that seemed to follow upon making
that a part of their testimony which is added ver. 3. And I went unto the
Prophetess, and she conceived, etc. was the only cause why some have conceited
that all this which is here related, was only seen in a Vision by the Prophet,
of which otherwise there is not the least ground in the Tezt. As for that
scruple which some have raised, how Uriah could be here termed a faithful
witness, who carried himself so unfaithfully in his place, when he complied
with King Ahaz so far, as to build him an Idolatrous altar after the fashion of
an altar which he had seen at Damascus, 2 King. 16.11. To this it may be justly
answered, 1. That Uriah had not yet discovered his base hypocrisy, as in that
business he did afterward, but was happily of great esteem at present amongst
the people. And, 2. that men may be looked upon as faithful witnesses, that are
not the faithful servants of God. In regard that he was at that time the high
Priest, he must needs be looked upon as a most credible witness; and in regard
too of his interest in Ahaz, none could be judged fitter for this service.

Ver. 3. And I went unto the Prophetess, etc.] That is, my wife, the same no
doubt by whom he had before that former Son that was called Shear-jashub, Chap.
7.3. Who is called the Prophetess, because she was the wife of a Prophet, as
with us a Dukes wife is called a Duchess, and a Count or Earls wife is called
a Countess, and so it is with many others. For methinks it is very hard to
think that which some others say, that he calls her the Prophetess, because the
bringing forth of the child, to whom God had appointed such a Prophetical name,
was a kind of Prophesying. It is in the Hebrew, And I approached unto the
Prophetess, whereby he modestly expresses, after the manner of the Scripture,
Genesis 6.4. and 29.23, 30. that he lay carnally with her, and thereupon it
follows, and she conceived and bear a Son. But however clear it is, that if
this which is here related concerning the birth of this Son of the Prophet, was
presently after the writing of the forementioned Prophetical roll; then his
going in to the Prophetess, and her conception thereupon, was long before, and
so should rather have been rendered, And I had gone in to the Prophetess, and
she conceived; and on the other side if this his going in to the Prophetess was
after the writing of this roll, then it was well nigh a twelvemonth after e're
this his Son was born, and that God gave him that following command concerning
his name, Then said the Lord to me, call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz. And
therefore I question not but that this was a different passage from that
related in the two foregoing verses; and that some time after the setting up of
this roll, upon the birth of this his Son, he was enjoined to call him by that
mysterious name, which was written in the roll, and that to confirm that
foregoing Prophecy, and that this name of his child might be a continual
memorial of that Prophecy, written in the forementioned roll concerning the
destruction of the Syrians and the Israelites.

Ver. 4. For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and my
mother, etc.] Some understand this indefinitely, as they did the like
expression before Chap. 7.16. (concerning which see the Note there of any
newborn child. But methinks it is clearly spoken with reference to that which
was said in the foregoing verse, to wit, that before that newborn Son of the
Prophets, whom God had appointed to be named Maher-shalal-hash-baz, should
begin to discern his Parents from strangers, and be able to speak that which
was intended by that name should come to pass; and so in these words there is a
reason given, why God appointed this name to be given to his child, namely, to
make known how suddenly that foretold destruction should come upon those two
Kings and their chief Cities; For before the child, that is, this newborn
child of the Prophets, called Maher-shalal-hash-baz, shall have knowledge to
cry, My father, and my mother, that within a year, or a year and a half, or
thereabouts, the riches of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken
away before the King of Assyria; that is, the Kingdoms of Syria and Damascus
shall be plundered and wasted in his sight, and at his command; or in these
words, before the King of Assyria, there may be an allusion to the custom of
carrying the rich spoils they had gotten from any vanquished people, before the
Conqueror, when he returned in triumph into his own Country. And it may be read
too, as it is in the Margent of our Bibles, He that is before the King of
Assyria, that is, his Officers and Ministers, or his Captains and Commanders,
shall take away the riches of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria. But however
it is clear, I conceive, that the accomplishment of this was when, in or about
the fourth year of Ahaz, Tiglath-pileser the King of Assyria took Damascus, and
slew Rezin their King, and carried away the people into captivity, 2 King.
16.9. at which time he made great havoc also in the land of Israel, 1 King.
15.29. though he did not take and destroy Samaria, as he did Damascus (for that
was done sometime after by Salmaneser in the days of Hoshea, 2 King. 17.6.) and
this some conceive to be the reason, why it is said here that the riches of
Damascus should be taken away by the Assyrian, and that he should only take
some spoil in Samaria.

Ver. 5. The Lord spoke also unto me again, saying.] To wit, in the same, or
some other Vision afterward.

Ver. 6. Forasmuch as this people refuses the waters of Shiloah that go
softly, etc.] That is, that run on gently and silently, not with any such
violence and noise as other great rivers do. We read of the pool of Siloam,
Joh. 9.7. and of the tower in Siloam, Luke 13.4. and it is generally said, that
this Siloam or Shiloah was the same that is elsewhere called Gihon; see the
Note, 1 King. 1.33. a little brook at the foot of Mount Sion, which running
into Jerusalem, or about some part of it, must needs be a great refreshing to
the inhabitants, but could be no great defense to the City, and that therefore
the weak estate of the Kingdom of Judah at this time is here intended by the
waters of Shiloah that go softly, concerning which see the Note, Psalm. 46.4.
The great question is, what people it is of whom the Prophet here says, For so
much as this people refuses the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice
in Rezin and Remaliahs Son; the most Expositors understand it of the people of
Judah, to wit, that the generality of them (for there were some ^ a better
temper amongst them, whom the Lord afterward, ver. 16. calls his Disciples),
did either, 1. Approve of Ahaz his sending for the Assyrian, as distrusting
their own weak estate, and not minding the promise which God had made for their
deliverance against the threatened invasion of the two Kings of Syria and
Israel, and relying wholly upon the mighty army which he would bring with him
(the warlike noise whereof is here opposed to the soft running of the waters of
Shiloah), in the confidence whereof they should even rejoice to be fighting
with Rezin and Pekah. Or, 2ly, did wish themselves to be in such a rich and
flourishing estate as the Israelites and Syrians were, and under the command of
such potent Kings as Rezin and Pekah were. Or, 3. that considering to what a
low ebb the Kingdom of Judah was brought, and how unable they should be to
resist the invasion of these two mighty Kings, they did indeed desire that
these Kings might reign over them, or at least that Son of Tabeal, mentioned
before, Chap. 7.6. whom they intended to leave as their Viceroy amongst them,
and for the better effecting hereof had underhand some treacherous compliance
with them. But now because we find not the least mention in the Sacred story of
any such intended defection of the men of Judah from Ahaz and the House of
David; and because it cannot be thought without manifest forcing the Text, how
it should be well said that the people of Judah did rejoice in Rezin and
Remaliahs Son, that were coming out against them with such fury and bloody
intentions; therefore I conceive that others do far better understand by this
people here mentioned, the people of Israel; for so much as this people, that
is, this army of the Israelites and Syrians that are now combined against
Judah, refuses the waters of Shiloah that goes softly, that is, do slight and
scorn the weak estate of Jerusalem, that has no great river for its defense,
but only the small brook of Shiloah, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliahs Son,
that is, in the power of these two great Kings, by whose conjoined forces they
made account they should certainly subdue the Jews, and bring Jerusalem under
their power. And observable it is with what contempt these two Kings are still
mentioned ( Rezin and Remaliahs Son, see Chap. 7.4.) in whose great strength
these invaders of Judah did so exceedingly triumph.

Ver. 7. Now therefore, behold the Lord brings up upon them the waters of the
river, strong and many, etc.] They that understand the foregoing verse of the
people of Judahs distrusting their own weak estate, and desiring the aid of the
Assyrian to help them against the two Kings of Syria and Israel, do accordingly
understand this verse of the havoc which the Assyrians should make in the land
of Judah; to wit, that since the people of Judah were not satisfied with their
own defenses, the waters of Shiloah that go softly, (notwithstanding Gods
express promise for their deliverance), but desired the great strength of other
potent Princes, and that the Assyrian should be hired to come into their aid,
therefore God would by those forces of Assyria, as with a mighty flood,
overrun and waste their land. And accordingly they understand the last Clause,
And he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks; to wit,
that the Assyrian would not keep to the Promises, and Oaths, and Covenants,
whereby he had bound himself to Ahaz, when he hired him to come into his help,
but would break thorough them all, and do them much mischief, as it is said, 2 Chronicles. 28.20. The King of Assyria came unto him and distressed him, but
strengthened him no^* But now understanding it, according to what is said in
the foregoing Note, of the people of Israel, together with their associates the
Syrians, the meaning of the words is plainly thus, Because this army of Rezin
and Pekah despised Jerusalem for her weakness, the waters of Shiloah that go
softly; therefore (says the Prophet) the Lord brings up upon them the waters
of the river, strong and many; that is, of the river Euphrates, (see the Note,
Chap. 7.20.) meaning the Assyrian army, which as a mighty strong river should
presently overrun them, and sweep them away; for so he explains himself in the
next words, even the King of Assyria and all his glory; that is, his army
consisting of many glorious Princes, brave Captains and Soldiers, that should
make a gallant show when they came marching into the land, and in whom the King
of Assyria would exceedingly glory and boast, according to that which is said,
Chap. 10.8, 13. Are not my Princes altogether Kings? and he shall come up over
all his channels, and go over all his banks; that is, he shall come out of
Assyria as a river, that in a great flood swells up above all his channels, and
goes over all his banks, and so shall invade and overrun the whole land of
Israel. And how this was accomplished, first by Tiglath-pileser, and afterward
by his successors, see in the foregoing Note, verse. 4. and likewise Chap. 7.17,
20.

Ver. 8. And he shall pass through Judah, etc.] That is, the Assyrian having
overrun the land of Israel, shall also break into the land of Judah; He shall
overflow and go over, that is, as an overflowing river he shall overrun that
Country also; which though it may include that damage which Tiglath-pileser
brought upon Judea, when he came to aid Ahaz against the Syrians and
Israelites, 1 Chronicles. 28.20. yet it must needs be principally meant of that
Invasion of the Assyrians in the days of Hezekiah, when Sennacherib entered the
land with a mighty army, and took in a manner all their fenced Cities, 2 King.
18.13. as is evident in the following words, He shall reach even to the neck;
the meaning whereof is, either, 1. That the Assyrian army, having almost
overrun the whole land round about (for still they are in their proceedings
compared to the inundation of some great river) should at last swell so high,
that they should come up to the very walls of Jerusalem, which was their
Head-city. Or, 2ly, that they should prevail so far, that all Judah should be
in danger to be utterly lost, being in the condition of a man upon whom a
deluge of waters breaking in, they rise and swell up at last to his very neck,
so that he has much ado to keep his head above water, and is in apparent
danger of being wholly overwhelmed and drowned; and indeed the like expression
we find elsewhere used to set forth a dangerous and even desperate condition,
as Chap. 30.28. His breath as an overflowing stream shall reach to the midst
of the neck; see also Habbak. 3.13. And the stretching out of his wings shall
fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel; that is, his numerous troops and
companies of Soldiers (which we still usually call the wings of an army) shall
overspread and subdue the whole land of Judea, which is neither his nor
theirs, but thine, O Christ, see the Note, Chap. 7.14. The Prophet calls it his
land, not so much because he was to be born there, as because he had given it
to be the habitation of his peculiar people, his Church, amongst whom he was to
reign as King, according to that Psalm. 2.6. I have set my King upon my holy
hill of Zion; and that Joh. 1.11. He came unto his own, and his own received
him not. And had settled it to be the peculiar place of his Worship. Yet the
drift, I conceive, of this turning his speech to Christ, was not only to imply
the indignity of the fact, that his land should be so surprised and wasted by
his proud enemies, but also to hint this comfort to the faithful, that though
they should prevail far in Judea, yet they should not be able to hinder the
coming forth of their Immanuel there; as likewise an earnest desire and hope
that they should not be able to cast him out of his inheritance, but that their
Immanuel would protect them from the present Invasion of R^zin and Pekah, as is
afterward expressed, ver. 10. and that when the Assyrian should break out in
greatest rage against them, Judah should not be wholly overwhelmed by them, as
Israel should be.

Ver. 9. Associate your selves, O ye people, etc.] It is in the Original
(peoples) in the Plural number, and thereby is meant both the Syrians and
Israelites, that were combined against Judah and Jerusalem, as likewise the
Assyrians that afterward invaded Judea in the days of Hezekiah, (see the Note,
Chap. 7.18.) whose army consisted of several Nations. Yea, I conceive it is
purposely expressed in such general terms to imply, that this which is here
foretold, should be the issue of the associations of all the enemies of Gods
Church and people. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken
in pieces. Having made mention of Immanuel in the latter end of the foregoing
verse, in the confidence of his assistance the Prophet breaks forth here into a
holy insultation over their enemies, assuring them, that all they did should
end at last in their own utter ruin; hereby seeking to cheer up the faithful,
that were like to be much dejected with the misery which the enemy for a time
were like to bring upon Judea. As for the following words, and give ear all ye
of far countries, some take that also to be spoken Ironically, as if he had
said, O ye Nations afar off, if you long to be broken in pieces, give ear to
the Assyrian, when he invites you to join with him for the invading of Judah.
But others, and I think better, understand it as a warning to those Nations to
attend to what the Prophet now said, and so to beware of joining with those
that should invade Gods people, lest they perished together with them. Not that
there was any hope that they should come to hear what the Prophet had said, but
only the more emphatically hereby to express, how certain it was that all that
joined in that attempt should be ruined and destroyed, as we see it came to
pass in that miraculous destruction and routing of the Assyrian army, 2 King.
19.35. To which end he does again and again repeat that holy insultation, gird
your selves, that is, arm your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird
your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; to wit, either to set forth the
undoubted certainty of it, or that the words might make the deeper impression
upon those that heard them; or else to imply, that though being rooted, they
should muster new forces, they should get nothing thereby but a second routing;
yea, that though they should never so often invade and assault Gods people, all
should be in vain.

Ver. 10. Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught, etc.] This is
added to show, that as the enemy should not prevail against Gods people by
their great-power, so neither by their crafty consultations and plots. Speak
the word, that is, determine never so resolutely what you will do, and it shall
not stand; that is, you shall never be able to effect it. For God is with us,
that is, God through Christ is with us to protect and defend us. He alludes to
the name Immanuel, concerning which see the Note, Chap. 7.14.

Ver. 11. For the Lord spoke thus to me, etc.] Here the Prophet gives a reason,
why he had in the foregoing words spoken with such contempt and scorn of all
the consultations and preparations of the enemies of Gods people against them,
and had thereby sought to encourage the faithful not to fear them. For (says
he) the Lord spoke thus ^^ me with a strong hand; that is, he spoke thus to me,
and made a strong impression upon my heart, by accompanying his word with the
mighty power of his spirit in me, to wit, thereby to hearten me against the
terrors of the generality of the unbelieving Jews, who were so extremely
affrighted with the Confederacy of the two Kings of Syria and Israel against
them, that I might not be discouraged by their infidelity, nor carried away
with their fears, but might rather encourage those that were faithful amongst
the people, against them. And observable it is, that by alleging with how
strong a hand he was confirmed herein, he implys how hard a thing it is, not to
be carried away in an evil course, when the generality of a people amongst whom
men alive, do unnimously run on therein; and instructed me that I should not
walk in the way of this people, that is, that I should not say as they said,
nor do as they did; that I should not join with them in their unbelieving
fears, and in their desires and design to call in the Assyrians, that by them
they might be enabled to withstand the feared invasion of the Israelites and
Syrians.

Ver. 12. Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say,
A confederacy, etc.] That is, say some Expositors, Let not the faithful in the
land talk as men affrighted, as the generality of the people do, saying, Oh,
there is a confederacy, there is a confederacy of the two mighty Kings of Israel
and Syria against us; and therefore we shall be utterly ruined, we shall never
be able to stand before them; for that this, say they, is intended here, we may
see by that which is added by way of explaining this, neither fear ye their
fear, nor be afraid; that is, fear not that which are they afraid of. But
according to our Translation, I conceive it must be understood of making a
confederacy with the Assyrians, Say ye not a confederacy to all them to whom
this people shall say, a confederacy; that is, Do not thou say, nor let not the
faithful in the land say, as this people do, Oh! we must make a confederacy
with the Assyrian, or else we shall never be able to withstand these two Kings
that are coming against us. Whenever this people are in any danger of enemies,
they are still talking of making a league with some potent State or other, the
Egyptian or Assyrian, or some other Nation, by whose aid they may hope to
secure themselves; and so it is now, there is nothing almost to be heard
amongst them but about a confederacy with the Assyrian; that is the only way
they can take to preserve their Country. But do not ye so much as by a word of
your mouths join with them herein. Neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid;
that is, fear not your enemies with such an unbelieving, excessive fear; as
they do; be not affrighted and dismayed as men that have no hope nor confidence
in God. Thus the words must be understood here subjectively; of the fear which
was in Ahaz and his people; though indeed in 1 Pet. 3.14. (where the Apostle
does plainly allude to this place) the fear intended is to be understood
effectively of the fear wherewith the enemy sought to affright Gods people, Be
not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled.

Ver. 13. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, etc.] That is, make it evident
that you acknowledge him the great and holy God that does rule and govern the
whole world, and that is faithful to make good all his promises, and so
glorify and advance his great name; to wit, by resting upon him, his promise
and protection, without dreading the power of any creature; and by fearing him
with a filial fear of offending him; and exposing your selves to his fatherly
chastisements, by distrusting his promises, and being frighted with the power
and rage of your enemy (...) so causing the name of ^od to ^e blasphemed by
your means. See the Notes, Levi^. 10.3. and Numb. 2^.12. And so the following
words are added by way of explaining these that went before, and let him be
your fear, and let him be your dread; that is, fear him so, as to fear nothing
else in comparison of him. And just so the Apostle Peter also explains these
that went before, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread, that is,
fear him so, as to fear nothing else in comparison of him. And just so the
Apostle Peter also explains these words, 1 Pet. 3.14, 15. Be not afraid of
their terror, neither be troubled; But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts.

Ver. 14. And he shall be for a Sanctuary, etc.] As if he had said, The holy
God will be as a Sanctuary, a sacred and inviolable place of refuge to those
holy and faithful ones that do sanctify him, as was said in the foregoing
verse; we find the same expression, Ezekiel. 11.16. I will be to them as a little
Sanctuary in the countries where they shall come. And in both places there
seems to be an allusion in the words to the custom of men's flying for shelter
to the Tabernacle or Temple, see the Note, Psalm. 27.5. But for a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, that is, to the
rest of the wicked and ungodly ones, even to the whole body of the Israelites,
both in the Kingdom of Judah, and that of Ephraim, that refuse to be ruled by
him, and to rely upon his promises, the Lord will be as a stone lying in the
way, at which men stumble, or as a rock against which if a man or ship casts
violently, it will bruise and break them; that is, he will be an occasion of
their ruin, in that they shall stumble and take offense at his word, not
believing what he said, and so shall bring destruction upon themselves. And to
the same purpose are the following words added, For a gin and for a snare to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem; to wit, to show that his word would be but as a
snare to entangle them to their utter perdition; only it is withal observed,
that these words, to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, are here inserted purposely
to imply, either, 1. That it was not the Royal seat, or Gods Sanctuary then,
that should secure them, but that they also should suffer with the rest. Or, 2.
that God in his word should be an occasion of ruin, not only to the meaner sort
of people, but also to the chief amongst them, even to the Rulers and Priests
at Jerusalem. Now the main drift of all this was, to encourage the faithful not
to be carried away with the stream of the people, that would not believe nor
obey Gods Word, because the Lord would be a Sanctuary to those that did believe
and obey, but a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense to the rest. But
withal most observable it is, that in many places of the New Testament this is
applied to Christ the true Immanuel, mentioned before ver. 8. as in Act. 4.11.
This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is become the
head of the corner. And Romans 9.32* 33. where it is said of the unbelieving
Jews, They stumbled at that stumbling-stone, as it is written, Behold I lay in
Sion a stumbling-stone and rock of offense. And, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Unto you
therefore which believe he is precious; but unto them which be disobedient, the
stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner;
and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them which stumble at
the word. See also Mat. 23.42. And the ground of this is, because Christ, and
so God in him, was to those that believed in him, a foundation-stone, a rock of
Salvation (concerning which see the Note, Psalm. 118.22.) but to others, who
through their blindness and madness took offense at the meanness of his outward
condition, and the Doctrine of life and salvation, which he taught them, he
became a stumbling-stone and a rock of offense, that is, an occasion of their
ruin and perdition; and thus he was the savor of death unto death to some, but
the savor of life unto life to others, 2 Cor. 2.16. and was set for the fall
and rising again of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. see also Joh. 9.39.

Ver. 16. Bind up the Testimony, etc.] This is a part of that charge, which (as
is said before, ver. 11.) was given by God particularly to the Prophet by way
of informing him what he should do, Bind up the Testimony, seal the Law among
my disciples. By the testimony may be meant, 1. The Law or Word of God in
general, which is often so called in Scripture. See the Notes, Exodus 25.16. and
Psalm. 19.7. and 78.5. and that because the Lord has therein made known his
will to his people, and by a solemn and severe sanction had attested thereto.
Or, 2. the great roll which the Prophet was commanded to write, mentioned ver.
1. of this Chapter, and that because there was therein a Testimony written
concerning the defense of this people, and the ruin of their enemies that were
combined against them. Or, 3. The whole Word of God which he had now delivered
to them, both in the roll which he had written and set up for the people to
read, and in that Prophecy which he had now spoken to them in the name of the
Lord; the Doctrine which he had now taught them, and wherein he had testified
what the Lords will was that the faithful should do, namely that they should
not walk in the way of that incredulous people. Yea, herein also may be
included what he fore-prophecyed concerning the Messiah, the true Immanuel,
that mystery which was testified before by the Prophets, Romans 1.2. And so
likewise the same may be meant by the Law, to wit, either the Word of God in
general, or else that word or message he had now delivered to them, to which
they were bound to yield obedience, as to a command or Law given them from God.
But now what is meant by binding up the Testimony and sealing up the Law
amongst Gods disciples? I answer, that this is diversely expounded by
Expositors; for, 1. some conceive that the Prophet was hereby charged to fold
and bind up that roll again, mentioned before ver. 1. that the promise therein
contained concerning their approaching deliverance, might not be any longer
exposed to the neglect, and scorn, and derision of an incredulous people* but
that withal he should still preach and press the truth therein contained upon
the faithful his followers, that were capable of understanding such mysteries,
and ready to receive and embrace them; and that he should more and more assure
them of the certainty of it, that it might be esteemed as a sealed truth
amongst them, and an established Law, according to the direction whereof they
were to order themselves. 2ly, Others, understanding it of the whole Word of
God which he had now delivered them, take it to be an information given to the
Prophet concerning the success his words should find amongst the people, to
wit, that his Disciples only that were enlightened and taught by him, should
understand and embrace them, as matter of authentic truth, having Gods seal
stamped on it; but that unto the rest of the people they should be as a Book
that is closed and sealed up; that is, they should be hidden from them, so that
they should not understand them; and so indeed we find the same expression used
afterward, Chap. 29.11, 12. And thus these words, bind up and seal, are
understood to imply both the hiding of this Prophecy from the incredulous
people, and the keeping and preserving it charily for the use of the faithful;
and this some conceive is principally meant of the mysteries therein revealed,
in part concerning the Messiah, which were to be reserved as a hidden secret
til the days of the Gospel. See Dan. 12.4. and Rev. 5.1. And, 3ly, therefore I
conceive the main intent of these words was to make known to the Prophet that
it would be in vain to press his Doctrine upon an obstinate incredulous people,
but yet that he should not be discouraged herewith, because though it were
despised by the generality of the people, yet there were some few that should
believe and embrace it, whom he calls Disciples, as the Christians were at
first called, Act. 11.26.

Ver. 17. And I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of
Jacob, and I will look for him.] As if he should have said, seeing God has
commanded me not to walk in the way of this people, not to be transported with
their fears, ( ver. 11.) and has promised to be a Sanctuary and rock of refuge
to them that sanctify his name and trust in him, ( ver. 13, 14.) I will
quietly and constantly wait upon the Lord for that help and deliverance which
he has promised us; let both King and people look, if they will, after the
Assyrians for help, I will constantly wait upon God, and expect deliverance
only from him, notwithstanding the Lord does indeed show himself to be highly
displeased with his people for their wickedness, both by the judgments he has
already brought upon them, and those he has now farther threatened. And thus he
encourages the people by his example to trust in God, and to wait upon him for
deliverance. Or else thus; seeing God has revealed this to me, that my words
shall be hidden from the generality of this rebellious people, and some few
only shall believe and embrace it, I will go on in my work, quietly waiting
upon him for that success which he is pleased to give to my labors, and
patiently submitting to his good will and pleasure, even when he hides his
face in anger, and does punish their obstinacy by withdrawing his grace and
spirit from them, and so causes his word to be as it were bound and sealed up
from them.

Ver. 18. Behold, I, and the children whom the Lord has given me, are for
signs, and for wonders in Israel, etc.] Because these words, Behold, I, and the
children which God has given me, are by the Apostle, Heb. 2.13. applied to
Christ, therefore many learned Expositors hold, that they are not the words of
the Prophet, speaking of himself and his Disciples, or followers; but the very
words of Christ, speaking to the Prophet, and that to comfort him against the
hatred of the wicked, and the scorn and contempt which they cast upon him, by
his own example, who taking upon him in our nature the work of a Prophet, was
to be used as scornfully and contemptuously himself; as if it had been said,
Behold I (who am the Son of God, and the great Prophet of the Church) and my
Disciples, that shall through the grace of God embrace my Doctrine, the
children which God shall give me (according to that Chap. 53.10. When thou
shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed), shall be
esteemed as monsters, derided and reproached amongst Gods people; and therefore
it is no wonder though they use thee so. The disciple is not above his master,
nor the servant above his Lord, Mat. 10.24. But to make these not to be the
words of the Prophet, but of Christ only, is methinks very harsh, and
overthrows the whole passage of the Context. Nor is it necessary they should be
so taken, because the Apostle applies them to Christ; nothing being more usual
in the New Testament than to apply many passages to Christ, that in the Old
Testament were spoken of others that were Types of Christ, as we may see (for
instance) in 2 Samuel 7.14. for which see the Note there. Others therefore do
better, I conceive, take them to be the Prophets own words; but withal they
differ in their opinion concerning the meaning of them. For,

1. Some understand this of the Prophets children, born to him by his lawful
wife, to wit, Shear-jashub, and Maher-shalal-hash-baz, mentioned before, Chap.
7.3. and 8.3. and accordingly they conceive that the Prophet in these words did
either, 1. Call upon the faithful to look upon him, his constancy and undaunted
resolution, (upon that express revelation he had received from God) and upon
his children, by whose mysterious and Prophetic names he had assured them of
those things that should come to pass, to wit, the good which God would do for
his people, and the evil he would bring upon their enemies, that so their faith
might be strengthened thereby, and they encouraged against the terrors of the
generality of the people. Or else, 2ly, bewail their condition, in that whilst
he and his children were ordered by God to be for Prophetic signs unto the
people, (see Chap. 20.2, 3.) they were for this hooted and pointed at, as so
many monsters, scoffed at and flouted by the profane multitude, as it is also
said, Zach. 3.8. Thou and thy fellows that sit before thee, are men wondered at.

And, 2ly, some understand it of the faithful, such as were ver. 16. called
Disciples, that believed and obeyed his Doctrine, whom he calls here the
children which God had given him, because through grace he had begotten them
again unto God, according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.15. In Christ Jesus
I have begotten you through the Gospel. See also Gal. 4.19. And accordingly
they conceive the words, Behold I and the children whom the Lord has given me,
are for signs and wonders in Israel: To be spoken,

1. By way of complaining of the ineffectualness of his labors amongst the
people, and the great contempt that was cast upon him and his Disciples and
followers, in that being but a few, and not going along with them in their way,
they looked upon them as so many prodigies and monsters, (see the Note, Psalm.
71.7.) and did reproach and deride them.

And, 2. by way of rendering themselves ready to be ordered by the Lord in all
things, Behold I and the children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs
and wonders in Israel, even amongst Gods professed people; as if he should have
said, Let others do what they will, behold I and my children, my Disciples and
followers, are ready and willing to rest upon thy promises, to obey thy
commands, and to make known thy will, whatever contempt and scorn we may endure
for so doing.

And then for the last words, From the Lord of Hosts which dwells in mount
Zion; they are added to imply, either, 1. That it was by Gods appointment that
he and his children (if of them we understand the foregoing words) were
Prophetic signs, and that his children were called by those Prophetic n^mes
that were given them. And then God is here called the Lord of hosts, purposely
to tax the incredulity of the people, that were so overborn with fear,
notwithstanding they had a promise of deliverance from God, who was the Lord of
hosts. Or else,

2ly, That it was by express warrant from God that he and his Disciples did
rest upon Gods promise, and durst not go in the way of the generality of the
people in seeking after the Assyrians; and that therefore however they boasted
of the God that dwelt in Mount Zion, yet the truth was, that by opposing, and
despising and reproaching them that were his faithful servants, they did oppose
and despise the Lord of hosts himself that dwelt there.

Of, 3ly, that they knew it was not without the will and appointment of God,
that they should be so despised and derided, and hooted at by the rude
multitude, and therefore they would patiently bear it. Thus I conceive these
words are to be understood. As for the Apostles applying those words to Christ,
Heb. 2.13. Behold, I, and the children which God has given me, the ground of
that was, because Isaiah being a type of Christ, that which Isaiah there spoke
of himself, might well be applied to Christ, as spoken in his person, in regard
that, 1. Christ did in our very nature exercise his Prophetical office; and, 2.
that Christ's Disciples were by him begotten again to God, and in that regard
might be called his children, as Isaiah called his Disciples. 3. That it was by
the special grace of God, that Christ's Disciples as well as the Prophets were
so begotten again, according to that of our Savior, Joh. 6.44. No man can come
unto me, except my father which has sent me draw him. And again, Chap. 17.6.
Thine they were, and thou gave them me. And, 4. that as Isaiah presented his
Disciples to God, as ready to cleave to God, and to obey him in all things, so
are the faithful continually presented before God by Christ their Mediator.

Ver. 19. And when they shall say unto you, etc.] These are still the words of
the Prophet to the faithful. Because this people were prone in time of great
troubles and danger, to run to Sorcerers for counsel; therefore the Prophet
advises the Faithful to beware that they were not drawn away by these, And
when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar Spirits, and
unto Wizzards; that is Sorcerers, such as were usually called Cunning-men. The
word in the Original which we translate them that have familiar Spirits, is
derived from an Hebrew word which signifies a Bottle; because when their evil
Spirits entered into them, as sometimes they did, they used to swell and blow up
their Bodies like a bladder or bottle, and then gave answers from within them,
out of their bellies, or out of their throats. And therefore are those words
added, I conceive by way of derision, that peep and that mutter, either first
because these evil spirits spoke in them with a low, whispering and puling
voice, like chickens not yet hatched; or with a hollow, grumbling and grunting
voice, a broken and scarce articulate sound, they could not well be heard or
understood, that so they might the better deceive those that heard them; or
because the witches or wizzards themselves used a kind of muttering or low way
of speaking in their charms, or in the answers they gave, that they might
strike those that repaired to them with the greater dread or awe of them. Or,
3. because at least they spoke so obscurely that their hearers did not know
what to make of their words. And hence are the like expressions used by our
Prophet, Chap. 29.4. Thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice
shall be as of one that has a familiar spirit out of the ground, and thy
speech shall whisper out of the dust.

Should not a people seek unto their God? etc.] These words may be taken either
as an argument whereby the Prophet seeks to dissuade them from harkening to
such seducers, or as the answer which they should return to those that should
persuade them to go to witches and wizzards; as if it had been expressed thus,
When they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar spirits and
unto wizzards, let this be your answer, should not a people seek unto their
God? as if they should have said, Every Nation will yield this, that in their
straits it is fit they should seek to their God for counsel and direction; and
shall not we much more do so, that serve the living and the true God? For the
living to the dead? that is, will any rational men go to enquire of dead men on
the behalf of those that are living? to wit, by seeking to witches that they
may raise up the dead to give them counsel, concerning which see the Notes,
Deuteronomy. 18.10. Some I know read it from the living to the dead; intending thereby
that it was a vain thing to go from the living Prophets, or from the living God
to dead men. But I conceive it is better rendered, as in our Translation, for
the living to the dead; so to imply how absurd a thing it was on the behalf of
living men to go to enquire of dead men, that can know nothing of what is done
upon earth.

Ver. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, etc.] That is, let them seek to the
Word of God for counsel and direction; which may include both the written word,
(see the Note above, ver. 16.) or the present teaching of the Prophet or
Prophets. If they speak not according to this word, that is, according to what
I now say, to wit, that men are not to enquire of witches nor wizzards, nor any
where else, but only from the Word of God, It is because there is no light in
them, or (as it is in the Hebrew) because there is no morning in them, that is,
because they have no truth in them; or because they are stark blind, void of
common sense and understanding.

Ver. 21. And they shall pass through it, etc.] That is, this wicked people
that would not rely upon God, but would seek help elsewhere, and go to witches
and wizzards for advice, shall pass through the land of Judea, to wit, either
as the enemy are carrying them away captives into a strange Country, or in a
way of wandering up and down from one place to another to find some relief,
help, and refuge, yet no where finding any, (no not in that land wherein God
had promised to give them a quiet and settled habitation, Genesis 17.8.) being
every where hunted and pursued by their enemies, hardly bestead and hungry,
that is, suffering many hard and grievous things, being stripped and spoiled of
all they enjoyed, and ready to starve for want of food.

And it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and shall curse their King and their God, etc.] That is, being
overwhelmed with misery, out of extreme impatience of spirit, and being
stricken with a kind of desperate rage and madness, they shall not only curse
their King, as judging him the cause of their calamities, in that he had called
in the Assyrian, or had some way ill managed the business with him, and so had
provoked him against them, but their God also, to wit, because he had not
helped them. Some indeed conceive that this last is meant of their false gods,
whom they should curse when they should by experience find how vainly they had
expected help from them. But I see not but that it might be meant of the true
God, and that this is purposely added to set forth the extreme height of their
wickedness and fury, according to what is foretold of those desperate wretches
under the Beast, Revel. 16.10, 11. They gnawed their tongues for pain, and
blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains. But however, if we
understand it of their Idol-gods, very observable is the event of their sin.
They would not trust in Gods promise, but forsook him, and placed all their
hope in the policy of their King; and now the issue is, that they come to curse
their King and their false gods, to whom they (with their King) had given away
the honor of the true God.

As for the last words, and look upward, though some would have it imply, that
being convinced of their former folly in resting upon men, they should now
begin to look Heavenward for help; yet because it is joined so immediately with
their cursing of God, I cannot think that can be intended. And therefore I
conceive that either here the Prophet begins to relate the desperateness of
their condition, in that first they should in vain look upward to God for help,
(for which see the Note, 2 Samuel 22.42.) and afterward to as little purpose
should look to the earth, as it is expressed in the following verse; or else
rather, that this is added the better to set forth the desperate madness of
these blaspheming wretches, to wit, that even with their faces looking
Heavenward they should curse God. All which most Expositors do understand of
that miserable condition whereinto this people were brought in the days of
Zedekiah, when Jerusalem was taken by the Babylonians, 2 King. 26.45, etc.

Ver. 22. And they shall look unto the earth, etc.] They that understand the
last words of the foregoing verse, and look upward, of their looking to Heaven
for help, do accordingly conceive, that here a reason is given why they should
at last look Heavenward, to wit, because on earth there was nothing to be
discovered but misery and sorrow. But rather, the drift of the words is to
imply, that in the whole land they should find no hope of help and comfort; and
so if that last Clause in the foregoing verse were to imply, that they should
in vain look upward to Heaven for help, (as it is there noted that some hold)
then these words are added, And they shall look unto the earth, and behold
trouble and darkness, to imply, that neither in Heaven nor on earth any hope of
help should appear, so that in their trouble they should be as men in the dark
not knowing which way to turn themselves. The expressions here used are much
like those, Chap. 5.30. concerning which see the Note there. And to the same
purpose are the following words, dimness of anguish; and so also the last
Clause, and they shall be driven to darkness; for this implies that their
misery, and their anguish, and perplexity of mind in their misery, should
increase daily more and more. A man driven headlong in the dark must needs fall
the more desperately. And so the Prophet would imply it should be with them.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. NEvertheless the dimness shall not be such, etc.] Lest the faithful
should be over-pressed with fear and sorrow, hearing of such a sad and a black
day that was coming upon the land, in regard of those grievous miseries and
straits that should befall them, mentioned in several places of the foregoing
Chapter, and especially in the last verse, where he speaks of the trouble, and
darkness, and dimness of anguish that should come upon them, therefore the
Prophet does here add a promise by way of consolation, telling them of that
which might much allay the bitterness of the calamities which are there
threatened. Some indeed hold that the promise made to the faithful begins not
till the second verse. The first verse they conceive it rather inserted by way
of aggravating the darkness threatened in the foregoing Chapter, Nevertheless
the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he
lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun, etc. as if he had said, No marvel though
it be said that the people shall be in such perplexity, as is before described,
when the calamities there threatened shall come upon them; for this affliction
when it comes, shall darken the land otherwise, that is, in a far more grievous
manner than it was darkened by the invasions of enemies in former times.

And indeed if the calamities threatened in the foregoing Chapter (the dimness
here spoken of) be understood of the destruction made in the land by the
Chaldeans in the days of Zedekiah, when the City Jerusalem was taken, and the
Temple burnt, and the people were carried captives into Babylon, that was in it
self a blacker day of distress than ever had been seen in the land of Israel,
when the Assyrians had made the saddest havoc amongst them. Well, but yet
because this expression, the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation,
seems in an ordinary way of speaking, to import that it should not be so great;
and especially because the following verse seems plainly to be added, as a
farther explanation of that which is said here, The people that walked in
darkness have seen a great light, etc. therefore I rather conceive that the
drift of this verse also is to mitigate their fears, by assuring them, that
though the judgments threatened in the foregoing Chapter should fall very heavy
upon the land of Israel or Judah, yet in some respect it should not be such,
that is, so great as it was in those vexations of the land of Israel by the
Assyrians, mentioned in the latter part of the verse. And accordingly I
understand the words thus; Nevertheless the dimness, (to wit, that threatened in
the foregoing Chapter, whether we understand thereby the calamities they
underwent in the days of Hezekiah, by Sennacheribs invading the land with such
a mighty army, or the grievous destruction that was brought upon them by the
Chaldeans in the days of Zedekiah) shall not be such, that is, in every respect
so great as was in her vexation; that is, as it was when the land was vexed and
afflicted by those two Invasions of the Assyrians, mentioned in the following
words, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun, and the land
of Naphtali; which may be meant either first of that Invasion of the land of
Israel, when Pull the Assyrian made an inroad into the Country in the days of
Menahem, and then was presently hired with a sum of money to be gone again, for
which see the Notes, 2 King. 15.19. which seems to me most probable; or else,
2. of that Invasion made by Tiglath-pileser, which fell chiefly indeed upon the
Tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali, and wherein they might well be said to be more
lightly afflicted, because then only some of the Tribes (about five of them)
were carried away captives, and not all of them, as they were afterward by
Salmanasser; for which see the Note, 2 King. 15.29. And afterward did more
grievously afflict her; which may be meant of that more grievous hand of God
upon the whole Kingdom of the Ten Tribes in the days of Hoshea, when by
Salmanasser Samaria was taken, and the whole people of Israel in a manner were
carried away captives into Assyria, 2 King. 17.3, etc. for which see the Notes
there. Or rather of the Invasion of Tiglath-pileser, which may be termed more
grievous with respect to the foregoing inroad of Pull; which I think is far most
probable; for whereas it may be, and it is usually objected, that the Prophet
speaks here of calamities that had formerly come upon the land of Israel; and
it is clear, that neither the Invasion by Tiglath-pileser, nor that by
Salmanasser, were come to pass when the Prophet spoke this, though indeed he
lived to see them both accomplished. Though to this it may be answered, that it
was usual with the Prophets to speak of things to come, as if they were past
and done already, only to imply the certainty of them; yet I should think that
this objection may be better prevented by holding that the Prophet speaks here
of two Invasions of the land of Israel that were in a manner past already, to
wit, that of Pull, and that of Tiglath-pileser, which was now immediately coming
upon them, and in a manner in being. And indeed the following description of
that part of the land of Canaan, which was to feel the misery of this more
grievous affliction, agrees best with the Invasion of T^glath-pileser, and
cannot so well be understood of that of Salmanasser, when the whole Kingdom of
the Ten Tribes was overrun and dispeopled; as first, in that this is said to
have been by the way of the Sea; for this cannot so well be meant of the
midland-Sea, called the great Sea, Josh. 1.4. which was the utmost border of
the land of Israel, westward, and very far remote from Jordan (which is also
here mentioned.) And that which is said by some is altogether uncertain, to
wit, that the tract of land of which he speaks here, is said to have been by
the way of the Sea, because there was a highway in those parts about Jordan,
whereby they carried their wares, which were to be transported through the land
to the Seaside, which was hereupon called the way of the Sea. And therefore I
rather think it is meant of that part of the Country which lay upon the Lake of
Gennesareth, as it is called, Luke 5.1. which was also called the Sea of
Cinnereth, Josh. 13.27. or the Sea of Gennesareth; and Mat. 4.18. The Sea of
Galilee; and Joh. 21.1. The Sea of Tiberias. And the like may be said of the
following words, Beyond Jordan in Galilee of the Nations; or as some translate
it, in populous Galilee; for though the whole land of Galilee was divided into
two parts, the one whereof was called the upper Galilee, and the other the
lower, and some think the lower Galilee is here meant, which was in the Tribe
of Zebulun; and that it was called populous Galilee, because it was so full of
people: and others think the upper Galilee is here meant, which was in the
Tribe of Naphtali, which they say was called Galilee of the Nations, because
there were many of the Heathens usually inhabiting there, in regard that it was
near to the Tyrians and Zidonians, or for some other reason, (for which see the
Notes, Genesis 14.1. Josh. 12.23. Judge. 4.2. and 1 King. 9.11.) Yet, first,
because it is evident that the Prophet speaks here of a storm that fell upon
those parts of the land that lay near to Jordan, and not upon the whole Kingdom
of the Ten Tribes; as that Invasion of Salmanasser did. 2. Because it is clear
that Tiglath-pileser did indeed subdue and carry into captivity the Tribes
without Jordan, and those within Jordan, to wit, on the East Side of it, even
all the inhabitants both of the upper and lower Galilee, (which may therefore
be here said to be beyond Jordan, with respect to those without Jordan, that
were at the same time carried away into captivity), see the Note, 2 King.
15.29. And 3. because the Evangelist citing this passage of Isaiah, Mat. 4.14,
15, 16. seems to speak of those places about Jordan, where our Savior first
Preached the Gospel; therefore it seems to me most probable that the Prophet
speaks here of the Invasion of Tiglath-pileser. Well, but however, whether this
more grievous affliction of the land of Israel be meant of the Invasion of
Tiglath-pileser, or of that of Salmanasser; yet if that judgment which the
Prophet in the foregoing Chapter foretold should come upon Judah, be meant of
that destruction which was made by Nebuchadnezzar in the days of Zedekiah, when
Jerusalem was taken, and both the City and the Temple it self was sacked and
burnt, and the Jews for the generality were all carried away captives into
Babylon, (which was doubtless the greatest blow that was ever given to the
land) how can it be said that the dimness then was not such, that is, so great
as it was in her vexation by those two foregoing Invasions of the land of
Israel by the Assyrians? Indeed if the judgment threatened against Judah in the
foregoing Chapter, were the Invasion of Sennacherib in the days of Hezekiah
(which many think most probable) that might well be said to be not so great as
were the two foregoing Invasions of the land of Israel by the Assyrians. But if
that threatened in the foregoing Chapter were that dreadful ruin that was made
in Jerusalem, and in the land of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar, how can that be said
to have been not so great as those two Invasions of the Kingdom of the Ten
Tribes by the Assyrians?

I answer, 1. Because this dimness was not perpetual, as the other was. The
Jews that were carried captives into Babylon returned afterward back again into
their own Country (which the Israelites that were carried away by the Assyrians
never did) at which time both the City and Temple at Jerusalem were rebuilt
again.

And, 2. Because some few years after, the promised Messiah should come, and
then they should enjoy the light of the Gospel, which to the faithful should
yield so great comfort, that it would make them forget all their former
sufferings and sorrows. And indeed it is clear, that the Evangelist St. Matthew
does in the place above cited apply that which he says there concerning the
springing up of the light of the Gospel to the places here mentioned by the
Prophet; implying that as those parts first tasted of the miseries here spoken
of, so they should be first revived by the bright shining of the Gospel amongst
them.

Ver. 2. The people that walked in darkness, have seen a great light, etc.]
This was in part accomplished, first, when Sennacheribs army was destroyed,
wherewith he had besieged Jerusalem in the days of Hezekiah, and so the siege
was broken up, and the enemies were forced to fly out of the land with great
confusion and shame; for then the people of Judea might well be said to have
seen a great light, not only because their joy must needs then be exceeding
great, after such a dark time of extreme distress and sorrow, but also because
their deliverance in such a miraculous way was so apparently the mighty hand
and work of God.

2. When the Jews were delivered out of Babylon, and brought back again into
their own land, at which time some of the Ten Tribes also returned, in regard
whereof it may be spoken of the whole Nation of Israel. And indeed considering
that when by Nebuchadnezzar the City and Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed, and
so the people were wholly taken off from the public Worship of God, it might
seem hereby that the Covenant betwixt God and them was broked off, and the hope
they had of the promised Messiah was at end, therefore when the Lord had
brought them back again from the land of their captivity, their joy must needs
be exceeding great, see Psalm. 126.2, 3.

But, 3. principally and most clearly by the coming of Christ, and the breaking
forth of the light of the Gospel, when the Jews (and Gentiles too) were
enlightened by the shining of that Sun of Righteousness amongst them, and
delivered from that blindness, and that bondage under sin and Satan, wherein
formerly they abode (whereof the Babylonian captivity was a type), and brought
into an estate of clearer knowledge, and greater joy than ever that people had
enjoyed before in the time of the Law. And indeed, as is partly noted before,
this I conceive is the chief reason why Zebulun and Naphtali, and the land
about Jordan, were particularly mentioned in the foregoing verse, to wit,
because the light of the Gospel did first break forth in those parts; and there
Christ wrought his first Miracles, and the chief of his Apostles were there
first called. And the same is intended in the following words, They that dwell
in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined; for this
also may comprehend both the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, where they
seemed to have been in as hopeless a condition, as men are that lie dead in
their graves, according to that which is said of them, Ezekiel. 37.12. O my
people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves,
and bring you into the land of Israel. And likewise more especially the
deliverance of Christ's redeemed ones from that darkness of sin and death, both
temporal and eternal, under which they lay by nature, see the Note, Job 3.5.
And observable it is, that to express how certain it was that this should be,
the Prophet still speaks of that which was to come to pass many years after, as
if it were done already.

Ver. 3. Thou have multiplied the Nation, and not increased the joy, etc.] The
Prophet still proceeds in a Prophetical strain, speaking of future things, as
if they were past already. The words may be read, as it is in the Margent of
our Bibles, Thou have ^^^^ipli^^ ^he Nation, and to him increased the joy; as
if he had said, Thou will multiply this Nation, and wilt increase their joy.
And indeed, whether we understand this of the joy of the Jewish Nation, either,
1. at their deliverance from Sennacheribs army that had besieged Jerusalem: Or,
2. at their deliverance from the Babylonian captivity: Or, 3ly, at their
deliverance by Christ, their promised Messiah, these two may well be joined
together concerning the multiplying of the Nation, and the increasing of their
joy: Because,

1. When Sennacherib had made great havoc amongst the people in the land,
after his army was destroyed so miraculously, to the great joy of that Nation,
God was pleased to cause them to multiply and thrive again, according to that
promise made to Hezekiah, Chap. 37.31. And the remnant that is escaped of the
house of Judah, shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.

2ly, Because after their joyful return out of Babylon, through the blessing of
God upon them, the people did great multiply, as was foretold by the Prophets,
Jer. 31.27. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will sow the house of
Israel, and the house of Judah, with the seed of man, and with the seed of
beast. And Zach. 2.4. Jerusalem shall be inhabited as Towns without walls for
the multitude of men and cattle therein. And,

3ly, Because at the coming of Christ, which was a time indeed of greatest joy,
the people of God were exceedingly multiplied, by the confluence of multitudes
of the Gentiles that joined themselves to the Church of Christ. See the Notes,
Chap. 3.1, 2. and Psalm. 17.1, etc. And this Marginal reading of the Text I
cannot but judge far the most probable, because according to this Translation of
the words, the meaning of the place is so clear and easy; whereas if we read
it as it is in our Bibles, Thou have multiplied the Nation, and not increased
the joy; there seems to be a manifest contradiction betwixt this and the
following words, They joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as
men rejoice when they divide the spoil. Whence it is that so many ways have
been found out by Expositors to salve this seeming contradiction: For, first,
some understand the first part of the verse of the Assyrian, to wit, that
though the Assyrian had raised, or though God by his Providence had suffered
him to raise a very numerous army, yet their joy was not answerable thereto,
because by the sword of an Angel there was such havoc made amongst them, as
they lay before Jerusalem, and so they returned not home rejoicing and
triumphing in their victory, as they thought to have done. And then the
following words they understand of the Jews, to wit, that they had cause of
abundant joy, though the Assyrian had none. They joy before thee according to
the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. And,

2ly, Some understand both branches of the verse of the Jews in the days of the
Gospel, that then they were many in number, as God had promised, or that they
were multiplied by the access of the Gentiles, who joined themselves to the
Church of the Jews; but that this was without any great joy of the Jews, the
Nation to whom Christ and the Gospel were peculiarly promised, because so few
of them did embrace the faith of Christ; or because they did very much envy the
Preaching of the Gospel amongst the Gentiles, or because they were within a few
years after rooted out by the Romans. Or else, of the Church of Christ, as made
up both of Jews and Gentiles; to wit, that though Gods people were then
mightily increased in number, yet their joy was not answerable thereunto, and
that because of the grievous persecutions, and the manifold calamities and
miseries that were continually their portion. And now because in both these
joys there was a mixture of much grief and trouble of spirit, therefore they
say in the following words, this joy of theirs is compared to the joy of men in
harvest, when their joy is mixed with a great deal of toil and labor; and to
the joy of those that divide the spoil, which is not obtained without much
hardship, and after many sharp and bitter conflicts.

But, 3ly, others understand that the Prophet in the first part of the verse
speaks of the Jews in former times, to wit, that God had exceedingly multiplied
that Nation in former ages, as he had promised (under which term some also
comprehend the advancing of them, and their growing great in riches, power, and
many glorious victories); but that their joy then was comparatively nothing in
regard of that joy they should have in the breaking forth of that light whereof
he had spoken in the foregoing verse. Then their joy should be such as it had
never been since God began first to multiply that Nation; which is therefore
set forth in the following words by those expressions, They joy before thee
according to the joy in harvest, etc. And this may be understood of their joy:
Either, 1. When Jerusalem was delivered from Sennacheribs army. Or, 2. when the
Jews were delivered from the Babylonian captivity. Or, 3. when Christ came to
deliver them from the bondage of Sin, Satan, Death and Hell. And indeed because
it is expressly said, that the joy of this Nation when they were returned out of
Babylon, and had begun to build their City and Temple again, was not so great
as it had been in former times, see the Note, Ezra 3.12. therefore I conceive
the joy the Prophet here speaks of, is chiefly meant of the joy that redounded
to believers by Christ; which was indeed as much greater than all the joys of
Gods people in former ages had been, as the light of the Sun is greater than
the light of a candle; and that because this was the greatest mercy that ever
was promised Gods people, and because the light of the knowledge of God, and the
way of Salvation was far more clearly discovered and imparted to them, than
ever it had been in former times. As for that expression, they joy before thee,
etc. either that is spoken with respect to the thank-offerings and praises
which they offered up unto God, upon their deliverances, in the Sanctuary, and
in the assemblies of his people. Or else to set forth the heartiness, and
reality, and sincerity of their joy, to wit, that they should be indeed
heartily and inwardly joyed, as acknowledging Gods wonderful work in their
deliverance.

Ver. 4. For thou have broken, etc.] Here the Prophet shows us what the ground
should be of that wonderful joy promised to Gods people in the foregoing verse,
to wit, Gods wonderful delivering of them from that miserable bondage under
which they had been sorely oppressed; which as it may be partly understood of
the Jews deliverance both from that bondage under which Sennacherib endeavored
to bring them, and from the yoke of the Babylonian captivity; yet it must be
principally understood as looking farther, even to that great redemption of
Gods people by Christ, when the yoke of Satan, and sin, and the world, and
death, and hell was broken, and they were brought into the glorious liberty of
Gods children. Thou have broken the yoke of his burden, that is, the burdensome
yoke of that bondage, and those many heavy pressures under which thy people
lay; and the staff of his shoulder, that is, the staff wherewith their
shoulders were beaten; the rod of the oppressor, that is, the tyrannical rule
of those that oppressed him, or the rod wherewith their taskmasters were wont
to beat them, by way of forcing them to pay their taxes, or to dispatch those
works of drudgery that were imposed upon them; as in the day of Midian, that
is, totally, and easily, and wholly by the outstretched arm of God, without
the help of man and military forces, as when Gideon overcame the Midianites.
And to this it is thought the deliverance here promised is compared, because
the deliverance of the Jews from Sennacheribs army, and from the Babylonian
captivity, but especially our deliverance by Christ, was indeed effected, not
by the power of man and weapons of war, but solely by the almighty power of
God, and because in the manner of Gideons vanquishing the Midianites there was
such a notable typical resemblance of the victory of Christ and his members
over Satan, that great oppressor of his people, for which see the Notes, Judge.
7.19.

Ver. 5. For every battle of the warrier is with confused noise, etc.] If we
read this verse according to the Translation that is set in the Margent of our
Bibles, When the whole battle of the warrier was with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood, etc. then the whole verse seems clearly to be meant
of that overthrow of the Midianites mentioned in the foregoing verse, when the
whole army of the Midianites being suddenly struck with a panick fear, there
was a confused noise amongst them, and they fell upon, and flew one another, so
that they lay tumling in their own blood. And if we thus read the Text, then
the meaning of the last clause, and it was with burning and fuel of fire, must
needs be this, either that the bodies of the Midianites, together with their
garments, being thus soaked and spoiled with the abundance of blood that was
spilt, were fain to be burnt, and made fuel of fire; or else that by this their
slaughtering one another, their whole army was easily, instantly, and utterly
destroyed, as when any combustible matter is suddenly consumed and burnt up
with a flaming fire. But now if we read it, as it is in our Bibles, as
consisting of two parts, the one opposed to the other, For every battle of the
warrier is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood, but this shall be
with burning and fuel of fire, then these words must needs be added to set
forth, why he had compared the deliverance now promised, to that of Gideons
victory over the Midianites, namely, because it should be effected in a strange
and miraculous way, and not by the vanquishing of their enemies in battle, as
usually people are delivered; For every battle of the warrier is with confused
noise, and garments rolled in blood, that is, with the confused noise of Drums
and Trumpets, the clattering of arms, and neighing of horses, the shouting of
Soldiers, and the cries and skreeks of men wounded and slain, that lay weltring
in their blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire, that is, this
deliverance of Gods people which is now promised, shall not be effected by the
power of man, by fighting and bloodshed, but by the almighty power of God,
consuming the enemy on a sudden in a miraculous way, as with a flame of fire.
And this some think is meant of that miraculous destruction of Sennacheribs
army, that had besieged Jerusalem in the days of Hezekiah, which was effected
without any tumult of a battle, without any fighting or bloodshed, multitudes
of the Assyrian army being suddenly slain in the dead of the night by the
stroke of an Angel, and so were destroyed, as if they had been smitten with
lightning from Heaven, and burnt up and consumed like so much fuel of fire. But
others understand it of the deliverance of Gods people by Christ from the
bondage of Sin and Satan, which is not accomplished by weapons of war, battles
and bloodshed, but by the Preaching of the Gospel, and the mighty working of
the Spirit of God, purifying their hearts, and burning up their lusts and
corruptions, the strong holds of Satan, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. even as when any
combustible matter is burnt up and consumed by fire. See the Note, Chap. 4.4.
Or else (as some think) of Christ's destroying the enemies of his people in a
strange and wonderful way, and his making them at last the fuel of Hellfire.

Ver. 6. For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given.] To wit, Jesus
Christ, the great gift of Gods free Grace, who as he was the only begotten Son
of God, (see the Notes, Psalm. 2.7. and 2 Samuel 7.14.) so he was also a child
conceived and born of the Virgin Mary; the same that was before foretold by the
name Immanuel, Chap. 7.14. (for which see the Note there; for much is there
said to show the ground why these Prophesies concerning Christ are inserted in
these places, and to prove that they cannot be meant of Hezekiah, as the Jews
would have it.) To imply the certainty of that which is here foretold, the
Prophet still expresses this which was to be done many years after, as if it
were done already, For unto us a child is born, etc. where by those words unto
us, the Jewish Nation may be primarily and peculiarly meant, from whose Royal
stock he was descended, according to that which the Angel said to the
shepherds, Luke 2.11. Unto you is born this day in the city of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And hereby it is clear, which is observable,
that Christ was given of God to be a Savior, even to those that lived in the
days of the Old Testament. But withal they must be extended to all mankind in
general, because this Son of God by taking man's nature upon him, became a
Savior for man in general, upon condition of believing in him; and because all
that do believe in him (to whom only he is effectually given to be a Savior)
become spiritually the seed, and are joined in one body with the Church of the
Jews. Now this concerning the birth of Christ is here inserted, as a reason of
all that was said before, For unto us a child is born, etc. 1. Because the
deliverance of Gods people by Christ was the great mercy that was principally
intended in the foregoing promises, the victory which was to be accomplished
without tumult and bloodshed, and that which should be the matter of such
exceeding great joy to them; see the foregoing Notes, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. 2ly,
Because the great mercy intended in those temporal deliverances, included also
in the foregoing promises, to wit, that when Jerusalem was saved from
Sennacherib, and that of the Jews return out of Babylon was the preservation of
the Royal stock of David, that so from thence this great Redeemer the Lord was
to spring, in whom that Kingdom of David was to be continued unto eternity, and
by whom the restoration of the Church, begun in the return from Babylon, was
to be perfected and brought to a more flourishing and joyful estate than ever.
And, 3ly, Because even those temporal deliverances of the Jews before mentioned
were effected by this their Messiah, and the virtue of the great work of his
Redemption.

And the Government shall be upon his shoulder.] That is, God shall appoint him
to be the King of his Church, and impose upon him the Government of his Church,
yea he shall make him his Viceroy for the ruling and governing of the whole
world under him, that so he may the better protect and provide for his Church,
and order all things for the benefit and advantage thereof. See the Note, Psalm.
2.6. This phrase, The Government shall be upon his shoulder, may seem to allude
to the custom of carrying a Scepter upon the shoulder, as the sign of Regal
power; as the like is noted in that which is said concerning Eliakim, Chap.
22.22. The key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; but the
meaning is clear, that God should commit the Government of the Church to him,
and so the care of it should in all regards lie upon him, and he should uphold
it with his care and power; he should not commit the Government of it to
others, as needing no other to help him to bear the burden of it, but he
should manage it wholly by his own power; and whereas other Kings are wont to
be burdensome to their subjects, it should not be so with him, because he
should bear his subjects as his burden. Yet there may be also in these words an
allusion to that which he had said before, ver. 4. Thou have broken the staff
of his shoulder; and so the drift of them may be to imply, that having freed
them from the tyrannous oppression of their enemies, they should live as a free
and happy people under his just and righteous Government.

And his name shall be called, etc.] That is, he shall be, and shall by God and
his people be owned to be, Wonderful, Counsell^r, etc. The Jews that they may
with some show of reason, apply this Prophecy to Hezekiah, do violently
transpose the words of the Text, and read it thus, He that is Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, shall call his name, The
Prince of Peace. But the words as they are in the Hebrew, will not bear such a
reading as many of their own do acknowledge; for they stand clearly in the order
as they are rendered in our Translation, And his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, etc. First Wonderful, to wit, with
respect to that incomprehensible wonder of his two natures, the Divine and
Humane nature, united together in one person; as likewise with respect to the
wonder of his Concepton, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, together with all
the miraculous works that were done by him, and especially that great and
astonishing work of man's Redemption, which the Angels themselves did admire, 1
Pet. 1.12. 2ly, Counselor, as being abundantly furnished to reveal all truths
to his people, and in all things to counsel and direct them what to do. See the
Note, Prove. 8.14. 3ly, The mighty God, which shows clearly that this cannot be
understood of Hezekiah, or any other mortal man, but only of the Lord Christ.
4ly, The Everlasting-Father, to wit, because it is he that regenerates the
faithful in all ages, and is the father of eternity, the author of life eternal
to all that believe on him. And, 5ly, The Prince of Peace, to wit, because he
should not advance his Kingdom by force of arms, but in a way of peace; because
he makes our peace with God, and united Jews and Gentiles together, as one
people; and because he is the sole author of all the peace of his people,
outward and inward, temporal and eternal. See the Note, Chap. 2.4.

Ver. 7. Of the increase of his Government and peace there shall be no end,
etc.] This is added with respect to the last Title, given to Christ in the
foregoing verse, The Prince of Peace, to wit, that the extending of his
Principality and Government, and the peace and prosperity thereof, should never
come to an end, but should still proceed farther and farther; which is
especially accomplished by the enlargement of his Kingdom amongst the Gentiles.
See the Note, Psalm. 2.8. And observable it is, that by foretelling the increase
of the peace of his Kingdom, together with the great extent of his dominions,
these singular privileges are implied, 1. That his Kingdom should be carried
on, not by the sword, but by the Gospel of peace. And, 2. that whereas the
enlargement of other Princes Kingdoms do usually tend to their ruin, it should
not be so with his. As for that which follows, 1. It is said that this his
Government should be upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, because
Christ was David's son and heir, and David's Kingdom was a type of Christ's, see
the Notes, 2 Samuel 7.11, 16. Ps. 72.1. and 132.11. And accordingly even in
Jerusalem, the seat of David's Kingdom, Christ Preached the Gospel, and was
owned as the Son of David, and vanquished the spiritual enemies; and from
thence the Gospel of the Kingdom went forth into all the world. 2ly, It is said
that this should be to order it, and to establish it, that is, for the
well-ordering, the strengthening and settling of his Church and Kingdom, with
judgment and with justice, that is, with just judgment; or by punishing the
wicked, and protecting and rewarding the righteous. See the Notes, Psalm. 89.14.
Prove. 16.12. And, 3ly, it is said that this shall be from henceforth even for
ever, that is, from the time that Christ in man's nature shall undertake the
Government of his Church, unto all eternity. And, 4ly, because the
accomplishing of these great things which he had promised, might in the
declining estate of David's Kingdom seem impossible, therefore he adds that
clause, The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this; for which see the
Notes, 2 King. 19.31.

Ver. 8. The Lord sent a word in to Jacob, etc.] It is not a matter of any
concernment to know whether this be a new Prophecy, or a continuation of that
which went before; clear it is, that after the interlacing of the foregoing
comfortable promises, the Prophet here returns to foretell the judgments that
were coming upon the men of Israel, and that for the comfort of Judah, who were
now terrified with the confederacy of Israel with Rezin King of Syria against
them. The Lord sent a word into Jacob, that is, the Lord has by me, or rather
by the many Prophets that have been sent to them, made known the ruin that is
coming upon the posterity of Jacob in the Ten Tribes; and it has lighted upon
Israel, that is, it shall light upon Israel; however they flatter themselves,
even upon them it shall fall; it shall certainly come upon them, as it has
been foretold. See the Note before, ver. 7. Yet there are some Expositors that
would have it understood thus, and it has lighted upon Israel, that is, the
word sent unto them, was accordingly delivered to them, and known amongst them,
falling amongst them, as the seed does on the ground where it is sown.

Ver. 9. And all the people shall know, etc.] That is, when the judgment
threatened shall come upon them, then they shall all know to their cost
experimentally, that it was indeed the word of God that was spoken to them,
though now they will not believe it, but do vainly flatter themselves, even
Ephraim, (see the Note, Psalm. 78.9.] and the inhabitants of Samaria, that is,
of the Kingdom of Samaria, to wit, the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes of Israel: or
rather the inhabitants of the City Samaria, the Royal and chief City of that
Kingdom; who are particularly mentioned by way of intimating to them that they
should not escape by the strength of their fortifications, but should the
rather be destroyed for their vain confidence therein, as is more clearly set
forth in the following words, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart, to
wit, that which is added in the next verse.

Ver. 10. The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones, etc.]
That is, our enemies have beaten down our brick-buildings, but we will build
them again of hewn stones, which will be far more costly, and strong and
stately; the Sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars; that
is, they have hewn and broken down our houses made of the timber of
Sycamore-trees, which was of no great reckoning; but we will build others of
Cedar-Timber, far more stately and lasting. Some, I know, understand this last
Clause of planting Cedars in the room of those Sycamore-trees, which the
enemies had cut down, when they made all the spoil they could in the Country;
which cannot so probably be thought to be here intended. But however the
meaning of these Proverbial Expressions is, that though their State and Land
had suffered much by their Enemies, yet they would soon bring all things into a
more splendid and glorious condition than ever they had been in before;
insomuch that the ruins the Enemy had made should prove an advantage to them,
as being an occasion of making their Cities more beautiful, and their defenses
and fortifications stronger, than they were before. And most probable it is,
that this is meant of that havoc which Pull had made in the Land of Israel, 2
Kin. 15.19. Or else it must be meant of that which after him Tiglath-Pileser
was to make amongst them, 2 Kin. 15.29.

Verse. 11. Therefore the Lord shall set up the Adversaries of Rezin against
him, etc.] In showing how the Judgment threatened against the Israelites should
light upon them, as the Prophet had said before, verse. 8. First he tells them,
how the Lord would raise up Adversaries against Rezin, with whom they had made
a Confederacy, and on whose side they did so much rely, and would make them
prevail over him; which is meant of the Assyrians, who did indeed invade Syria,
and took Damascus their chief City, and slew Rezin, 2 Kin. 16.9. And then he
adds, And join his enemies together; which some would have to be understood of
the many Nations that should be joined together in the Assyrians Army against
Rezin. But I rather think, that having first showed how the Lord would cut off
Rezin, in whose Confederacy they so much gloried, he then adds, that this being
done, he would then join his enemies together, that is, Isreal's Enemies, to
wit, those mentioned in the following words.

Verse. 12. The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind, etc.] That is, the
Syrians, in whose help they put so much confidence, being subdued by the
Assyrian, and become his Subjects, shall come under his conduct; and being
joined with his Forces, shall invade the Israelites on one side, and the
Philistines at the same time shall invade them on the other side; And they
shall devour Israel with open mouth, that is, As so many ravenous beasts, that
with open mouth fall upon their prey, they shall with all greadiness and
eagerness seek utterly to devour and destroy them. For all this his anger is
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. For which see the Note,
Chap. 5.25.

Verse. 13. For the people turns not unto him that smites them, etc.] That
is, they are not reclaimed and brought home to God, by the Judgments that God
brings upon them, and therefore greater must follow; Neither do they seek the
Lord of Hosts, to wit, by Prayer and Repentance.

Verse. 14. Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, etc.]
That is, all of all sorts, from the highest to the lowest, from the chiefest to
the basest and most despised amongst the people, see the Note, Deuteronomy. 28.13. And
such another Proverbial Form of Speech is that which follows, Branch and rush:
For thereby seems to be meant, both the strong and weak; or more particularly,
their choice young men, the beauty of each Family from whence they sprang, as
the Branch does out of the Tree; and likewise those of the poorer and meaner
sort of people. And it is said, that this should be done in one day; that is,
at one and the same time; they should be all cut off suddenly and together:
Which was done when they were all carried away into Captivity by Shalmaneser,
and other Nations planted in their stead, 2 King. 17. But withal observable it
is, that in setting forth this destruction of the Kingdom of the Tribes, he
threatens the cutting off the branch, not the cutting down of the tree; because
the root and stock of this people was still to be preserved. Nor is it wholly
to be disregarded which some add, that in those words, The Lord will cut off
from Israel head and tail; He speaks of the Israelites, as of a people that
were transformed into a beast, and that to imply their Wickedness and brutish
Sins.

Verse. 15. The ancient and the honorable, he is the head, etc.] The Prince and
Magistrate, he that is of high account for Age or Office, he is the Head; to
wit, because the Magistrate does take care for, order and govern the people,
even as the Head does the Body. As for the word honorable, See the Note Chap.
3.3. And the Prophet that teaches Lies, he is the tail: And I conceive lying
Prophets are so called, to imply, how base such men were in the esteem both of
God and good men, according to that which God spoke of the wicked Priests, Mal.
2.9. I have made you contemptible and base before all the people. Yet it might
be also spoken with respect to their abject and base outward condition, because
it is likely that their false Prophets were of the meanest and lowest of the
people, as Jeroboam's Priests also were; See the Note, 1 King. 12.31. Neither
is it wholly to be disregarded what some Learned Expositors have added, that
the Prophet that taught Lies, might well be compared to the Tail: 1. Because
instead of going before the people with holy Doctrine, and an exemplary holy
Life and Conversation, as it was fit the Lord's Prophets should do, they were
still ready to comply with the people, the great ones especially, in saying
whatever they would have them say, and doing whatsoever they would have them
do, turning and winding themselves after them; even as the tail of a beast
follows and turns about which way soever the beast goes. And 2. Because for
their Bellies sake, even for pieces of Bread, as the Prophet Ezekiel says,
Ezekiel. 13.19. they were wont with vile and sordid Flatteries to fawn upon the
People, and especially those that were in high places, even as dogs (to whom
such lying Prophets are compared, Chap. 56.11.) use to fawn upon men with
wagging their tails. Now if it be questioned* why the Prophet does not here
explain what was meant in the foregoing verse by branch and rush, as well as
what was meant by head and tail: To this it is answered, that the reason of
this was, because he intended chiefly to strike at those that were the chiefest
Offenders, and that were a main cause of all the wickedness that was amongst
the people. Yet it may be that which follows, verse. 17. may be added to explain
that Proverbial expression of the branch and rush.

Verse. 16. For the Leaders of this people cause them to err, etc.] See the
Note, Chap. 3.12. This is added as a reason why God would cut off both head and
tail; to wit, Because the Leaders were Seducers, and the people were so ready
to be misled by them.

Verse. 17. Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, etc.] This
may be intended to explain what was meant before, verse. 14. by branch and rush.
And the meaning is, That whereas usually when the people of God do walk as
becomes his people, the Lord does rejoice in them, and in seeing them in a
prosperous condition, according to that, Chap. 65.19. I will rejoice in
Jerusalem, and joy in my people; and that which David says, That the Lord has
pleasure in the Prosperity of his Servants, Psalm. 35.27. See the Note, Deuteronomy.
28.63. And consequently is delighted to see their young men to grow up and
prosper, as being a chief stay and strength for them: Now on the contrary,
because of their sins, he would not rejoice in them, nor in their young men,
nor in any thing that should be for their welfare; but as being grieved at
their wickedness, Psalm. 95.10. He would not spare them nor show them any
favor, but would punish and destroy them. This I conceive is the full intent
of this expression. Yet it may be understood Figuratively thus, The Lord shall
have no joy in their young men; that is, he will detest and abhor them: Neither
shall have mercy on the fatherless and widows; as if he should have said,
Though these even bloody enemies are sometimes wont to spare; or, though God be
usually very favorable to these, and very tenderly careful and watchful over
them; yet now he will not spare them, he will regard neither Sex, nor Age, nor
State; For every one is an hypocrite, and an evil d^er, and every mouth
speaks folly, or villainy, as it is in the Margin. The meaning is, That they
were not ashamed openly and impudently to declare their wickedness: For all
this his anger is not turned away, etc. See the Note, Chap. 5.25.

Verse. 18. For wickedness burns as the fire, etc.] Some understand this
merely of the growth of wickedness amongst the Israelites, to wit, that as a
fire in combustible matter does spread and rise higher and higher, so had all
kind of wickedness grown and increased amongst that people, so that it had
overspread the whole land, and was grown up to a mighty height. But the words
seem plainly to intend the destruction of a people. And therefore I take this
to be the meaning of them, that as a fire kindled in the underwood, the briers
and thorns, in some great wood or forest, does first devour them, and then
afterward taking hold of the higher trees, does likewise consume them, (which
is expressed in these words, It shall devour the briers and thorns, it shall
kindle in the thickets of the forest), so this peoples wickedness, by reason of
the wrath of God it would bring upon men, should consume and destroy the whole
people, even in the most populous places, from the lowest to the highest; see
the Notes, Deuteronomy. 32.22. Psalm. 97.3. and 83.14. And they shall mount up like the
lifting up of smoke, that is, the people being made the fuel of Divine
vengeance, shall be utterly consumed, and vanish away to nothing. See the Note,
Psalm. 37.20. yet some add, that hereby may also be implied, that their
punishments should be a terror to all that were about them.

Verse. 19. Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened, etc.]
That is, the land of Israel shall be brought into a very calamitous, sad,
dreadful and hopeless condition, see the Notes, Chap. 5.30. and 8.22. In this
expression, I conceive, the Prophet alludes to the last words of the foregoing
verse, they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke; as is the more evident
by the following words, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire,
concerning which see the foregoing Note: No man shall spare his brother, that
is, as men in the dark, they shall fall foul upon one another, and consume and
destroy one another. The land shall be full of uproars, seditions, and civil
dissentions, wherein they shall mutually spoil and destroy one another, not
sparing their nearest relations; which yet cannot be meant of those civil
outrages mentioned, 2 King. 15. because they were before this was Prophesied.
Lest the people should flatter themselves with a vain hope that none of the
evil here threatened by the Prophet should come upon them, because there was no
appearance nor likelihood of any enemy that should invade them, therefore they
are told, that rather than God would want those that should execute his
vengeance upon them, he would arm them against themselves, and make every one
destroy his brother.

Ver. 20. And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall
eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied, etc.] That is, they
shall spoil and plunder all that are about them on every side, without making
any difference of the persons of whom they make a prey, whether they be rich or
poor, strangers or near relations; like so many famished, starved men, they
shall snatch at every thing they come nigh, and yet after all this they shall
still be hungry and unsatisfied; which is added, either to imply the extreme
scarcity that should be in the land, in that those that used such violence to
supply their wants, should not be able to get enough to satisfy the necessity
of nature; or else to imply their insatiable covetousness or cruelty, and the
apparent curse of God that was upon them. They shall eat every man the flesh of
his own arm; that is, they shall prey upon their nearest Relations, being
herein like so many distracted men, or so many men turned mad with extremity of
hunger, that gnaw and eat their own flesh. Yea, because by spoiling and
destroying their Brethren, they spoiled and destroyed those that might have
been a defense to them; therefore it is said, that they should eat not only
their own flesh, but also the flesh of their own arm.

Ver. 21. Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh, etc.] Manasseh shall rob,
and eat, and devour Ephraim, and Ephraim shall do the same to Manasseh. These
two Tribes are particularly mentioned, because they were obliged to one another
by somewhat a more singular relation, as being not only descended from Jacob,
as the other Tribes also were; but likewise as being both of them the Posterity
of Joseph, which the other Tribes were not: And therefore it was the worse in
them mutually to spoil and destroy one another: And they together shall be
against Judah: that is, They shall both join together to destroy their Brethren
of the Tribe of Judah; though that were the Tribe to whom God had assigned the
Regal Power, and from whom God had promised their Messiah should descend. And
this happily might be accomplished, when the Israelites of the ten Tribes were
subdued by the Assyrians, and so might serve under the command of Sennacherib,
Eswhaddon or Nebuchadnezzar, when they invaded the Land of Judah. As for that
clause, which was before twice inserted, verse. 12, and 17. For all this his
anger is not turned away, etc. See the Notes, chap 5.25.

CHAP. X.
VERSE 1. WOE unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, etc.] Here again the
Prophet returns to mention some notorious Sins, for which the Judgments before
threatened should come upon them; as namely, the Oppressions of their
Magistrates: which he the rather insists on, to let them know, that as they had
a chief hand in the Sins of the Land, so they should be the first or the chief
in the Punishment: Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees; that is, the
Princes that make unrighteous Laws, and the Judges that pronounce unjust
Sentences in Courts of Judgment. And the very same thing may be intended by the
following Clause, And that write grievously what they have prescribed; that is,
That cause Laws, or Decrees, to be written down, entered and enrolled, that were
very grievous and burdensome to the poor Subjects, not being ashamed that they
should be kept as a public Monument of their Injustice. But yet there are
diverse Learned Expositors that do rather read the second Clause, as it is in
the Margin of our Bibles, And to the writers that write grievousness which they
have prescribed, and so hold that Judgment is here denounced severally; 1.
Against those that made such unrighteous Laws, and pronounced such unjust
Decrees: And 2. against their Scribes or Registers, that were subservient to
them, in writing and enrolling these Decrees; which to me seems most probable.

Ver. 2. To turn aside the needy from judgment, etc.] That is, To keep the poor
from being able to proceed in a course of Law before their Tribunals against
those that wrong them, and so at last to get a day of hearing; or some way to
obstruct the course of Law, that Justice shall not be done them, nor a just
Sentence pronounced for them; which last is more clearly expressed in the
following words, And to take away the right from the poor of my people. Some
would limit the Injustice of those Laws and Decrees, whereby the Judgment of
the poor was turned aside, to their making the Fees and Charges of Lawsuits so
insupportable, that a poor man could not in a way of Law seek at any time to
right himself. But I see not why it should be limited to this. Many other ways
the poor might be kept from having Justice done them. As for that expression,
The poor of my people. See the Notes, Chap. 3.12, 15. That widows may be their
prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. See the Notes, Chap. 1.17, 23.

Ver. 3. And what will ye do, etc.] This is spoken to the unjust Princes,
reproved in the two foregoing verses; And what will you do in the day of
visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? That is, from the
Land of Assyria. Even their coming from a Country so far off, did imply them
to be a mighty Nation; because else they could not have born the charge of so
great an Expedition. But see the Notes, Chap. 5.26. and 7.17, 18. And see the
Note also Job 31.14. To whom will ye flee for help? As if he had said, You that
would not be a refuge to the poor, when they fled to you for help, shall in
that day find no refuge for your selves. Your great friend Rezin will then be
cut off; and the Syrians, now your Confederates, shall then join with your
Enemies against you (see the Note Chap. 9.12.) and your Idol-gods will be then
found no way able to defend you, so that you will be left destitute of any
help: And where will you leave your Glory? that is, your Riches and your
Bravery, wherein you did so exceedingly glory? where will ye find a place
wherein you may secure them? where will ye find any to whose trust ye may
commit them, that so afterward ye may receive them back again? As if he should
have said, Alas, there will be no saving them, the enmy will make a prey of
them all. And could they be hidden in any place of safety, when you are carried
away into captivity what benefit or advantage will the securing of them be unto
you? Or else by their Glory may be meant their Honor and Greatness, their
Dignity and Eminency in the World: Where will ye leave your Glory? It is
Ironically spoken; as if he had said, And what will then become of your Glory?
you will then be cast down from your high state and dignity. Now ye exalt your
selves above the people like so many Demigods, and very glorious titles of
honor are still given you; but who will make any reckoning of your greatness
and glory, or give you any such titles in that day? The Sword of the enemy will
put no difference betwixt you and the meanest of the people.

Ver. 4. Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall
fall under the slain, etc.] According to this Translation of ours, the meaning
must needs be, either 1. That were it not that God had respect to the glory of
his Name, and to his faithfulness in making good his Promises, and did
thereupon resolve to remember mercy in the midst of Judgment; they should be
all miserably destroyed, either captivated or slain. Or 2ly. That they should
be all made Prisoners or slain, but without any fault in God; their destruction
would be wholly of themselves, Hos. 13.9. Or 3ly. That because they had cast
off God, and God had justly cast off them, therefore as a people that had no
interest in God, nor hope of help from God, they should be most miserably
destroyed. For this, They shall bow down-under the prisoners, and they shall
fall under the slain, may be an Hyperbolical expression, implying, either 1.
That they should humble themselves, crouch and bow to their enemies, even
beneath those that are taken Prisoners, and those that are slain; or rather,
2ly. That their misery should exceed the misery of those that were extremely
miserable, that they should be more hardly, cruelly, and reproachfully used,
than other captives and slain men used to be. And this was done when Salmaneser
took Samaria, 2 King. 17.6. And observable it is also, that this is spoken to
their wicked Princes and Judges; as if it had been said, And this shall be the
end of all your Glory. As for that which is again repeated, for all this his
anger is not turned away, etc. See the Note above Chap. 9.25.

Ver. 5. O Assyrian, etc.] Here the Prophet begins to threaten the Assyrians
with destruction, and that to support and comfort his faithful ones amongst his
people, as giving them to understand hereby, that though for a time he might
make use of the Assyrian by way of scourging his people for their sins, yet it
should not be long ere he would call them to an account, and destroy them for
all their wickedness. O Assyrian; it is in the Hebrew O Ashur; for so it seems
the land of Assyria or the Inhabitants thereof, were called, either from Ashur,
the son of Shem, Genesis 10.22. as it is most genera'ly thought, or from one of
the posterity of Ham, of the same name. See the Notes Genesis 10.11. and Psalm.
83.8. And hereby in this place is meant the King of Assyria, to wit,
Sennacherib, (together with his army) as appears plainly, ver. 7. Are not my
Princes altogether Kings? and in many other such like passages. As for this
expression, O Assyrian the rod of mine anger, either it may be taken, as spoken
by God in a way of calling the Assyrian to come and destroy the I^raelites,
according to the Commission which God in his anger against Israel had given
him; or else as in a way of lamenting the sad miseries that were coming upon
his people, when the Assyrian should be used as his rod to punish them for
their sins: which is also repeated in the following words, and the staff in
their hand is mine indignation. The meaning whereof seems to be, That as the
Assyrians were Gods Rod to correct his people, so the staff in their hand, the
weapons wherewith they came armed, and all the power which they had wherewith
to fight against the Israelites, were but the Instruments of Gods Indignation
for the punishing of the people. Indeed, if we read the first words, as they
are in the margin of our Bibles, Woe to the Assyrian, the rod of mine anger;
then the next clause may be read also, as it is there rendered, though the staff
in their hand is mine indignation. And then the drift of this clause, must be
to imply, that though God in his just indignation would make use of the
Assyrian for the punishing of his people; yet woeful destruction would at last
come upon the Assyrians for all that; so that this is clearly added for the
comfort of Gods people, to whom the very name of the Assyrians must needs be
dreadful, because of some incursions they had formerly made into the land of
Israel.

Ver. 6. I will send him against an hypocritical Nation, and against the people
of my wrath will I give him a charge, etc.] That is, against the people of
Israel, that do continually and without ceasing provoke me to wrath against
them, and against whom therefore I am highly offended, and have determined to
pour forth my wrath, upon them; yea, this expression, the people of my wrath,
may seem to imply that there was nothing in them, but what might justly stir up
Gods indignation against them, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, etc.
which is fully an explanation of what was signified by that Prophetic name
given lately to the Prophets Son, Maher-shalal-hash-baz, for which see the Note
Chap. 8.1.

Ver. 7. Howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think so, etc.] To
wit, That he is employed by me, as the Rod of mine anger, or that he is sent by
me to punish the wickedness of my people; no such thought will ever come into
his heart. All that he will mind, will be the satisfying of his cruel and
ambitious desires, by conquering Kingdoms, and destroying the people. As for
that which may be objected, how then did Rabshakeh say to Hezekiah, 2 Kin.
18.25. Am I now come up without the Lord against this place to destroy it? the
Lord said to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it; see how this may be
answered in the Note there.

Ver. 8. For he says, Are not my Princes altogether Kings? That is, Are not my
Nobles and Princes, that attend upon me, every way equal to Kings in riches,
glory, state and power? Or, Are not the several King that I have subdued,
become my Princes, holding me as their Sovereign, and serving under my command?
And thus from the pride of the Assyrian, the confidence he had in his own
greatness and power, the Prophet proves what he had said in the foregoing
verse, that he minded not God in his expedition against the land of Israel, but
went forth merely in the proud confidence he had of his own unresistible power.

Ver. 9. Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not Samaria as
Damascus?] As if he should have said, Have not I, my Father and other
Progenitors, subdued all these strong Cities and Provinces, as well the one as
the other? When any one of them stood out against us, were they not brought
under our power, as the other before had been? And thus from his prevailing
over these, he intends to infer, that he should certainly prevail over others
whom he had not yet subdued, and particularly over Jerusalem. In 2 King. 18.34.
we find a like vaunting speech uttered by Rabshakeh, wherein some of the places
here named, are also mentioned. And because that, and diverse other of the
vaunting and blasphemous speeches of his there recorded, are so like to these
wherewith the Prophet does here set forth the blasphemous pride and
self-confidence of the Assyrian, it seems most probable that it is that
Invasion of Sennacherib that is here pointed at. Because Calno, or Calneh, Amos
6.2. is said to have been in the land of Shinar, Genesis 10.10. and Carchemish is
expressly said to be a City lying by Euphrates, 2 Chronicles. 35.20. therefore it is
thought the most of the places here named were in those parts.

Ver. 10. As my hand has found the Kingdoms of the Idols, etc.] That is, As I
have subdued and gotten to my self by my great power several Kingdoms that were
under the patronage and protection of their several Gods, and whose graven
Images did excel them of Jerusalem and Samaria; that is, were mightier Gods
than theirs. But for the better understanding of this passage, we must know, 1.
That to set forth how easily he subdued these Kingdoms, he uses this
expression, As my hand has found the Kingdoms of the Idols; he found it no
harder work to take these Kingdoms, than it is for a man to take up a
birds-nest that he finds in his way, as he does afterward express himself,
ver. 14. 2ly. That his intention was blasphemously to insult, not only over the
Nations whom he had vanquished, and also over their Gods, whom he also esteemed
Gods not able to defend their people, purposely that he might in like manner
reproach the God of Jerusalem, on whose aid he knew Hezekiah and his people did
with much confidence rely; for agreeable hereto were these blasphemous vauntings
of Rabshakeh, 2 King. 18.33, 34, 35. and 19.12. 3ly. That he calls their gods
Idols and Graven-Images, either because it was the constant course of the
heathens to worship their gods in and before Idols and graven Images; or else
as by way of contempt, as not accounting their gods worthy the name of gods in
comparison of their great God Nizrech, 2 King. 19.37. that had advanced the
Assyrian Empire to such a mighty height. 4ly. That the reason why he does so
peremptorily aver, that the graven Images of the Kingdoms whom he had
vanquished did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria, was because they judged
of the greatnese and power of their Gods, according to the multitude and
greatness, the riches and prosperity, the success and victories of the people
that worshipped them: and it may be to according to the multitude of Sacrifices
that were offered them, and the Pomp and Solemnity used in their Worship. And
observable also it is herein, with what horrid Blasphemy, by preferring those
Idols before the God of Jerusalem, this Miscreant makes thr true God less than
nothing; for an Idol is nothing, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.4, 5. That the
words of this Verse are an abrupt and imperfect kind of speech, As my hand has
found the Kingdoms of the Idols, and whose graven Images did excel them of
Jerusalem and Samaria; as if he had said, so shall my hand also much more find
and subdue Jerusalem too, as is more fully expressed in the following verse.

Ver. 11. Shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her Idols, so do to
Jerusalem and her Idols?] Hezekiah had demolished all the Idols in Judah, when
the Assyrian went up against Jerusalem; but this Heathenish King after his
manner speaks no otherwise of the true God, the God of Jerusalem, than of the
Idols of other Nations.

Ver. 12. Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord has performed
his whole work upon Mount Zion and on Jerusalem, etc.] To wit, his Church and
People; and see also the Note, Chap. 1.27. When the Lord has fully done by the
Assyrian what he means to do, by way of taking vengeance on his People for
their wickedness, (for that is his work, as he is the just Judge of the world)
and by way of Fatherly Correction, for the humbling, purging and reforming his
chosen ones; when he has sufficiently quieted them under his hand, and brought
them home by Repentance unto himself; then, says the Lord, I will punish the
fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria; that is, his blasphemous and
reproachful speeches uttered against God, and against his Servants, his proud
vaunting speeches concerning himself, and all his hard and cruel usage of God's
people. It is in the Hebrew, I will visit upon the fruit of the stout heart of
the King of Assyria; an Expression used with respect to God's forbearing, and
not seeming to mind the wickedness of a people for a time, when yet afterward
he appears against them to punish them; as likewilse to imply, that God never
punishes or corrects without a due cognizance of the Cause and Crime; see the
Note, Genesis 11.5. As for the last words, And the glory of his high looks,
thereby is meant all the Assyrian did proudly and contemptuously against God
and his people.

Ver. 13. For he says, By the strength of my hand I have done it, etc.] That
is, By my great Power, by the multitude and strength of my Armies, and by my
wisdom, for I am prudent; that is, by my Craft and Policy, in sowing Discords
amongst Nations, in raising occasions amongst them for my invading of them, and
other suchlike State-stratagems, and by my wise managing of all my Designs
when I did invade them: And I have removed the bounds of the people, to wit, by
bringing them all as one people under my Dominion, and distributing them under
the Government of my Viceroys after what manner I pleased: and have robbed
their treasures, that is, their secretest stores and treasures, whether public
or private; and I have put down the Inhabitants like a valiant man, that is,
like a man of extraordinary courage and strength, I have destroyed the
Inhabitants, though never so many, and never so strongly fortified.

Ver. 14. And my hand has found as a nest the riches of the people, etc.] That
is, I have as easily seized upon the riches of the people, in the several
places that have been subdued by me, as a man may take eggs out of a Birds
nest, where all the labor indeed is in finding the Nest; when a man has once
found it, he may easily put in his hand and take the eggs away with him: which
is more fully expressed in the following words; and as one gathers eggs that
are left, to wit, the Dam not being there, or flying away for fear; have I
gathered all the earth; that is, even with as much ease have I gathered
together, and taken to my self the wealth of the whole world; and so he speaks
in a proud vaunting manner: because he had conquered the greatest part of the
Earth then known, and brought it under his Dominion. Some I know in this
Phrase, of his gathering all the Earth, would have his carrying away the
Inhabitants of the Land included, as well as his surprising of their Treasures.
But I conceive that is not here, at least principally, intended. And with how
little difficulty he did this, is farther set forth in the following words,
wherein proceeding still in the same Similitude, he adds, And there was none
that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped. Birds when they are in
their Nests, will sometimes in defense of their eggs strike with their wings,
or peck with their bills, or make some kind of peeping noise, out of a kind of
discontent against those that disturb them; or else they will fly about, and
with some chattering or crying Note will express their anger against those that
rob them. And therefore to express how easily he took away the wealth of those
places where he prevailed, he compares himself to one that takes away the eggs
out of a birds nest, where there is no bird in the least to stir against him;
there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped; that is,
there was none that durst in a manner make any resistance against him. Such a
terror fell upon them, that they scarce durst lift up a hand, or mutter against
me, or so much as expostulate the matter with me, or complain or cry to others
for help.

Ver. 15. Shall the Ax boast, etc.] This is inserted by the Prophet by way of
discovering the absurdity of the fore-recited vauntings of the Assyrian: Shall
the ax boast it self against him that heweth therewith? Or shall the saw
magnify it self against him that sh^keth it? That is, when the workman has
made a piece of work, shall the ax or saw, which he made use of, glory and
vaunt, that it was they which made the work, and not the Artificer that made
use of them? That were against all reason. It were absurd enough, if an Ax or
Saw of a better metal, and sharper than another, should advance it self against
one that were blunter and of a worse metal; and that because it is not from it
self, but merely from the pleasure of him that made them, that they are better
or sharper than others; but much more absurd it would be, if they should
advance themselves against him that made use of them. And every way as absurd
it was for the Assyrian to advance himself against God, that made use of him
for the hewing, and wounding, and cutting down the Nations, considering that he
had all the Power he had from God; neither could he have done any thing against
them, had not God been pleased to make use of ^im herein. And to the same
purpose is the following clause, As if the rod should shake it self against
them that lift it up; or as if the staff should lift up it self, as if it were
no wood; that is, as it were absurd for a rod or staff to advance themselves
against the man that should smite with them, saying, It was we that gave the
strokes, and not you; so forgetting, as it were, that they are but pieces of
dead wood, no way able of themselves to stir or move themselves; even so absurd
and ridiculous it was in the Assyrian, who was raised up by God, and enabled by
him to do what he did, to exalt himself against God, and to ascribe all that he
did to himself; so forgetting what a poor contemptible creature he was in
himself, unable to have done any thing, had not God been pleased to make use of
him as a rod and a staff, to scourge and beat his people. This last clause may
be read, as it is in the Margin of our Bibles, As if a rod should shake them
that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up that which is not wood;
which implies the very same thing, that as it is against all sense and reason
to think that a rod or staff should have power over a living man, that is not a
dead piece of wood, as that is; so it was a most unreasonable thing for the
Assyrian to exalt himself against God. But the Translation which is in our
Bibles is (I think) clearly the best.

Ver. 16. Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones
leanness, etc.] That is, Because of this proud and blasphemous boasting of the
Assyrian against the Lord, and because of his rage and cruelty against his
people, God will pull down his great strength and power, in the confidence
whereof he does thus arrogantly exalt himself. In denouncing this judgment, he
gives God the title, The Lord, the Lord of Hosts, by way of opposing the Lords
Almighty Power to the weakness and pride of the Assyrian; and the hosts which
God has under his command both in Heaven and Earth, to Sennacherib's Army,
which he deemed so invincible: and the Judgment intended is the dreadful
destruction that was brought upon the Assyrian Army, whilst it lay before
Jerusalem, by one of the Lord's Heavenly Host. As for this Figurative
expression wherewith their destruction is set forth, The Lord shall send among
his fat ones leanness; either that slaughter is meant that was made amongst the
Princes and great Commanders of his Army, of whom he had boasted before, ver.
8. (for which see the Note 2 Kin. 19.35. and what is noted upon the like
expressions, Job 15.27. and Psalm. 22.29.) Or more generally, that the vast and
huge body of the Assyrian Army should by the slaughter of so many thousands be
suddenly consumed and brought down to a very poor and thin company. A
Similitude therefore the fitter, because the Assyrian in his exalting himself
against God, is thereby covertly compared to some fat pampered horse, that will
not be under command, but kicks and flings, and at last casts off the man that
rides him. See the Note, Deuteronomy. 32.15. And then in the following words the same
judgment is set forth under another Similitude, And under his glory he shall
kindle a burning like the burning of a fire; whereby is meant, that his
glorious and victorious Army, whereof he vaunted so greatly, and for which he
was so glorious and dreadful amongst all the Nations round about, should be
suddenly and utterly consumed, even as so much wood would instantly be burnt up
by a fire that should be kindled under it. And herein it may well be there is
an Allusion either to that Custom which was used in those times, of burning
the dead bodies of men upon piles of wood, whereon they were laid; or else to
the manner of that miraculous destruction of Sennacherib's Army, which some say
was done by a burning Pestilence, and others by some strange kind of blasting,
such as was that of Nadab and Abihu, Levit. 10.2. and that of the Israelites,
Numb. 11.1. But see the Note above, Chap. 9.5. and likewise Psalm. 21.9. and
83.14.

Ver. 17. And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, etc.] That is, The God
of Israel who is usually the enlightner and comforter of his people, both by
chearing them up in their afflictions, and by delivering them out of the
darkness of their tribulations, as he was to the Jews at that time of their
great distress, when they were besieged by the Assyrian Army, (the Prophet
alludes to what he had said before, Chap. 9.2. for which see the Note there)
shall be as a fire to burn up their enemies, and his holy One for a flame; See
the Note, Chap. 1.4. The meaning is, that the holy God, who had sanctified
Israel to be his peculiar people, would manifest himself to be such, both by
defending them and destroying their enemies; And it shall burn and devour his
thorns and his briers; that is, the Soldiers of his Army, that as briers and
thorns had sorely galled and distressed God's people, in one day, that is
altogether at one and the same time; the Army that was so long a time-gathering
and forming, should be all suddenly destroyed. And indeed though this were done
in the night, 2 King. 19.35. yet it might be properly enough said to have been
done in one day; because the night is a part of the natural day. Some would
have the briers and thorns to be meant of the meaner sort of the Assyrian Army.
But I conceive that this, concerning the destruction of all sorts amongst them,
great and small, may rather be thought to be set forth in the following verse.

Ver. 18. And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field,
etc.] That is, the Bravery and Pride of his glorious Army, (See the Note
before, verse. 16.) which by reason of the multitude of the Soldiers therein,
and by reason of the Spears and Lances wherewith they were armed, seemed to
resemble some mighty forest, full of all sorts of trees, as thick as they can
stand one by another; or some rich field, wherein the ears of corn do lift up
their heads as close as they can possibly grow together: This seems to be the
plain meaning of this Metaphorical Expression. Yet it may also well be, which
some think, that by the glory of his forest may be meant the great ones, his
Princes and Commanders in the Army, that were as so many lofty and stately
trees; and by the fruitful field, the meaner and inferior body of his Soldiery:
Or else, that his Camp being of a very large extent, that part of his Army that
lay encamped in the higher and more eminent places, is compared to the high
trees of a Forest; and that part that lay in the plains and lower grounds, is
compared to ^corn in the Valleys. The greatest difficulty is in the following
words, Both Soul and Body, which is in the Hebrew, From the Soul, and even to
the flesh: And therefore it is so many several ways expounded; As 1. that the
vengeance of God should fall not upon their Bodies only, but upon their Souls
too. Or 2. that both man and beast should be destroyed. Or 3. that not only the
Soul should ^e smitten, and the Life taken away, but also their Bodies should
be destroyed and consumed. Or 4. that by smiting their Bodies, they should be
bereaved of their Souls, their Lives, and so they should be utterly destroyed.
Before they were threatened with a consumption or leanness, verse. 16. which
might be without loss of Life: but here it is expressed that they should be
slain and utterly destroyed, even as fire by burning the body does take away
the Life. Or 5. that the Commanders and Captains, who were as the Soul and
Spirit of that vast body of their Army, should be cut off; and withal the body,
that was enlivened, as it were, and governed by the Soul, should be destroyed.
And these two last indeed I judge may most probably be here intended.

And they shall be as when a Standard Bearer faints.] That is, As when a
Standard-bearers heart melts away, because he sees his Soldiers forsake
their Colors, and thereupon he flies with the rest, and so the Standard is
taken; or as when a Standard Bearer faints, and falls and dies, the whole Army
is usually then discouraged and routed; so it shall be with the Assyrian Army,
upon this miraculous havoc that shall by an Angel be made amongst them, they
shall be all dismayed, and irrecoverably disordered and forced to fly. But yet
some do particularly apply this to the fainting and flight of Sennacherib their
King, 2 King. 19.36, 37. and the terror that fell upon the Nations under his
command, upon his destruction.

Ver. 19. And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a Child
may write them.] That is, of the Soldiers of that numberless Army, there shall
be but a very few left alive. Some shall escape, that they may report in their
own Country what the God of Israel had done to them; but they shall be but a
poor small number. In this expression, A child may write them, there seems to
be an Allusion to the enrolling and listing of the names of the Soldiers by the
Muster-masters, or Clerks of their bands; and so it is all one in effect, as if
the Prophet said, that there would be no need of any such Officer to keep a
Roll of them; even a Child would be sufficient to take an account of them. And
indeed observable herein it is what was the issue of the proud boasting of
Rabshakeh, 2 King. 18.23.

Ver. 20. And it shall come to pass in that day, etc.] To wit, when the Lord
has finished his whole work upon his people, and has punished the Assyrians,
by whom he was pleased to correct them, That the remnant of Israel, and such as
are escaped of the house of Jacob, that is, the remnant that shall escape and
not be destroyed in the Assyrian Invasion, shall no more again stay upon him
that smote them, that is, the Assyrian, but shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy
One of Israel. See the Note, Chap. 1.4. In truth, that is, sincerely, not
hypocritically, as they had formerly done, when they made an outward profession
indeed of trusting in God, but did rely wholly upon the Assyrians. The meaning
is, that when the remnant that were escaped had experimentally found the sad
fruit of their own folly, in calling in the Assyrian to their help, and in
resting upon him with so much confidence, in that he had proved a scourge to
them instead of an help, and God had made them sorely to smart for it; and when
by God's destroying the Assyrian, they had learnt what a reed the Assyrian was
to be leaned upon, and how Almighty and Merciful the Lord was, this should make
them resolve never more to stay themselves upon the Assyrians, or any such as
they were, but wholly and solely to rely upon the Lord.

Ver. 21. The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty
God.] To wit, of whose infinite Power they should have clear experience by that
Destruction which God would bring upon the Assyrian Army, and the Deliverance
which thereby should be wrought for Jerusalem, which they had straightly
besieged. It is as if the Prophet had said, And indeed so it shall be; that
which I foretold by the Prophetic name of my Son Shear-jashah, which is, being
interpreted, The remnant shall return, (concerning which see the Note, Chap.
7.3.) shall certainly come to pass; a remnant shall escape, that shall not only
come back to the places of their abode, from whence they had been driven by the
Assyrian; but also return to God by unfeigned Repentance.

Ver. 22. For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet a remnant
of them shall return.] That is, only a small remnant of them shall escape, and
by Repentance return to the Lord their God. If we read these words, as if
Israel were spoken to in the V^cative Case, For though thy people, O Israel, be
as the sand of the Sea, they may be taken as spoken by way of Apostrophe,
either to the Patriarch Jacob. Though the Promise made to thee concerning the
wonderful increase of thy Posterity shall be wonderfully made good to thee, yet
but a remnant of them shall be saved: Or else to the people of Israel: Though
thy people, O Israel, shall be as the sand of the Sea, yet but a few of them
shall be saved. But as they are expressed in our Bibles, they seem rather the
words of God to the Prophet, For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the
Sea, yet a remnant of them shall return. And indeed when the Assyrian had not
only carried away the ten Tribes of the Kingdom of Israel into Captivity, but
also had so far impaired the number of the other Tribes that were of the
Kingdom of Judah, by the havoc he hade made amongst them in the days of
Hezekiah, this was then clearly accomplished concerning a remnant only that
should be preserved. And because this was a clear Type of those few of the
Jewish Nation that were in the Apostles time converted to the Faith of the
Gospel, therefore St. Paul speaks of that, as an accomplishment of that which
the Prophet here says, Romans 9.27. Esaias also cries concerning Israel, Though
the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a remnant shall
be saved.

The consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness.] Or, in
righteousness, as it is in the Margin. The meaning is, that the destruction
wherewith God had determined to consume and waste the Jews, should as a mighty
flood (see the Notes before, Chap. 8.7, 8.) overflow the Land, and thereby
sweep away the Inhabitants, to wit, so far as God had withal decreed it should
go; and that this should be done with righteousness, or in righteousness, in
that hereby he should proceed with great Justice and Righteousness for the
punishing of the wickedness of his people, and withal approve himself faithful
and just in reserving a remnant according to the Promise he had formerly made
for the preservation of the seed of Abraham, and the raising of the Messiah out
of his stock. This I conceive is the clear meaning of this clause; and that
this is purposely added, to show why he had said in the foregoing words, that
only a remnant of them should return. But yet many others hold, that by the
consumption decreed is meant that little remnant that should be left of the
people thus wasted and destroyed; and that it is said that this consumption
decreed should overflow with righteousness; because this remnant being
reclaimed and refined by their Afflictions, should abound in Holiness and
Righteousness; which they say was partly fulfilled in the remnant that returned
unto the Lord in Hezekiah's days, when God had so miraculously delivered
Jerusalem from the Assyrian Army; but most remarkably in that eminent Grace
that was so conspicuous in that remnant of the Jews that embraced the Faith of
Christ, the Apostles and other Christians of the Primitive Church. Yea others
would extend this further, namely, that this small remnant left of the
consumption decreed, should cause Holiness and Righteousness to overflow the
whole world, to wit, by their spreading of the Gospel amongst all Nations.

Ver. 23. For the Lord God of Hosts shall make a consumption, even determined,
in the midst of all the Land.] That the Jews might not slight all the Prophet
had spoken, either in the confidence of their own strength, or as pretending it
to be incredible, that God should bring such a consumption and destruction upon
his people, to whom he had made so many gracious Promises, and with whom he had
made an everlasting Covenant; the Prophet does here yet once again assure them,
that so it should be; the Lord, even the Lord of Hosts, would certainly bring
this desolation upon them, even in the midst of all the Land, that is, all the
Land over; or, even in the heart and inmost places of the Land. Where the
Apostle Paul cites some part of the foregoing verse, to prove that there would
be only a remnant of the Jews converted and saved; he adds also the words of
this verse, but according to the Translation of the Septuagint, Romans 9.28. For
he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness; because a short
work will the Lord make upon the earth: wherein though the words seem to differ
much from these here, which are rendered according to the Hebrew; yet the sense
is the same, the drift of the Apostle being thereby to show, that what the
Prophet did of old foretell, should be fulfilled in those times; because God had
proposed to make a short work of the business, even speedily and within a short
time, to cut off in a manner the whole Nation of the Jews, to wit, by the
Romans; and so then likewise only a remnant should be saved.

Ver. 24. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Hosts, etc.] See the Note above,
ver. 16. Because the Prophet had spoken of such an universal consumption that
should be amongst the people of the Land, lest the faithful amongst them should
be overmuch disheartened and discouraged thereby, he now by commission from God
chears up them; and because the immediate storm that was coming, and was most
likely to be dreadful to them, was the Siege of Jerusalem, therefore he
addresses his Speech particularly to the Inhabitants of that City, together
with those that had fled thither for refuge, O my my people that dwell in
Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian, that is, be not extremely terrified when
the Assyrian shall come to invade you and besiege you, because of this which I
have said; to which purpose observable it is, that in these words he owns them
still as his people, and hints to them the tender respect he had to Zion; which
he had chosen to be his dewlling place; He shall smite thee with a rod, and
shall lift up a staff against thee after the manner of Egypt. This has respect
to that which he had said before, verse. 5. O Assyrian the rod of mine anger,
etc. for which see the Notes there: And the meaning is, that as formerly God
suffered the Egyptians to oppress them sorely, but did not suffer them to
destroy them, or to keep them in perpetual bondage, but did at last destroy
Pharaoh, and deliver them; so it should be with the Assyrian; God would use him
as a rod to scourge his people, and as a staff to beat them, but not as a Sword
to slay them; he should not be able utterly to ruin them as he intended; but
God would at last seasonably deliver them, and destroy Sennacherib, as he did
Pharaoh. And so likewise under this might be employed, that at the near
approaching Invasion of the Assyrians by Sennacherib, they should not take
Jerusalem, (he should only lift up his staff against them, and threaten them
sorely, as it is said afterward, ver. 32. He shall shake his hand against the
mount of the daughter of Zion) and that they should not carry away the people
into Captivity, as they had carried away the ten Tribes of Israel. But now if
we read this passage according to the Translation that is set in the Margin of
our Bibles, He shall smite thee with a rod, but he shall lift up his staff for
thee after the manner of Egypt; then the meaning must needs be clearly this,
that though God would sharply chastise them by the Assyrian, his rod, as he did
their Forefathers by Pharaoh, yet as then by the lifting up of Moses's Rod upon
the Red Sea, he did save their Fathers, and destroy Pharaoh and all his mighty
Army, so he would now lift up his staff for the defense of Jerusalem and his
people, when they should seem to be in as desperate danger, as the Israelites
were in at the Red Sea; they should only stand still and see the Salvation of
God; the Lord of Hosts himself would lift up a staff for the securing of them,
and for the utter destruction of Sennacherib and his terrible Army.

Ver. 25. For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and
mine anger in their destruction.] That is, It shall be but a very little while
before I will utterly destroy the Assyrian, and so in his destruction there
shall be an end of mine anger and indignation against mine own people. But now
because there was not an end of God's anger against the Jews, upon the
destruction of Sennacherib's Army, therefore some would extend this very little
while, to the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon. But I conceive there is
no necessity of that. Upon the destruction of Sennacherib's Army God did no
more for a time afflict the Jews by the Assyrians; and this may be all that is
intended in this Promise.

Ver. 26. And the Lord of Hosts, etc.] See the Note before, ver. 16. These
words may be taken either as the words of God, speaking of himself in a third
person; or else rather as the words of the Prophet. And the Lord of Hosts shall
stir up a scourge for him, that is for the Assyrian; As if he had said, When
God has chastised his people by the Assyrian, as a Father corrects his Child
with a rod, he shall bring a sorer judgment upon the Assyrian, beating them
with a scourge, as a Master does his Slave; according to the slaughter of
Midian, that is, suddenly, even in one night, by the immediate hand of God,
without the loss of any one of God's people. See the Note before, Chap. 9.4. At
the r^ck of Oreb, see the Note, Judge. 7.25. And as his rod was upon the Sea, so
shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt. See the Note above, ver. 24.

Ver. 27. And it shall come to pass in that day, etc.] As above ver. 20. that
his burd^n shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy
neck; see the Note, Chap. 9.4. for under this may be comprehended the
deliverance of the Jews from their captivity in Babylon, (which the taking off
the yoke from their neck does most properly imply) but principally and most
immediately I conceive it is meant of the freeing of the Jews from that
tribute, and those heavy pressures and exactions which the Assyrians had
imposed upon them, and from that perpetual bondage under which Sennacherib
intended to bring them, by Gods miraculous destroying of his mighty Army,
wherewith he went up to besiege Jerusalem. 1. Because the drift of the Prophet
here, seems to be the comforting of Gods faithful Servants against the terrors
of the near approaching invasion; and 2ly, because in the following verses
there seems to be a Description of Sennacheribs going up against Jerusalem. And
though Hezekiah had assayed to shake off this yoke by refusing to pay the
Assyrian his tribute; yet it was not done till God destroyed Sennacheribs Army.
And the yoke shall be destroyed, (that is, not only taken off and broken for
the time, but also so marred and spoiled, that thou shall be no more afflicted
therewith, as thou have been) because of the anointing, that is, because of
Christ the promised Messiah, Gods anointed; see the Notes, Psalm. 2.2. and 45.7.
and 132.17. Or because of the eternal Kingdom promised to David's posterity in
Christ, whereof the anointing of the Kings of Judah was a type. So that hereby
is implied, both that God would preserve the Royal stock of David, with respect
to the accomplishment of his promise for the springing up of the Messiah from
thence (and so under this may be comprehended his respect to holy Hezekiah, in
destroying the Assyrian Army upon his Prayer) and likewise that God would
deliver his people for the sake of his anointed, the Lord Christ. And thus way
is made, as some conceive, to that glorious Prophecy concerning Christ, which
is inserted in the following Chapter.

Ver. 28. He is come to Aiath, etc.] That is, the Assyrian mentioned before,
ver. 24. Here the Prophet begins to describe the march of Sennacherib with his
Army (to wit, the headquarters of his Army, where himself was present; for his
Army was no doubt spread abroad all the Country over) how he passed along from
one place to another; and what Cities he took and plundered one after another by
the way, as he went up to besige Jerusalem. And that which was designed hereby,
was, That when all things came exactly to pass, as is here foretold, the
faithful might be assured hereby that the Assyrian moved not a foot, but
according to the foreknowledge, and fore-appointment of God; and that therefore
their deliverance foretold likewise by the Prophet, would be exactly
accomplished, as this was; yea, and withal, the manner how the Prophet relates
this is observable, to wit, as if he had seen all this done in a Prophetical
rapture or vision; or as if he were telling the rumors that were every where
in the affrighted peoples mouths, concerning the raging and prevailing of the
Assyrian Army; He is come to Aiath, or Ai, see the Note, Josh. 7.2. He is
passed to Migron, see the Note 1 Samuel 14.21. at Michmash he has laid up his
carriages; a place not far from Migron and Gibeah, 1 Samuel 13.2. and 14.5. and
it is probable, that there he left his carriages, wherein he had his train of
Artillery, and all kind of luggage and provision for his Army, purposely that
he might march with the more speed against Jerusalem; and because he looked
upon that as a convenient place where he might lodge them safely under the
custody of some few of his forces, and supply his Army from thence as occasion
did require. Yet some would have it, that he did it out of confidence, That he
should presently take Jerusalem, and so should then return thither again.

Ver. 29. They are gone over the passage, etc.] That is, Having left his
Carriages at Michmash, as is said in the foregoing verse, he with his Army went
over that strait, rocky and difficult passage between the Mountains, which in 1 Samuel 13.23. is called The passage of Michmash, concerning which see also the
Note, 1 Samuel 14.4. They have taken up their lodgings at Geba, which I take also
to be the same that is called also Gibeah, 1 Samuel 14.5. because the passage
there spoken of is said to lie between Michmash and Gibeah. But however, there
was a Geba in the Tribe of Benjamin, (in whose lot all the rest of the Cities
here mentioned were) as we may see in Josh. 21.17. and Neh. 11.31. And the
mention that is here made of their lodging at Geba, may seem to be to imply,
that the hard labor they had undergone in getting thorough the passage at
Michmash, made them glad to stay a while to refresh themselves at Geba, or
Gibeah; and yet that withal they were so eager to pass on to Jerusalem, that
they lodged there but one night, and then presently away they went. Ramah is
afraid, as being near to Geba. Gibeah of Saul is fled; that is, the Inhabitants
of that Gibeah where Saul of old dwelt: See 1 Samuel 10.26. and 11.4. And this I
coneive is also added to show how easily Sennacherib should take these places,
when the rumor of his approach should strike the Inhabitants with such a
terror, that multitudes of them should immediately fly away to save their lives.

Ver. 30. Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim, etc.] See the Notes, 1 Samuel
25.44. and 2 King. 19.21. The meaning is, that there should be a grievous
outcry amongst the Inhabitants in that City, upon the breaking in of the
Assyrians upon them; and the same is intended in that which is added concerning
Anathoth, one of the Towns in the Land of Benjamin that were given to the
Priests, where the Prophet Jeremy was born and had his abode, Jer. 1.1. Cause
it to be heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth. That is, Do thou also, O poor
Anathoth, lift up thy voice so, that it may be heard unto the utmost borders of
the Land of Israel, (which is an Hyperbolical expression, to set forth the
extremity of her misery, with respect whereto also he calls the Town, poor
Anathoth.) For that Laish was in the utmost North-parts of Canaan nigh unto
Zidon, see Josh. 19.47. and Judge. 18.29.

Ver. 31. Madmenah is removed, etc.] That is, the Inhabitants of Madmenah
(which was a City in Judah, Josh. 15.31.) are fled and gone. See the Note
above, ver. 29. yet some conceive there is an Hyperbole in the expression the
Prophet here uses; as if he had said, That Madmenah was so shaken, as if it
would have removed to some other place; Or, that the terrified Inhabitants were
in such a tumult, as if they would have carried the City away with them; the
Inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee, that is, every man being afraid
to flee apart by himself, they gather themselves together to flee in companies,
that they might the better defend themselves, if they should meet with any
straggling Soldiers of the enemy by the way.

Ver. 32. As yet shall he remain at Nob that day, etc.] According to our
Translation, the meaning of these words seems to be this, That though the
Assyrian with his Army got as far as Nob (a City of the Priests in the Tribe of
Benjamin, see the Note 1 Samuel 21.1.) that day that he marched from Geba, where
he lodged for a night, ver. 29. yea, as the words seem to import, some good
time before night (so great speed they made to get to Jerusalem) yet being a^
Nob, he should remain there that day, to wit, to order his Affairs for the
Siege of Jerusalem. And because at Nob he was so nigh to Jerusalem, that he
might see Mount Zion; therefore it follows, he shall shake his hand against
the Mount of the daughter of Zion (see the Note Chap. 1.8.) the hill of
Jerusalem, to wit, by way of contempt and threatening, as intimating that it
should not be long ere he would be with her. And now all this concerning the
Assyrians carrying all this as a torrent before him, is thus set forth,
purposely to show, That it was merely by the mighty hand of God, that the Jews
were afterward delivered from him. And indeed as much is covertly intimated in
that which is said here of his shaking of his hand against Jerusalem; for this
implies, That this was all he should be able to do to her. He might straiten
and affright her, but she should never come to assault her. And therefore, as
in opposition to this shaking of the Assyrians hand against her, it was
afterward promised, That in a way of scorn and derision she should shake her
head at him, 2 King. 19.21.

Ver. 33. Behold the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, etc.] See the Note above ver. 16.
Many learned Expositors hold, That here the Prophet proceeds to show in this
and the following verse, what havoc the Lord would make by this victorious
Army of the Assyrian amongst the Jews, both high and low, rich and poor. And
the principal reason that induced them to think that this passage was thus to
be understood, was, because the mention that is made in the following verse of
the ^elling of Lebanon, and the thickets of the forest, with iron, was not so
proper to express the destruction of the Assyrian Army, as the destruction of
the Jews, to whom Lebanon did belong; and who were indeed hewn down with iron,
that is, by the sword of the Assyrian; whereas the Assyrians were destroyed by
the stroke of an Angel. But these Objections may be easily answered. Neither
seems it to me probable, That the Prophet should thus largely set forth, as he
has in the foregoing verses, how the Assyrian Army should overrun all without
any opposition, till he came to Jerusalem; and yet then should add nothing
concerning the miraculous destruction of his Army there. And therefore I rather
understand both these verses, of the hewing down of the Assyrian Army. Behold,
the Lord, the Lord of Hosts shall lop the boughs with terror; as if he had
said, When the Assyrian is thus gotten to the very walls of Jerusalem, behold
suddenly and unexpectedly, and in a manner that shall bring great terror and
affrightment with it, God shall hew down this strong and mighty Army of the
Assyrian, or, the strong and mighty ones of this Army: and the high ones of
stature shall be hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled; that is, his
Princes and Commanders shall be utterly destroyed.

Ver. 14. And he shall cut down, etc.] As before the Prophet had compared the
destruction of Sennacheribs Army to the burning of a Wood or Forest, (see the
Notes above ver. 17, 18.) so here he compares it to the hewing down of a
Forest; And he shall cut down the thickets of the Forests with iron, that is,
the Lord shall hew down the main body, the mixed multitude of the common
Soldiers, in the Assyrians numerous Army, made up of many several Nations, even
as a Wood is cut down with Axes and Hatchets; and Lebanon shall fall by a
mighty one, that is, the mighty Army of the Assyrians that shall be like to
Mount Lebanon for the tall Cedars and abundance of thick Woods that are
thereon, shall fall by the immediate stroke of an Angel, 2 King. 19.35. Some I
know, understand this literally of the waste made in Mount Labanon by the
Assyrians hewing down the trees there, according to that which is said of him,
2 King. 19.23. With the multitude of my Chariots I am come up to the height of
the Mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall Cedars
thereof, and the choice Fir-trees thereof. But for that see the Note there.
Here the destruction of the Assyrian Army is rather intended by the felling of
Lebanon, as is before said, in the foregoing Note. And that there is no
impropriety of speech herein, is evident enough, because elsewhere the Assyrian
King is called a Cedar of Lebanon, to wit, Ezekiel. 31.3.

CHAP. XI.
VERSE 1. AND there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, etc.] They
that understand the two last verses of the foregoing Chapter, of the Assyrians
hewing down the State and people of the Jews, even as when a whole Wood is
felled and cut down to the ground, do accordingly hold, That this is added to
show, that notwithstanding this grievous devastation made amongst them, there
should afterward a little sprig spring forth from the seeming dead stock of
David's family, to wit, the promised Messiah, that should by degrees grow up to
a mighty Wood which should overspread the whole world. But rather the inference
of this promise concerning Christ, upon that which went before, may be by way
of rendering a reason of that which had been said in the foregoing Chapter,
verse 27. That God would deliver Judah from the Assyrian bondage, because of
the anointing, namely, because there was a necessity of preserving the Royal
Stock of David's Family, from whence the promised Messiah, the Lord Christ, was
to spring; and because the accomplishment of the great promise of sending
Christ into the World, was the foundation, fountain and cause of all other
mercies and deliverances, which God should at any time afford his people. And
there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow
out of his roots; that is, when David's Family shall be in a manner utterly
ruined, so that there shall not be the least appearance of any Regal Dignity in
it, but it shall be reduced to a very mean and low estate, like the stub, the
trunk, or stump of a tree, that is cut down almost close to the ground; so that
there is nothing left of it, but a little dead stock that has its roots still
in the ground; then unexpectedly there shall spring up a small, weak,
contemptible twig or branch out of this seeming dry and dead stump, and shall
grow up, that at last in and by him, the family and Kingdom of David, yea, that
whole seed of Abraham shall mount up to a greater estate of Glory than ever
formerly they enjoyed. And observable it is, that ^^e better to set this forth,
it is said, That this rod or sprig should come forth out of the stem* ^ot of
David, but Jesse, to imply, that when this should be done, David's Family should
be in as low a condition, as it was in the days of his Father Jesse, who was a
mean obscure man, see the Note 1 Samuel 10.27. Now of Hezekiah, as the Jews would
have it, this cannot be meant; because in his days the Family of David was
never brought so low. And far greater things are here spoken of this branch,
than can with any show of reason be applied to Zorobabel, or any other Ruler of
the Jews after their return from the Babylonian Captivity. But now in Jesus
Christ this was fully accomplished; because by the mean condition of the Virgin
Mary his Mother, (who at her Purification brought the Offering of the poorer
sort of people, Luke 2.24.) and his Foster-father Joseph, to whom she was
married, a poor Carpenter, it appears plainly, that the Royal Family of David,
from whom they both were lineally descended, was at that time brought to a very
contemptible condition, even like to the dry and dead stump of a tree. And
accordingly the outward condition of Christ, the weak and poor twig that sprung
from this withered stub, was very base in the eye of the world. But yet we see
to what a height of Spiritual Glory the Kingdom of David was in Christ soon
advanced by the preaching of the Gospel. By the last clause, and a branch shall
grow cut of his roots, the same in effect (I conceive) is meant; yet some would
have it, That by growing out of his roots, is meant his being descended from
Abraham and others the Progenitors of David, to whom the Messiah was promised.
And because the Hebrew word here translated a Branch, is Nezer; therefore some
conceive there is an allusion herein to the City Nazareth, where Christ usually
dwelt, Matthew. 2.23.

Ver. 2. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, etc.] That, is the
Holy Ghost, and therewith the gifts of the Holy Ghost shall take up its
perpetual uninterrupted residence with him, and in him; which was signified at
the Baptism of Christ, when the Holy Ghost came down upon Christ in the
likeness of a Dove; and as the Baptist said, it abode upon him, Joh. 1.32.
Indeed we read of the Spirit's resting upon others, as upon the seventy Elders
that were chosen to assist Moses in the government of the people, Numb. 11.25.
upon Elisha, 2 King. 2.15. yea, upon all real Christians, 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of
God rests upon you. But we must know, that the Spirit rested upon Christ in a
more special and singular manner than it does, or ever did upon others. 1.
Because in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. 2ly,
Because the gifts of the Holy Ghost were conferred upon his human nature in all
perfection, both for number and measure, Joh. 3.34. See the Note Psalm. 45.7.
Amongst men, some have some gifts of the Spirit, and others have other gifts;
but Christ had all that others have, and more than all others have. And again,
others have gifts requisite for the members of the Church, some in a greater
measure, and some in a less; but now Christ had gifts requisite for the head,
proper and peculiar to himself. And 3ly, Because the Spirit so rested upon him,
even in regard of his person, that it was impossible it should ever be removed
from him. However observable it is, how clearly it is hereby implied, That the
Kingdom of Christ was to be wholly a spiritual Kingdom; in that the Prophet
having in the foregoing verse spoken of his first coming into the World, and
then undertaking here to show how he should be in his person fitted for the
discharge of the Office of the Messiah, he mentions this, as that wherein the
whole Power, and Glory, and Majesty of his Kingdom should consist. That the
Spirit of God should in so eminent a manner rest upon him, and that he should
be so superabundanly furnished with spiritual gifts, even that he might be as
an everlasting treasure from whence these gifts should be continually imparted
to his Church. And accordingly the Prophet does here recite some of the choice
endowments wherewith he should be fully replenished both for the managing of
his spiritual Kingdom, and the constant supply of his people; the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, whereby men are enabled to understand things aright,
and to order all things wisely and prudently; the Spirit of Counsel and might,
whereby men are enabled to judge rightly in difficult cases and straits, and
courageously to undertake and go through with any thing they are called to do
or to suffer in a just cause. (See also the Notes, Chap. 9.6.) The Spirit of
Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord; that is, the power of discerning the
most hidden things, and a reverential fear toward God. But now we must know,
that under these all other the manifold gifts of the Spirit are by a
Synechdoche comprehended; only these seem to be particularly mentioned, with
respect to Christ's Regal Power for judging his people, whereto these gifts here
named, are principally requisite.

Ver. 3. And shall make him of quick understanding, etc.] That is, the Spirit
of the Lord that shall rest upon him, shall make him exceedingly, yea,
infallibly sagacious in discovering persons and things; for the Prophet having
in the foregoing verse, shown the excellent endowments of the person of Christ,
here he proceeds to show how he should exercise these his gifts and endowments
in the Administration of his Regal power. It is in the original, And he shall
make him sent or smell in the fear of the Lord; which therefore some expound
thus: That by reason of this his being so abundantly anointed with the holy
Spirit of God, he should breathe forth nothing but what was sweetly pious and
religious; or that in all his courses he should send forth a sweet sent
suitable to the precious savor of his spiritual unction. But rather by this
figurative expression is only meant that which we have in our Translation, And
shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord. By the smell we
discover things more secret, than those things are which appear to the eye or
ear; and likewise by the smell we discover things more easily and quickly than
any other way; so that when it is said, That the Spirit should make Christ sent
or smell in the fear of the Lord; This seems to intend, that he should be of a
sharp and quick understanding, certainly and presently to discover the truth of
things; as in our ordinary speech we use to say of a man that does quickly find
out a thing, That he has soon smelt out the matter. As for that which is added
concerning the fear of the Lord, and shall make him of quick understanding in
the fear of the Lord, thereby is shown wherein the quickness of his
understanding should be discovered, to wit, not in earthly things, which are
far beneath his Cognizance; but in the things that appertain to Religion and
the fear of God, and in judging of men's persons, as to the inward frame of
their Spirits; that looking into their hearts, he would soon discover whether
they were such as did truly fear the Lord, or such as did not fear God, even
when they did hypocritically make the fairest shows of Piety; yea, and some
would have this also farther included in that expression, That he should judge
of men in these regards according to the fear of God, that is, justly and
uprightly, acquitting and saving those that truly fear God, and judging and
condemning those that are void of his fear; and he shall not judge after the
sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears; that is, he
shall not be carried away with respect of persons, neither shall he acquit or
condemn any man merely upon outward appearances, the looks, or gestures, or
words of men, or what is rumoured, reported or affirmed by others, but
according to the clear knowledge which he shall have of their hearts. Men that
have no other way to judge, but according to what they see or hear, are often
mistaken in judging. But so it could not be with Christ, because he should of
himself know all things, yea, even the thoughts and intentions of men's hearts.

Ver. 4. But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, etc.] See the Note
before, Chap. 2.4. and likewise the Notes, Psalm. 72.1, 2. The meaning is, That
he should do justice to the poor as well as to the rich, though he should not
favor them in any unjust thing because of their poverty; or, that he should,
as a righteous King, rule and govern his people, poor, brokenhearted,
self-condemned sinners, protecting them against all their enemies temporal and
spiritual. And much to the same purpose is the following clause, and reprove
with equity for the meek of the earth, to wit, That he should plead the cause
of his poor people that were meek and gentle under their sufferings, rebuking
and punishing their proud Oppressors. Or, that he would correct his own meek
ones, but it should be with gentleness and moderation, as intending to reform
and not to destroy them.

And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of
his lips shall he slay the wicked.] This may be understood, 1. of the preaching
of the Gospel, (which as it is elsewhere called the word of his mouth, Rev.
2.16. and 19.15. so here it is called the rod of his mouth, and the breath of
his lips, to wit, that with this word, as with the Scepter of his Kingdom,
Christ should sharply smite those that dwell on the earth, as with a rod,
reproving and convincing them of their sins with such mighty efficacy, that
some should thereby be brought to submit themselves, and so his word should be
the savor of life unto life to them; and others should be mortally wounded,
even to despair, and so the Gospel should be the savor of death unto death to
them: And 2ly, of the Almighty Will, the sovereign sentence and command of God,
to wit, That Christ should only with a word of his mouth smite the earth, that
is, wicked earthly-minded men, the enemies of God and his people, and should
utterly destroy them, as we know it is peculiarly said of Antichrist, That the
Lord shall consume him with the Spirit of his mouth, 2 These. 2.8.

Ver. 5. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, etc.] Because in
those times, 1. men did constantly use girdles to bind their loose Garments
close to their bodies: And 2ly, by binding up their long Garments about their
loins, they were the better fitted and strengthened for the dispatch of any
work or service they undertook: And 3ly, they wore also their Girdles as a
choice Ornament; and there was a Belt or Girdle that was usually the special
Ornament of Princes (for all which, see the Notes Job 12.18.) therefore it is
said here, That righteousness should be the Girdle of Christ's loins, and
faithfulness the Girdle of his reins, to imply, 1. That he should be constantly
and eminently fitted and funished with righteousness and faithfulness for the
execution of the Office which God had imposed upon him. 2ly, That he should
most justly, faithfully and industriously manage and perfect the work he had
undertaken for the Salvation of his people. And 3ly, This should be an honor
and glory to him throughout the world. These glorious endowments of Gods Spirit
should be to him instead of those outward Ornaments that are usually wore by
the great Princes and Potentates of the World.

Ver. 6. The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie
down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the fatling together,
etc.] That is, those men that were before of a proud, fierce, cruel and savage
disposition, most untractable, most brutish, and ravenous, and shameful in the
places where they lived, more like Wolves, and Lions, and Leopards than men,
when they shall once be subdued by the Gospel and Spirit of Christ, and give up
their names to him, shall become meek and gentle, tame and tractable, so that
they shall live and converse together in the same Church with other poor
Christians quietly and harmlesly; and the weakest that are, shall not need to
fear them. Now this is mentioned as one of the strangest and most glorious
effects of the Kingdom and Government of Christ, that thereby the most wicked
and mischievous men should be changed, as if they were transformed out of
beasts into men; and so consequently to show what wonderful peace and concord
there should be in the Church of Christ. All which I conceive was chiefly
accomplished in the conversion of the Gentiles.

And a little child shall lead them.] That is, though they were never so fierce
before, yet being converted and brought into Christ, they will become so tame
and tractable, that it will be an easy thing for any body to guide and govern
them. Though their Pastors given them of God to be their guides, be never so
mean and contemptible in the World (as we know it was eminently so with the
Apostles) yet they shall readily and willingly give up themselves to obey them,
and to be ordered and governed by them; there will be no need of any external
power to compel them; yea, they will be willing to be taught and directed by
the meanest that is able in any thing to inform them and counsel them for the
best.

Ver. 7. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, etc.] To wit, together, as it
follows in the next words, their young ones shall lie down together; which is
added, the better to set forth the real change that should be wrought in these
ravenous Creatures, in that their regard to their young ones should not make
them, as it is usually with such beasts, the more eager and violent to make a
prey of all they come near; and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox, that is,
say some, the greatest and mightiest, and those that were most savage amongst
them, shall yield themselves to be fed with the word and Sacraments, no less
than the meanest of the common sort of people; Or, as others say, they shall
not live any longer upon spoil and rapine, but shall be content with what they
can get by any honest labor and employment. And it may well be, which some
think, that in this expression here used, there is an allusion to the state the
Creatures lived in at their first Creation before man sinned; when, as many
learned men think, they all lived upon such fruit as grew out of the earth,
Genesis 1.29, 30. neither was there any that lived by prey and devouring of other
Creatures. But indeed, all that I conceive is intended hereby, is, that those
men that were before most fierce and mischievous, upon the change that should
be wrought in them by the Spirit of Christ, should be as harmless toward those
with whom they conversed, as any others were.

Ver. 8. And the sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, etc.] That
is, The weakest and simplest amongst Gods people (some say, those that are
newly converted, newborn Babes in Christ) shall without any danger converse
with those that formerly were most subtle, poisonous and hurtful; yea, the
expression here used of their playing on the hole of the asp, may seem to
imply, that they should count it a recreation and delight to converse with
them. And the same is in other words repeated again in the following clause,
And the weaned child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den, to wit, out of a
childish curiosity to thrust his hand, as if it were into a birds-nest, to feel
what is there.

Ver. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy, etc.] As if he had said, they shall
be so far from destroying, that they shall not so much as hurt one another, in
all my holy mountain; that is, in my whole Church, spread abroad throughout the
whole World, see the Note, Psalm. 15.1. Whereas other mountains are usually full
of ravenous beasts, it shall not be so (says the Lord) in my holy mountain;
and that because Gods people there, shall be a holy people. And therefore we
see that this wonderful change here spoken of, is meant only of those that are
true Believers, truly regenerate and made new Creatures; for the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, that is, of the true and saving Knowledge of
God in Christ, as the waters cover the Sea, that is, those hollow places of the
earth wherein the Sea is held. The meaning is, That the Knowledge of God should
be spread abroad every where all the World over, as there is water every where
in the Sea; and that there should be far more abundant Knowledge in those days,
than there had been in the time of the Law; by means whereof there should be
such a mavelous change made in the Spirits of men. And therefore the Prophet
speaks of this, as of a rare and unusual thing, that had not hitherto been seen
in the World.

Ver. 10. And in that day, etc.] This is added, as the cause of that wonderful
peace that should be amongst men, mentioned in the foregoing verses, even
amongst those that were formerly of such a brutish and savage temper of Spirit.
And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, that is, that Rod or Branch
mentioned before, verse. 1. springing up out of the root of Jesse (for which see
the Note there) namely, the Lord Christ; we have the like expression concerning
Israel, Hos. 14.5. He shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as
Lebanon; and concerning Christ also, as Chap. 53.2. He shall grow up before him
as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground; and Rev. 5.5. and 22.16.
where he is called the root of David, that is, the branch that sprung out of
David's stock or family. And as for that which follows, which shall stand for an
ensign of the people; the meaning of that is, That this low contemptible branch
should by degrees mount up to such a height, that he should be as an ensign
lifted up in the sight of all the Nations of the World, who should thereupon
through Faith, as by a kind of Divine instinct, gather themselves together to
him from all parts of the earth, even as soldiers do to a Standard or Ensign
that is set up, that under his conduct and defense they may maintain a constant
fight against their spiritual enemies. All which was accomplished when Christ
was lifted up first on the Cross, John 8.28. and 1^.32. and afterward in the
Ministry of the Gospel, whereby he was made known to all Nations; concerning
which, see the Note Numb. 25.8. yea, and the expression here used is
observable, a root of Jesse shall stand for an ensign of the people, because
this implies, that though the enemy should bend all their force against this
ensign (as in Battles it uses to be) Luke 2.34. Behold, this Child is set for
a sign, which shall be spoken against; yet it should still stand victoriously,
neither should they be able to over-bear, or overcome it: to it shall the
Gentiles seek, that is, they shall voluntarily come in to him, as their Savior
and Redeemer, even as soldiers are wont to flock in to their ensign. See the
Note Genesis 49.10. And so the Apostle does expressly expound this Prophecy
concerning Christ, Romans 15.12. And again Esaias says, There shall be a root of
Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the
Gentiles trust. As for the last words, and his rest shall be glorious; some
understand this of Christ's death and burial, to wit, how ignominious soever his
death should be to him in the sight of the world, yet he should be then and
thereby exceedinlgy glorified, according to that which he said when he was
preparing himself to dye, Joh. 17.1. Father, the hour is come, glorify thy
Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee. And indeed it cannot be denied, but
that this Rest of his, was glorious, first, because he then overcame all the
powers of darkness: and 2ly. because his name was then highly honored by the
great and wonderful things that were done at his Death, and the eclipsing of
the Sun, etc. and especially by his Resurrection, honored with the apparition
of Angels, and many miraculous passages, and by his triumphant Ascension into
Heaven; and 3ly. because of the great Glory given him by the Chuch for that
great work of their Redemption. But yet I do rather conceive, that the meaning
of these words in this place, is either, that the Rest and Peace of his Church
would be very glorious; or else that his Church, the place where he had
determined to settle his perpetual residence, (according to that, Psalm. 132.13,
14. The Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation: this is
my Rest for ever, etc. and that, Matthew. 28.20. Lo, I am with you always even
unto the end of the world; and the people upon whom he had settled his love and
favor, should be very glorious, to wit, in regard of the glorious signs and
effects of his presence amongst them, in the abundant knowledge and eminent
holiness that should be wrought in them by his word and Spirit, and in the
great and wonderful things that should be done amongst them for their
deliverance and safeguard. And herein there seems to be an Allusion to that
which is often formerly said, That the Tabernacle and Temple was filled with
the Glory of God. See Exodus 40.34, 35. Lev. 9.23. and 1 King. 8.11. And see
also the Note before, Chap. 4.2, 4.

Ver. 11. And it shall come to pass in that day, etc.] In the foregoing verse,
the Prophet foretold the Conversion of the Gentiles; here now he adds, that at
the same time the Jews should also be converted. And it shall come to pass in
that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time, etc. Some
understand the first deliverance here intimated to be that of the Israelites
out of Egypt; and the second here promised, to be that of the Jews out of
Babylon. But because the Jews that were delivered out of Babylon, were for the
generality only of the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin; and here the Prophet
speaks of the deliverance of his people of all the Tribes from all parts of the
World, and that too in the days of the Messiah (that ensign that should be
lifted up, whereof he had spoken in the foregoing verse) I rather think, that
this is meant of their deliverance by Christ from the spiritual Bondage of
Satan, Sin, Death and Hell, to wit, that as the Lord did once before with an
out stretched arm, deliver the Israelites out of Egypt by the Ministry of
Moses, so he would the second time with great zeal again set himself to recover
the remnant of his people which shall be left; that is, to bring home to
himself by Christ those of his ancient people the Jews, which shall there
remain undestroyed amongst the Gentiles, as being still mindful of the Covenant
he had formerly made with them. And this was partly accomplished in those many
thousands of Jews, Act. 21.20. (though but a remnant in comparison of the whole
body of the Nation) that were by Christ and his Apostles won to embrace the
Faith of the Gospel; and shall be more fully performed, when the main body of
the residue of that Nation shall in the last days be brought in to Christ; of
which the Apostle speaks clearly, Romans 11.25, 26. And indeed because the
Prophet does in this place, first foretell the gathering in of the Gentiles to
Christ (in the foregoing verse) and then does here after that, add this
concerning the bringing in of the Jews; therefore many learned Divines have
thought that it is that last Conversion of the Jews, that is here principally
intended by the Prophet. As for the places here mentioned, from which the
believing Jews should be gathered from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from
Buthros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and
from the Islands of the Sea; it is hard clearly to determine what all these
Countries are. It may suffice us to know, that upon the grievous miseries that
were brought upon this people, first by the Assyrians, and afterward by the
Babylonians, many of them did of their own accord leave the Land of Judea, and
flee into Egypt, (of which, Pathros seems to have been one particular Province,
Jer. 44.1, 15.) See Jer. 43.57. and 44.27, 28. and so likewise into other
Countries; and that many of them that were carried away Captives by the
Assyrians and Babylonians, might by them be sold to other Nations, and so be
dispersed all the world over: And evident it is in Scripture, that all those
Countries that bordered upon the Sea, and were divided from them by the Sea,
were by the Jews usually called the Islands of the Sea, Jer. 47.4. See also the
Note Genesis 10.5.

Ver. 12. And he shall set up an ensign for the Nations, etc.] See the Note
before ver. 10. But this I conceive is a farther Explanation of what was said
in the foregoing verse, concerning the Conversion of the Jews; and therefore by
saying, that the Lord should set up the ensign of the Gospel for the Nations,
either the Prophet intended, that the Jews should be gathered in hereby to the
Church from the Nations amongst whom they were dispersed; or else, that the
Nations should hereby be summoned to bring in the Jews unto Christ; or at
least, that the Jews should be converted by the preaching of the Gospel,
together with other Nations: for that the Prophet does principally here speak
of the Conversion of the Jews. And therefore by saying that the Lord should set
up the ensign of the Gospel for the Nations, either the Prophet intended, that
the Jews should be gathered in hereby to the Church from the Nations, amongst
whom they were dispersed; or else, that the Nations hereby should be summoned
to bring the Jews unto Christ; or at least, that the Jews should be converted
by the preaching of the Gospel, together with other Nations; for that the
Prophet does principally here speak of the Conversion of the Jews, is evident
by the following words, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel. (See the
Note Psalm. 147.2.) and gather together the dispersed of Judah, from the four
corners of the earth. It is in the Herew, from the four wings of the earth,
that is, from all parts of the world, even from the utmost skirts of the earth;
wherein there is a clear Allusion to that promise made to the Israelites,
concerning Gods bringing them home upon their Repentance from the uttermost
parts of the world, Deuteronomy. 13.3, 4.

Ver. 13. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, etc.] That is, in the days of
the Messiah they of the ten Tribes shall not envy those of Judah, as now they
do; and the Adversaries of Judah shall be cut off; that is, As they shall not
be any longer enemies one to another, so also their Foreign enemies shall be
destroyed, that so they may every way enjoy the greater peace. Ephraim shall
not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim: The sum of all is briefly
this; By foretelling the ceasing of all envy and discord between Ephraim and
Judah, who had been so many years contending about the Kingdom of Israel; that
which the Prophet intends is, That the people of God under Christ should live
peaceably together, as well Jews as Gentiles, without any discord or enmity one
against another. How the truth of this Prophecy can consist with the great
Dissentions and Wars that have been, and are still amongst Christians, see in
the foregoing Note verse 9. and in the Notes Chap. 2.4. The Prophet speaks only
of real Christians, and does comprehend in these words that peaceable estate
whereto all shall be brought to at last.

Ver. 14. But they shall flee upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the
west, etc.] That is, The people of God, both of Ephraim and Judah, shall
jointly together with much speed and fervency of zeal, fall upon the Gentiles
by the preaching of the Gospel, even as an Eagle or Hawk does fall upon the
shoulders of any thing, Lamb or Kid, or smaller Bird, which they seize upon as
their prey; and some of them they shall bring in to Christ, and others they
shall at least render inexcusable; yet indeed this expression of fleeing upon
the shoulders of the Philistines, may imply the bringing of them under the yoke
and dominion of Christ, Matthew. 11.28. because the yoke or burden on the
shoulder, is an Emblem of servitude. See the Notes Chap. 9.4. and 10.27. They
shall spoil them of the East together; that is, They shall gather in Gods elect
from amongst them, in despite of all the mighty men of the world that shall
oppose them. See the Note Chap. 2.6. They shall lay their hand upon Edom and
Moab, that is, They shall seize upon them, and subdue them, according to that
expression, Psalm. 89.26. I will set his hand also in the Sea, and his right
hand in the Rivers. And some think too, that this implies, how suddenly and
easily they should be subdued by the Gospel, even with as much ease as a man
may put his hand into a birds-nest, to take the young ones from thence. And so
there may be an Allusion to what the Assyrian had said before in a vaunting
way, Chap. 10.14. and the children of Ammon shall obey them, to wit, by
embracing the Doctrine of of the Gospel. The drist therefore of all these
expressions, is to show, how the remnant of the Jews that should believe in
Christ, should immediately with all cheerfulness and diligence bestir
themselves to spread abroad the Gospel for the Conversion of the Gentiles. But
in expressing this, he mentions only those neighboring Nations that were
making War upon the land of Israel; the Philistines, the Edomites, and
Moabites, either because the Christian Jews did first carry the Gospel into
those neighboring Countries, and then afterward into the remoter parts of the
world (as indeed we read of Philips preaching of the Gospel at Azotus, or
Ashdod, Act. 8.40. and Peter's at Lydda, Act. 9.32. and at Joppa, Act. 10.5.
which were Cities in the Country of the Philistines) or else to imply, that
when this blessed peace foretold should be wrought amongst them by the Gospel,
even those Nations that were now continually afflicting them, should by them be
subdued to the Scepter of Christ.

Ver. 15. And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea,
etc.] By the tongue of the Egyptian Sea, here, is meant the Red Sea, that out
of the main Ocean shoots up into the land, between Arabia and Egypt, in the
form and fashion of a tongue, broader at the first, but growing narrower still
by degrees, and licking the land, as it goes along; for having before, ver.
11. compared that second deliverance there promised them, to wit, their
deliverance from their spiritual bondage, and the reducing of them to the
obedience of their Messiah, the Lord Christ, to the first deliverance of the
Israelites out of Egypt; suitable hereunto he does in these words promise, that
as in that first deliverance, God made way for his people to go into Canaan by
dividing the Red Sea before them, so in that second here promised, he would not
divide, but destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea, that is, utterly dry it up,
that it should be no more. But the meaning is only, that he would in the days
of the Gospel utterly remove all lets and obstacles, that might hinder the
bringing of his people unto Christ, by whom a way was opened for them into the
Heavenly Canaan; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the
River, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dry-shod;
that is, he shall utterly dry up the River Nilus in her seven streams, as
formerly by a mighty wind he divided the Red Sea before the Israelites, Exodus
14.21. It is evident by many ancient Writers, that Nilus, called the River of
Egypt, Josh. 15.4. did, as it drew near to the Sea, divide it self into seven
Channels, which were commonly called the seven Mouths of Nilus, whereby it
emptied it self into the Sea. Now because the passages out of Countries are
chiefly for the most part shut up by Seas and Rivers, therefore to imply, that
nothing should be able to hinder the Apostles and others from spreading the
Gospel over all the world, and from bringing in Gods Elect to Christ from all
Nations; the Prophet in a figurative expression says here, that to the
Red Sea, and the River Nilus, even near the Sea, when it was deepest, should be
dried up before them. As for that expression of shaking his hand, with his
mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the River, either it is mentioned as a
gesture of threatening (see the Note Chap. 10.32.) Or else by way of alluding to
Moses lifting up his Rod over the Red Sea, when it was thereby divided before
the Israelites.

Ver. 16. And there shall be a highway for the remnant of his people, which
shall be left from Assyria, etc.] That is, a plain, easy Causey-way; Because
the Israelites of the ten Tribes, that were already carried into Assyria, when
the Prophet spoke this, or were shortly to be carried thither, might seem to be
utterly lost and cast off by God without all hope of recovery, as being carried
much farther than those of Judah were, that were carried into Babylon, and not
likely to return back to their Country, when those of Judah should return;
therefore the Prophet does here particularly assure them, that even they should
at last be brought home to Christ by the preaching of the Gospel. However
incredible it might seem in the eye of Reason, yet God would make a clear way
for this their return, like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out
of the land of Egypt; as God did miraculously effect that, so he would as
miraculously accomplish this.

CHAP. XII.
VERSE 1. AND in that day, etc.] That is, In that day when the root of Jesse
shall by the preaching of the Gospel be lifted up as an ensign for the
gathering in of Gods people (see the Notes before Chap. 11.10, 11.) Thou shall
say, O Lord, I will praise thee, that is, Thou my Church and people (he speaks
to them collectively, as to one man, because of that firm Union of hearts that
should be amongst them, Act. 4.32.) shall praise God with a Song of
Thanksgiving, as once the Israelites did, when they were delivered out of
Egypt, Exodus 15.1. for having in the latter end of the foregoing Chapter, ver.
11, 15, 16. compared the deliverance of Gods people by Christ to the
deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, even in this gratulatory Song that
is here prescribed, there may be also an Allusion, as I conceive, to that Song
of Moses. And though it might be intended as a Psalm of Thanksgiving for their
deliverance out of the Babylonian Captivity, as that was a type of our
Redemption by Christ; yet it is evident by those promises in the foregoing
Chapter, that this Song does chiefly relate to the great deliverance of Gods
redeemed ones in the days of the Gospel; there being also further assurance
given them of the assured certainty of that great work, by prescribing them a
Song to be sung by them.

Though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou
comfortedst me.] that is, Though in thy just displeasure thou seemedst utterly
to have cast us off, by driving us out of our Country, depriving us of thine
Ordinances, and scattering us abroad all the world over; yet now by calling us
home to thy self, thou have fully comforted us again.

Ver. 2. Behold, God is my salvation: I will trust and not be afraid, etc.]
This may have particular respect to that wonderful work of our Redemption by
Christ, who was true and very God; for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my
Song, he also it become my Salvation. See the Note Exodus 15.2.

Ver. 3. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the Wells of Salvation.]
By the Waters here promised, may be meant all the benefits which Christ has
purchased for poor sinners; and move especially the word of life, and the
Spirit of Christ, together, with the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit, which
are often compared to Water in the Scripture, as Joh. 7.38. 1. Because they
wash and purify men spiritually, Ezekiel. 36.26. Then will ^^inkle clean Waters
upon you, and ye shall be clean, etc. 2ly. Because they make men fruitful in
good works, see the Note Psalm. 1.3. And 3ly. because they do fully quench the
thirst of men's souls, as well by taking away men's insatiable thirst after
earthly things, as by satisfying their earnest desires after righteousness and
life eternal, Joh. 4.14. Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give
him, shall never thirst, etc. And then by the Wells of Salvation, may be meant,
either the promises of the Gospel, or else Christ himself, from whom all these
Blessings are derived unto Believers, Joh. 1.16. And of his fullness have all we
received and Grace for Grace: so that the meaning of the words is summarily
this, That in the days of the Gospel Believers should abundantly, day after
day, with ready and strong desires draw forth unto themselves from Christ and
his Gospel-Promises and Ordinances, all those precious Benefits which are there
stored up for them; and that with as much joy, as when thirsty men do meet with
pure and wholesome waters wherewith they may quench their thirst; yet withal,
these words [with joy] may be inserted, as in opposition to the hard labor
which men do usually undergo, in drawing water out of deep Wells; thereby to
imply, that their endeavors to draw forth these Spiritual Waters for
themselves, should be no way grievous and burdensome to them, as the drawing of
water uses to be unto men.

V. 4. And in that day shall ye say, Praise ye the Lord, etc.] See the Note 1
Chro. 16.8. The meaning is, That in those days the faithful should not only
praise God themselves, but should also stir up one another to do it; yea, and
that they should take care for the converting of others, that they who being
brought in to Christ might praise God together with them: Call upon his name,
to wit, as thereby acknowledging, that in him is all your hope of Salvation;
yet it may be read as it is in the Margin, Pro^^nim his name, to wit, by your
thanksgiving and speaking to his praise; declare his doing among the people, to
wit, as all other the great works of God, so especially what he has done for
man's Redemption by Christ. See the Note Psalm. 57.9. make mention, that his name
is exalted, to wit, by the great things he has done, and by the making of them
known throughout all Nations.

Ver. 5. Sing unto the Lord; for he has done excellent things, etc.] Even this
is also principally meant of the excellent things done by Christ for the
Salvation of his redeemed Ones. And therefore is that added, this is known in
all the earth.

Ver. 6. Cry out and shout, thou Inhabitant of Zion, etc.] that is, shout for
joy all ye that are of the Church and people of God, for great is the holy One
of Israel in the midst of thee; that is, God; see the Notes Chap. 1.4. and
Psalm. 48.1. But it may be meant also of Christ, who dwelt in the midst of his
people in regard of his bodily presence, whilst he lived upon earth, and did
great and ineffable things for them, even when he was of so little esteem in
the eyes of the world; and has promised, that he will by his Spirit be
continually with them even unto the end.

CHAP. XIII.
VERSE 1. THE burden of Babylon, etc.] See the Note 2 King. 9.25. which Isaiah
the son of Amos did see; for which, see the Note Chap. 1.1. In the twelve
following Chapters the Prophet foretells the sore Judgments and ruin that
should shortly come upon most of the foreign States and Nations round about
them; those especially upon whose help they had most relied, or by whom they
had been, or were hereafter like to be most vexed and oppressed, such as were
the Moabites, the Syrians and others. And this was purposely done, that Gods
people might see, that these Judgments being thus foretold, came from God; and
that all Nations are under his power and command, that they might be afraid of
those sins for which they saw them punished so severely; as considering, that
if God spared not the wickedness of those heathen people, much less would he
spare them that had the Law and Word of God to inform them. 3ly. That they
might not think that God dealt worse with them, than with others; or that he
favored those wicked Nations. And 4ly. That they might be comforted with this
discovery of Gods love to them, and tender care over them, in the vengeance he
would bring upon their mischievous enemies. Accordingly therefore he begins
first with foretelling the Destruction that should come upon Babylon, the chief
City of the Caldean or Babylonian Empire, built at first, as it is generally
held, by Semiramis; but, it seems, greatly enlarged and beautified by
Nebuchadnezzar, as appears by that vaunting speech of his, Dan. 4.30. Is not
this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might
of my power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? For because the Babylonians
(against whom this Prophecy was delivered in the year that King Ahaz died,
Chap. 14.28.) were like to prove their most formidable enemies, by whom
Jerusalem was to be destroyed, the Temple burnt, and the people carried
Captives into Babylon; therefore to fore-arm the faithful against the terror of
these sad Calamities, and to support the poor Captives in that long Captivity,
it was most necessary, that the downfall of the Babylonian should be foretold,
as the means whereby a way should be opened unto them for their return again
into their own Country.

Ver. 2. Lift ye up a standard upon the high mountain, etc.] This is spoken as
in Gods name to the Medes and Persians that were to destroy Babylon; And indeed
the Medes are afterward in this Chapter expressly named, ver. 17. Behold, I will
stir up the Medes against them. By the high mountain some understand Babylon;
and that this City, though situated in a low, plain Country, is so called,
either because in its vast greatness, and the exceeding height and eminency of
her buildings, it looked like some great Mountain, and seemed too as unmovable
as a Mountain; or else because the State of Babylon did so proudly lift up her
self, and was at that time in Power and Glory exalted above all other Nations.
And indeed it is clear, that upon these accounts Babylon is elsewhere called a
mountain, Jer. 51, 25. Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, faith
the Lord. Now they that thus understand these words, do accordingly hold, that
by lifting up a standard upon this high mountain, the taking of Babylon is
intended, because when a City is taken, the soldiers are wont to set up their
colors upon the walls; and as a parallel place hereto, they allege that
passage, Jer. 51.12. Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon; and to the
same purpose they also expound the following words, Exalt the voice unto them,
shake the hand, because, say they, there is never more shouting, nor lifting up
and brandishing the sword in the hand, than when a City is taken; but with most
of our best Expositors, I rather conceive, that the mention here made of
lifting up a standard, is to foretell the gathering together of a mighty Army
for this service against Babylon. See the Note Chap. 5.26. and to imply how
readily upon the least sign or notice given, soldiers should come flowing in to
them; and the standard is appointed to be lifted up upon the high mountain,
because they used in this case to set up their Ensigns, and display their
Banners upon the tops of hills and mountains, from whence such a signal might
best be descryed. As for the following words, exalt the voice unto them, shake
the hand, either the same thing is intended, to wit, the calling in of soldiers
near or far off, by crying out, or by beckning to them with the hand; or else
it is meant of giving them a signal, whether by shaking the hand, or by some
shout or word of command, by way of encouraging them to make an assault upon
the City; and that also to signify how ready they should be to do it; that
they may go into the gates of the Nobles, that is, into the houses of the
Nobles, which is said, because soldiers at such a time are wont to choose to
break into such houses, where they expect the most and best pillage; or into
the gates of Babylon, where the King kept his Court commonly, and so most of
the Nobility had their constant residence there; or where many of the
Inhabitants by reason of their great wealth, lived like Princes or Nobles. And
withal, observable it is, that to signify how easily they should prevail over
this seeming strong and invincible City, he speaks of the taking of it, as if
there were no more to be done for the effecting of it, but their mere going
into the gates without any resistance.

Ver. 3. I have commanded my sanctified ones, etc.] That is, by a secret
instinct and guidance of my providence I will stir up the Medes and Persians
under the conduct of Cyrus and Darius, to go against Babylon. And he calls them
his sanctified ones, because he had set them apart, destined and prepared them
for that holy service of destroying the wicked Babylonians. Those that are
separated to any any holy service of God, are usually said to be sanctified
thereto, as we see in that which is said of Jeremiah, Chap. 1.5. Before thou
came forth out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a Prophet
unto the Nations. And accordingly because the Scripture does usually speak of
the slaughtering of wicked men, as of a sacrifice offered up to God, Ezekiel.
37.17. Speak unto evey feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field,
Assemble your selves and come, gather your selves on every side to my sacrifice
that I do sacrifice for you, etc. And Zeph. 1.7, 8. The Lord has prepared a
sacrifice, he has bid his guests: And it shall come to pass in the day of the
Lords sacrifice, that I will punish the Princes, etc. therefore the Lord here
calls those that were to slay the Babylonians, his sanctified ones. See the
Note also Exodus 32.29. And so in the following words he calls them his mighty
Ones, I have also called my mighty Ones for mine anger; to signify, that God
would furnish them with courage and strength to fit them for the service he had
called them to, even the pouring forth of his vengeance upon the Babylonians,
even them (says the Lord) that rejoice in my highness, that is, that will be
cheerfully forward to do my work upon Babylon, with great bravery and
gallantry; and then will with great exaltation triumph in the doing of it. And
this their valor, their gallant success, victory and triumph is called Gods
Highness; 1. because it was by God their Commander in chief, that they should
so gallantly demean themselves, and attain so great glory by subduing and
triumphing over the pride of Babylon. And, 2ly. because the infinite eminency
of Gods Power, and Holiness, and Justice, as likewise of his Mercy and
Faithfulness, was gloriously discovered by the just vengeance that he brought
upon that wicked and mighty City Babylon, and the great deliverance which
thereby he effected for his own people.

Ver. 4. The noise of a multitude, etc.] The Prophet speaks this in such a
manner, as if he would report, that he heard that actually doing, which in the
foregoing verse the Lord said he had commanded to be done. As a Watchman set
upon a Watchtower is wont first to relate what he hears, and afterward when
he discovers what that noise was, then to make known that too; so does the
Prophet here: The noise (says he) of a multitude in the Mountains, as of a
great people; as if he should have said, Methinks I hear a confused noise upon
the Mountains, as is wont to be in a place where a great multitude of people
are gathered together. And then he tells what this noise was, and that God was
amongst them; a tumultuous noise of the Kingdoms of Nations gathered together,
that is, of people of several Nations and Kingdoms; which is said, because the
army gathered against Babylon, was to consist of many Nations, according to
that of the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 50.9. I will raise and cause to come against
Babylon an assembly of great Nations from the North-Country. And so again Chap.
51.27, 28. The Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle, as if he had
said, And where this King of Nations is Commander in chief, it is no marvel
though such a numberless multitude come in to him upon the setting up of his
standard, as was said before, ver. 2. even a mighty army fit to vanquish such a
mighty City. As for the mountains here mentioned, thereby may be meant, either
the mountains of Media and Persia, where this huge Army was to be first
gathered and mustered; or else the mountains over which the Army was to march,
that they might break into Chaldea; yet some think the mountains are
particularly mentioned, because Armies are wont to seize upon them, as places
of greatest strength and security, and from thence their none is most easily
heard far abroad; according to that, Joel 2.5. Like the noise of Chariots on
the tops of mountains shall they leap.

Ver. 5. They come from a far Country, etc.] To wit, from Media and Persia,
Countries far distant from Babylon. See the Notes, Chap. 1.7. and 5.26. from the
end of heaven; see the Note, Neh. 1.9. even the Lord, and the weapons of his
indignation; that is, the armies, together with all their warlike Provision,
wherewith the Lord intends to fight in his wrath against Babylon, to destroy
the whole Land; to wit, not only the City, but also the whole Country of
Babylon.

Ver. 6. Howl ye, etc.] As if he had said, You, O Babylonians, that are now in
so great jollity, shall shortly howl for the extreme miseries that are coming
upon you: for the day of the Lord, that is, the day wherein the Lord has
determined to take vengeance on Babylon, (See the Notes, Job 24.1. and Psalm.
37.13.) is a^ hand; which is spoken as with reference to what the Prophet had
said before, wherein he had spoken of those that were to execute this vengeance
upon Babylon, as if they had been already upon their way going thither. It is
true indeed that Jerusalem's destruction was nearer at hand than Babylon's (for
it was about two hundred years ere Babylon was destroyed) and therefore there
might seem to be greater cause to call upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem to
howl, than the inhabitants of Babylon. But for this we must know, that the
drift of the Prophet here, was to comfort the Jews against they came to be
Captives in Babylon, by letting them know how confidently they might expect
that Destruction that is here threatened to Babylon. And notwithstanding it was
so long ere Babylon was to be destroyed, yet 1. with reference to God, to whom
so long a time was but as a day; And 2ly, with reference to the security of the
Babylonians, who were so confident in the strength of their City and Empire, it
might well be said, That this day of the Lord was at hand, it being nearer
indeed than any of them would have expected; and see the Notes on the last
verse of this Chapter, it shall come as a Destruction from the Almighty; that
is, it shall be inevitable and irreparable, so grievous and horrid, that every
one shall plainly see, that it was the work, and from the wrath of an Almighty
God.

Ver. 7. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt.]
See the Notes 2 Samuel 4.1. Josh. 7.5. and Psalm. 22.14. The Prophet does here
covertly deride the proud confidence of the Babylonians; for when God should
thus bereave them of all courage and strength, what good, alas, would all their
Wealth do them, and all the strong Fortifications of their seeming invincible
City?

Ver. 8. And they shall be afraid, etc.] That is, extreme fear shall surprise
them. And this is mentioned as the cause of that feebleness and faintness
threatred in the foregoing verse, Pangs and sorrows shall take hold-on them,
they shall be in pain as a woman that travelleth, that is they shall be
inwardly tortured with grievous vexation and anguish of Spirit, that shall
suddenly seize upon them by reason of their terrors, they shall be amazed one
at another, that is, they shall stand silent, gazing upon one another, as men
astonished; to wit, either as wondering mutually at their fear and
faint-heartedness, that they that had wont to be so renowned for courage and
valor, should now be so heartless and cowardly, suffering themselves to be
enslaved by the Medes and other Nations that had been formerly in subjection to
them; or else out of desperate perplexity of Spirit, as being at their wits
end, not knowing what to think, or what to say, or which way to turn
themselves; though they were able enough to resist their enemies, yet they
should have no heart to do any thing that might tend thereto; but as men
overwhelmed with despair, they should stand staring one upon another, unable to
encourage or counsel one another, or so much as to express their minds or
sorrows; their faces shall be as flames, that is, red like fire, say some, as
blushing for shame at the consideration of their strange distraction,
dismayedness, and base fears, according to that, Ezekiel. 7.18. shame shall be
upon all faces; or, as others think, as being inflamed with anger and fury;
which indeed will usually make the blood to come into men's faces, as if they
were all on a fire. But I rather think it is meant of the paleness of their
faces through fear, which is that the Prophet is here speaking of; and that
therefore it is said, their faces shall be as flames, either because their
faces should look pale, and wan, like the flame of a fire; or else because
their faces should be pale, and swarthy, and dim, and dead-coloured, and full
of horror, even as it uses to be with men that work at the Forge, or that
stand before some kind of fire, that use to look as if they had no blood in
their bodies, so that this place may well be paralleled with those, Jer. 30.5,
6. We have heard a voice of trembling of fear -- and all faces are turned into
paleness; and Joel 2.6. Before their faces the people shall be much pained; all
faces shall gather blackness.

Ver. 9. Behold, the day of the Lord comes, cruel, both with wrath and fierce
anger, etc.] This is thus expressed, to set forth how cruelly God should cause
the enemy to deal with them as it is said of Babylons enemies, Jer. 50.42. They
are cruel, and will not show mercy; and that it should be from Gods just wrath
against them, that they should be so severely handled. To lay the Land
desolate, and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it, that is, the
wicked ungodly inhabitants thereof, especially the great ones amongst them.

Ver. 10. For the stars of heaven, and the constellations thereof, shall not
give their light, etc.] To wit, those figures in the Heavens, consisting of
many bright Stars, such as those mentioned Job 9.9. The Sun shall be darkened
in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine. The drift
of all these expressions, is to set forth, that the state of the Babylonians in
that day, should ^e extremely sad and dreadful, so full of horror, confusion
and distraction, that they should not have, neither by day nor by night, the
least glimps of comfort. They may be intended to imply, that the calamity of
those times should be so grievous and horrible, that the Heaven should, as it
were, muffle up it self, that it might not behold it: Or, because when the Sun,
and other the Heavenly lights do shine clear and bright, God seems to smile
upon men; therefore Gods frowning upon the inhabitants of Babylon, may be
employed by this darkning of them. But I rather think, that all that is implied
is, that they should be in a most doleful and dismal Condition, void of all
Comfort, and not knowing which way to turn themselves; insomuch that the very
light of the Sun, Moon and Stars, which are so pleasing and delightsome to
others, should be as no light, no way comfortable to them, but rather
displeasing and distastful to them; neither should any of the Creatures yield
them any refreshing or comfort. See the like expressions Ezekiel. 32.7. Joel 2.10,
31, and Matthew. 24.29.

Ver. 11. And I will punish the World for their evil, and the wicked for their
iniquity, etc.] By the World is meant the Babylonian Monarchy, that had brought
the greatest part of the then known World into subjection under them, according
to that which Daniel said to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.22. Thy greatness is grown
and reaches unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth And it is
the rather thus expressed, to imply, that no strength that is, can stand before
God; and that if all the world conspire to rebel against him, he can easily
destroy them, as he did the old world; and I will cause the arrogance of the
proud to cease, and I will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. See the
Notes Chap. 2.11. and 10.12.

Ver. 12. I will make a man more precious than fine Gold, even a man than the
golden wedge of Ophir.] The meaning is either, 1. That the enemy should make
such a mighty slaughter amongst the Babylonians, that there should be but a
very few of them left alive; a man shall be a rare thing to be found amongst
them. See the Note 1 Samuel 3.1. Or, 2ly. That the soldiers should be so cruel to
them, that they should not spare their lives for the greatest quantities of the
purest gold that could be tendered to them, according to that which follows,
ver. 17. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard
silver, and as for gold they shall not delight in it; which may seem the more
probable, because we read, that in that night when Babylon was taken,
Belshazzar their King was slain, Dan. 5.30. And it is likely that with him,
many of the great ones were likewise cut off, that would have been glad to have
redeemed their lives at a great rate. But yet because we find not either in the
Scripture, or in any other History, that there was such a general slaughter
made of the inhabitants, when Babylon was taken by the Medes and Persians,
therefore many learned Expositors do understand both this, and that which
follows, of the utter Destruction of Babylon in future times, whereof this
subduing of that proud City by the Medes and Persians, should be only the
beginning; yea, our Annotations do propound it as considerable, whether this
that is said here, That a man shall be more precious than fine gold, may not be
spoken with respect to Babylons being utterly deserted in the time of this her
great danger, by those auxiliary forces which they had taken in for their
defense; of which the Prophet speaks afterward again, ver. 14.

Ver. 13. Therefore, etc.] To wit, that I may be avenged on them for their
wickedness, mentioned before, ver. 11. Or, by reason of this grievous terror
and dread that shall seize upon them, when the Medes and Persians shall invade
them; I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place,
that is, they shall be in such extreme confusion and destruction, that the very
Heaven and earth shall seem to them to shake and tremble. See the Notes Chap.
5.26. and 2 Samuel 22.8. and Psalm. 76.8.

Ver. 14. And it shall be as the chased Roe, and as a Sheep that no man takes
up, etc.] That is, Babylon, or the Babylonian army shall flee as a Roe, chased
by some Huntsman or wild beast, or shall wander up and down like a straggling
sheep, that is not able neither by flight, nor otherwise, to secure it self;
and that has no shepherd to take it up or defend it. See Ezekiel. 34.6. The
meaning is, that they should not be able to bear the sight of the enemy, but
should presently run away, and seek to shift for themselves; and that no man
should be able to keep them to their colors, or to bring them to make a stand,
or to rally again together; or else, that no man should dare to receive them
into their houses when they fled, to shelter and hide them there. And indeed,
that this is chiefly meant of the auxiliary forces, which they had taken into
Babylon from other Nations, that they should disband and be gone for fear, or
flee before the enemy, is apparent by the following words, they shall every man
turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own Land; which fully
agrees with that which the Prophet Jeremy foretold concerning Babylon, Jer.
50.16. and 51.9.

Ver. 15. Every one that is found shall be thrust through: and every one that
is joined unto them, shall fall by the sword.] Some think that here the Prophet
speaks of the slaughter that should be made in the City, having spoken in the
foregoing verse of those that should seek to save themselves by flight. But I
rather think that it may better be understood of all, both within and without
the City; and that the meaning is, that the enemy should put all to the sword
they could find, whether they were Natives, or Strangers that lived amongst
them, or that had joined themselves to them as soldiers that came in to aid
them. Or else by them that were found, are meant, those that were found
wandering and fleeing alone by themselves; and by those that were joined, those
that were gotten together into a body, or were gathered together into any place
of strength for the defense of themselves.

Ver. 16. Their Children also shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes,
etc.] See the Note Psalm. 137.9. And thus the Babylonians, through the just
Judgment of God, were destroyed with the same cruelty wherewith they had
destroyed Gods people; for they slew the Children of Zedekiah before his eyes.
See the Note 2 King. 25.7. and in 2 Chronicles. 36.17. it is said, that they had no
compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age. And
the same must be understood of that which follows, their houses shall be
spoiled, and their wives ravished, to wit, before their eyes. See the Notes
before, Chap. 1.7. And herein likewise the Babylonians had dealt so with the
Jews; whence is that, Chap. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou were not
spoiled -- when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and that Jer.
50.15. Take vengeance upon her; as she has done, do unto her. And Lam. 5. they
ravished the Women in Zion.

Ver. 17. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, etc.] To wit, together
with the Persians, for they also joined with the Medes in this Expedition
against Babylon; whence was that Exposition of the Handwriting on the wall
made by David to Belshazzar, Dan. 5.28. PEERS, thy Kingdom is divided, and
given to the Medes and Persians. But the Medes are here only named, because the
Expedition was chiefly undertaken upon their account; for, as we find in other
Histories, the proud Babylonian joining with Craesus, King of the Lydians, had
made war upon the Medes, whose King Cyaxares then was, who is also called
Darius the Son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, Dan. 9.1. Hereupon Cyrus
King of the Persians, the Son-in-law of this Cyaxares or Darius, rising up in
the defense of his Father-in-law, and having first subdued the Lydians, did
afterward join with Cyaxares or Darius his Father-in-law, then sixty and two
years old, in this Expedition against Babylon. See the Note, Ezra 1.1. And
indeed considering that this was foretold by the Prophet about two hundred
years before it came to pass, when the Medes had no quarrel against Babylon,
and were besides, a poor despised people comparatively, and no way likely to
subdue such a mighty City; this was a clear evidence, that the Prophet had this
by revelation from God. As for that which is here added concerning the Medes,
which shall not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it,
see the Note before, ver. 12. They would not spare the lives of the
Babylonians, neither for silver nor gold; but when they had destroyed them,
they were eager enough upon the pillage; whence is that in the foregoing verse
of their spoiling men's houses.

Ver. 18. Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces, etc.] The meaning
may be either, 1. That not staying to shoot them, they dashed out their brains
with their Bows; or 2ly. that not content to have shot them through, and slain
them (so great should be their rage) they should afterward beat their dead
bodies to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the Womb, that
is, the Child whilst it is yet in the Womb; yet hereby may be meant young
Children in general, who are called the fruit of the Womb, Psalm. 127.3. And
then the same is repeated again in other terms in the following words, Thine
eye shall not spare Children, that is, tender Infants and young Children crying
out and clinging to to their Mother for help. See the Note before, ver. 16.

Ver. 19. And Babylon the glory of Kingdoms, etc.] That is, the chiefest and
most glorious State and Monarchy that ever was; therefore termed the Lady of
Kingdoms, Chap. 47.5. and the praise of the whole earth, Jer. 51.41. and
compared to a head of fine gold in Nebuchadnezzars Dream, Dan. 2.32. the beauty
of the Chaldees excellency, that is, the City, in the beauty whereof the
Chaldees did exceedinly vaunt themselves, and might well indeed be said to
excel all other Nations, that City being in those times counted one of the
seven wonders of the World, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha,
to wit, not only because it was utterly and irreparably destroyed, and in such
a manner, that it was apparent to be from the wrath and indignation of God
against her, as when God overthrew those Cities; but also because in the
Destruction of Babylon, one of the most goodly places in the world was laid
desolate, as it was in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, of the pleasantness
and fruitfulness of whose situation, see Genesis 13.10.

Ver. 20. It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
generation to generation, etc.] To wit, after it is once utterly destroyed,
never to be built up again. It was not indeed thus utterly destroyed by Cyrus
^^e^ he took it, but it stood long after that, in great splendour and glory. But
then it lost the Empire, and Ctesiphon, and Seleucia being some years after
built not far from Babylon, they by degrees drained away the riches and glory
of Babylon; and so some ages after, followed her total ruin; for that is now
still remaining as another Babylon, built not far from the Babylon which still
lies desolate. See the Note above ver. 12. Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent
there, that is, the people of Ararabia the desert, a thievish wild people, that
used not to dwell in houses, but in Tents, which they removed from one place to
another, as they wandered about to seek herbage for their cattle; and the same
may be intended in the following words, neither shall the Shepherds make their
fold there; or else the meaning may be, that neither the Arabians, nor any
other Shepherd should seek to fleed their cattle there. See Jer. 50.3. to wit,
either because there should be no grass, where the ruins of the City lay, but
only nettles, and thorns, and briars should grow up there; or because of those
terrible and hurtful Creatures that should lodge there, as is expressed in the
following verse; or as some think, because the very soil of the land
thereabouts should be accursed of God. However, the drift of these words is to
set forth the wonderful change that God would bring upon Babylon, in that
thievish Arabians and poor shepherds shall not vouchsafe to have their abode
there, where Kings and Princes had wont to dwell.

Ver. 21. But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there, etc.] That is, such as
use to lodge in desert places. The word in the Original, Ziim, is derived from
an Hebrew word, which signifies a wild and waste place, Psalm. 68.6. And
therefore it is sometimes used for people, that inhabit such dry and desert
places, as in Psalm. 72.8. where this word is translated, they that dwell in the
wilderness. But here it must needs be meant of some wild Creatures living in
such solitary places; for which see the Note also Psalm. 74.14. and their houses
shall be full of doleful Creatures (Octim it is in the Hebrew) which seems to
be derived from an Interjection of exclaiming and crying out in a time of
affrightment and fear; or else of mourning or groaning; and consequently
Interpreters hold, that the word imports either Creatures of such a terrible
aspect, that they should make men, when they see them, cry out for fear; or
else such as make a mournful, doleful noise; and Owls shall dwell there, see
the Note, Job 30.29. It is in the Hebrew, the daughters of the Owl, that are
wont to make a dreadful skreeking noise when their Dams are from them,
especially when they want food. But that may be only an Hebraism; and Satyrs
shall dance there, whereby I conceive is meant either some kind of strange,
monstrous, ugly beasts (which seems the more probable, because elsewhere the
Prophet speaks of them, as of beasts that are wont to cry one to another, Chap.
34.14. The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of
the Island, and the Satyr shall cry to his fellow); or else Devils, appearing
to men like hairy, shag Creatures. See the Note Lev. 17.7. such as it may well
be the Satyrs were, of whom the Ancients speak so often, that used to haunt
Woods and Deserts, having faces and hands like men, and going upright as men
do, but yet were horned, and hairy, and cloven-footed like Goats. And indeed
such unclean Spirits love to appear, and to haunt men in such solitary places,
because there men are most apt to lie struck with terror; and thence may that
be, Math. 12.43. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
through dry places. And that Prophecy concerning mystical Babylon is fully
parallel with this, Revel. 18.2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is
become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a ^^ge
of every unclean and hateful bird.

Ver. 22. And the wild beasts of the Islands, etc.] That is, that breed or keep
in Islands void of Inhabitants, and whereto others do seldom or never come,
Shall cry in their desolate houses, and Dragons in their pleasant Palaces; that
is, shall answer one another with a loud cry. See the foregoing Note.

And her time is near to come, etc.] That is, the time of the beginning of the
miseries here threatened against her, when Babylon was to be taken by the Medes
and Persians. See the Note above, ver. 6. And so likewise in the following
words, And her days shall not be prolonged; either the same is again repeated,
to wit, that the day of her overthrow should not long be deferred; or the
meaning may be, that the days of her prosperity should not continue much longer.

CHAP. XIV.
VERSE 1. FOR the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, etc.] This is given as a
reason, why God would hasten the destruction of Babylon, foretold in the
foregoing Chapter, as he had said he would do in the last words of that
Chapter; to wit, that the Jews might by Cyrus, who was to subdue Babylon, be
sent home again into their own Country. See the Note, Ezra 1.1. For the Lord
will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own
Land; that is, He will yet again receive them into his favor, whom he had cast
off for a time, as if he had chosen them anew; or, He will by appearing
wonderfully for them, make it evident, that they were his chosen people; or, He
will choose or pick out the remnant of his people, whom he intends to deliver,
out of the places where they were dispersed. And by Jacob and Israel are meant
the Posterity of Jacob, the Jews, principally those of the Tribes of Judah and
Benjamin; but together with them, those likewise of the ten Tribes, that came
in to those of Judah in the days of Hezekiah, and so were with them carried
into Babylon, and afterward sent back with them into the Land of Judea: And the
strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of
Jacob: that is, many of the Heathens amongst whom they had lived in Babylon,
Chaldeans, Medes and Persians, being converted to the Jewish Religion, either
by the instruction and persuasion of the Jews, or by observing the holiness of
their lives, or by taking notice of the wonder of their deliverance out of
Babylon, (see the Note, Psalm. 126.2.) shall join themselves to them, and go
along with them to Jerusalem, (see Ezra 2.65.) as it was with the Israelites
when they went out of Egypt, see the Note, Exodus 12.38. But though this was
partly thus accomplished, as in a Type, by strangers joining themselves to the
Jews in their return into their own Land; yet the conversion of the Gentiles in
the days of the Gospel, when they joined themselves to the Church of the Jews,
is the principal thing here intended.

Ver. 2. And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place, etc.]
That is, say some Expositors, the several Tribes and Families of the Jews shall
take those strangers, those Proselites mentioned in the foregoing verse, that
had joined themselves to the house of Jacob, and receiving them into their
company and society, shall carry them along with them into the Land of Israel.
But the meaning rather is, that the people of several Nations, the Babylonians,
Medes and Persians; with others that dwelt in the way, whereby the Jews were to
return home into their own Country, should afford the Jews all the respect and
help they could, in and for their return into Judea, entertaining them and
encouraging them on their way, and furnishing them with cattle, and carriages,
and all other necessary accommodations for their Journey, as Cyrus had
commanded. See the Note, Ezra 1.4. and see also Neh. 2.7.9. And the house of
Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord (see the Note, Exodus 15.17.)
for servants and handmaids; that is, many of these people shall become servants
to the Jews, when they are settled in their own Land. And this some understand
of those Proselites or Strangers that had joined themselves to the Jews, either
that they should be as serviceable to the Jews, as any servants could be; or
else that in process of time some of them, or their children, should be sold to
them for servants, which was indeed agreeable to God's Law concerning Servants,
Levit. 25.44, 45, 46. And others again understand it of the Babylonians, who
being vanquished by the Medes and Persians, should be sold by them to the Jews
for slaves; or by reason of their penury should voluntarily yield themselves up
to be their servants. Whereupon it follows, And they shall take them captives,
whose captives they were, and they shall rule over their oppressors; that is,
those Nations should be servants to the Jews, to whom the Jews had formerly
been in bondage: which some also extend to the Jews vanquishing and bringing
into bondage those Nations, after their return out of Babylon, in the days of
the Maccabees, as had before lorded over them. But now most Expositors
understand all this spiritually, as well they may, of the conversion of the
Gentiles by the Ministry of the Jews in the days of the Gospel; to wit, that
the Jews should by the Preaching of the Gospel bring those Nations under the
yoke of Christ, to whom they had formerly been captives; and hereupon the
Gentiles should show great respect to them, as owning them to be God's
firstborn people, and should submit themselves to the word of the Gospel, and
should be subservient to the believing Jews, in laboring to establish Christ's
Kingdom in the world, and in gathering in his Elect to his Church. So that the
Dominion here promised to the Jews over the Gentiles, is not a Temporal
Dominion, but a Spiritual; their ruling over them in the Lord. See 2 Cor. 10.3,
4, 5. L^ke 22.25, 26. 2 Cor. 1.24. and 1 Pet. 5.3.

Ver. 3. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall give thee
rest from thy sorrow, etc.] That is, when thou shall be delivered from thy
Captivity in Babylon, and from all the griefs, and fears, and sore miseries
thou there enduredst.

Ver. 4. That thou shall take up this Proverb, etc.] or taunting speech; See
the Note, Numb. 21.27. against the King of Babylon, to wit, Belshazzar, the
last of the Babylonian Monarchs, together with whom that State fell; and say,
How has the Oppressor ceased? the golden City ceased? That is, the City that
was so full of Gold, and was so confident in her excessive wealth. And
therefore set forth by a head of Gold, Dan. 2.32, 38. and by a golden cup, Jer.
51.7. Babylon has been a golden cup in the Lords hand. It is spoken by way of
deriding Babels pride and confidence: as if it had been said, How is it
possible that this cruel Tyrant and his golden Monarchy should be thus ruined
in one night, and so by that means the poor people of God be delivered from
their bondage? That which we render, the golden city, some translate, the
exactress of gold; that is, the City that drained all the gold from other
Nations: But our Translation I conceive is the best. However observable it is,
that the word in the Original seems to be Syriack, the language then used
amongst the Chaldeans, Dan. 2.4. and so the Prophet mocks the Chaldees with a
word taken from the Chaldean tongue.

Ver. 5. The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked, and the Scepter of the
Rulers.] See the Notes, Chap. 9.4. and 10.5. This is in answer to the foregoing
question, verse. 4. as if the Prophet had said, Wonder not at the sudden
destruction of Babel: It is the Lord that has done it by way of taking
vengeance on them for their horrid wickedness and oppression.

Ver. 6. He who smote the people in wrath, etc.] To wit, Not in a way of
Justice, but of Rage and Fury, with a continul stroke; that is, immoderately,
and implacably, and with extreme cruelty. He never thought he had laid on load
enough; neither was there any pacifying his wrath. And therefore the Prophet
adds, that the like should be done to him, He that ruled the Nation in anger,
is persecuted, and none hinders; that is, he shall be destroyed inevitably
and irreparably: he shall not be able to defend himself; and for others, they
shall not be able, neither shall they have any mind to do it.

Ver. 7. The whole earth is at rest and quiet, etc.] That is, the Inhabitants
of the world, that could never be quiet for this proud City: They break forth
into singing; to wit, for the downfall of this great oppressing Empire.

Ver. 8. Yea, the Fir-trees rejoice at thee, etc.] Some understand this
Figuratively of those States and Princes that had been oppressed formerly by
the Babylonians. See the Note, Chap. 2.13. But it is better understood
literally, that it should be a joy, as it were, to the trees of the Forest,
that the Babylonian was destroyed, because he had wont to make such havoc in
felling down the Fir-trees, and as it follows, the cedars of Lebanon, that were
so far from him, partly to make passages for his Armies, and partly for the
building of his Houses and Ships, and for the raising of his Bulwarks, and
other uses in his Wars; whereas now, the Babylonian being hewed down, they
should stand quietly in their places without any molestation, Since thou art
laid down, (say they) no feller is come up against us. And indeed it may well
be, that this is spoken with reference to that which had been said before,
Chap. 2.13. concerning the great havoc that should be made by the Babylonian
in the forest of Israel.

Ver. 9. Hell from beneath, etc.] Or rather, the grave from beneath, because
this agrees best with that which follows, ver. 11. Thy pomp is brought down
to the grave -- the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee. Having
related, how all the inhabitants of the earth, yea, even the senseless
creatures, the trees, should rejoice at the downfall of the Babylonian
Monarch, the Prophet now proceeds to show, in a like poetical strain, that not
only the living, but the dead also from beneath should rejoice at his ruin and
death, and insult over him: To which end he speaks here of Hell, or the grave,
as under the person of some great Prince or King, having the dead under his
dominion and command. Hell, or the grave from beneath is moved for thee, to
meet thee at thy coming; whereby seems to be meant, either 1. That this Prince
of the lower Regions was moved with fear, to wit, at the report of the coming
of this mighty Monarch toward them, as fearing lest he would cause as great
troubles amongst the dead as he had done amongst the living, and that he was
coming to subdue them under his dominion, as he had done the several Nations of
the world above; and thereupon was resolved to meet him, and to oppose his
coming thither: Or else 2. That he was moved with awe of his greatness, and
with care about entertaining him with all requisite solemnity, as people use to
be when they hear of some great King that is coming toward them, and so
thought to go forth to meet, and to receive him magnificently, with all the
honor they could afford him. Or. 3. That he was moved with astonishment at his
fall, or with indignation against him for his horrid oppressions and cruelty,
and so intended to go out to meet him, that they might keep him off, as
unworthy to be buried and lodged amongst them, or that he might insult over him
for his pride and cruelty; which last seems indeeed the more probable, because
this is afterward expressed. And accordingly we must understand that which
follows; it stirs up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the
earth; to wit, that Hell or the grave had stirred up all the dead under his
power to resist him, or to entertain him honorably, or to deride and scoff at
him; and amongst the rest, all the great Kings and Monarchs that were amongst
the dead; to wit, either as their King, all little enough to resist him, or
that the presence of those might contribute much to the honor of his
entertainment, or because those great ones that had been slain by him, were
fittest to insult over him. And indeed observable it is, that in the last
clause, it has raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations; by
their thrones are meant their Sepulchers; or Royal Monuments, wherein their
bodies lay interred; or the Prophet speaks of them in a Poetical way, as if
they had thrones in the lower Region, as they had when they lived in the world;
and that phrase of their being raised up from their thrones, may seem to imply,
that as Princes are wont to rise up from their seats to some great Monarch, so
should these Kings rise up from their graves before the Babylonian, as to him
that had conquered them, their Lord and Sovereign. But still all is spoken by
way of derision and scorn.

Ver. 10. All they shall speak, and say unto thee, etc.] That is, when the
dead, even the chief among the dead before mentioned, that were stirred up to
meet thee, or to resist thee, or insult over thee, shall see thee come naked
and unarmed, not to subdue Hell or the grave, but to be there in the same
condition with other dead people, they shall then say to thee, as in a way of
derision, Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us? As if
they should have said, What! art thou come amongst us? Is it possible! How
came thou to die as others dye? Thou that were feared by all Nations, as if
thou had been invincible, that were extolled by thy Parasites, as if thou
had been some Demi God, and that were ready to adore thy self, as somewhat
more than a man, art thou at last found to be a poor mortal creature, as we
were?

Ver. 11. Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols,
etc.] That is, all the pomp and glory, together with the delights and pleasures
wherein thou have lived, and wherein thou were exalted far above others, is now
laid in the dust, and buried in the grave with thee. And it may well be also,
that in the mention that is made of his Viols, there is some respect had to
that mighty feast which Belshazzar made for his Princes (that jollity whereof
we may well think was accompanied with variety of music) at the very time when
the City of Babylon was surprised, Dan. 5.1. the worm is spread under thee, and
the worms cover thee.] That is, maggots and worms shall be thy bed or carpets
under thee, and thy coverlets over thee. Instead of a soft bed to lie upon, or
of rapistry carpets, whereon thou were wont to tread or sit; and instead of
those rich and gorgeous coverlets, wherewith thou were wont to cover thee, thou
shall have worms under thee, and worms above thee. Yet some there are that
refer this wholly to the Babylonians being cast forth without burial; to wit,
that instead of being embalmed and wrapped up in sere-clothes and fine linen,
as great Princes used to be, that their bodies might be preserved from
putrefaction, he should be left to rot above ground, and to be eaten up of
worms: Yea, some extend it to that of the worm that never dies, Mark 9.44. And
here I conceive is the end of the speech of the dead to the Babylonian, begun
ver. 10. and that in the following verse the Prophet proceeds on in that
proverbial taunting speech or song, began ver. 4.

Ver. 12. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer! etc.] Or, O day star! see
2 Pet. 1.19. son of the morning; that is, that art usually the immediate
forerunner of the morning; and therefore also called the morning star, see
Rev. 2.28. because this is the greatest and brightest of all the stars (whence
it is observed, that the beams of none of the stars do cause a shadow but this
only; and that this is seen in the Firmament a while after the Sunrising, when
none of the stars else can be seen), therefore to set forth, that the
Babylonian Monarch seemed to be advanced, as it were, to the very Heavens for
his riches and glory, and did as far exceed all other Kings of the earth in
splendour and Majesty, as this did excel all the other stars in beauty and
brightness; and that there seemed to be no more fear of his downfall, than
there seemed to be of the falling of this day star out of the Heavens;
therefore (I say) is the wonder of the fall of this great Monarch, or Monarchy,
expressed in these terms, How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, son of
the morning* And to the same purpose are the following words, how art thou cut
down to the ground, to wit, like some lofty tree, that being hewn down is laid
along on the earth; which did weaken the nations? That is, oppress, waste and
destroy them.

Ver. 13. For thou have said in thine heart, etc.] This is added as a reason of
the Babylonians downfall; to wit, that it should be for his proud exalting
himself against the great God of Heaven: Thou have said in thine heart, I will
ascend into Heaven, that is, I will assume unto my self the honor and glory
due only to God; I will exalt my self, as it is expressed in the following
verse, as one like the most High, as one that intended to fight against God: I
will exalt my throne above the stars of God, that is, the highest or brightest
stars, see the Note, Psalm. 104.16. Or rather the stars of God's making, and
which he has set in the Heaven, the place of his own peculiar habitation. Now
though these things may be said of the Babylonian Monarch, (or Monarchy) with
respect to any thought of his, wherein out of a presumptuous conceit of his own
wisdom and power, he arrogated any thing to himself, above what could justly be
ascribed to man; as his affecting the universal Monarchy of the world, that he
might have all Mankind under his command; and his requiring to be owned and
worshipped as a God, (in his image) Dan. 3.5. Yet I conceive they are
principally spoken with respect to his proud resolving to invade and subdue the
Jews, Gods peculiar people, together with his Temple and Sanctuary, never
minding the Almighty Power of God, whereby he heard they were defended, which
was all one in effect, as if he had resolved to subdue and dethrone God
himself: And if thus we understand that which is said here, then the following
words may seem to be added by way of explaining these, I will sit also upon the
mount of the congregation, in the sides of the North, see the Note, Psalm. 48.2.
That is, I will set my Throne upon Mount Sion, called here, The Mount of the
Congregation, because there God's people used to assemble themselves together
to meet with their God; as for the same reasons the Tabernacle was of old
called, The Tabernacle of the Congregation, see the Note, Exodus 29.42. And
hereby may be meant, either that he would assume the same honor to himself,
which by the Jews was given to God in Mount Sion; or else rather, that he would
bring Jerusalem, and the Temple in Mount Sion into subjection under him. And
indeed Belshazzars proud triumphing in this was the immediate forerunner of
Babylon's ruin. For the same night that City was taken, by way of insulting
over God, he sat drinking with his Princes and Concubines in the vessels that
had been taken out of the Temple, Dan. 5.2.

Ver. 14. I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the
most High.] See the foregoing Note.

Ver. 15. Yet thou shall be brought down to Hell, etc.] That is, instead of
climbing up to Heaven, thou shall be cast down to Hell, or the Grave. See
above, verse. 9. To the sides of the pit; as if it had been said, Instead of
sitting upon Mount Sion in the sides of the North, (for to that foregoing brag
of the Babylonian, verse. 13. there is a clear Allusion in this place) thou
shall be cast down into the basest room of the infernal Pit; or rather, into
some obscure corner of some common pit, dug upon some other occasion; and
that this shall be to thee instead of a Sepulcher. And indeed it is probable,
that Belshazzar was in the fury of the Surprise of Babylon thus cast out
amongst others that were slain, without any decent burial.

Ver. 16. They that see thee, etc.] This may be understood either of the
living, that should behold the Babylonians carcass so cast out, as is
beforesaid; or else of the dead, as formerly; ver. 13. that should gaze upon
him, when he came among them. They that see thee, shall narrowly look upon
thee, and consider thee; that is, they shall look wistly upon thee, to wit, as
wondering at his great, and sudden, and unexpected fall, doubting whether it
were he or no, and scarce believing their own eyes: Saying, Is this the man
that made the earth to tremble, that raised an earthquake, as it were,
throughout the world, that did shake Kingdoms? to wit, by the terrors, the
troubles, the ruins and alterations which he brought upon them.

Ver. 17. That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the Cities
thereof, etc.] That is, that laid all waste where he came, slaughtering the
Inhabitants, or carrying them into Captivity, and burning up the houses where
they dwelt: That opened not the house of his prisoners, that is, say some, so
inhumane he was, that he would never suffer his prisoners to stir out of the
Prison-doors, though with Shackles about their heels. But rather the cruelty of
the Babylonian here intended is, that he would never release those whom he had
once cast into Prison; either he would slay them, or else damn them to
perpetual Imprisonment. And therefore some read this place, as it is in the
Margin of our Bibles, That did not let his prisoners loose homeward; that is,
never set his prisoners free, that they might go away to their own homes: which
may be said with special respect to the Jews, that could never get to be
released and sent back to their own Country, till the Medes and Persians had
subdued and destroyed Babylon.

Ver. 18. All the Kings of the Nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every
one in his own house.] That is, the Kings of all Nations are ordinarily laid up
in stately Tombs and Sepulchers, which they had beforehand provided for
themselves, or which belonged of old to their Families, and where their
Ancestors were buried; which usually were in their own lands or possessions.
See the Notes, 1 Samuel 25.1. and 1 Kin. 2.10.

Ver. 19. But thou art cast out of thy grave, etc.] That is, Thy dead body
shall be cast out amongst the carcases of other mean men, and shall never be
honorably laid up in that Sepulcher which thou preparedst for thy self, and
wherein thou hopedst to lie amongst thy Progenitors; like an abominable branch,
that is, like some fruitless base plant, which men are wont to grub up; or like
some branch of a tree, which as being dead, and withered, and hurtful to the
tree (as are the suckers especially that sprout out from the root), men do
therefore cut off and cast away; or which being pruned away, as good for
nothing, are suffered to lie rotting upon the ground, till they become so
loathsome, that no body will care to touch them: And as the raiment of those
that are slain, thrust through with a Sword; that is, the garment of one slain
in the battle, that is so cut and mangled, and besmeared with blood, that it is
thence-forth good for nothing, neither will any man scarce vouchsafe to touch
it, and therefore they cast it away together with the carcass, whereon it was
found; which is that the Prophet intends in the following words, That go down
to the stones of the pit; that is, which slain men (together with their
garments) are unstript, cast into the bottom of any pit that is near at hand,
where stones lie scattered here and there; or upon which (the dead being laid
there) they afterward cast a heap of stones: As a carcass trodden under foot,
that is, some stinking carrion, or the carcass of a man, which out of hatred,
or in the heat and fury of war, is not only left to lie and rot above ground,
but is so trampled upon, bruised and broken, that no man well can, or much less
will undertake the burying of it. And all this is thus expressed, to show how
abominable the Babylonian should be unto all men for his Pride and Cruelty.

Ver. 20. Thou shall not be joined with them in burial, etc.] That is, Thou
shall not have that honor done thee in thy burial, which other Kings of the
Nations have usually done for them, (for this is spoken with reference to that
which was said before, ver. 18.) Thou shall not be laid in such a stately
Sepulcher amongst thy Progenitors, nor be carried thereto with that Pomp and
Solemnity, as other Kings use to be; because thou have destroyed thy land, and
stain thy people, to wit, the land of Babylon, and his subjects there. For
though some would have this to be understood of the land and people which he
had made his by Conquest; and others that understand it of his Hereditary
Kingdoms, do withal hold, that he is said to have destroyed this his land, and
to have slain his people, only because by his wickedness he had provoked God to
destroy them; yet I rather conceive that this it is that is here intended, as a
great aggravation of his Tyranny, that not content with the ruin that he
brought upon other Kingdoms and Nations; he did likewise destroy his own Land,
and his own people, to wit, by the sore burdens and exactions wherewith he
oppressed them, and by the cruelties he exercised amongst them, as bloody
Tyrants are wont to do.

The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.] That is, instead of being
renowned, the memory of them shall be abhorred, yea the remembrance of them
shall utterly perish. See the Note Prove. 10.7. They shall by degrees be cut
off, so that at last there shall not be one left to be called by their name,
neither shall there be any mention made of them. And this, though delivered in
general terms, is here inserted with relation to Belshazzar and his wicked
Progenitors, as a reason why he was cut off, and after him all his posterity
too, as is farther threatened in the following Verses.

Ver. 21. Prepare slaughter for his children, etc.] That taunting Speech, or
Song, begun ver. 4. being ended with the foregoing verse; here the Prophet does
again proceed to foretell the destruction of the Babylonian, and his Posterity,
Prepare slaughter for his children, for the iniquity of their fathers, see the
Note, Josh. 7.25. Now this is spoken as to the Medes and Persians that did at
first surprise Babylon, as that before Chap. 13.2. so to all others that were
in aftertimes to execute farther vengeance upon Babylon, till it was utterly
destroyed: That they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of
the world with Cities; that is, that they may not grow up in their fathers
stead, and raise up again that State and Empire which God had overturned, and
replenish the world with another wicked generation, that might dom near and
make as much havoc in the world, and enlarge their Dominion by building and
beautifying many Cities called by their names, as their Fathers had done before
them.

Ver. 22. For I will rise up against them, says the Lord of hosts, etc.]
Having in the foregoing verse enjoined the Medes, Persians, and others, to cut
off the issue of the Babylonian King, that they might not rise nor possess the
land; here he assures them, that this should be effected, how incredible soever
it might seem in an eye of reason, because the Lord himself would rise up
against them, who would certainly bring it to pass, and cut off from Babylon,
that is, from the King of Babylon, the name and remnant, that is, all his
Posterity, see the Notes Psalm. 9.5. 1 King. 14.10. and so it is expounded in
the following words, and Son and Nephew. But yet there are very many Expositors
understand this more generally, that God would cut off from Babylon the name;
that is, the great fame and glory which that City had gotten by the renown of
their King; and remnant, and Son, and Nephew, that is, the Posterity of the
inhabitants of Babylon.

Ver. 23. I will also make it a possession for the Bittern, etc.] A kind of
waterfowl, that thrusting her bill into the mire, or some broken cane, does
thereby several times together make a most hideous noise, like the braying of
an Ass: which translation of the original word seems the more probable,
because of the following words, and pools of water, and because elsewhere the
Bitter and the Cormorant (another waterfowl) are joined together, Chap. 34.11.
But the Cormorant and the Bittern shall p^ssess it, and so also Zeph. 2.14. As
for that which is said here, of making Babylon pools of water, the most
Expositors hold, that this was occasioned by Cyrus his letting out the River
Euphrates into many ditches which he had cut for that purpose, that so he might
with his Army pass over that great River and surprise Babylon; by means whereof
the Country or Land thereabouts, that was low and watery before, became much
more moorish and fenny, especially in aftertimes; when by degrees the dams and
sluices came to be more and more neglected, and the dikes to be choked up: and
I will sweep it with the besome of destruction, says the Lord; to wit, by
clearing it of all the riches and inhabitants thereof: See the Notes, Chap.
13.19, 20. and 1 Kings 14.10.

Ver. 24. The Lord of hosts has sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so
shall it come to pass, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 5.9.

Ver. 25. That I will break the Assyrian, etc.] The rod of Gods anger, as the
Prophet had before called him, Chap. 10.5. in my land; that is, the land of
Judea, which God had given to his people, and where he had promised to dwell
amongst them; and upon my mountains; that is, the mountains of Judea, or those
about Jerusalem: tread him under foot, as in great wrath and contempt. See the
Note, Psalm. 44.5. And this I conceive is meant of the destruction of
Sennacherib, King of Assyria, and his Army, related 2 Kings 19.35, 36. which
was done not far from Jerusalem, which they were come to besiege, that hereby
it might be the more apparent, that it was the God of Israel that destroyed
him, and that for seeking to ruin his people; then shall his yoke depart from
off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders: that is, then shall
the Assyrian yoke be taken from off my people. See the Note, Chap. 10.27. Some
indeed hold, that it is the Babylonian that is here called the Assyrian (See
the Note, Ezra 6.22.) to wit, because the Assyrian Empire was translated to the
Babylonians when they subdued the Assyrians, and because when the Babylonian
invaded the land of Judea, his Army consisted chiefly of the Assyrians, who
were then under his command, and nearest to Judea, and upon pretense of whose
old quarrel against the Jews, it may well be that he took occasion to invade
them. But this cannot be; for it is clear, that the Babylonian was broken by
the Medes and Persians in Babylon, and not in Gods land, and upon his
mountains, as it is here said the Assyrian should be. Rather therefore this
which is here said concerning the Assyrian is inserted, both to confirm again
that which he had before foretold, concerning the ruin of Sennacherib and his
Army, Chap. 10.33, 34, and likewise that hereby that which he had now also
foretold concerning the ruin of the Babylonians, might be the more readily
believed; this being all one, as if he had said, As I will now shortly destroy
Sennacherib, the Assyrian, when he shall invade you, so will I in time to come
destroy the Babylonian too, as I have now told you: And this your first
deliverance from the Assyrian, shall be a sign to you of your future
deliverance from the Babylonian. Yea, some Expositors conceive, that the
foregoing Prophecy, concerning the destruction of the Babylonian, was delivered
by Isaiah after the destruction of Sennacherib; and then indeed the destruction
of Sennacherib, the Assyrian, could be here mentioned only to assure them, that
as he had already destroyed the Assyrian, and delivered them from his yoke, so
he would also destroy the Babylonian, as he had now foretold, and would deliver
them from their bondage under him; or that as he had begun to destroy the
Assyrians under Sennacherib, so he would quite destroy them when they were
under the command of the Babylonian, and that Empire should also be ruined, as
the Prophet had now foretold. And this they judge the more probable, because in
the days of Ahaz there was yet no cause of fearing the Babylonian. But this is
altogether uncertain: and for this see the following Note, ver. 29.

Ver. 26. This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth, etc.] That
is, this which I have now foretold, is that which shall come upon that great
Babylonian Empire that shall have the whole earth in a manner under their
command: and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations; to
wit, the nations that are in subjection to Babylon. See the Note, Chap. 13.11.
And this therefore seems to be added to assure Gods people of the truth of that
which had been now foretold concerning the ruin of the Babylonian Empire,
however incredible it might seem to them. Though the Babylonian had never so
many Nations under his command, yet that should not hinder his ruin. But yet
there are some, I know, that hold, that this is spoken with relation to that
which was said in the foregoing verse, concerning the Assyrian; This is the
purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth, etc. that is, this which I have
purposed and decreed concerning the Assyrian, I have also purposed concerning
Babylon; or this which I have determined concerning the Assyrian, I purpose
also to do to all Nations, that shall attempt to destroy my people. And this
indeed has much probability in it.

Ver. 28. In the year that King Ahaz died, was this burden.] That is, say some,
the foregoing Prophecy against Babylon. See the Notes, chap. 13.1. and 2 King.
9.25. But the most of Expositors understand hereby the following Prophecy
against Palestine; and that this concerning the time when this Prophecy was
delivered, to wit, In the year that King Ahaz died, is purposely inserted, to
imply the occasion of this Prophecy, which was the exceeding triumphing of the
Philistines upon the death of Ahaz, as is clearly hinted in the following
verse; or else because here the Prophecies begin under Hezekiah, the Son of
Ahaz. For which see the Note, chap. 6.1.

Ver. 29. Rejoice not thou whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote
thee is broken, etc.] By Palestina is meant that part of the land of Canaan,
that was inhabited by the Philistines, called elsewhere Philistia, Psalm. 60.8.
Now because Uzziah King of Judah (or rather the state of Judah under Uzziah)
had in his days sorely smitten this Land and People of the Philistines, 2 Chronicles. 26.6. (concerning which see the Note, 2 Kin. 15.3.) and because this rod
of him that smote them, that is, the power of the state of Judah, was very much
broken, weakened and brought down in the days of his wicked grandchild Ahaz,
when both the Philistines and diverse other Nations had mightily subdued them,
and made great havoc in their land, 2 Chronicles. 28.17, 18, 19. (concerning which
see the Note, 2 King. 16.7.) and the Philistines might hope it was utterly in a
manner ruined and broken, when Ahaz was dead, (for then there was no longer any
fear, lest he, by the help of his confederate, the Assyrian, should seek to be
revenged on those Nations that had invaded his land; and of Hezekiah his Son,
who was young and tender, there was no great fear) therefore it is most
probable, that this people of the Philistines did indeed mightily rejoice and
triumph all the land over, when they heard Ahaz was dead, as being fully
persuaded, that now they should quite swallow up the Kingdom of Judah; and
hereupon it is that the Prophet speaks this, as in a way of deriding the
jollity of the Philistines, Rejoice not thou, Palestina, because the rod of him
that smote thee is broken; as if he should have said, Alas! thy jollity will be
soon turned into bitter mourning, by reason of thy miseries, even all thy land
over; For out of the Serpents root shall come forth a Cockatrice, (or, an
adder;) That is, out of the stock of Uzziah (who did bite or sting thee, as a
Serpent) I will raise up Hezekiah, the Son of his Grandchild Ahaz, who shall be
a sorer plague to thee, than ever Uzziah was, even by how much a Cockatrice is
worse than a Serpent; yea he shall be worse to thee than so, which is expressed
in the following words, And his fruit shall be a fiery flying Serpent,
concerning which see the Note, Numb. 21.6. And indeed Hezekiah did mightily
prevail against the Philistines, see the Note, 2 King. 18.8. And it may well be
too, that his speed in subduing the Philistines, is implied by terming him a
fiery flying Serpent. And not only Hezekiah, but also the state of Judah under
Hezekiah, may be the Cockatrice and fiery flying Serpent here intended.

Ver. 30. And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie
down in safety, etc.] That is, The people of God, the Jews, that were under
Ahaz brought to extreme poverty, even to be the poorest of all poor people (see
the Note, Job 18.13.) by his exactions, and the manifold miseries wherewith the
land was involved through his wickedness, shall under Hezekiah enjoy great
peace, and shall live in great plenty of all things in their own Country, and
not be made a prey to their enemies, as they formerly were; See the Note, Chap.
5.17. and Psalm. 23.2. And thus he that shall be a Cockatrice and a fiery flying
Serpent to you, O Philistines, shall be as a Shepherd to feed and to defend the
poor people of God. Yet some by the firstborn of the poor, here, understand
the very poorest amongst the people; to wit, that even they should come to
enjoy plenty of all things; and by their feeding, some also understand their
feasting together with great joy, upon Hezekiah's destroying the Philistines.
And I will kill thy root with famine; that is, I the Lord God will utterly
destroy thee, O Palestina, even as a tree is destroyed, whose root withers
for want of moisture; See the Note, Chap. 5.24. And he shall stay thy remnant;
as if he should have said, When I shall have destroyed thee with famine, then
the Cockatrice Hezekiah (or the state of Judah under Hezekiah) shall slay the
remnant with the sword, 2 King. 18.8. But yet others do rather think that it is
God that is intended in both clauses, though it be delivered in different
persons, I will kill, says the Lord; and he shall slay, says the Prophet. And
indeed the Philistines were not utterly destroyed by Hezekiah, as is evident by
the mention that is made of that Nation by the Prophets, after the days of
Hezekiah; but God did it by degrees, at several times, and by several
instruments. However the drift of this whole verse seems to be, to assure God's
people, that however the Philistines might insult over them for a time; yet ere
long there should be a great change: the Philistines should be ruined and
undone; and they should live in great peace and plenty.

Ver. 31. Howl, O gate, etc.] That is, You Rulers and Princes of Palestina,
that are wont to sit in the gates of your Cities. See the Note, Genesis 22.17.
Cry, O City; That is, You the inhabitants of each City there. Yet by Gate and
City the same thing may be meant, to wit, the Inhabitants of all their Cities
in general: concerning whom the Prophet does hereby foretell, that instead of
rejoicing at the misery of God's people, (of which he had spoken before, ver.
29.) they should howl for the extreme miseries that were coming upon
themselves. Thou whole Palestina art dissolved, or melted; and the meaning is,
that they should be affrighted or utterly ruined, see the Notes, Psalm. 46.6.
and 75.3. And observable is the expression, Thou whole Palestina art dissolved,
as in reference to what was said before, ver. 29. Rejoice not thou whole
Palestina; for hereby is implied, that their dread and desolation should be as
general, as before their joy and triumph was. For there shall come from the
North a smoke; that is, from Judea, or Jerusalem, (which partly lay North-east
from Gaza and other Cities in Palestina) Hezekiah shall break in upon you with
a mighty Army; which is termed a smoke, because as a black, thick, stifling
smoke, that arises upon the kindling of some great fire, cannot be kept out,
but fills all places where it comes, and darkens the air, and does exceedingly
vex and annoy men, and drive them out of the places of their abode, and breaks
out at last into a devouring flame; so should this Army of Hezekiah's break in
unresistably upon them, and overspread the whole land, overwhelming them with
the darkness of extreme misery and terror, and setting the whole land by
degrees on a light flame: And none shall be alone in his appointed times, or
assemblies; that is, the people shall not come in singly one by one, but in
whole Companies and Troops, at the set times, or the set places appointed for
their assembling together; so readily and cheerfully shall they join themselves
to Hezekiah in this his expedition for the invading of the Philistines. Yet
some would have the meaning to be, that no man should withdraw himself from
this service, and through faint-heartedness stay alone at home.

Ver. 32. What shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? etc.] Either
the word nation must be here collectively taken, nation for nations; What shall
one then answer the messengers of the nations? And then the meaning may be,
either 1. That when Ambassadors should be sent to Jerusalem to congratulate
this great victory of theirs over the Philistines; or when messengers should be
sent to Judea upon any other occasion, and coming thither, should enquire of
the late overthrow of the Philistines; the answer that should be returned in
Judea to these Ambassadors, or Messengers of the Nations, should be, that the
Lord has founded Zion; that is, that he had built it, and appointed it to be
the place where he would dwell amongst his people; and that accordingly he
would protect and establish it for ever. See the Note, Psalm. 78.69. and 87.1.
and that the poor of his people shall trust in it; that is, they shall account
themselves safe in Jerusalem, because they shall be under Gods protection
therein. And the meaning is, that the Jews should answer the Ambassadors, or
Messengers of the Nations, that by this which God had done to the Philistines,
it was evident, that God had undertaken to establist and defend Zion; and that
therefore all his enemies must needs be destroyed. Or 2. That when the
Ambassadors, or Messengers of the Nations returning home from Judea to their
own Countries (and it may be extended to any strangers that had been there),
should relate what a wonderful victory the Jews had gotten over the
Philistines, every one there should be ready to answer, that surely the Lord
has founded Zion, etc. And if thus we understand the words, it is all one in
effect, as if it had been said, What think ye will be the report that will be
spread all the world over, concerning this great overthrow of the Philistines
by Hezekiah? Why truly, that God has engaged himself for the protecting and
preserving of Zion; and that therefore his people, even when they are brought
to the poorest condition, may well rely upon her safety. But now by the
Messengers of the Nation may be meant, the Ambassadors of the Philistines, the
Nation spoken of in the foregoing verses: And then the meaning seems to be
this, that in case the Philistines should, upon the death of Ahaz (supposing
Judah then to be in a weak condition), send Ambassadors to Hezekiah with many
proud demands, denouncing War against him if those demands were not granted; or
rather, if after their defeat they should send to desire peace of Hezekiah, but
yet upon very unequal and unreasonable terms; the answer which Hezekiah, or
some other for him, should return to these Messengers of the Philistines, would
be this, that the Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall
trust in it, or shall betake themselves unto it; to wit, as a place of refuge
and safety.

CHAP. XV.
VERSE. 1. THE burden of Moab, etc.] See the Notes Chap. 13.1. and 2 Reg. 9.25.
Some say the destruction here threatened, was brought upon them by the Assyrian,
either Salmanassur, or Ezarhaddon, of which Amos they say prophesyed in the
days of Uzziah, Amos 2.2. and others, by Nebuchadnezzar after he had taken and
destroyed Jerusalem; concerning which it is hard to determine any thing; yet
the last seems the most probable, because that destruction of Moa^ of which
Jeremy prophesied Chap. 48. must needs be that by the Babylonians. And this may
be well deemed to be the same with that, because Jeremy seems to describe the
Destruction with many of the same expressions that are used here; but see the
Note Chap. 16.14. It may well be, that both the one and the other are here
intended.

Because in the night, etc.] And so suddenly and unexpectedly, when they were
secure and fearless, and must be needs struck with the greater terror; Ar of
Moab (see the Notes Numb. 21.28 and Deuteronomy. 2.9.) is laid waste and brought to
silence, that is, the inhabitants thereof are destroyed and slain (See the Note
1 Samuel 2.9.) or the Place thereof is destroyed and left desolate. And besides,
in this expression of her being brought to silence, there may be a close
intimation of the just hand of God upon her, in that her inhabitants, that had
wont to let loose their tongues to blaspheme the God of Israel, and to insult
over, abuse, and deride his people, should then have their mouths stopped. But
this clause may be read, as it is in the margin, Ar of Moab is laid waste and
cut off, that is, not only spoiled and plundered, but also utterly ruined and
destroyed; because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste and brought to
silence; and this was another chief City of the Moabites, called here happily Kir
of Moab, to distinguish it from another City of that name in Media, 2 King.
16.9. but elsewhere Kir-hereseth and Kirharesh, Chap. 16.7, 11.

Ver. 2. He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places to weep.] That
is, the Moabites, the people of Moab, shall in this their great distress go up
to their high places at Bajith, and Dibon, and elsewhere, to bewail their
misery before their Idol-Gods ( Chemosh especially, see the Note Numb. 21.29.)
and with much weeping and howling, and many sacrifices offered, to cry to them
for help and defense. And this is added by way of deriding their folly in
steeing thus, some to one high place, and some to another; and perhaps in
running from one God, and from one altar to another for relief and succor, when
alas, neither the one nor the other were able to help them.

Moab shall howl over Nebe, and over Medeba, etc.] To wit, for the miseries
already come upon these Cities, or ready to come upon them. As for the Cities
or Towns here mentioned, Dibon, and Neb^, and Medeba; it is evident, that they
were in the possession of the Tribes of Israel without Jordan; see Numb. 21.3^.
and 32.3. and Josh. 13.9, 16. But it seems in aftertimes they were again
recovered from the Israelites, and repossessed by the Moabites: on all their
heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off; see the Notes Lev. 19.27. and
21.5. and Deuteronomy. 14.1. and Job. 1.20.

Ver. 3. In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth, etc.] See
the Note Chap. 3.24. On the tops of their houses, and in their streets every
one shall howl, weeping abundantly; that is, within their doors and without,
there shall be nothing but weeping and howling. The tops of their houses
(concerning which, see the Note, Deuteronomy. 22.8.) are mentioned, because thither
they might flee, to get as far as they could from the enemy; or that thence
they might see what the enemy did in the streets; or because thither they were
wont to go up to pray, and to cry to heaven for help, as it is said, Jer.
32.29. that on their roofs they offered incense, unto Baal, and Zeph. 1.5. That
they worshipped the host of heaven on the house-tops. As for those last words,
weeping abundantly, it is in the Hebrew, descending into weeping, or, coming
down with weeping; and that which is intended thereby, seems to be either, that
they were dissolved into weeping, or that their eyes ran down with tears; or
rather, that as they went up to their high places, and to the tops of their
houses to weep, so they came down again weeping, not finding any hope of help
or Comfort there.

Ver. 4. And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh, etc.] These places were also
formerly in the possession of the Israelites, Numb. 32.57. but were, it seems,
in aftertimes, gotten from them by the Moabites: Their voice shall be heard
even unto Jahaz, a Town in the utmost border of Moab, Numb. 21.23. so that
hereby is employed, either that there should be an outcry of the people all the
land over, or how lamentable their outcry should be, in that it should be
heard so far off; therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out, that is,
the soldiers themselves shall be so perplexed and terrified with the howling of
the people, that even they also instead of fighting, shall cry out with the
rest; his life, that is, the life of each man of the Moabites, or of the armed
soldiers, shall be grievous unto him, they shall be all weary of their lives.
Yet some would have these words imply, that every man should be afflicted for
his own danger, not minding his nearest Relations.

Ver. 5. My heart shall cry out for Moab, etc.] Some take these to be the words
of the Moabites, or of the armed men of Moab (mentioned in the foregoing verse)
professing how heartily they were grieved for the misery that was come upon
their poor Country; and that hereby is implied, how lamentable a sight it would
be, to see such a goodly Country lay desolate. But the most of Expositors, take
them to be the words of the Prophet, as if he should have said, Though the
Moabites be enemies, yet my very heart is troubled for them, and I cannot but
mourn inwardly, when I think of the cruel and dreadful destruction that is
coming upon them. And this seems the more probable, because we find the very
same thing in a manner, spoken concerning the Moabites, by the Prophet Jeremy,
Chap. 48.31. Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will cry out for all Moab.
And again, verse 36. Therefore mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes, and
mine heart shall sound like pipes for the men of Kir-heres. And of this sorrow
and mourning the reason seems to be given in the following words, his fugitives
shall flee unto Zoar, that is, those of the Moabites that endeavor to escape
the rage of their enemies, shall flee unto Zoar, there to secure themselves; or
that from thence they might flee out of the Land. And indeed, if Zoar stood in
the utmost borders of Moab (as some say it did) it is like that this last is
hinted thereby. And then for the following words, an heifer of three years old,
thereby is meant an heifer that is in her prime, as at those years they use to
be fat and lusty, and strong, and fair, and wanton, and never yet brought under
the yoke. And this some apply to Zoar as holding that she is compared to an
heifer of three years old, either to imply, that this City, however little at
first, was become by degrees, a place of much strength and beauty, that had
never yet been subdued, and that this was the cause why the Moabites fled
thither for refuge; or else to imply, that her inhabitants had lived as a
wanton Heifer, in great plenty and pleasure, and had never seen sorrow, though
then she should share in the misery that was come upon the whole Country. And
indeed, in Jer. 48.34. it seems to be Zoar, that is there compared to an Heifer
of three years old; from Zoar, even unto H^ronaim, as an heifer of three years
old. And some also apply it to Moab, or the fugitives of Moab; and so apprehend
the meaning to be, that though Moab had hitherto lived in great abundance and
wantonness, and had never been brought under the yoke of her enemies, like a
young heifer, yet then she should flee before her enemies, even to Zoar; or
else, that they should flee to Zoar, as a young Heifer is wont to run from one
place to another when she wants any thing, lowing and crying out as she runs.
Thus, I say, this difficult passage may be understood as it is rendered in our
Translation. But now if we read it according to the Translation that is set in
the Margin of our Bibles, My heart shall cry out for Moab to the borders
thereof, unto Zoar, even as an heifer of three years old; then the meaning
seems to be, that his heart should cry out aloud, after the lowing of a lusty
strong Heifer, so that it should be heard, even to Zoar, which was in the
borders of Moab. And taking these to be the words of the Moabitish soldiers, as
is before said, then that which some say, may be the meaning, to wit, That they
should cry aloud to the flying Moabites, to stay and defend the strong places
in the borders of Moab; and that their crying with so loud voice, as a lusty
strong heifer, was, because otherwise their voice would not have been heard in
the midst of that outcry and howling that was amongst the people.

For by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up, etc.] that
is, as they go up this high hill, they shall cry and weep all the way as they
go. And to the same purpose is the following clause, for in the way of Horonaim
(concerning which place, see the Note Neh. 2.10.) they shall raise up a cry of
destruction, that is, they shall cry out as people use to do, when enemies are
killing and destroying them. And this is here added, as some think, to show why
the soldiers should cry out with such a loud voice for the staying of the
people, as is said in the foregoing Note. But I rather think, that the drift of
it, is to set forth, that as the people fled to the mountains, or as they fled
to Zoar; or that all the land over, all places should be filled with weeping
and outcries.

Ver. 6. For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate, etc.] See the Note, Numb.
32.3. The meaning is, that even Nimrim, though a place so gallantly watered,
and therefore exceeding pleasant, and fruitful, and populous, should lie
utterly desolate, both the Inhabitants and their cattle being either slain or
carried away. For the hay is withered away; that is, the grass, which should
have grown up for hay: The grass fails, that is, the herbage newly grown up:
There is no green thing, to wit, because the Pastures should be quite spoiled,
as being either eaten up by the enemies horse, o^ trampled into the mire with
their feet. This I conceive to be the true meaning of this place; and that this
is added, to imply what just cause there should be of that general outcry in
the land, foretold in the foregoing Verses. Yet because this which is said
here, That there should be no green thing, seems to be added with reference to
that which went before, for the waters of Nimrah shall be desolate; Therefore
some hold, that by the desolation of the waters of Nimrah, is meant that the
waters of Nimrim should by the enemy be diverted elsewhere in other channels,
and so the land thereabouts should become dry and barren. And others again
would have the meaning of the whole verse to be only this, That by the
destruction which the enemy should make amongst the Inhabitants, even the rich
pastures and land about Nimrim should lie as desolate, as if there were neither
waters nor grass growing there for the use of them that should dwell in that
place.

Ver. 7. Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have
laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows.] First, this may be
understood, either of the inhabitants of Nimrim, (mentioned in the foregoing
verse) that they, because there was no water nor pasture there, should remove
their cattle and other goods to some well-watered grounds elsewhere, called The
brook of the willows; or else of the Moabites in general, That they, when the
enemy should break in with such rage upon them, should carry away what they
could of the great riches which they had stored up, and hide it in some obscure
place amongst the Willows, or it may be in the very River it self; to wit, so
much of it as might be kept there without damage, in hope afterward to find it
there again; and that because there was no place of strength in the land, where
they could hope to secure it from the enemy. But, Secondly, it may rather be
understood of the enemy; to wit, that they should carry away the abundance and
mighty spoil, which they had gotten from the Moabites, to some place in or near
to the land of Moab, called, The brook of the willows, and there to leave it
together under some guard, with a purpose afterward to go thither again, when
they had done pillaging the Country, and to divide the booty amongst
themselves. Yea, and some that understand this of the enemies carrying away the
riches of Moab to the brook of the willows, do yet think that the foregoing
words, The abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, must
be understood of the Moabites; and so would have the meaning of the place to be
this, that though the Moabites should get in all the wealth and provision they
could, that they might be the better able to hold it out in their strong places
against their enemies, when they should besiege them; yet their enemies should
break in upon them, and empty all their Storehouses, and carry all away with
them: Or, that though the Moabites should hide in abundance so much of the best
of their wealth and treasures, as they could possibly get together, at least of
that which was left; yet their enemies should find it, seize upon it, and carry
it away to the brook of the willows. And besides, because the words which are
rendered in our Bibles, The brook of the willows, may be translated, as it is in
the Margin, The valley of the Arabians; therefore the meaning may be, either
that the Arabians should carry away the spoil of the Moabites Country, either
as serving under the Assyrians or Babylonians; or as afterward entering the
land, to pillage and carry away what the Assyrians or Babylonians had left: or
else, that the Assyrians and Babylonians should carry away the prey they had
gotten from the Moabites, to the valley of the Arabians; their Confederates,
there to be kept a while by them, intending afterward to convey them from
thence into their own Country. But however clear it is, that this is mentioned
as one cause of the great outcry in the land of Moab, of which the Prophet is
here speaking.

Ver. 8. For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab, etc.] That is,
Because of these grievous miseries that shall come upon the Moabites, there
shall be a dreadful outcry amongst them all the land over, both of them that
are slain, and of them that flee from the enemy: The howling thereof unto
Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer-elim; that is, the howling of this
cry shall reach unto these places. See the Notes, Numb. 21.16.

Ver. 9. For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood, etc.] To wit, with the
blood of the slaughtered Moabites: So that this is also added as a reason of
that great outcry before spoken of, that should be in the land. Whether Dimon
be the name of a River, or of a City, is altogether uncertain; for we find it
no where else mentioned. However it seems that there was in this place some
greater slaughter made amongst the people, than in any other part of the land;
either because they here stood out longest in the defense of some place against
the enemy; or for some reason that is not expressed. And some think that Dimon
is the same City that was before, ver. 2. called Dibon, the name being changed,
and of Dimon called Dibon, which signifies bloody, upon that occasion. Yea and
very many learned Expositors hold, that there is an Allusion in these words to
the Story in 2 King. 3.20, 21, 23. concerning a stream of water that came
running down from the land of Edem into the Wilderness, where there was an Army
of three Kings that were going against the Moabites, which appeared to the
Moabites to be blood, and were afterward indeed died red with their blood; as
if the Prophet would have said, That as then the stream was onee before died
with blood, so it should be again: Whereas to me it seems more than probable,
that the waters mentioned in that place were miraculously sent of God for the
refreshing of those Armies, and were not the waters of a River that did
constantly run through that Wilderness. And therefore for those following words,
For I will bring more (it is in the Original, additions) upon Dimon; I do not
think the meaning of that is, that whereas those waters were made red with
blood at that time, when those three Kings slew the Moabites; now there should
be more blood there, because the slaughter of the Moabites by the Babylonians,
should be far greater than that formerly was by those three Kings. The meaning
of those words rather is; either, 1. That God would add streams of blood to the
waters of Dimon, which running into it from several places, should make the
river rise and swell more and more. Or, 2. that God would bring more and
greater vengeance upon Dimon, than upon other parts of the land; the slaughter
should be greater there, and so more blood should be shed there, than in any
other place besides. Or, 3. that God would bring more evils upon Dimon, than
what he had hitherto spoken of, concerning the spoiling of their pastures, and
the plundering of their goods, ver. 6, 7. even this here mentioned, the
shedding of their blood in so great abundance: yea (say some) more than that
here mentioned, to wit, that after the miseries brought upon them by the
Assyrians, the Babylonians should also in process of time utterly destroy them.
Or, 4. That to the judgment here threatened, that the waters of Dimon shall be
full of blood, he would add yet more; to wit, the judgment set forth in the
following words, Lions upon him that escapes of Moab, and upon the remnant of
the land; which though some understand of men fierce and savage as Lions, as
namely the Babylonian, or the Assyrian, who though he was only as a Bear to
other parts of Moab, yet he would be as a Lion to Dimon: Yet I rather think it
is to be understood literally, to wit, that those Moabites that had escaped the
Sword, and were left in the land, should be slain by Lions, (and other wild
beasts) to wit, either in the wilderness, whither they should flee to escape
the Sword; or in their own land, which lying desolate, Lions should breed in
it, as it was with the Colonies in Samaria, 2 King. 17.25.

CHAP. XVI.
VERSE 1. SEnd ye the Lamb to the Ruler of the land, from Sela to the
wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.] There are only two
Expositions of this place, which can consist with our Translation. The first
is, that by the Lamb here is meant a Sacrifice of Atonement, which the Moabites
are here stirred up to send to the Temple at Jerusalem: Only there is this
difference amongst those that do thus conceive of the Lamb to be sent, 1. That
some think the Prophet does here seriously advise the Moabites to send Lambs
and other such like cattle, to be offered up in Sacrifice to God, the Ruler of
the whole world, at the Temple at Jerusalem, there to pacify God's displeasure
against them. And 2. that others take it to be Ironically spoken, and by way of
insulting over the Moabites; as if he had said, You that had wont to despise
and blaspheme the God of Israel, now that you see your selves in such desperate
danger; now that you are so miserably destroyed, you had best send your
Sacrifices to the Ruler of the world at the Temple in Mount Zion: But alas, if
you had a mind to do so, it is now, you see, too late. But then the (2.) is,
that by the Lamb, which the Moabites are here advised to send to the Ruler of
the land, is meant the Tribute which they were wont to pay to the King of
Judah; Because it is evident, that the Moabites were subdued by David, and
became Tributaries to him. See the Notes, 2 Samuel 8.2. And it is most probable,
that the Tribute agreed upon was that which is mentioned 2. King. 3.4. An
hundred thousand Lambs, with an hundred thousand Rams, with the wool: which it
seems they paid duly to the Kings of Israel, after that Kingdom was divided
from the Kingdom of Judah, till after the death of Ahab, when they refused to
pay their Tribute any longer, either to Ahaziah or Joram his Son. See the Notes
2 King. 1.1. and 35. Therefore it is thought the Moabites are here advised to
pay their wonted Tribute again to the King of Judah, Send ye the Lamb, that is,
the Tribute which you formerly paid of Lambs and other cattle, to the Ruler of
the Land; that is, to the King of Judah, to whom of right you are Vassals, ever
since David subdued you: From Sela, some chief City in the South-borders of the
Land of Moab, which was afterward taken by Amaziah King of Judah, and called
Joktheel, See the Note, 2 King. 14.7. To the wilderness, that is the wilderness
of Jordan, in the North-border: Unto the mount of the daughter of Zion, that
is, to Jerusalem. See the Note, Chap. 1.8. Which is all one therefore as if he
had said, Let all the people all the Land over, gather up this Tribute and send
it. But indeed many Expositors understand this as spoken in a way of derision,
as if the Prophet had said, You had best (to prevent the ruin that from Judah
will be brought upon you) to send the old Tribute again you had wont to pay to
Hezekiah, the Ruler of the land (and it is like in your straits you will think
of doing so) but alas it will do no good; that will not then keep off the
destruction, which will certainly come upon you.

Ver. 2. For it shall be, that as a wandering bird cast out of the nest, (or, as
a nest forsaken) so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.] A
river in the utmost borders of the land of Moab, Numb. 21.13. The meaning
therefore seems to be, that as a wandering bird, driven out of her nest, or as a
brood of young birds, forsaken of their damme, or cast out of their nest, do
fly up and down, not having any body to protect them, not knowing whither to
go, or where to take up their rest; so the daughters of Moab, that is, the
Inhabitants of the Towns of Moab, or the Moabitish women, (see Chap. 3.16, 17.
and Luke 13.34. even they, as well as the men, shall flee away out of their
Country, and wander up and down in desert places, not knowing where to settle
themselves: Or, they shall be carried away captives into Assyria over the River
Arnon. But now we must know, that this may be taken as spoken only
conditionally, to wit, that thus it should be with the Moabites, if they did
not hearken to the advice given them in the foregoing verse. But others, that
understand that which is said in the foregoing verse, as spoken Ironically, do
accordingly understand this as added to show why there would be no thinking to
send a Lamb, either by way of pacifying God's anger by Sacrifices, or by way of
procuring their Peace, by paying their former Tribute; because instead of that,
they should flee in great dread from the Sword of the Enemy, or should be
carried away by the Enemy into Captivity, as easily as a bird is driven out of
her nest.

Ver. 3. Take counsel, etc.] That is, say some Expositors, Consult together how
you may escape the destruction that is coming upon you. And they that do
understand these first words thus, do accordingly hold, that in the next words
the Prophet tells them what would be the best course they could take, if they
desired to prevent their approaching ruin; namely, to be courteous and kind to
the outcasts of God's people in their distress, Execute Judgment, make thy
shadow as the night, etc. But I rather conceive, that these first words do
intend the same thing with those that follow after; Take counsel, that is,
Consider with your selves, and consult together; to wit, how you may any way
protect, and relieve, and procure the good of my people in their affliction and
distress: Execute judgment, that is, Do that for them, which in all Justice and
Equity you ought to do; be not injurious to my people in their distresses, as
you have formerly been; but show them that compassion, which is due to a people
in such misery: Make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday; that
is, when my people are driven out of their Country, and flee to you to shelter
them from their enemies, let them be concealed and hidden by you, that even at
Noonday they may be as if they were covered with the darkness or shadow of the
night, when no body can see them, or find them out; or rather, let the harbor
and entertainment they find amongst you, be as a safe and sweet refuge and
refreshment, against the noonday heat of the Assyrians breaking in upon them,
even as the pillar of the cloud (to which happily this Expression does allude)
was a covert to the Israelites against the heat of the Sun, as they traveled
through the Wilderness to Canaan; hide the outcasts, bewray not him that
wandereth; that is, Hide those, that being driven out of their own Land, wander
up and down amongst you, to seek for some place of shelter, and do not deliver
them up into the hands of their enemies. But now all this is understood by
many, as spoken Ironically; Take counsel, execute Judgment, etc. as if he had
said, Now when the enemy is broken in upon you, it may be you will wish you had
done what it was indeed your duty to have done to Gods poor people, when they
were persecuted and pursued by their enemies. But alas, it is now too late; you
had wont to reject them, and to deal cruelly with them at such times; and now
you will meet with the same hard measure.

Ver. 4. Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab, etc.] That is, those of my
people that are driven out of the land which I had given them, and that I own
still as my people, though I have at present in just displeasure against them,
cast them out for their sins; Be thou a covert to them from the face of the
spoiler, as if he should have said, As at the first bringing of my people out
of Egypt, you did discover your spleen against them, (See the Notes Deuteronomy.
23.4.) so you have done ever since, being still ready to side with their
enemies that have prevailed against them, and to deal hardly with them in their
distress; but beware, do not so still, but rather let them have a hiding place
amongst you, to shelter them from the rage of their enemies, to wit, the
Assyrians, as most Expositors do here conceive. But now the drift of all this
is only to show, what in all reason the Moabites ought to have done; and, as
some think, to insult over their destruction, because they had not done so: for
the Extortioner is at an end, the spoiler cease, the oppressors are consumed
out of the land; that is, the Land of Judea shall be quite freed from the enemy
that came to spoil and oppress her, which, I say, most Expositors understand of
the quick dispatch that God made of Sennacherib and his army, 2 King. 19.35. so
that the drift of this passage seems to be this; that considering the calamity
that was to come upon Gods people, was not like to last long, but that they
should be speedily settled again peaceably in their own Land; the Moabites had
no cause to reject the Jews, when they fled to them for shelter, as fearing
lest the Assyrians should be enraged against them for it; but rather might do
well therein to gratify the Jews, thereby to make them their friends for the
time to come. And all this we must know, is spoken by way of insulting over the
Moabites in their destruction, because they had not done that, which in all
reason and equity they should have done.

Ver. 5. And in mercy shall the throne he established, etc.] Or, prepared. That
is, However the Throne of Judah shall be dangerously shaken by the invasion of
the Assyrian, which shall cause the Jews to flee to thee, O Moab; yet it shall
not be utterly overthrown and ruined; but through the mercy and free grace of
God, it shall be established and settled again in great strength and power, for
him to whom it belongs. Some, I know, understand those words [in mercy] of the
mercy of the King of Judah, whereby his Throne should be established for him,
and for his Successors. But I question not, but that it is meant of Gods mercy
to the Kingdom of Judah. And thereupon it follows, and he shall sit upon it in
truth, etc. which words must be understood, both of Christ, and of Hezekiah as
he was a type of Christ. Understanding it of Hezekiah, the meaning is, That he
should sit upon the Throne of Judah in truth, i. e. certainly; or surely,
firmly and constantly; or that he should govern the people sincerely, and
uprightly; in the Tabernacle of David, that is, in the house and palace of
David; judging, and seeking Judgment, and hastening Righteousness, that is,
being careful to execute Judgment and Justice amongst them without partiality,
and without delay. But understanding it of Christ, who is indeed principally
here intended; the meaning then is, That God would raise him up out of the
Posterity of David, and that he should sit upon the Throne of David for ever,
(See the Note Chap. 9.7.) protecting his people, and executing Judgment upon
his and their enemies (see the Note Chap. 11.5.) And accordingly the drift of
this passage seems to be; first, more particularly, that in regard the Assyrian
should be destroyed, and Hezekiah settled in the Throne of Judah, it would be
better for the Moabites to side with the Jews, than with the Assyrians. And
2ly. more generally, that it was mere solly in the Moabites and others, to
expect the ruin of the Throne and Kingdom of Judah, upon every prevailing of
their enemies against them; there being a King to arise in the posterity of
David, who should sit on that Throne, and should justly govern and prosperously
defend Gods people for ever.

Ver. 6. We have heard of the pride of Moab, etc.] Some Expositors hold, that
God speaks here of himself in the Plural Number, as in Genesis 1.26. for which,
see the Note there. And others suppose, that this is spoken in the name of
other people, alleging the pride of the Moabites, as a reason why it was no
wonder to them to hear of their Destruction. But more generally it is thought
by Expositors, that in this word [We] the Prophet does include the Lord God
himself, the Jews, and all the neighbor Nations, and that it is all one in
effect, as if he had said, That the Pride of Moab was on all sides well known;
We have heard of the Pride of Moab (he is very proud) even of his haughtiness,
and his pride, and his wrath; that is, the wrath, which out of his great pride
and haughtiness he has discovered against the Jews. The full scope of this
whole passage, may be thus expressed. These things-whereto the Moabites have
been here advised, verse 1, 3, 4. they ought in all reason to have done; but
alas, they are too proud to do any such thing: we have heard of their proud
boastings and threats. Because they are a great and wealthy people, and their
Country and Cities are very strong, therefore they fear nothing; and instead of
carrying themselves to the people of God, according to the counsel before given
them; they on the contrary, do in their pride deal despitefully and injuriously
with them. But this their pride shall not secure them, but shall rather prove
their ruin; which is implied in the following words, but his lies shall not be
so, that is, their vain confidence, their proud boastings and threatenings shall
prove but lies; that which they vainly and proudly conceit, and boast, and
threaten, shall not come to pass.

Ver. 7. Therefore, etc.] That is, because of their horrid pride, Moab shall
howl for Moab, that is, say some, the living Moabites shall howl for the dead;
or rather, they shall mutually howl one to another, or one for another; so
that, as it follows, every one shall howl, that is, there shall be a general
howling all the Land over; for the foundations of Kir-hareseth (See the Note
Chap. 15.1.) shall ye mourn, that is, not for the plundring or defacing of it,
but for the utter subverting of it, and razing the very foundations of it; and
the rather happily, because ye thought them invinsible. This, indeed, may be read
as it is in the Margin of our Bibles, for the foundations of Kir-hareseth shall
ye mutter. And they that read it so, conceive the meaning to be, That they
should mutter within themselves, that seeing that Town had formerly stood out
against the siege of three Kings, (for which, see the Note 2 King. 3.25.) and
was now in as good strength as ever; therefore they should be well enough able
to defend it: and accordingly they hold, that in the following words, surely
they are stricken, the vanity of these their hopes is discovered, in that
notwithstanding this their muttering, the foundations of this their strong
Town, were stricken, that is, overthrown or destroyed; or they that flattered
themselves thus, were stricken; that is, wounded or slain. But I conceive the
former Translation to be far the best; and that in the last words the reason is
given why they should mourn for the foundations of Kir-hareseth, namely,
because they should surely be stricken, that is, razed and ruined.

Ver. 8. For the fields of Heshbon languish, etc.] That is, they lie waste and
desert; see the Note Chap. 15.4. and the vine of Sibmah, a City formerly taken
from the Amorites by the Children of Israel, Numb. 32.38. but now in the
possession of the Moabites; both were places it seems of great note for their
Vineyards; so that the mention of these imports, that the most pleasant and
fruitful of the Land should be destroyed: The Lords of the Heathen have broken
down the principal plants thereof; that is, the Princes and Commanders of the
armies invading the Land of Moab, whether Assyrians or Chaldeans; or those
great Potentates and Conquerors that have in a manner subdued all the Nations
far and near, have by their armies utterly wasted the choice plants of these
Vineyards; they are come even unto Jazer, a City in the confines of Moab,
formerly a City of refuge in the Tribe of Gad, Josh. 21.39. And some understand
hereby, that the Lords of the Heathen went on, wasting the Vineyards even unto
Jazer, and so on to the Wilderness, etc. as it follows in the next words,
because so far that goodly track of Land was replenished with Vineyards. And
others understand hereby the peoples fleeing, or being carried Captives, even
unto Jazer, through the Wilderness, and over the Sea; for so also they
understood those words that follow, they wandered through the Wilderness, and
they are gone over the Sea. But because there is afterward again mention made
of the Vineyards, her branches are stretched out; I rather conceive that this,
with all that follows, is spoken of the Vineyards of that goodly Country; and
that the drift of the words is, either 1. to set forth the large extent of
those Vineyards, that so the former flourishing condition of those places might
stir up the greater lamentation for the sad devastation that was coming upon
them; They are come even unto Jazer, that is, these Vineyards of Sibmah do
stretch forth themselves, even as far as Jazer; they wandered through the
wilderness, that is, they went along, winding this way and that, through the
Wilderness, to wit, of Moab; see the Note above, verse. 1. Her branches are
stretched out, they are gone over the Sea; that is, they ran out as far as the
Sea, that is, the Dead-Sea, the Lake of Sodom; yet in Jer. 48.32. it is
expressed thus, Thy plants are gone over the Sea, they reach even to the Sea of
Jazer; or else, 2ly. to show how these their Vines, as being very precious, and
their VVines (under which all their wealth may also be comprehended) were
carried away (together with their persons) even unto Jazer, and so through the
Wilderness, and over the Sea, into some remote Country. See the Note Chap. 15.7.

Ver. 9. Therefore I will bewail, etc.] This may be taken as spoken by the
Prophet, either in the person of the Moabites, or in his own person; See the
Note before, Chap. 15.5. and it is expressed thus to imply, that the misery of
Moab should be so great, that it would cause any man to mourn bitterly with
them; I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer, the vine of Sibmah; that is, I
will bewail the destruction of the Vineyards of Sibmah, with the weeping
wherewith men wept over Jaz^r; I will weep as bitterly for the destroying of
these precious vines of Sibmah, as men wept for the destruction of that goodly
City Ja^^r.

I will water thee with my tears, O Heshb^n and Elealeh, etc] That is, I will
weep abundantly for thee, pouring forth even streams of tears. And see the Note
Chap. 15.4. Yea, considering that Heshbon was famous for her fish-pools, as
appears by that expression in Solomon's Song, Chap. 7.4. thine eyes like the
fish-pools in Heshbon; it may well be, that the drift of this expression might
be the same, as if he had said, that Heshbon should not want his tears to water
her, though he knew her to be abundantly watered already. And why he would weep
so bitterly for these places, he shows in the following words, for the
shouting for thy Summer-fruits, and for thy harvest is fallen; that is, your
wonted singing and shouting with a great deal of jollity at the bringing in of
your Harvest and Vintage, is now ceased; to wit, because your Corn and vines
are spoiled by the enemies. But this clause now may be read as it is in the
margin, for the alarm is fallen upon thy Summer-fruits, and upon thy Harvest;
as if the Prophet had said, In Harvest and Vintage-time the enemy shall break
in upon you with a hideous shouting, (and indeed so it is expressed Jer. 48.32.
The spoiler is fallen upon thy Summer-fruits, and upon thy Vintage) and that
shall be instead of the joyful shouting that used to be in your fields at those
times; for if this last clause be thus translated, yet that this is implied, is
evident by the next verse.

Ver. 10. And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field, and
in the Vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting,
etc.] To wit, as at such times of Harvest and Vintage there used to be; see the
Notes Judge. 9.27. and Psalm. 126.5, 6. and that because there should be no Corn
to reap, nor grapes to tread, the enemy having destroyed all, by reason of
God's just wrath against them, as it is expressed in the following words, The
treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses; I, says the Lord, have made
their vintage-shouting to cease.

Ver. 11. Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine
inward parts for Kir-heresh.] See the foregoing Notes, ver. 9. and Chap. 15
ver. 1, and 5. In Jer. 48.36. it is expressed thus, Mine heart shall sound for
Moab likr pipes, etc. And therefore this of the sounding of his bowels and
inward parts, may be meant only of the deep sighs and groans that came from his
heart. Yet because extremity of grief will many times cause a man's bowels to
roll together, and so to rumble and make a noise within him, it may be meant of
this, according to that, Jer. 31.20. where God says of Ephraim, My bowels are
troubled for him; which is in the Hebrew, my bowels do sound for him. And there
may be also an Allusion to the old Custom of using mournful Music, and singing
doleful Songs, when they bewailed their dead Friends, or at any other time of
great lamentation.

Ver. 12. And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on the
high places, etc.] That is, when it is evident that the Moabites are even
wearied and tired out with seeking help of their Idol-gods, upon their
high places, the ordinary places where they used to serve them; to wit, partly
by their running from one high place to another, and partly by their weeping
and praying there, and the multitude of their Sacrifices which in each high
place they offered up to their gods; but especially by the fruitlesness of all
these their endeavors, in that they can procure no help from their gods by all
they do: That he shall come to his Sanctuary to pray; to wit, some place
reputed more holy than their ordinary high places, the Temple (as it is most
probable) of their chief Idol Chemosh, (See the Note, 1 Kin. 11.7.) whither
they shall fly as their last refuge, and their chief Sanctuary in times of
great distress, hoping there at last to find some help and relief; But he shall
not prevail, that is, even there also they shall lose their labor, and shall
not prevail with their god to come to their help. And this now is added in the
close of all the Judgments threatened against the Moabites, as the height of
their misery; to wit, that when in their distress they should seek to their
gods for succor, they should be ashamed and confounded, because all would be
lost labor: the longer they wearied themselves therein, the worse things
should still go with them. And indeed so this is expressed by the Prophet
Jeremy, Chap. 48.13. And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, etc.

Ver. 13. This is the word that the Lord has spoken concerning Moab since that
time.] That is, this which has hitherto been foretold concerning the Moabites
is the word which God has spoken, since that time, that the Judgment which God
had passed against them, was first revealed to me. That which follows, ver. 14.
was after revealed. Yet I do not see, but that these words may be the entrance
into the following Prophecy, wherein the precise time is set down, when this
destruction now threatened should come upon the Moabites. Having largely related
the burden of Moab, Chap. 15.1. that is, the Prophecy which God had revealed to
him concerning the miseries that were coming upon Moab; as in reference to
that, now he adds This, that is, this Prophecy that follows in the next
verse, is the word that the Lord has spoken concerning Moab since that time;
that is, since the revelation of the foregoing Prophecy.

Ver. 14. But now the Lord has spoken, saying, etc.] As if he should have
said, Since the time of the revelation of the foregoing Prophecy, God has now
further made known his Will concerning Moab; But now the Lord has spoken,
saying, Within three years, as the years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab
shall be contemned, with all that great multitude; and the remnant shall be
very small and feeble. That is, Three years hence, at the end of three years,
the glory of Moab in the multitude of his people, wherein he now prideth
himself, and whereon he relies with so much confidence, shall be brought very
low, by the great destruction which their enemies shall make amongst them. And
as for those words, As the years of an hireling, they are added to imply, that
this Calamity should come upon them precisely at the end of three years,
neither sooner, nor later; even as an hireling goes away from his Master, just
at the expiring of the time for which he was hired; sooner than that his Master
will not let him go, and a day longer than that he will not stay: it being
usual with such hired Servants earnestly to long for the expiring of the time
of their services, for which see the Notes, Job. 7.1. and 14.5. The great
question is concerning the three years, the time prefixed for the destruction
here threatened. Indeed if we should understand these words, within three years,
as some do, of the space of time that should be spent by the enemy in the
destroying of it, there would then be no difficulty in the words, because they
might be understood of any three years at any time whatsoever. But questionless
the Prophet does here determine the time, when Moab should be wasted, as is
here foretold, and that purposely for the encouragement of God's people, by
letting them know, how soon this ruin should come upon these their proud
enemies the Moabites. And therefore too I cannot think, that this is meant, as
some would have it, of Nebuchadnezzars destroying the Moabites, three years
after he had destroyed Jerusalem. The foregoing Prophecy is rather meant of the
destruction of Moab by the Babylonians, at least principally of that, (see the
Notes, Chap. 15.1.) And this is added as another Prophecy distinct from that,
and revealed to the Prophet since that; and therefore must be meant of some
destruction brought upon them by the Assyrians three years after the
promulgation of this Prophecy. First therefore, Some hold that this was
prophesied in the beginning of Hezekiah's Reign, and that it was fulfilled
accordingly in the fourth year of Hezekiah, when Shalmaneser went against
Samaria, 2 King. 18.9. and so as he went thither, might subdue and destroy the
Moabites, that he might not leave an enemy behind his back. Or else that this
was foretold by the Prophet, when Shalmaneser did first besiege Samaria, and
that when he had taken Samaria, (which was after he had besieged it three
years, 2 Kin. 17.5.) he went against the Moabites, and brought this calamity
upon them, that is here foretold: which last seems of the two the most
probable; because those foregoing passages, Chap. 16.3, 4. seem to upbraid the
Moabites for their former inhumane dealing with God's people, when they fled to
them for shelter; which may be meant of those of the ten Tribes, that fled to
them upon that invasion of their land by Shalmaneser. Again 2ly, Some hold,
that the Prophet foretold the destruction here threatened about the eleventh
year of Hezekiah, and it was executed upon the Moabites by Sennacherib, when
three years after, to wit, in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah, he invaded the
land of Judah, 2 Kin. 18.13. to wit, that as he marched with his Army out of
Assyria, with a purpose to subdue Jerusalem, he fell upon the Moabites by the
way, (which might be, though Rabshakeh makes no particular mention of Moab
amongst the people whom his Master had vanquished, 2 Kin. 18.34.) For indeed
after the siege of Jerusalem it could not be, because his Army was then so
miraculously destroyed. And thirdly, Others think that this was threatened by
the Prophet about the fourteenth or fifteenth year of Hezekiah, and executed
upon Moab about the seventeenth or eighteenth year of Hezekiah, and that by
Ezarhaddon the Son of Sennacherib, when he swept away the remainder of the
Israelites that were left in their land, and so might well destroy the Moabites
at the same time; for which see the Note before, Chap. 7.8.

CHAP. XVII.
VERSE 1. THe burden of Damascus, etc.] The chief City of Syria, Chap. 7.8. So
that under this the ruin of the whole Land of Syria is threatened. And see the
Notes also, Chap. 13.1. and 2 King. 9.25. Behold, Damascus is taken away from
being a City, and it shall be a ruinous heap. As if the Prophet should have
said, How impossible soever it may seem to you, yet assure your selves the time
shall come when you shall see that great Damascus, of which you are now so
exceedingly afraid, to be made a very heap of stones and rubbish. When this was
effected, it is hard to determine: We find that Damascus was taken and sacked,
and the Inhabitants carried into Captivity by Tiglath-Pileser, in the days of
Ahaz. See the Note, 2. King. 16.9. And indeed, because in this place the
destruction of Israel is threatened together with the destruction of Syria, it
may well be, that the intent of this Prophecy was to comfort the men of Judah
against the invasion of the two Kings of Syria and Israel, whereof so much has
been spoken before, Chap. 7. But now if this was prophesied, as it is thought
by most Expositors, in the days of Hezekiah, then it may be that Damascus was
again taken, and totally ruined and destroyed by Shalmaneser, in that
expedition of his, wherein he took Samaria, 2 King. 18.9. Or else by
Sennacherib, as he went against Jerusalem, 2 King. 18.13. For we see before,
Chap. 10.9. Shalmaneser, as it is commonly thought, is brought in boasting of
the conquest of Damascus by him or his Father: And if the City were so ruined
at that time, and the Inhabitants so slaughtered or carried away captives, that
it ceased to be a City; yet certainly it was repaired and fortified again: And
therefore we read of another destruction brought upon Syria and Damascus by the
Babylonians, Jer. 49.23, etc. And some think this is that which is here
foretold by our Prophet.

Ver. 2. The Cities of Aroer are forsaken, etc.] Some think this Aroer was a
Country in Syria, near the River Arnon. But others more generally hold, that by
the Cities of Aroer, here are meant the Cities in the land of Israel without
Jordan, near unto the City Aroer, which was situated by the banks of the River
Arnon. See Deuteronomy. 2.36. and Numb. 32.34. Only some hold that those Cities were
in the possession of the Syrians when this desolation came upon them; and
others say, that the Prophet here threatens the destruction of the Israelites
together with the Syrians, because they should be both destroyed together:
However the meaning of that which is said here, that these Citi^s of Aroer
should be forsaken, is, that they should be left desolate, the Inhabitants
being slain, or carried away Captives by the Assyrians, upon the invasion of
Tiglath-pileser, or Shalmaneser: Whereupon it follows, They shall be for
flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid; to wit, because
the Inhabitants should be all gone, and so there should be no body to disturb
them.

Ver. 3. The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, etc.] That is, say some,
Damascus being destroyed, the Israelites of the ten Tribes (see the Note, Psalm.
78.9.) shall lose that which was wont to be their fortress and refuge; they
being wont in their dangers and troubles still to fly to the Syrians of
Damascus for defense and succor. But I rather conceive that the Prophets
intent here is to foretell, that the Israelites and Syrians should both be
destroyed, that were so often joined together against Judah. The fortress also
shall cease from Ephraim; that is, Samaria, and all other the strong holds in
the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, shall be ruined and destroyed: And the Kingdom
from Damascus and from the remnant of Syria; that is, Damascus shall cease to
be a Royal City, the seat of the Kings of Syria, nor shall the Syrians that are
left after the ruin of Damascus be a Kingdom any longer, or have a King to
reign over them, their King Rezin being slain, see 2 King. 16.9. but shall
become a Province belonging to Assyria. And observable the difference is which
the Prophet makes between the destruction of Damascus and Ephraim, (to wit, in
this, that because the Israelites of the ten Tribes continued a Kingdom, even
after Tiglathpileser had made great havoc amongst them, which Damascus did
not; (see the Note, 2 King. 16.9.) Therefore he does not say, That the Kingdom
should cease from Ephraim, as he does of Damascus; but only that Ephraim's
Fortresses should be beaten down and destroyed. And then it follows, They shall
be as the glory of the children of Israel; that is, the Syrians shall be in the
same glorious condi^ion with the children of Israel; which is spoken
Ironically, and the meaning is, that the Syrians should be stripped of all
wherein they had formerly gloried, their multitude, strength and riches, even
as the Israelites were. The glory of the Israelites came at last to this, that
they were utterly ruined, and carried away captives; and so shall it be with
Damascus.

Ver. 4. And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall
be made thin, etc.] This is added by way of explaining that which the Prophet
had said in the foregoing verse, that the Syrians should be as the glory of the
children of Israel; to wit, that as the glory of the Israelites should be
exceedingly impaired, so should it be with the Syrians too, and that much about
the same time. See the Note also Chap. 16.14. And the fatness of his flesh
shall wax lean. See the Note, Chap. 10.16. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Job 15.27. and Psalm.
22.29.

Ver. 5. And it shall be as when the harvest-man gathers the corn, and
reapeth the ears with his arm, etc.] That is, When the Judgment before
threatened shall be executed on the Israelites, it shall be that as the
harvest-man does easily cut down the corn, though it grow never so thick, and
binds and carries it away by whole arm-fulls, so shall the Assyrians with ease,
partly mow down with the Sword, and partly carry away into Captivity, even the
whole body of Israel in a manner, though there be never so great multitudes of
them; so that the Land of Israel shall be left as a corn-field that is newly
reaped, a very few, a little gleaning of them being only left; and this was
done, partly by Tiglath-pileser, 2 Kin. 15.29. but more fully by Shalmaneser, 2
Kin. 17.6. And it shall be as he that gathers ears in the valley of Rephaim;
that is, afterward those few that are left shall also be carried away, even as
the scattered ears that are left in a corn-field are with all diligence
gathered up and carried away by poor people: And this was done by Ezarhaddon,
Ezra 4.2. As for the valley of Rephaim, a valley on the North-side of
Jerusalem, rendered the valley of Giants, Josh. 15.8. is expressed by name only
because it was famously known for its great fruitfulness.

Ver. 6. Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, etc.] That is, Though the
Assyrians shall thus again and again carry away the Israelites captive out of
their Land, as is before-said, yet shall they not make such a clear riddance of
them, but that there shall be a gleaning there, some few that shall be still
left in the Land. See the Note, Chap. 6.13. As the shaking of an Olive Tree,
two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the
outmost fruitful branches thereof, says the Lord God of Israel; which last
words are added, not only to assure them, that what the Prophet had now
foretold should certainly come to pass; but also to imply, that because God's
Covenant was with Israel as well as with Judah, that he would for ever be their
God, therefore even of them also there should be a remnant left.

Ver. 7. At that day shall a man look to his Maker, etc.] That is, In that day
of their calamity, several of the Israelites owning and repenting of their
former Idolatry, shall return to the true God, the Lord their Creator, who had
separated them to be a holy people to himself: See the Note, Deuteronomy. 32.6. And
shall seek to him for help, resting upon him, as their only sure refuge: which
is repeated again in other words, And his eyes shall have respect to the holy
One of Israel, see the Note, Chap. 1.4, And this was accomplished, partly in
the days of Hezekiah, when diverse of Asher, and Manasseh, and Zebulun, being
invited thereto by Hezekiah, came to Jerusalem to keep the Passover, and helped
to destroy all the Altars, and Groves, and Images that were left, not only in
Judah and Benjamin, but also in Ephraim and Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 30.11, 14. and
31.1. and partly afterward in the days of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.33.

Ver. 8. And he shall not look to the Altars, the work of his hands, etc.] That
is, which he made of his own hand without any warrant or command from God, and
that for the worship of his Idol-gods; and therefore is that which follows
added, Neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the
groves or the Images, See the Note, Chap. 2.8. For the groves here joined with
their Images, See the Notes, Genesis 21.33. Deuteronomy. 16.21. and 2 King. 23.6. The
word in the Original, which is translated in our Bibles, Images, may be rendered
as it is in the Margin, Sun-images; whereby it is like are meant, either images
that stood abroad open in the air, where the Sun might shine upon them; or
rather such images, wherein they worshipped the Sun, and which happily were made
round, to represent the Orb of the Sun.

Ver. 9. In that day, etc*] That is, In that day of Isreal's great calamity,
mentioned before ver. 4, and 5, (for the three verses immediately foregoing are
by our Translators included in a Parenthesis) shall his strong Cities be as a
forsaken bough; that is, as the small twigs and branches growing out of a tree,
which the Husbandman passes by and leaves, when he lops the tree, not
vouchsafing to cut them off: And an uppermost branch; that is, a bough left
standing on the top of a tree, when all the rest are lopped away, and so the
tree is left naked and bare. The meaning is, that Isreal's strong Cities,
wherein they had so greatly trusted, should be left in a poor despised
condition, ruined and forsaken of the greatest part of their inhabitants,
standing alone and desolate, all the smaller Towns and Villages round about
them being utterly wasted and destroyed. I know that some Expositors by a
forsaken bough do understand a bough stripped of all her beauty* fruit and
leaves, and so accordingly hold that hereby is signified, that their strong
Cities should be lest ruined, stripped of all their Riches, Glory and
Inhabitants, all being fled, slain, or carried into Captivity. But the former
Exposition is far the best: And suitably hereunto I understand the following
words, which they left because of the children of Israel, that is, which strong
Cities, thus ruined, the Assyrians left for the little remnant of the
Israelites to dwell in, that were not destroyed; God in his Providence so
disposing it, that there should be some poor refuge left for the small remnant
of his people, which he determined should escape, and not be cut off. This
indeed is also, I know, otherwise expounded by diverse Learned men, namely thus,
which they left because of the children of Israel; that is, which strong Cities
the Canaanites did formerly leave and forsake for fear of the Children of
Israel, or being dispossessed thereof by the Children of Israel; who would have
the meaning of the place to be this, That the strong Cities of Israel should be
left as a forsaken bough, in that they should be no more able to defend the
Israelites against the Assyrians, than in former times they were able to defend
the Canaanites against the Israelites; but as the Canaanites did forsake those
Cities, though fenced with strong and high walls, for fear of the Israelites,
so now the Israelites should forsake them for fear of the Assyrians. As for the
last words, And there shall be desolation; either it is meant of the Cities
beforementioned, that even in those that were left, there should be great
desolation; or else of the Country in general, that not only in the Cities, but
even in the whole Land there should be extreme desolation.

Ver. 10. Because thou have forgotten the God of thy salvation, etc. That is,
Because thou have slighted and despised the God that has so often saved and
delivered thee from thine enemies, and so would still have done, had thou not
forsaken him, and gone after strange gods, and have not been mindful of the
rock of thy strength, See the Note, Deuteronomy. 32.4. a surer refuge than their
strongest Cities could have been: Therefore shall thou plant pleasant plants,
that is, with much care and pains thou shall husband thy grounds, planting it
with the choicest plants thou can get; And shall set it with strange slips,
that is, slips brought from far out of foreign Countries, which thou shall tend
and nurse with greatest care, as esteeming them highly for the rarity and the
excellency of them. But all this shall thou do in vain, as is expressed in the
following verse.

Ver. 11. In the day thou shall make thy plant to grow, and in the morning
shall thou make thy seed to flourish, etc.] That is, Day by day, yea early
every morning, thou shall use all possible means to cause thy plants, and the
seeds thou have sown, to grow up; and accordingly they shall successfully
spring up and flourish, and give thee great hope of a plentiful crop: But the
harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and desperate sorrow; that is, in
the day when your Country shall be destroyed by the Assyrians, they shall spoil
and carry away all your increase, and so your great hopes shall come to
nothing. That which this expression of their harvest being made a heap, seems
to aim at, is, either that it should be laid in heaps for the enemy to divide
and share amongst them; or else, that it should be suddenly consumed, even as a
little heap of corn would be, if a mighty Army of hungry Soldiers should come
to live upon it. Indeed this clause may be read, as it is in the Margin, But
the harvest shall be removed in the day of inheritance, and there shall be
deadly sorrow; that is, In the day when thou should come to inherit, and
possess that which thou have long hoped and waited for, all shall be snatched
up and carried away by the Assyrians; and so, though in the time of thy
planting and sowing, all went forward joyfully, yet when harvest comes thou
shall reap nothing of thy labors, but extreme grief and sorrows. See Deuteronomy.
28.33. This I conceive is the meaning of this place. Only we must consider,
that under this particular of the enemies robbing and spoiling the fruit of
their ground, their plundering and carrying away all the wealth, which with
much labor they had gathered together, is also comprehended.

Ver. 12. Woe to the multitude of many people, etc.] Some understand this of the
multitude of the Israelites and Syrians, that under the command of Pekah and
Rezin invaded the Land of Judah in the days of Ahaz, Chap. 7.1. And others
again understand it of the Assyrians, and others with them that invaded the
Israelites of the ten Tribes. For, say they, having in the foregoing part of
this Chapter spoken of the destruction of the Syrians and Israelites by the
Assyrians, (see the Note above, ver. 1.) here he foretells, how even these
Assyrians should likewise afterward be destroyed: And that this woe is denounced
by the Prophet against them, even out of pity to Israel, upon whom these
Assyrians should exercise so great cruelty. But now because of that which
follows, ver. 13, 14. in the description of the destruction of these
Assyrians, the most Expositors understand this of that numerous Army, made up
of many several Nations, that brake into the Land of Judah under Sennacherib;
and this is added to comfort them against that havoch that should be made by
the Assyrians amongst the Ten Tribes. For lest they should think, when they
have vanquished the Syrians and Israelites (as is before related) what if they
should break into our Country too? To this the Prophet answers, that though
indeed they should so do, yet God would then destroy them. Woe to the multitude
of many people, which make a noise like the noise of the Seas; and to the
rushing of Nations, that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty (or, many)
waters; where the breaking in of the Assyrians with a mighty and confused no s^
into the Land of Judah, is compared to the breaking in of the Seas, or an
overflowing Deluge of many waters; to imply, with what violence, and on a
sudden, their numerous Army should overrun their whole Country, so that no
body should be able to escape them, or stand before them. See the Notes* Chap.
5.30. and 8.7. and 13.4. and Psalm. 93.3.

Ver. 13. The Nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters, etc.] See the
foregoing Note. But God shall rebuke them. In great fury and indignation God
shall destroy them. See the Notes Psalm. 6.1. and 2.5. and 119.21. Even as he
rebukes the raging of the roaring Seas, so shall he still their fury, see the
Note, Psalm. 65.7. And this was done in the destruction of Sennacherib's Army.
See the Note, 2 Kin. 19.35. And they shall flee far off; to wit, Sennacherib,
and some few with him, that escaped and fled back into their own Country; and
shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, which is far
more easily and suddenly blown away, than the chaff or dust that is in the
Valleys, because there the wind has most power. And See also the Note, Job
21.18. and Psalm. 35.5. And like a rolling thing before the whirlwind. That is,
like a round wisp of stubble, or some other light thing, first gathered
together in a bundle, and then carried away with a Whirlwind. But now by some
this last clause is rendered, and like thistle-down before the whirlwind, which
is a thing indeed that must needs be easily driven away and scattered.

Ver. 14. And behold, at evening-tide trouble, and before the morning he is
not, etc.] This may be understood of the Assyrians, that in the night (which is
sometimes called, the Evening, see the Notes Genesis 1.5.) were terribly
affrighted, and put into a confused tumult, by the sudden and unexpected
slaughter which an Angel made amongst them, and before morning were all slain
or fled. See the Notes, 2 Kin. 19.35, 36. And perhaps too the evening-tide is
mentioned, because then the Angel began to slay them. But I conceive it is
rather spoken of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; to wit, that they should be over
night in great terror and trouble, because of Sennacherib's mighty Army that
had besieged the City, and because of some late blasphemies and menaces of
Rabshakeh, and yet before morning he and all his numerous Army are all dead or
gone away, there is not an enemy to be seen. The Prophet seems to imply, that
the fury of the Assyrians, of which he had spoken in the foregoing verse,
should be but like a Tempest, that arises in the Evening, and is gone in the
Morning; as they should on a sudden invade the Land of Judea, so on a sudden
they should be destroyed. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the
lot of them that rob us.] That is, The like to this shall befall all that make a
prey of God's people, and that by the decree and appointment of God, according
to that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.8. Whereunto also they were appointed. See
also the Note, Job 20.19.

CHAP. XVIII.
VERSE 1. WOE to the Land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the Rivers of
Ethiopia.] This Chapter is throughout very obscure: and the difficulty of it is
chiefly from hence, that it is very questionable, what Nation it is against
whom the woe here mentioned is denounced. Several reasons are given by
Expositors, why the land here threatened is called a land shadowing with wings;
As 1. Because it was shadowed with huge high Mountains, that were spread out
like wings in the utmost coasts of the Country. Or 2. Because it abounded with
swarms of flies, and bees, and locusts, and huge flights of fowl, that out of
colder Countries flew thither in great flocks, by reason whereof the air was
often darkened. Or 3. Because they used to cover over the lands, whither they
went, with their huge Armies, winged with troops of horsemen, (see the Note,
Chap. 8.8.) like so many thick clouds of Locusts; of which indeed we have a
notable instance, 2 Chronicles. 14.9. where there is mention of an Army of
Ethiopians that came against Asa, the like whereof for number we read not of,
either in the Scripture, or (I think) in any other History. Or, 4. Because the
Inhabitants of this Land were wont to extend their power for the protecting and
shadowing of their neighboring Nations, or at least to promise that they would
with their Auxiliary-forces shelter them from their enemies; and so caused
them, the people of God especially, to trust much in the shadow of their
protection. And indeed it is usual in the Scripture to speak of any defense or
protection under this Figurative expression, of a shadow or covering, and
shadowing with wings. See the Note, Numb. 14.9. Judge. 9.15. Psalm. 91.1, 4. and
Ruth 2.12. Or, 5. Because it was a Land that abounded with Ships, that shadowed
the Sea where they lay, and when they were carried before the Wind or the Seas,
seemed like so many flying Birds, both in regard of the swiftness of their
motion, and because their Sails were thereon like wings, according to that of
the Poet, -- Velorum pandimus alas. But then the great Question is, What that
Country was, that is here called the Land shadowing with wings? Very many
Expositors hold that it is Egypt, that is so called. And true it is, that most
of the reasons before given, why it is called, The Land shadowing with wings,
do very well suit with Egypt, especially the two last, which seem the most
probable. For Egypt abounded with ships, and traded much in merchandising, and
the Jews trusted much in the aid of the Egyptians, being still ready to fly to
them for shelter, and to send to them for succor, when they were in danger to
be invaded by any other Nation. But yet, 1. Because in the following Chapter
Egypt is threatened by it self. And 2. because in the very next words it is
said, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia; whereas Egypt lay nearer to the
land of Canaan than Ethiopia did; it is rather thought that Egypt is not the
land shadowing with wings, against which the woe is here denounced; but rather
the land of Ethiopia, or at least that part of it which lay Southward of Judea,
near to the Red Sea, together with those other neighboring Nations that are
usually mentioned together with the Ethiopians, as we may see Jer. 46.9. and
Ezekiel. 30.5. Which seems most probable, 1. Because Ethiopia was a rich Country,
very populous, (and therefore their Armies were usually exceeding numerous, as
is before-noted) full of Havens, Ships* and merchandising, that often joined
with Egypt in aiding the Jews against their enemies, that were in danger to
swallow up them, together with the Jews; and a land that might well, for all
the other reasons before-given, be termed a land shadowing with wings. And 2.
Because having here denounced destruction against this land shadowing with
wings, and against Egypt in the following Chapter, then in the 20th Chap. he
seems to join them both together, and there the Egyptians and Ethiopians are
expressly named, ver. 4. So shall the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians
prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives. That indeed which makes this most
questionable is, that concerning this land shadowing with wings, those words
are added, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia. But considering that all
Expositors in a manner agree, that by the rivers of Ethiopia, the streams of
Nilus are here principally meant, so called, because from and thorough the land
of Ethiopia, they run down into Egypt (though other rivers that run into Nilus
may be also included.) I see not but that the reason of adding this clause,
which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, may be to show, that the judgment here
denounced should fall even upon the utmost parts of Ethiopia, that were beyond
the springs of Nilus. So that I conclude, that according to our Translation,
wherein the woe is clearly denounced against the land shadowing with wings,
Ethiopia must needs be meant: And that this woe is here denounced against the
Ethiopians, either because the Ethiopians had been oftentimes great enemies to
the Jews, as we may see 2 Chronicles. 12.3. and 14.9. Or else rather to discover to
the Jews their folly in resting upon the Ethiopians for help, that should not
be able to secure themselves. The very drift of this Phrase, Woe to the land
shadowing with wings, being to imply, (according to the Reasons before given
for it) that notwithstanding her high shadowing Mountains, or the multitude of
shipping, or her huge Armies, or her forwardness to be a shadow of defense to
others, even she her self should be miserably destroyed by the Assyrians. And
many hold, that this was done by the Assyrians, when Tirhakah the King of
Ethiopia went out to fight against them, 2 King. 19.9.

Ver. 2. That sends Ambassadors by Sea, etc.] According to our Translation
this is clearly spoken of the Land described in the foregoing Verse, that is,
the people inhabiting that Land, to wit the Ethiopian, that sends Ambassadors
by Sea, that is, by the River Nilus, say some (it being usual with the Hebrews
to call all great waters Seas) or by the Red Sea, which had Egypt and Ethiopia
on the one side, and Arabia on the other, and was therefore also called, The
Gulf of Arabia; even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, that is, in
boats, barks or ships made of bulrushes, but overlaid with pitch, both within
and without, to keep out the water; for indeed we find in many ancient Writers,
that such kind of Vessels were much used in those times, both in Egypt and
Ethiopia; not only because by reason of their lightness they sailed the more
swiftly; but also because they did not sink so deep into the water, as our
Vessels made of Timber usually do, but did rather float and glide on the top or
surface of the water (with respect whereto some think this expression is used
of Vessels of Bulrushes upon the waters) and so were in the less danger of
being split or broken upon the rocks and shelves, of which there were many in
the River Nilus: Yea, and because where there were great Cataracts, or steep
downfals of water, they could hale them ashore, and carry them on their
shoulders over land, and then put them into the river again beyond those
downfals. But whither were these Ambassadors sent by the Ethiopians? I answer,
That is set forth in the following words, wherein the Ethiopians are brought
in, Saying, Go ye swift messengers to a Nation scattered and peeled, etc. For
the understanding whereof we must know, That 1. some understand this of the
Ambassadors or Heralds sent by the Ethiopians to denounce war against the
Assyrian, (which they conceive was done when Tirhakah King of Ethiopia went out
against them, 2 Kin. 19.9.) and that they are called swift messengers, with
respect to the lightness or swiftness of the vessels wherein they were sent.
And accordingly, as with respect to the Assyrians, they understand the
description that is here given us of the Nation to whom they were sent, to a
Nation scattered and peeled; they are said to be scattered, because their
Forces were dispersed abroad, some in Judea, and some in other Countries; and
peeled, because the people were by this means left bare of their Soldiery: Or,
because they had been peeled and made bald by long continuing Wars, see Ezekiel.
29.18. (and if we read this, as it is in the Margin, outspread and polished,
the meaning must needs be, that they were a Nation that had large Territories,
and were glorious for all outward bravery) to a people terrible from their
beginning hitherto; that is, that have been from their first original unto this
time a terror to other Nations, by reason of their fierceness and cruelty, and
the many Countries that had been subdued by them: A Nation meted out and
trodden down, that is, that shall shortly be meted out and destroyed. See the
Notes, 2 Samuel 8.2. and 2 King. 21.13. or as it is in the Margin, A Nation that
meteth out and treads down, that is, that meteth out other Nations to destroy
them, or that trampleth and treads them down at their pleasure: Or, that
seeks to bring all the Nations round about into subjection to them, to impose
what yoke, what Laws and conditions they please upon them, or else they tread
them under foot: whose land the rivers have spoiled; or, as it is in the
Margin, whose Land the Rivers despise, that is, whose land the Ethiopians
despise, as being so compassed about with great Rivers, that they have no cause
at all to be afraid of the Assyrians. Thus, I say, several Expositors
understand this passage of the Ethiopians sending out their Messengers to
denounce War against the Assyrians, whom they describe in this manner, A Nation
scattered and peeled, etc. Purposely to imply, that their expedition against
them would be easy and just; because against a Nation scattered and peeled*
and from whom the situation of their own Country, being environed with great
Rivers, would surely defend them; and just, because against a Tyrannous People,
that were fit to be opposed and curbed. And the drift of all this (say they)
is, to discover the folly of the Ethiopians confidence, who in the trust of
their own strength, and the strength of the Egyptians, their associates, did
thus slight the Assyrians, by whom not long after they should be utterly
ruined. Again, 2ly. Others understand this of Ambassadors sent by the
Ethiopians to the Jews, with promises of aid and supplies from themselves and
from the Egyptians for their defense against the Assyrians, Go ye swift
Messengers, say they, to a Nation scattered and peeled, that is, to the poor
Jews, a Nation miserably afflicted, and exceedingly exhausted by diverse
devastations that have been made in their Country; To a people terrible from
their beginning hitherto, that is, to a people, that from their first being a
people, or their first being God's peculiar people, unto that present time, had
been ever and anon in such a sad and dreadful condition, by reason of the
Judgments executed upon them for their sins, that they were an astonishment to
other Nations, Deuteronomy. 28.37. it was enough to terrify and affright men to
behold into what a dismal plight they were brought: Or rather, to a people that
from their first beginning unto that time had been terrible to other Nations,
in regard of the great and wonderful works God had wrought for them in all
ages, and the strange Judgments he had executed upon their Enemies. A Nation
meted out and trodden down; that is, that has been often by their Enemies
subdued and destroyed, or that is now by the Assyrians designed to be utterly
wasted and destroyed: Whose land the rivers have spoiled; that is, the Nations
breaking in upon them like an overflowing Torrent, that carries all before it:
See the Note, Chap. 8.7. And now they that thus understand this place of the
Ethiopians sending Ambassadors to the Jews, with a promise that they would come
in to their aid against the Assyrian, do accordingly conceive, that by
inserting this, the Prophet's drift is covertly to tax the folly of the Jews,
in resting so much upon these vaunting promises of the Ethiopians, that were
themselves to be destroyed by the Assyrians, as well as they. But 3ly. Others
hold, that the Messengers here mentioned, are supposed to be sent by the
Ethiopians to the Egyptians, or by the Eastern Ethiopians that dwelt in Arabia,
a part of Asia, (where the Seat of that great Kingdom was) to the Western
Ethiopians, that inhabited a part of Africa, on the South of Egypt, and were
divided from the Eastern Ethiopians by the Red Sea, or the Gulf of Arabia; and
that these Messengers were sent, either to stir them up (which some think) to
invade and vex the Jews: or else rather to inform them of the great
preparations made by the Assyrians against those parts, and to persuade them to
levy Forces, that they might aid the Jews against the Assyrians, and so withal
secure their own Countries against such a potent prevailing Enemy, that having
subdued Judea, would be likely enough presently to overrun their Countries
too. And accordingly they understand the description here given us by the
Prophet, of the Nation to whom they were sent, Go ye swift Messengers to a
Nation scattered and peeled; that is, to the Egyptians, or rather to the
Ethiopians, who are called a scattered Nation, or (as it is the Margin)
outspread, because of their large Territories, or the great extent of Land,
that was overspread by them; and peeled, or polished, because they were a
beardless, smooth-skin'd people; or because they were to be peeled and
plundered of all they had by the Assyrians; or, scattered and peeled, because
they were an abject, base Nation, commonly sold up and down for Slaves, as
indeed the Moors use to be: To a people terrible from their beginning hitherto,
that is, that from the first had been a grim, fierce and savage people, and so
still were: A Nation meted out and trodden down, or, that meteth out and
treads down* that is, a Nation that is designed of God to be destroyed, or
that uses to subdue and level all before them, where they came: Whose land the
rivers have spoiled, to wit, the great Rivers of Ethiopia, by their mighty
Inundations; or rather, whose land the rivers despise, that is, the Assyrians,
who making account to break in upon Ethiopia, like some mighty overflowing
rivers, as they have been wont to do upon other Countries, as is before noted;
do despise and slight the strength of the Land, not doubting but that they
shall easily overrun and subdue it. And indeed this last Exposition of this
verse, I judge the most probable, to wit, that the Ethiopians are the Nation
here described, they being the people against whom the Prophet here denounces
a Woe; and that either by way of comforting the Jews, by foretelling the utter
destruction of these their enemies; or rather by way of hinting the folly of
the Jews, in relying with so much confidence upon the Egyptians and Ethiopians,
that were shortly to be destroyed by the Assyrians, as well as themselves.

Ver. 3. All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye
when he lifts up an ensign on the mountains; and when he blows a trumpet,
hear ye.] Very many learned Expositors do understand this of God's overthrowing
the Assyrians. The Prophet, say they, having in the foregoing verses foretold
the woeful destruction that should come upon the Ethiopians, thereby covertly
taxing the folly of his people in relying upon them, and their Associates, for
help, that should not be able to defend themselves from the Assyrians; here he
adds, for the comfort of his people, that though they should be disappointed of
the help which they vainly expected from Ethiopia and Egypt, yet the Lord
should so wonderfully deliver them, and destroy their Enemies, the Assyrians,
that all the Nations far and near should see and acknowledge, that it was God
that had fought against them in the defense of his people, whom they sought to
destroy. But I rather conceive with others, that the Prophet does here still
proceed, in setting forth the woeful destruction that should come upon Ethiopia
and her Associates, and that by calling upon all the inhabitants of the world,
and dwellers on the earth, to see when he lifts up an ensign upon the
mountains, and to hear when he blows a trumpet; he implies, Either 1. That
several of all Nations, far and near, should come in to serve in the War, which
was made by the Assyrians or Chaldeans against Ethiopia, as readily, as if the
Lord had by the sound of Trumpets, or the lifting up of an Ensign upon the
mountains, summoned them to come in; See the Notes, chap. 5.26. and 13.2. Or 2.
That all the Nations round about should see the Assyrians or Chaldeans
returning triumphantly and in great jollity, with Colors flying and sound of
Trumpets, from the conquest of Ethiopia; which tends to assure God's people of
the certainty of this, which in regard of the strength of Ethiopia, might seem
to them impossible. Or, 3. That the judgment of God upon the Ethiopians should
be so strange and wonderful, that all the world in a manner should ring of it;
yea, and all Nations should take notice of it, and be as fully satisfied, that
it was God that had brought this ruin upon them, as if they had seen the Lord
lifting up an Ensign on the Mountains, and blowing a Trumpet, by way of
gathering his Armies, and leading them on against that people.

Ver. 4. For so the Lord said unto me, I will take my rest, etc.] That is, I
will sit quietly in my house, and not interpose my self to hinder or cross the
proceedings of my peoples enemies. The Lord speaks here of himself after the
manner of man, I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dewlling place,
that is, in my Temple, the place which I have chosen for my settled habitation*
Psalm. 132.13, 14. Or rather in Heaven, my set dwelling, as it is here called in
the Hebrew, I will sit quietly, and only from thence behold and consider what
is done upon earth. Diverse of our best Expositors hold, that the drift of this
verse is merely to assure the Jews, That in the midst of the confusions that
should be amongst them, and the Heathen Nations round about them, God would
take care to bless, and cheer up and prosper them. The Prophet, say they,
having threatened destruction to the Ethiopians and their Associates in the
foregoing verses, (to which he returns again in the verse after this) in this
verse he interposeth a promise concerning the care that he would take of his
people, in the midst of these confusions. I will take my rest, and I will
consider in my dwelling place; As if he had said, I will indeed for a time sit
still and take my rest in my dewlling place, as if I minded not what the Enemy
intended and did against my people; I will suffer the Assyrian to go on in
subduing many Nations, and to invade and waste Judea, yea to go up to the
besieging of Jerusalem; and when the Ethiopians and their Associates shall
raise up Forces to withstand the Assyrians and to aid Judea, I will suffer the
Assyrians to vanquish and destroy these Auxiliary Forces, that were coming in
to the aid of my people, and will only look on as a Spectator of that bloody
Tragedy: But in the mean season I will in my dewlling place consider of what I
see done; when the Assyrians after this conquest of the Ethiopians come flying
upon the Jews, I will take notice of their doings and their rage, (as it is
said, 2 Kin. 19.27. I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and
thy rage against me) and I will consider of the danger of my people and my
dewlling place in Jerusalem, and what is fit to be done, that so though I do
not presently exert my power in driving away the Assyrians, yet I may
seasonably secure my people and my dewlling place, and not suffer my self to be
dispossessed thereof by the Assyrian. And then to show what should be the
effect of his provident care over his people^, even when he seemed to sit still
and nor to mind them, he adds those last words, I will consider in my
dewlling place like a clear heat upon herbs, (or, after-rain) and like a Cloud
of dew in the heat of harvest; That is, as the heat of the Sun shining upon
herbs in a clear day, or after rain does refresh the herbs, and cause them to
spring up and flourish very sweetly; and as a shadowy cloud, that does not pour
down hurtful showers of rain, but only distill a cooling dew, does comfortably
allay the extremity of Harvest-heat, and so does refresh not the Husbandman
only, but the Corn also, and make it the more flowery; so the Lord's provident
care over his people will at last manifest it self by shining comfortably on
them, when arising from his rest, he shall destroy the Assyrians, and so by a
timely deliverance shall revive and refresh them, after all their fears and
dangers by reason of the heat of their Enemies Invasion. And some think too,
that there may be an Allusion in the words, to that Pillar of a Cloud and Fire,
that went before the Israelites in the Wilderness; for which see the Note,
Chap. 4.5. Thus, I say, diverse learned Expositors understand this verse, as
inserted merely for the comfort of the Jews, by setting forth the care that God
would take of them, even whilst he seemed not to mind them; but to suffer the
enemy to go on as they pleased. And therefore also some do read the foregoing
words, as it is in the Margin; not, I will consider in my dewlling place; but,
I will regard my set dwelling; that is, I will however take care for Zion. But
because the Prophet seems clearly to intend the same thing in this and the two
following verses, I conceive it is better understood by others; Either 1. Of
the Ethiopians and their Confederates, that whilst they mustered great Forces,
and went out with great Pride and Confidence against the Assyrians, God would
sit still, and seem to shine favorably from his dewlling place upon them, Like
a clear heat upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest, till
thereby they became ripe for that destruction, when the Assyrians overthrew
them, and made such a dreadful slaughter amongst them. Or else, 2. Of the
Assyrians, that when they invaded the Land of Israel, God would not presently
oppose them, but would rather be unto them like a clear heat upon herbs, and
like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest, which are the ordinary means
whereby the Corn and other Fruits of the earth are cherished, and that cause
them to prosper and flourish, and hasten the ripening of them: And so the
meaning is, That God would suffer them to go on prosperously and successfully
(as they did in their vanquishing the Ethiopians, that were coming in to the
aid of Judea) and with a great deal of triumphant joy to proceed in their
intended design for the subduing of Jerusalem; and yet after all this would
suddenly cut them off. I know that diverse Expositors do understand this last
clause, I will consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat upon herbs, and
like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest, of Gods destroying the Ethiopians,
or Assyrians; to wit, that God would be unto them as a torrid heat, that
scorcheth and parcheth herbs; or as those Dews, that in Harvest-time do rot and
blast the corn. But I see no probable ground for this Exposition. The drift of
the words is rather to show, that even when God seems to sit still in his
dewlling place, as if he minded not the Government of the world, nor what
became of his people; yea whilst he seems to shine favorably upon his and his
peoples enemies, yet even then by the secret working of his Providence, he
makes way to their ruin, and does only ripen them for destruction.

Ver. 5. For before the harvest, etc.] Under Harvest the Vintage is here also
comprehended, as before, Chap. 17.11. because they usually are together: when
the bud is perfect, that is, when the bud, that first appears, is become a
perfect, but a green grape; and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, that
is, when the grapes, that are grown out of the flower, and are yet sour, begin
to ripen; to wit, when the Harvest or Vintage is nigh at hand; He shall cut off
the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches; that
is, he shall cut down both the smaller twigs, and the greater boughs or
branches, together with the green grapes growing thereon. Now some understand
this of the Assyrian, to wit, that when he had vanquished the Ethiopians, and
thereupon should begin to think, that his design for the taking of Jerusalem
did ripen apace, as making full account that it was in a manner his own, and
that he should reap a rich harvest of all his labors, on a sudden the Lord
should mow down his mighty Army, both Captains and common Soldiers, 2 Kin.
19.35. and so all his endeavors should be frustrate before they came to
maturity. But rather this is spoken of the Ethiopians, whose destruction is set
forth all along in this Chapter, and that as an effect of that which the
Prophet had said in the foregoing verse, concerning the Lords taking his rest
in his dewlling place, and suffering the Ethiopians to prosper, yea his seeming
to shine favorably upon them; namely, that when they had raised a great Army
to beat off the Assyrians, and were gone forth with great assurance of breaking
them in pieces, before they had effected what they intended, they should be cut
down and destroyed by the Assyrians, great and small, fathers and children,
even as when the sprigs and greater branches of a Vine are lopped in the prime
of her pride, when she was full of grapes, but green and not fit to be eaten.
The same thing therefore that was said in the foregoing verse, is here asserted
again under other Figurative expressions, to wit, That God does not always cut
off his enemies presently, but suffers them to flourish for a time; yet
afterward when their hopes are greatest of bringing their Designs to
perfection, he suddenly heweth down both them and their Posterity. But indeed
some understand this here of the destruction that was brought upon the
Ethiopians by the Babylonians.

Ver. 6. They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to
the beasts of the earth, etc.] That is, Those Vine-sprigs and branches
mentioned in the foregoing verse, with the branches of unripe grapes thereon,
being cut down and cast away, shall be left lying on heaps together, for the
fowls that usually breed and abide on the Mountains, to feed on, and for the
beasts of the field to browse on: And the fowls shall summer upon them, and all
the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them, that is, both the fowls and
beasts shall abide on them, as finding harbor and food there, all the year
long, both Summer and Winter. Now this some understand of the wealth of the
land, or the people therein still abiding, being left as a prey to their
Conquerors and new Lords, or to Thieves and Robbers, as it usually falls out in
Countries that have been lately subdued and wasted by the invasion of enemies.
But according to the Exposition of the foregoing verse, it is better understood
of the dead carcases of the Assyrians, say some, slain by the Angel, 2 King.
19.35. but rather of the Ethiopians slain by the Assyrians, (and indeed some
extend it to both together) to wit, that they should be meat for Eagles, and
Vulturs, and such like fowls of prey, here called Fowls of the mountains, and
for the beasts of the earth, and that for a whole year together, by reason of
the multitudes of those that shall be slain, and that there shall be none left
to bury them, which is implied in those last words, And the fowls shall summer
upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.

Ver. 7. In that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts, of a
people scattered and peeled, etc.] According to the Exposition before given of
the second verse, to which the Prophet does here clearly allude, we must
certainly understand this also: 1. They that hold, that it is the Assyrians,
that are there called, A Nation scattered and peeled, etc. do accordingly
understand these words thus, That at that time when the Assyrians should be
destroyed by the Angel of the Lord, (as they conceived is foretold in the
foregoing verses) from the spoil of that their ruined Army, who should then
indeed be a people scattered and peeled, the Jews should bring Presents to the
Lord at Zion. See the Note, Psalm. 76.11. Again, 2. They that say, that by a
Nation scattered and peeled, etc. is meant the Jews, do likewise understand
this place of them, to wit, thus; Either, 1. That they that were looked upon
with pity and contempt, as a people scattered and peeled, when they should see,
that though the Ethiopians were destroyed by the Assyrians, on whose help they
had vainly relied, yet the Lord had miraculously delivered them from their
proud enemies, should thereupon go with a Present of Praise and Thanksgiving,
Sacrifices, and other Gifts and Offerings, unto the dewlling place of God in
Zion. Or else, 2. That after that time, when the Lord had destroyed the
Ethiopians and Assyrians, a remnant of God's people, then indeed a scattered
and peeled people, should by Cyrus be sent home out of Babylon with many rich
Gifts, and so should be brought as a Present to the Lord at Mount Zion. But 3.
Because the whole Argument of this Chapter is concerning the Ethiopians,
therefore it seems more probable, that as before, verse 2. so here also they
are The people scattered and peeled, etc. of whom the Prophet here speaks,
foretelling, that after all these ruins and calamities from this people, or of
this people, there should be a present brought unto the Lord of Hosts at Zion;
The meaning whereof is, either that many of the Ethiopians should by the Jews,
that lived amongst them, be brought to embrace their Faith and Religion, (even
before the coming of Christ into the world) and so should bring Gifts to the
Temple at Jerusalem, and worship the true God there, as the Ethiopian Eunuch
did, Act. 8.27. Or else, that in the days of the Gospel they should embrace the
Christian Faith, and so should be brought in as a present to God, joining
themselves to the Church of Christ, whereof Zion was a Type; the first fruits
whereof we find accomplished in the conversion of that noble Ethiopian
beforementioned. And thus this Prophecy seems to be the same with that, Zeph.
3.10. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my Suppliants, even the daughter of
my dispersed shall bring mine offering. See also the Notes, Psalm. 68.31. and
72.10.

CHAP. XIX.
VERSE 1. THE burden of Egypt, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 13.1. and 2 King.
2.25. Because the Egyptians joined with the Ethiopians against the Assyrian, by
way of aiding the Jews, therefore the Prophet, having in the foregoing Chapter
foretold the ruin of the Ethiopians, here he also prophecieth against the
Egyptians their Associates; and that still to show the Jews their folly, in
relying so much upon these Nations. Behold, (he speaks as of a thing that was
presently to come to pass; and he speaks of God, as of a King that with his
Troops of Horse breaks in upon an enemies Country) the Lord rides upon a swift
cloud, and shall come into Egypt. As for this expression of his riding upon a
swift cloud, (for which see also the Notes, 2 Samuel 22.11, 12. Psalm. 68.3. and
104.3.) It is to imply, that he should break in upon Egypt, like a violent
Storm, suddenly, speedily, and irresistibly: For how could their walls and
bulwarks keep out him, that from the clouds would break in upon them? Nor is it
improbable, which some think, that this expression of a stormy Cloud, is the
rather used also, because in Egypt, where they have no rain, Zach. 14.18.
Clouds were very unusual, and so the more dreadful. All which is doubtless
meant of the Assyrians invading Egypt under Sennacherib, (and some say the
Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar) with Armies that should overshadow the land
like a cloud.

And the Idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, etc.] That is, Their
Vanity shall be discovered, in that they shall not be able to help the people.
See the Note, Exodus 12.12. Or they shall be broken down and dashed in pieces,
and carried away by the Conquerors into Captivity, as our Prophet speaks, Chap.
46.1, 2. Yea, and the meaning may be too, that the Devils, that were worshipped
in those Idols, should tremble at the great discovery of God's indignation
against them. And the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it; That is,
The courage and strength of the Inhabitants of the Land shall fail, even where
they might think themselves surest and safest. See the Notes, Josh. 7.5. and
Psalm. 22.14.

Ver. 2. And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, etc.] That is, I
will order it so, that they shall break out into Civil War amongst themselves:
And they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
neighbor: See the Notes before, Chap. 9.19, 20. City against City, and Kingdom
against Kingdom; where by Kingdoms are meant the several Provinces whereinto
Egypt was divided. Now this, some say, was accomplished, when after the death
of Sethon, Civil Wars arising amongst them, Egypt was divided into twelve
Kingdoms; and then afterward upon new dissentions, Psammitichus, one of their
new Kings, being cast out by the rest, by the help of his Friends, and the aid
of foreign Forces which he called in, he vanquished his enemies, and brought
all Egypt under his sole dominion: For this, they say, was about the end of
Hezekiah's, or the beginning of Manasseh's reign. But now others think, that
this is meant of those Tumults and Dissentions that arose in Egypt, when the
Assyrians had vanquished that huge Army of the Ethiopians, and Egyptians their
Associates, which Tirrakah King of Ethiopia had led out against them; for, say
they, the Assyrians by the advantage of this Victory being likely to invade and
subdue Egypt, the Egyptians hereupon fell into intestine Combustions among
themselves; some of them standing for the submitting of themselves to the
dominion of the Assyrian King, and others opposing this with all their power.
But indeed, what the cause was of the Civil Wars here threatened, is altogether
uncertain.*

Ver. 3. And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof, etc] That is,
say ^ome, the Egyptians shall become as dead men, void of life: Or, say others,
their strength or courage within them shall fail them. But I rather take the
meaning to be, that their understanding and wisdom should fail them, (for the
failing of their courage was spoken of before, verse. 1.) and see also the Note,
Prove. 15.13. And hereto agrees that which follows, And I will destroy the
counsel thereof; that is, I will bereave them of all ability to advise what
should be done for the securing of themselves, or their State; they shall be in
their astonishment like so many fools or madmen, not knowing which way to turn
themselves. See the Notes, Job 5.17, 20, 24. Or, All their consultations shall
come to nothing. And indeed the more observable that is which is here
threatened, because the Egyptians in those times were highly conceited of
themselves for their great Learning and Wisdom, and were indeed for these
things mightily admired throughout the world. That which is translated in our
Bibles, And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof, is in the
Hebrew, And the spirit of Egypt shall be emptied in the midst thereof; as if
the Prophet had said, All their Wit and Understanding shall be drained out. And
herein there may be an Allusion to their folly in draining away the waters of
the river Nilus; whereof some think the Prophet speaks afterward, ver. 5, 6.

And they shall seek to the Idols, etc] To wit, by praying to them: See the
Note before, Chap. 15.2. Or, by asking counsel at the Oracles they had there;
according to that which follows, And to the Charmers, and to them that have
Familiar Spirits, and to the Wizzards; For which see the Note, Chap. 8.19. And
this is added as a clear evidence, how void of wisdom and counsel they should
be, in that not knowing what to do, they should thus run from one vain means to
another, as men that were indeed at their wits end.

Ver. 4. And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel Lord,
etc.] It is in the Hebrew, Lords; which therefore many understand of those
twelve Lords, that after the death of Sethon divided the Kingdom of Egypt into
twelve petty Kingdoms, and did each of them in their several Dominions by
causeless huge Taxes, and their civil Broils amongst themselves, mightily
oppress the people. And accordingly the next clause And a fierce King shall
rule over them, they understand of Psammitichus, who at last subdued them all,
and tyrannized cruelly over the whole Land; of which see the Note before, ver.
2. But now many again understand both the one and the other, of foreign Kings,
that often vanquished the Egyptians, and made slaves of them, and sometimes
subdued the Land. Thus some think the Assyrian to be the cruel Lord, and the
fierce King here intended, according to that which is said in the following
Chapter, ver. 4. So shall the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians
prisoners; and others think it is meant of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon,
who, amongst other Nations, did at last subdue and cruelly waste the whole Land
of Egypt, according to that which we find often foretold by the Prophets, as in
Jer. 46.26. where God says of the Egyptians, I will deliver them into the hand
of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar, etc. And
Ezekiel. 29.19. Behold, I will give the Land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar, King of
Babylon, etc. And indeed we may the rather think, that this is here intended,
because the expression here used in the Hebrew, seems to imply a total and
perfect subduing of Egypt, which was effected by Nebuchadrezzar. And the
Egyptians will I shut up into the hand of a cruel Lord; That is, I will give
them up so absolutley into his power, that he shall mightily oppress them, and
they shall be no way able to shake off his yoke, or to rescue themselves out of
their bondage. Yea some hold, that all the several evils beforementioned, that
came upon the Egyptians, may be here included. For, say they, the drift of this
Prophecy being to show the Folly of the Jews in relying so much upon Egypt,
(which they did even to the reign of the Sons of Josiah) the Prophet does
accordingly foretell, what a succession of sad times were coming upon Egypt,
wherein they should not be able to secure themselves, and much less to help the
Jews.

Ver. 5. And the waters shall fail from the Sea, etc.] By the Sea here some
understand the River Nilus, because the Hebrews call all great waters, Seas)
and so they make it the same with that which follows; And the river, (that is
Nilus, see the Note, Chap. 11.15.) shall be wasted and dried up. But others
again understand it, as the words do plainly seem to import, the first clause
of the sinking or failing of the waters of the Sea, and the second of the
drying up of the waters of Nilus. But what was the failing of the waters of the
Sea and Nilus, that is here threatened? I answer, 1. It may be understood to be
only Figuratively and Hyperbolically spoken. Because, say some, the Egyptians
thought the Sea and Nilus such a sure defense unto their Country, that there
was no fear of their being invaded by foreign Enemies: therefore by the
expression here used, the Prophet would imply, that these should be no defense
to them, but that the Assyrians (or Chaldeans) should break in upon them, as
easily as if the waters of the Sea, and the river Nilus, were dried up. Or, say
others, because the wealth and plenty of Egypt did much depend upon their
Traffic by Sea, and upon the overflowings of Nilus, which instead of rain,
watered their grounds; and by such slimy stuff, as it brought down with it,
made the Soil exceeding fruitful: Therefore by this expression the Prophet
intimates, that partly by their Civil Wars, and partly by the invasion of
Foreign Enemies, Egypt should be brought into as poor, and forlorn, and
miserable a condition, as if the wate^s should fail from the Sea, and the river
Nilus should be wasted and dried up; see the Note, 2 King. 19.24. But 2. it may
be understood Literally; as namely, either 1. of a great drought that God
should bring upon Egypt, whereby, and that especially by the low ebb that
should be in the river Nilus, there should be a sore Dearth and Famine all over
the land. Or, 2. of that great check that was given to the overflowing of
Nilus, and the manifold detriment which thereby redounded to the whole land,
when those twelve Kings of Egypt, mentioned in the foregoing verse, drained the
river in several places, and by several channels, for the more convenience of
their building those two huge Pyramids, and a Labyrinth not far from them,
(which were in aftertimes for their bigness and workmanship the wonder of the
world) and some say too for the making of that vast Lake, called the Lake of
Moeris, or Meroe; all which they did merely to satisfy their own Lust and
Ambition, mightily thereby oppressing the people, whom they employed in these
stupendous works, and impoverishing the land in many regards, by weakening the
river so, that it could not overflow the Country, as it had formerly done. And
this indeed suits well with the description given us in the following verses,
of the manifold mischiefs which Egypt underwent by the failing of their waters.

Ver. 6. And they shall turn the rivers far away, etc.] That is, The seven
streams of Nilus, see the Note, Chap. 11.15. Or rather, the brooks or
watercourse drawn from thence. It is spoken of those that by draining the
river had been the cause of the failing of the waters, mentioned in the
foregoing verse. And this expression of turning the rivers far away, as if they
minded them not, seems to imply their slighting and disregarding the common
good of the land, in the overflowings of Nilus: And the brooks of defense shall
be emptied and dried up; That is, The brooks or rivers drawn out of Nilus,
which were a great defense to Egypt, or which were purposely drawn out for the
environing and defending many of their Cities and strong Holds; or the brooks
which were defended or kept in with strong banks. The meaning is, that the
brooks of Nilus should be dried up, where they were widest and deepest, and
where the river ran with the strongest stream. The reeds and flags shall
wither; to wit, for want of moisture. And these are the rather mentioned,
because the Egyptians did many ways make great use of them; for of these they
made darts, mats for their beds, weeles for their fishing, baskets, and many
such things; yea their boats and barks. See the Note before, Chap. 18.1.

Ver. 7. The Paper-reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, etc.] By
Paper-reeds here are meant reeds, of whose rind or skin they made Paper, which
was a great commodity in Egypt in those days; and by the mouth of the brooks is
meant, the bank or brink of the brooks, where these canes or reeds used to
grow. For it seems not so probable which some say, that by the mouth of the
brooks should be meant the Fountain or Springhead of the river Nilus, at which
the waters issued out as at a mouth (which was not in Egypt); or those
passages, where the water of the river did first enter and disgorge it self
into those channels and watercourse that were drawn from thence; and that
because the Prophet's aim is to show, that all things should wither all the
land over, even in those places which lay close to the banks or brinks of those
brooks, that were drawn from the river, which used to be the most fruitful
places; according to that which follows, And every thing sown by the brooks
shall wither, be driven away, and be no more; whereby is meant, that as those
things that grew of themselves, so those things also that were set or sown,
should wither and utterly perish, even in the most fertile places. Yet some, I
know, understand this of the spoil that should be made of those things by the
rage of war.

Ver. 8. The Fishers also shall mourn, etc.] Because the Egyptians fed much on
fish, wherewith that Country abounded, (and the more, by reason they did
superstitiously forbear the killing and eating of many sorts of beasts) whence
was that of the Israelites, Numb. 11.5. We remember the fish we did eat in
Egypt freely; and so many lived on the trade of fishing: Therefore it is said,
that they should mourn, to wit, because their Trade would be quite marred, the
fish dying for want of water: And all they that cast angle into the brooks
shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish; to wit,
as pining away for grief, when they should see their way of getting a
livelihood quite decayed and brought to nothing.

Ver. 9. Moreover, they that work in fine flax, and they that weave net-works
(or, white works) shall be confounded.] That is, They shall be ashamed and
overwhelmed with vexation, to see their Trade quite lost, for want of materials
to work upon; fine yarn and fine linen were of the principal commodities of
Egypt, whence is that of the Harlot, Prove. 7.16. I have decked my bed with fine
linen of Egypt; See also the Note, 1 King. 10.28. And therefore the better to
set forth, how their land should be impoverished by the failing of their
waters, this also is added, that they should want materials for the making of
these things, which were their chief traffic in foreign parts. Indeed,
because in the foregoing verse the Prophet had spoken of the mourning of their
fishermen, some hold that by networks here are meant nets for fishing. But
because fine flax is here forementioned, as the stuff whereof these net-works
were made, it is more probably thought, that hereby is meant pure white
linen cloth, or garments woven or wrought net-wise, See the Note, Chap. 3.18.

Ver. 10. And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make
sluices and ponds for fish.] This place is very differently rendered by
Interpreters, and thereupon several different Expositions are given of it. The
words which we translate, in the purposes thereof, are in the Hebrew, in the
foundations thereof. And so in the latter clause, those words which we
translate ponds for fish, are in the Original, ponds of the soul, or, of souls:
Whereby some think is meant, not ponds of living things, or ponds of fish, (as
it is best rendered in our Translation) but ponds made for delight and
pleasure. Now they that thus render the words of this verse, do accordingly
understand it of the great task imposed upon the Egyptians by those twelve
Tyrants, that had divided the land amongst them, in digging and making that
huge Lake of Moeris, or Meroe, (mentioned before in the Note, ver. 5.) which
was three thousand and six hundred Furlongs in compass, and in making channels
and watercourse for the conveying of the waters of Nilus into the said Lake.
And the meaning of the place they would have to be this, That the poor people
of the Land that were employed in making these huge works, merely for the
delight and pleasure of their great Lords, should be broken in the foundations
thereof; that is, multitudes of them should miserably perish, being slain and
broken to pieces by the falling down of the foundations of the earth upon them.
But now in our translation, that which is in the Hebrew, in the foundations
thereof, is rendered in the purposes thereof; because projects or purposes are
the foundation of action. And the words being read thus, as they are in our
Bibles, And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluices
and ponds for fish, the meaning must needs be, either 1. That those that lived
by the fish of Nilus; and to that end made ponds to keep fish in, and sluices to
let the waters of Nilus into those ponds, should be miserably broken and undone
by the purposes and projects of Egypt, and the Lords thereof, in draining the
River Nilus, as is before said; whereupon there should follow such a failing of
the waters, to the marring of their Trade of fish: or by their own purposes, in
advancing those to be their Kings that should so miserably oppress them: Or
else, 2. That they should be broken in their purposes and projects for the
great gain they expected to make of the fish they resolved to have always in a
readiness in the ponds they dug for that purpose, and that because by the
failing of the waters they would be disappointed of their hopes. As before he
showed, ver. 8. that there should be no catching of fish; so here, that there
should be no keeping of fish in the dams and ponds, which to this end they had
prepared.

Ver. 11. Surely, etc.] Here the Prophet does again return, farther to set
forth that which he had said before, ver. 3. concerning the Lords infatuating
the Egyptians; for which see the Note there. Surely the Princes of Zoan are
fools; and Zoan was one of the Royal Cities of the Egyptians, see the Note,
Psalm. 78.12. It is as if he had said, Let them think never so highly of
themselves, and let others admire them never so much for their great wisdom,
yet surely they are fools. Yea, not only their Princes and Nobles are fools,
but even the wisest of their Counselors also (whereas those that are eminent
above others for wisdom, are usually chosen to be of a Kings Privy Council):
And therefore is that added, the counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is
become brutish: by their sottish doings they carry themselves more like brute
beasts than understanding men. And this he chargerh them with, to imply, 1.
That their Land was like to be impoverished and destroyed, not so much by the
invasion and power of foreign Enemies, as by their own foolish Counsels, and by
the silly and unadvised designs which they put their Kings upon, or wherein
they flattered them, and soothed them up. 2. That now they were in danger, they
were neither able to foresee, nor to prevent the ruin that was coming upon
them. And 3. That being unable to do any thing that might procure Gods favor,
which only could tend to true happiness, their wisdom in all other regards was
no better than folly. How say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the
son of ancient Kings]? This the Prophet speaks to the Princes and Counselors
of the King of Egypt; and some would restrain it to Sithon, a foolish King, who
they say, was invaded by the Assyrian in the days of Hezekiah; and others to
Psammi^i^hus, under whose tyranny much of the calamities here threatened came
upon Egypt. But it is better, I think, to understand it of their Kings in
general* However, either it may be taken as an expression of the way, how they
flattered their King, laboring thereby to puff him up with a vain conceit of
his own eminent wisdom, and of the antiquity of his stock, drawn down by a
continued line through many generations; How say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son
of the wise, the son of ancient Kings? That is, why do ye prescribe this form
of glorying to him? Why do ye persuade him to say thus of himself, as if
because of this he must needs be well instructed; or as if Wisdom, together
with his Regal Power, were his by inheritance, and that therefore there was no
cause why he should fear any foreign Power? Or else it may be taken, as spoken
to their King by way of vaunting of their own great Wisdom, thereby commending
themselves to him, that they might procure the greater respect to their
counsel; How say ye unto Pharaoh? That is, with what face can you that are
Pharaoh's Princes and Counselors, say every one of you to him in a boasting
way, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient Kings? That is, I have been
the Scholar of wise men (as those that were trained up in the Schools of the
Prophets, were called the sons of the Prophets; see the Note 1 Kings 20.35.) or
literally, I am descended from wise men and ancient Kings, because the
Egyptians boasted much of their great Learning, as if all Nations had received
the knowledge they had in all Arts and Sciences from them; and likewise of the
antiquity of their Nation and Kingdom, that they were many thousand years
before any other People (which they grounded upon this pretense, that Egypt,
where there was no rain, was not drowned, as the rest of the world was in the
general deluge); and because the ancient Kings of those Eastern Countries, were
men of eminent Wisdom and Learning, and had left many Monuments thereof behind
them, and that especially for Magic and Divination; and so others in
aftertimes professed themselves their Scholars, or that they were of their
Families; therefore the Prophet derides them for their vain boastings, How say
ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise? etc. as if he should have said, Why
do ye brag thus, as if you were sure to defend the Kingdom by your Wisdom,
whereas the event will indeed be, that you will destroy it by your foolish
counsels?

Ver. 12. Where are they? etc.] This the Prophet speaks to the King of Egypt,
by way of insulting over him. Where are they? That is, they that boasted
themselves to be the Sons of the wise, and of ancient Kings? Ver. 11. Where are
thy wise men? That is, thy wise Counselors, thy Wizzards and Diviners, that
pretend to so much skill in foretelling future things? What is become of these
men now? Why do they not appear in this time of thy great danger? And let them
tell thee now; that is, As becomes wise and faithful Counselors, let them
advise thee of the evil that is coming upon thee, and what thou should do to
prevent it: And let them know what the Lord of Hosts has purposed upon Egypt;
that is, let them see if they can find out, and so tell thee, what God has
determined to do unto Egypt.

Ver. 13. The Princes of Zoan are become fools, and the Princes of Noph are
deceived, etc.] See the Note before, ver. 11. This Noph was another of Egypts
Chief and Royal Cities, the same that is elsewhere called in the Hebrew Moph,
Hos. 9.6. Where by our Translators it is rendered Memphis, as it is commonly
called by profane Writers, near unto which the Pyramids were built, according
to that of the Poet, Barbara pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis; And it is
thought to be the same, that at this time is called Grand-Cairo. Now having
said that the Princes of this City were deceived, to wit, by the proud and high
conceit which they had of themselves, or by the just Judgment of God upon them,
he adds, They have also seduced Egypt; that is, the people of Egypt by their
Flatteries and foolish Counsels, and false Predictions of peace and prosperity,
yea by their not foretelling the calamities that were coming upon them: Even
they that are the stay of the Tribes thereof; that is, of the several Provinces
or Precincts of Egypt; for the Prophet in calling them Tribes, speaks only
after the language and custom of his own Country. It is in the Hebrew, Even the
corners of the tribes thereof; that is, say some, all Egypt from one end to the
other: Or rather, the Princes thereof. And that which is intended seems to be,
that the Princes of Zoan and Noph, that were by their place to have been the
support and glory of Egypt, as the corner-stones are the supports and beauty of
a building, were the men that had deceived and destroyed the land. See the
Notes, Psalm. 118.22. and Job 38.6.

Ver. 14. The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof, etc.]
It is in the Hebrew, a spirit of perversities; that is, an erring, foolish,
giddy mind or spirit, carrying them away into crooked and cross counsels and
courses, and putting them upon doing things contrary to all reason, and to what
they intended, tending to the ruin of their State, which they thought to
advance. In the Phrase here used, The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit;
there seems to be an Allusion to the mingling, preparing, or giving to men a
cup of Wine or strong Liquor (see the Notes, Chap. 5.22. and Prove. 9.2.)
whereinto something is put that makes men giddy-headed, or outrageous and mad.
And indeed the Judgments of God upon wicked men are often compared hereto in
the Scripture, see the Notes, Job 21.20. Psalm. 60.3. and 75.8. And thence it
follows here, And they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof; That
is, to mistake and act foolishly in every thing they do; as a drunken man
staggereth in his vomit; that is, as a man that staggereth, that is so
extremely drunk, that he goes up and down vomiting as he goes; or as a man
tumbles about in his vomit. As the more such a man rowls himself in his vomit,
the more he is defiled; so the more busling they shall make, the worse and
worse their condition should still be. The meaning of all is, That it was no
wonder, though the wise men of Egypt should thus play the fools, because the
Lord should infatuate them.

Ver. 15. Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail,
branch or rush may do.] That is, Neither the King nor his Wizzards, neither
high nor low shall be able to advise or do any thing, or at least to effect any
thing intended or desired, that may be any advantage to them, to save or help
them. See the Notes, Chap. 9.14, 15.

Ver. 16. In that day shall Egypt be like unto women, etc.] That is, the
Egyptians shall be fearful and faint-hearted; see the Note above, ver. 1. and
it shall be afraid and fear, because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of
hosts, which he shakes over it: That is, because the Lord God, whose wrath and
power is irresistible, shall by raising up the Assyrians to invade them,
terrify Egypt, and as it were, threaten to destroy it; see the Note, Chap.
10.32. In this expression of the the Lords shaking his hand over it, there
seems to be an allusion to Moses his stretching out his hand at Gods command
over the Red Sea, for the bringing back of the waters thereof upon the
Egyptians, whereby they were drowned and destroyed, Exodus 14.26, 27.

Ver. 17. And the Land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, etc.] As if the
Prophet had said, Yea, before the Assyrians shall invade Egypt, when the
Egyptians shall hear of the Assyrians prevailing in the Land of Judah, and the
great havoc they had made there, that Hezekiah had sent the Treasures of his
Kingdom and of the Temple to him, and had tendered to become his Tributary
Vassal, and yet could not by all this purchase. Peace from him, (concerning all
which see 2 King. 18.13, 14.) this shall exceedingly affright the Egyptians;
the land of Judah being thus sorely afflicted and endangered shall be a terror
unto the land of Egypt: 1. Because Judea being such a near neighboring
Country, and standing as a wall between them and the Assyrians, the land of
Judah being subdued, there would be a clear way opened for the Assyrian to
enter Egypt, and little hope there would be that they alone should be able to
withstand such a potent Enemy. 2. Because of the strict Confederacy that had
often been betwixt these two States of Egypt and Judea, and the readiness of
the Egyptians upon all occasions to help the Jews (see 2 King. 17.4. and
18.21.) which might provoke the Assyrian the more against Egypt. And 3. Because
if God had not spared his own people, the Egyptians might well think that he
would much less spare them. This I conceive is the true meaning of this place.
And accordingly it follows, Every one that makes mention thereof, shall be
afraid in himself; That is, every Egyptian (yea, some extend this to all other
Nations) that shall have occasion to speak of the land of Judah, to wit, of the
miseries that are befallen that Country, shall be struck with terror; the very
thinking of the place shall make them tremble; Because of the counsel of the
Lord of Hosts, which he has determined against it; that is, because of God's
determinate Counsel for the destruction of the Land of Judah, which they shall
see executed upon it: Or, because by the ruin brought upon the Land of Judah,
they shall see that he has determined also to destroy Egypt. Some I know
understand this whole verse of the fear wherewith the Egyptians should be
surprised, when they should hear how wonderfully God had destroyed the Assyrian
Army, that under Sennacherib had invaded Judea; to wit, that finding hereby
what a mighty God the Jews had to defend them, they should not only fear the
Lord; but also the people of the Lord, according to that which the Egyptians
said of old, Exodus 14.25. Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the Lord
fights for them against the Egyptians: and that, Deuteronomy 28.10. And all people
of the earth shall see that thou art called by the Name of the Lord, and they
shall be afraid of thee. See also 2 Chronicles. 32.23. But the former Exposition I
judge the more genuine. Yet some that understand it so, hold it is meant of the
destruction brought upon the Land of Judah by the Chaldeans, not of the waste
that was made therein by the Assyrians.

Ver. 18. In that day, etc. That is, after these judgments have been fully
executed upon Egypt, see the Note, Chap. 4.2. shall five cities in the land of
Egypt speak the language of Canaan; that is, the Hebrew tongue, the language
which the people of God spoke, that were planted by God in the Land of Cannaan;
which is therefore also called the Jews language, Neh. 13.24. See the Note
also, Genesis 11.1. But the meaning is, that the inhabitants of certain Cities in
Egypt (such as God had ordained unto life eternal) should embrace the Religion
of the Jews, and become one people with them, professing the same Faith, and
conversing together with them, as if they had been the same people, and spoke
all the same tongue (notwithstanding the deadly enmity that had formerly been
between the Egyptians and the children of Israel; of which see Genesis 43.32.)
Yea, and that they should by their praying to God, and praising of God, and by
the holiness of their speech in every regard, manifest themselves to be the
people of the Holy God of Israel, according to that; Zeph. 3.9. Then will I
turn to the people a pure language, that they may call upon the name of the
Lord, to serve him with one consent. As for the number of five cities here
mentioned, In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the
language of Canaan; I do not think that this is spoken with reference to the
five Principalities that were formerly in the Land of Egypt, 1 Samuel 6.4. (for
in the times the Prophet was immediately before speaking of, Egypt was divided
into Twelve Kingdoms). Nor that the Prophets intent was hereby to imply, that a
fith part in five of the Cities of Egypt should embrace the Faith (which some
hold), because of the following clause, one shall be called the City of
destruction. It is only, I conceive, a certain number put for an uncertain; and
that which is only intended is, that a considerable number of the Cities of
Egypt should embrace the Religion of Gods people. And because he speaks of the
conversion of Cities in general, this must needs be meant of their conversion
to the Faith in the days of the Gospel; not of some few that might be won to
embrace the Jewish Religion in the days before Christ, by those Jews that
should fly into Egypt for shelter, upon occasion of any troubles that should be
in the Land of Judah. And so likewise we must understand those following words,
and swear to the Lord of hosts; to wit, that the Egyptians should by being
baptized, renounce all idolatries, and give up themselves to the service of the
true God, even as Subjects are wont to take an Oath of Fealty and Allegiance to
their earthly Princes, as owning the Lord to be only Omniscient God, and the
Judge of the world, that will be avenged on all perjured persons, see the Note,
Psalm. 63.11. And then for the last clause, some read it as it is in the Margin,
one shall be called the city of the sun: and so they take the meaning to be,
that the city of the sun, where there was a Temple built to the Sun, one of the
chief Idols of the Heathens (which they take to be the same that is by the
Greeks called Heliopolis), should be one of those Cities that should speak the
Language of Canaan; and that the Prophet's intent is hereby to signify, that
even those that were most addicted to Idolatry, should embrace the Christian
Faith. But if we read it as it is in our Bibles, One shall be called the city
of destruction, the meaning must needs be, either 1. That some few of the
Cities of Egypt should refuse to embrace the Christian Faith, as many other of
their Neighbour-Cities had done, and so should be esteemed by the faithful
Cities, destined to eternal destruction: Or else, 2. That amongst those Cities
that should speak the language of Canaan, there should be some few, or one
particularly, that for its former horrid idolatry, or for its standing out long
obstinately against the Doctrine of the Gospel, should be deemed a City near to
destruction, or appointed to destruction, that should yet afterward embrace
the Truth, and become, together with the rest, the people of God.

Ver. 19. In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord, in the midst of the
land of Egypt, etc.] That is, in the very inmost parts of the land: but see the
Note, Chap. 10.2. The meaning is, that even in Egypt they should worship the
God of Israel in the spiritual Gospel-way, whereof the Altars and Sacrifices
amongst the Israelites, in the time of the Law, were types and shadows; For
thus it is usual in the Old Testament to speak of the worship of God in
Gospel Times, under those expressions of the Rites and Ceremonies that were
then in use amongst the people, as in Mal. 1.11. My name shall be great among
the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a
pure offering. See also Chap. 56.7. and Joel 2.28. And hereto agrees that which
follows, and a pillar in the border thereof to the Lord: That is, a pillar
erected to the honor of the true God, or whereon there should be engraven, To
the Lord Jehovah; even as it was a custom to set up pillars, as marks of the
bounds of Countries and Kingdoms, whereon there used to be the Arms, or some
other memorial of the Prince to whom the Country belonged. But there is
doubtless an allusion in these words to the pillars which the people of God
were wont to set up, as monuments and memorials of some special mercies they
had there received from God, or of their worshipping of God there: See the
Notes, Genesis 28.14. Exodus 24.4. and Josh. 24.26, 27. So that the meaning of that
which is here said, is only this, That all Egypt over; yea, in the very border
and out-skirts of the Country, in the pure exercises of Gods worship, and other
monuments and tokens of Christian piety, there should be such evident signs of
the true Religion being settled there, that as soon as any man should enter into
the land of Egypt, he should presently see, that they owned the God of Israel
to be their God, and that the true Religion was professed there.

Ver. 20. And it, etc.] That is, That Altar (and consequently also that
Pillar), set up in the land of Egypt, mentioned in the foregoing verse, shall
be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the Land of Egypt:
That is, they shall be a sign, that the Egyptians do own themselves to be his
peculiar people, and that he is worshipped there. And what is meant by the
Altar and Pillar, is shown in the foregoing Note; to wit, the open profession
they should make of their Faith, and their thankful acknowledgment of the free
Grace of God, in bringing them into a state of Salvation, together with the
service which they should constantly and openly yield unto God in praying to
him, and praising his Name.

For they shall cry unto the Lord because of the oppress^rs, etc.] This is
added, say some, to show how the Egyptians came to be converted, and to own and
serve the true God: and accordingly some understand this, of those spiritual
oppressors, Satan, Sin and Death; to wit, that being brought to be sensible of
this spiritual sore bondage, under which they were he^d, they cried unto the
Lord for deliverance; which may seem the more probable, because of that which
follows, and be sent them a savior; to wit, Jesus Christ. And again, others
understand it of Tyrants that oppressed them in their outward estate; but
withal hold, that this is mentioned as the occasion of their turning to the
true God; to wit, that being sorely afflicted hereby, and finding no help in
their Idol-Gods, they should hereby be the better fitted and prepared to turn
unto the true God, when, in the Ministry of the Gospel, Grace came to be
tendered unto them; whereupon that follows, and he shall send them a savior,
and a great one (that is, a great Savior, the great God and our savior Jesus
Christ, as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 2.13.) and he shall deliver them. But I
rather think, that this is spoken of the Egyptians after their conversion, and
that this is added, to show how those signs of their worshipping the true God
should come to be every where seen amongst them ( the Altar and the Pillar
intended in the foregoing Verse); namely, because under all their oppressors
they should cry unto the Lord; and their Savior, the Lord Christ, should
surely deliver them.

Ver. 21. And the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know
the Lord in that day, etc.] The same thing seems to be said here two several
ways, and that because this of their being brought to the true knowledge of God,
was a mercy of so great importance, even the foundation of all their bliss and
happiness; yet two distinct things may be implied hereby, as 1. That God should
reveal himself to the Egyptians by the preaching of the Gospel. And 2. That
hereby, through the enlightening of Gods Spirit, they should effectually be
brought to know the Lord; and so God that was before known only in Judea,
should be now known in Egypt too. Or by the first clause may be meant, that the
Egyptians should be brought to the knowledge of God; and by the second, that
they should make acknowledgment of that God whom they now knew, by serving him
in a Gospel-way, which is expressed figuratively in those following words, and
shall do sacrifice and oblation, etc. for which see the foregoing Note, ver. 19.

Ver. 22. And the Lord shall smite Egypt, he shall smite and heal it, etc.]
That is, His strokes shall not be mortal and destructive, because after he has
smitten them, he shall heal them again: Or rather, he shall smite them so, that
by smiting them, he shall heal them; to wit, spiritually, by working a saving
work of grace in them. And this may be meant, either of the evils above
mentioned, which should be an occasion of their conversion, or of those
afflictions, whereby after their conversion God should seek to reclaim them,
when they went astray. And to both these may that also be referred which
follows, and they shall return even to the Lord, and he shall be entreated of
them, and shall heal them; to wit, by delivering them out of their troubles.

Ver. 23. In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria; and
the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, etc.] That
is, These two Nations that had formerly been in continual hostility one against
the other, shall both embrace the Christian Faith; and so then they shall be at
peace, and there shall be free commerce between them, and loving communion,
especially in matters of Religion. See the Notes, Chap. 11.13, 16. and the
Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians: that is, They shall both serve one
and the same God jointly together, with one and the same worship, after one and
the same way. Yet there are some that would have this understood also of their
being ready to serve one another in love, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.13.

Ver. 24. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria,
etc.] That is, A third with those, amongst whom this mutual Concord and Amity
should be. The meaning is, that whereas hitherto the Israelites had been
disjoined from all other Nations, as being God's only peculiar people, now
there should be no distinction betwixt Jew and Gentile; the believing Jew
should now own the Egyptian and Assyrian, (and under these all other Nations
are comprehended) as the Israel of God, no less than themselves, and converse
with them in all brotherly Love, as such. Yet I know some conceive that there
is more than this intended in these words, that Israel shall be the third with
Egypt and with Assyria; namely, That Israel, whose land lay between Egypt and
Assyria, should come in, as it were, as a third person, to make peace between
the Egyptian and the Assyrian, to wit, by bringing them to be joined together
in the profession of the same Faith under Christ their Head, as one Church and
one People; so that whereas formerly Israel had wont to be the occasion of war
between Egypt and Assyria, by imploring sometimes the aid of the Assyrians
against the Egyptians, and sometimes the aid of the Egyptians against the
Assyrians, now he should be a means of uniting them together in holy Love and
Communion; as with themselves, so also one with another. And this indeed seems
to be the more probable, because of the following words, even a blessing in the
midst of the land. For this seems to have special respect to Israel, to wit,
that the Israelites should be a blessing, that is, a means of conveying a
blessing to all the Nations in the world round about them: both in regard of
the Messiah, that was to spring from them, and because by their means the
Nations should be converted and brought in to be God's people: Or, that they
should be a form and pattern of blessing. For all which see the Notes, Genesis
12.2, 3. and Psalm. 72.17. Yet I confess this last clause may be extended to all
the three beforementioned; to wit, that Israel, Assyria and Egypt should be a
blessing in the midst of the land: That is, that they should be Nations blessed
of God through Christ, whereto agrees that which follows in the next verse.

Ver. 25. Whom the Lord of Hosts shall bless, etc.] To wit, effectually,
saying, Blessed be Egypt, my people, to wit, no less than Israel had formerly
been; and Assyria the work of mine hands, to wit, in regard of Regeneration,
God's workmanship, as such are called, Ephesians. 2.10. See the Note also, Deuteronomy.
32.6. And Israel mine inheritance, that is, my chosen people, most dear to me,
see the Note, Deuteronomy. 32.10. But indeed some special Prerogative, belonging
peculiarly to Israel, seems to be hereby implied; as namely, that Israel had
been his people of old for many generations, and therefore called God's
Firstborn. See the Note, Exodus 4.22.

CHAP. XX.
VERSE 1. IN the year, etc.] The Prophet having before denounced the Judgments
that were to come upon the Ethiopians, Chap. 18. and the Judgments that were to
come upon the Egyptians, Chap. 19. does in this Chapter again jointly together
foretell the calamities that were coming upon both these Nations, and withal
expresses the time when he foretold this; In the year that Tartan came unto
Ashdod, (when Sargon the King of Assyria sent him) and fought against Ashdod
and took it. Some think that it is Salmaneser, who carried away the ten Tribes
of Israel captive into Assyria, that is here called Sargon, and that he sent
Tartan against Ashdod, who accordingly subdued and took it, about the fourth or
fifth year of Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 18.9, 10. And others conceive, that this Sargon
was the Son of Salmaneser, and Father of Sennacherib, and that he desiring to
prosecute his Fathers designs, and to enlarge his Dominions, did invade the
land of the Philistines, that bordered on the West upon the land of Israel, and
beginning with Ashdod, besieged that (the siege whereof might last three years,
as Samaria did, 1 Kin. 17.5.) and that when the Egyptians and Ethiopians came
in with great Forces to the relief of this City, they were by the Assyrians
vanquished and carried away captives in that shameful manner, as is here
afterward related. But because, 2 Kin. 18.17. Tartan is mentioned to have been
one of those three Captains, or Colonels, that were sent by Sennacherib to
summon Hezekiah to render up Jerusalem to him; therefore it is more generally
held, that this Sargon was Sennacherib, (it being usual in those times for men
to have two several names) and when he first invaded Judea, in the fourteenth
year of Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 18.13. he had amongst other the strong Cities of
Judah, taken Ashdod, by some forces sent against it under the command of
Tartan, (which they conceive was one of the Cities that Hezekiah had lately
recovered out of the hands of the Philistines, 2 Kin. 18.8.) and that in this
year it was that Isaiah was appointed to foretell the destruction of the
Egyptians and Ethiopians; which they conceive came to pass three years after
(see the Note here, ver. 3.) when Tirhakah the Ethiopian came out against
Sennacherib, being then wasting the Land of Judea, and was vanquished by him, 2
Kin. 19.9. Thus, I say, many Expositors do judge of the time of this Prophecy.
But however clear it is, that the drift of this Prophecy was more fully still
to convince the Jews, what a folly it would be in them to rely upon the
Egyptians and Ethiopians for help, that could not defend themselves from the
Assyrians. And indeed considering how in that Invasion of Sennacherib the land
of Judea was in a manner wholly subdued, (excepting only Jerusalem) it is most
probable that the Jews, according to their wonted manner, began then to look
after the Egyptians, and their Confederates the Ethiopians, for aid, (and
therefore we see that Sennacherib did upbraid them herewith, 2 King. 18.21.)
and that they were much encouraged herein, when they heard that Tirhakah was
indeed come out against the Assyrian, and that Sennacherib was already forced
to send forth part of his Army out of Judea, to stop him in his way. So that
upon this account it was necessary to convince the Jews, at this time, of their
Sin and Folly, in resting with so much confidence upon these Nations.

Ver. 2. At the same time spoke the Lord by Isaiah, the Son of Amoz, saying,
etc.] The meaning is, That when God commanded Isaiah that which follows, he
did withal charge him to acquaint the people, that it was by the Lords special
command that he did so. It is in the Hebrew, The Lord spoke by the hand of
Isaiah, that is, by the Ministry of Isaiah, as it is said, Levit. 8.36. That
Aaron and his Sons did all things which the Lord commanded by the hand of
Moses. Yet some think that this expression might be used with respect to the
custom of the Prophets writing their Prophecies. Go and loose thy sackcloth
from off thy loins; that is, The sackcloth, say some, wherewith the Prophet was
clothed at that time, purposely as a token of his bewailing the Captivity of
the Ten Tribes, and the dreadful calamities that he foresaw were coming upon
the whole land of Judea, for the wickedness and stubbornness of the people left
therein. And to the same purpose might that also be enjoined which follows, and
put off thy shoe from thy foot, see 2 Samuel 2.30. But rather the sackcloth here
mentioned was that rough hairy garment, which was the usual attire of the
Prophets, See the Note 2 Kin. 1.8. And why he was enjoined to put this off, is
set forth in the two following verses.

And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.] That this was not done in a
Vision only, as some think, is evident; because in doing this, he was to be a
sign to the people, to represent in their sight the misery that was coming upon
the Egyptians and Ethiopians, in whom they trusted. And that he went not up and
down stark naked, the immodesty and impudency of such an act may easily
convince us; but besides, had he been stark naked, what need would there have
been of adding that of his going barefoot, Walking naked and barefoot? The
meaning therefore must be, either that he did only put off, according to God's
appointment, his Prophetical outward Garment or Mantle, which covered all his
body, and went up and down only in some short close Coat, that he used to wear
under that, for which see the Note, 1 Samuel 19.24. Or else, that having put off
his Sackcloth, he walked up and down, not only barefooted and bare-legged, but
also in such poor, ragged, torn and tattered garments, that in many places did
not cover his naked body, just as Slaves and Captives used to go; thereby to
represent in what a pitiful manner the Egyptians and Ethiopians should be
carried away into Captivity. And though this were done only, as some think,
when the Prophet went forth to foretell the miseries that were coming upon these
Nations; yet we may be sure that such a spectacle, in so grave and holy a
Prophet, and one that was also of Noble Descent, must needs mightily affect the
people, and make them eager to enquire what the meaning thereof should be.

Ver. 3. And the Lord said, etc.] To wit, by Isaiah, who by God's appointment
informed the people what God intended to signify to them by that his strange
attire, Like as my servant Isaiah has walked naked and barefoot three years
for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and Ethiopia; That is, say many Expositors,
for a three years sign, a sign that three years after that, the Egyptians and
Ethiopians should just in that manner be carried away captives; Or, that their
Countries should be wasted, and they carried into Captivity for three years
together. And the more clearly to express this, some think that he went out in
this manner prophesying three several times, or three several days. But of this
supposition there is no necessity: For as Jeremiah's putting a yoke upon his
neck but for one day, signified a Captivity of seventy years continuance, Jer.
27.2. so might Isaiah's going naked and barefoot signify the Captivity of the
Egyptians and Ethiopians three years after, or for three years together, though
he should have done it but once. However, as the words are rendered in our
Bibles, they clearly hold forth, that Isaiah went naked and barefoot three
years together, as is said in the foregoing Note. And indeed it is probable
enough that he did so, the more to affect the people with that dreadful misery
that was coming upon these Nations, upon whom they relied for help.

Ver. 4. So shall the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and
the Ethiopians captives, etc.] To wit, Sargon or Sennacherib, see the Note
before, verse. 1. And if this were done when he vanquished Tirhakah the
Ethiopian, (which some think, as is there noted;) this shows that the
Egyptians did then join with Tirhakah in that Expedition: Young and old, naked
and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt, and so
likewise of Ethiopia. And this is meant of their being ashamed, not only of
their nakedness, but also of their former Pride and Self-confidence.

Ver. 5. And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation,
and of Egypt their glory.] That is, The Jews, or whoever else they were that
had relied on these Nations for aid, shall be stricken with terror, when they
shall see these their Confederates cut off, and so might expect that the
Assyrians would now use them as they had done the other; see the Note, Chap.
19.17. and withal they shall be ashamed of their folly in their former hope and
confidence in them. And thus these Nations, that had been before the cause of
their vain confidence and pride, should now become the cause of their fear and
shame.

Ver. 6. And the inhabitant of this Isle shall say in that day, etc.] That is,
The Inhabitants of Judea, and the Land of the Philistines may also be included,
as being a part of the Land of Canaan. Several Reasons are, I know, given by
Expositors, why this land should be called an Isle, which seem not to me to
have the least probability in them; as, because Judea was the Lord's peculiar
Inheritance, separated from the rest of the world, as an Island from the
Mainland; or because it had the Mediterranean-Sea on the West, the Red Sea,
Jordan, the Sea of Genesareth, and the Dead-Sea on other sides of it. But
indeed the most that can be probably said for this is, that it is called an
Isle, because it bordered upon the Seacoasts. And considering that the word
here used in the Original is in several other places of Scripture used, even
concerning Inland Countries; I conceive it is better rendered here, as it is in
the Margin of our Bibles, And the inhabitant of this Country shall say in that
day. However those words, this Isle or this Country, seem clearly to import,
that the Prophet speaks here of his own Countrymen, that they should say,
Behold such is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from
the King of Assyria. As if they should have said, You see what is become of
those Nations by whom we expected to be aided against the Assyrians; and how
shall we escape? That is, If the Assyrians have destroyed these mighty Nations,
on whom we relied; how shall we escape their fury? They that were not able to
secure themselves, are no way likely to defend us. And indeed when Sennacherib
had vanquished these their confederates, and overrun Judea, and was set down
with a mighty Army before Jerusalem, the condition of the Jews was desperate
enough in the eye of Reason, had not God miraculously delivered them.

CHAP. XXI.
VERSE 1. THE burden, etc.] See the Notes, Chap 13.1. and 2 Kings 9.25. of the
desert of the sea: that is, of Chaldea or Babylon, as is evident, both by the
express mention that is made of Babylon, ver. 9. Babylon is fallen, is fallen;
and by the naming of the Nations by whom Babylon was destroyed; to wit, the
Medes and Persians, ver. 2. Several reasons are given by Expositors, why it is
here called the desert of the sea; as 1. That it is called a desert, either 1.
Because there was a great desert betwixt Judea and Babylon; and so the Prophet
speaks here of Babylon, as with respect to the desert, beyond which it lay: Or
2. Because though Babylon was a very rich and fruitful Country, yet there was a
great and a vast desert that lay between Chaldea and the land of Media and
Persia, the inhabitants whereof were the Enemy that was to break into Chaldea,
and to destroy Babylon. Or 3. rather, Because by this invasion of the Medes and
Persians, which the Prophet here foretells, it was to be laid waste and
desolate, and turned into a very desert: see Chap. 13.19.22. and so the land
which had made the world a wilderness, was to be made a wilderness it self. And
2. That it is called the desertt of the sea, either, 1. Figuratively, because
Babylon was like a huge sea for the multitude of the people, and riches that
were therein; a sea of wealth, all the Nations and Kingdoms under that vast
Monarchy bringing in their treasures to Babylon, as the Rivers do all pour
their waters into the Sea; as likewise with respect to the turbulent temper of
that State, that was never quiet, but continually breaking forth with great
rage against other Nations: and to her insatiable covetousness and ambition,
being herein like the Sea, which is never full, though all the Rivers run into
it, Eccles. 1.7. Or else, 2. Literally; and that either with respect to the
situation of Babylon, near to the Banks of that greater River Euphrates, or to
the huge fens and lakes which that River made in the land of Chaldea in several
places, (whence is that expression concerning Babylon, Jer. 51.13. O thou that
dwell upon many waters) especially after Nitocris, a Queen of Chaldea, had
by diverting the river of Euphrates, in deep Channels dug for that purpose,
winding it up and down in several places, turned a great part of the Country
into a very Fen, to stop the violence of that river, when it ran right forward;
or as others say, purposely to prevent the breaking in of the Medes and
Persians upon Babylon on that side of the Country.

As whirlwinds in the South pass through, etc.] That is, As Whirlwinds, that do
usually arise suddenly in the South (called therefore Whirlwinds of the South,
Zech. 9.14. according to that, Job 37.9. Out of the South comes the whirlwind)
do pass on with mighty violence, so that nothing can stand before them; So it
comes from the desert, from a terrible land; that is, so this burden I am now
to foretell, this heavy calamity that will light upon Babylon, comes from the
desert, from a terrible land; which may be meant, either of that part of
Chaldea about Babylon, which Nitocris had turned into a very Fen and desert
place, by drawing Euphrates into it; or of that Desert which lay on the South,
between Chaldea, and Media, and Persia, (through which indeed Cyrus was to pass
with his Army.) Or else of the land it self of Media and Persia, the Northerly
parts whereof were waste and mountainous, and might well be called a terrible
land; because these Nations were indeed a very fierce and savage people, See
Chap. 13.17, 18. and the State of Babylon was very much afraid of them. That
therefore, which is intended by this clause is, that as formerly the
Babylonians had broke in like a violent Tempest upon Judea, so now the Medes
and Persians should on a sudden from the South break in like a violent Tempest
upon Babylon.

Ver. 2. A grievous Vision is declared unto me, etc.] To wit, that which he had
before called The burden of the desert of the Sea: And this begins in the
following words, wherein the Prophet relates what the Lord had said to him in
the Vision, The treacherous dealer deals treacherously, and the spoiler
spoileth. Now some conceive that the first branch of this, The treacherous
dealer deals treacherously, is meant of the Babylonians; and that the next,
and the spoiler spoileth, is meant of the Medes and Persians, who should
thereby punish the treachery of the Babylonians. And others understand both the
one and the other, of the Medes and Persians; and to show how they dealt
treacherously with the Babylonians, they tell us how some of the Babylonian
Captains revolted to them, of which Gadatas and Gobrias are named, and did much
help forward the taking of Babylon; Yea, some say, what can hardly be made good
out of any History, to wit, that the Medes and Persians were not only in League
with the Babylonians at that time when they invaded Chaldea, but also that they
were upon a treaty of Peace with them when they took Babylon, and were invited
by Belshazzar to a great Feast; and taking advantage of this, slew him, and
surprised the City. But with most Expositors I rather think that this is meant
of the Babylonian, and that it is prefixed as the cause, why those grievous
things that are here foretold, were certainly to come upon him; namely, because
the Babylonian had dealt so treacherously with God's people, and had so sorely
spoiled them, and so continued still to do, having the poor Jews in bondage
amongst them; and so God would now bring other Nations upon Babylon, that
should deal as treacherously and cruelly with them. And hereupon (as before,
Chap. 13.2, etc.) the Lord does as it were summon the Medes and Persians to go
up and besiege Babylon. Go up, O Elam; that is, O Persian, the inhabitants of
Elam, which was a Province in Persin, of which Shushan was one of the Royal
Cities, see Dan. 8.2. (And some think the Persian is named first, because Cyrus
the King of Persia was Commander in chief.) Besiege, O Media; the expression
here used seems to imply, how easily it should be done; it was but going up
against them, and laying siege to the City, and it should be presently taken.
And observable it is, that though it were about an hundred and seventy years
ere this came to pass, yet the Prophet speaks of it, as if it were then doing,
yea as if it were already done. All the sighing thereof have I made to cease;
that is, the great sighing which Babylon has caused amongst many Nations for
many years together, but especially amongst mine own People, by her Oppressions
and Cruelties, shall now come to an end, because Babylon shall now be
destroyed. And thus the cause of her destruction is also implied, to wit,
because she had been so savage and cruel to others, the poor captive Jews
especially.

Ver. 3. Therefore are my loins filled with pain, etc.] I cannot conceive that
this should be, as some think, the words of the Church, expressing her sighing,
mentioned in the foregoing Verse, for the miseries she endured by the treachery
and cruelty of the Babylonians. It is far more probable, which others say, That
the Prophet does here in his own person bewail the destruction, which by the
Vision he had seen, he perceived was coming upon the Babylonians, see the
Notes, Chap. 15.5. and 16.9. But because of those words in the following Verse,
the night of my pleasure has he turned into fear; I judge it far most probable,
that it is Babylon her self that is here brought in, bewailing the sad miseries
they endured when the Medes and Persians surprised that City; pangs have taken
hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth; see the Note, Chap 13.8.
I was bowed down at the hearing of it: that is, when the tidings were brought
of their marching toward us; I was dismayed at the seeing of it: that is, when
we saw them besieging the City, or breaking in with all possible rage and
cruelty upon us. And observable it is, that the Prophet uses the same
expression here that is ordinarily used concerning women in travail, as when it
is said of Phinehas his Wife, 1 Samuel 4.19. that she bowed her self, and
bewailed. See also the Note, Job 39.3. And indeed of this terror of the
Babylonians we have a notable instance in Belshazzar's afrightment, Dan. 5.6.
where it is said, that his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his
loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another; insomuch, that some
Expositors hold, that this is spoken in the person of Belshazzar particularly;
and that the words of hearing and seeing here mentioned, are meant of the
handwriting which he saw on the wall, and the interpretation which he heard
given of it.

Ver. 4. My heart panted, fearfulness afrighted me, etc.] The first words, My
heart panted, may be rendered as they are in the Margin of our Bibles, My mind
wandered: that is, it could not rest in its place and posture: my thoughts were
disturbed, and rou^'d up and down, as it is usual wi^h men under terrors, when
they know not which way to turn themselves: the night of my pleasure has he
turned into fear unto me: that is, God, or the Enemy, has turned the night
which I used to long for, and delight in, because of the pleasing rest I took
therein, into a time of extreme fear and terror. And under this all other
things may be comprehended, that used to be pleasant to them, but were now
embittered by their afrightment. But most clearly was this verified in the
Babylonians, in that fatal night wherein Belshazzar, being securely feasting
with his Princes and Concubines, and blaspheming the God of Israel, the City
was suddenly surprised, and he and his people were miserably slain, and so that
night of their great Jollity was turned into a night of extreme terror to
them. And herein they were justly repaid, that suffered not the poor captive
Jews to rest from their hard bondage, no not in the night season.

Ver. 5. Prepare the Table, etc.] Some Expositors would have these first words
to be the words of Belshazzar, enjoining his Servants to provide the Banquet,
(which is meant of the Feast, Dan. 5.1.) and the Watchmen in the mean season to
observe from their Watch-towers what the enemy did, and heartening his Guests
to eat, and drink, and be merry, without any fear of the enemy that had
besieged the City. Prepare the Table, watch in the Watchtower, eat, drink: and
then the following words, Arise ye Princes, and anoint the shield, they would
have to be the words of the Prophet, encouraging the Medes to take the
advantage of this their feasting securely together, to betake themselves
suddenly to their arms, and to surprise the City. But I conceive it far more
probable, that all the way the Prophet relates the hard Vision he had seen; and
so in these first words speaks to the Babylonians, Belshazzar and his Nobles,
in an Ironical way deriding their stupid security, Prepare the table, watch in
the watchtower, eat, drink; as if he should have said, Ay, do, make all things
ready for your sumptuous Feast; so that the Watchmen do but look out the whilst
from their Watch-towers, that will be enough, do you in the mean time eat and
drink freely, and be merry; and then in the next words he tells them what would
be the sad conclusion of this their Jollity, Arise ye Princes, and anoint the
shield; for this is all one as if he had said, that they would quickly hear a
cry, to wit, either from the watchmen, or from the people, upon the enemies
invading the City. Arise ye Princes, and anoint the shield; that is, Arm, arm,
ye Princes; this is no time for feasting, the enemy is upon you; and therefore
away with your cups, make ready your weapons, and stand to your arms. For by
anointing the Shield, I conceive is clearly meant, the making ready of their
Arms, that they might go out to battle; and that the ground of this expression
is, that in those times they used to anoint their shields with Oil, when they
went out to war, not only thereby to make them bright and glittering, but also
that their smoothness might cause the weapons that lighted upon them to glide
away, and not so easily to enter them. Yet some I know hold, that in these
words the Babylonian Princes are advised Ironically to arise and make them
another King, that might be a shield to them instead of Belshazzar that was
staing or to submit to their King Darius, Dan. 5.30, 31. For which see the
Note, Psalm. 47.9.

Ver. 6. For thus has the Lord said unto me, etc.] Here the Prophet proceeds
farther to relate the burdensome vision, which God had revealed unto him
concerning the Destruction of Babylon; and that to assure those to whom he
spoke, that what he had foretold, would certainly be (neither is there indeed
any reason why we should say with some others, that this was another Vision;
and so multiply Visions needlessly, when all may as well be understood of the
same Vision) Go, set a Watchman, let him declare what he sees. Because when
Isaiah foretold this Ruin of Babylon, there was no appearance of the least
likelihood of any such thing; therefore in the Vision that he saw he was
appointed to set a Watchman upon a high Watchtower, that should faithfully
declare what from thence he descried. And this I conceive was to imply, that
though at present there was no appearance of that which he foretold, yet he had
said nothing, but what as Gods Watchman, by the revelation of Gods Spirit, he
had, as it were, from Heaven foreseen coming upon the Babylonians; and
therefore though it were seen, as that which was afar off, yet assuredly it
would come to pass. And indeed upon this account, Prophets are often called
Watchmen in the Scripture, as in Ezekiel. 3.17. Son of man, I have made thee a
Watchman unto the house of Israel. There is much arguing amongst Expositors
concerning this Watchman, which Isaiah should set. Some think that all
intended hereby, was, that he himself should, as a Watchman from his
Watchtower descry what God would reveal to him; and this they would make good
from that which follows, ver. 10. That which I have heard of the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you. Again others say, that
Isaiah is here commanded to appoint some other Prophet, or some Son of the
Prophets, as a Watchman to expect what God by Vision would reveal to him
concerning this business, and faithfully to relate what he had seen. But
methinks it is clear, that all this is only a relation of what Isaiah had seen
in his Prophetical Vision, namely, that God bad him set a Watchman in a
Watchtower, that should faithfully make known what he should see. And
accordingly in the following Verses, he tells us what this his Watchman did, in
this his prophetical Vision, both see and say.

Ver. 7. And he saw a Chariot, with a couple of horsemen, a Chariot of Asses,
and a Chariot of Camels, etc.] That is, The Watchman, whom in his Vision at
Gods Command he had set in a Watchtower. Now the sight here related, which
this Watchman saw, some understand thus; that there was but one Chariot drawn
by an Ass and a Camel, and therefore called a Chariot of Asses, and a Chariot
of Camels, and two horsemen riding thereon; which they say, represen^ed Cyrus
and Darius. But in our Translation it seems to be clearly said, That he saw
three Chariots, one drawn by Horses, whereon two horsemen rode, (besides those
that were in the Chariot) or which was guided, or accompanied with a couple of
horsemen; and the other two were drawn, the o^e by Asses, the other by Camels.
And some add too, That by the couple of horsemen that accompanied the first
Chariot, is meant two troops of horsemen. However, this which he saw was
doubtless the Armies of the Medes and Persians, that were under the Command of
Cyrus and Darius, to invade Babylon; and wherein there were a multitude of
Horses, and Chariots, and Asses, and Camels, partly for military service, and
partly for the carriage of their baggage, and all manner of Provisions for
their Army, which must needs be exceeding great, both in regard of the many
desert places they were to march through, and the uncertain length of the siege
of Babylon, which was so strong a City, the main thing they had in design.

And he hearkened diligently with much heed.] That is, The Watchman before
mentioned, Ver. 6. proceeded to look about, and to hearken with all possible
diligence, to see if he could discover any thing more, and that he might fully
inform himself concerning that which he saw, as which way they bent their
course, and what they intended to do. And considering that this Watchman did
represent Gods Prophet, in his making known the destruction that was to come
upon Babylon; hereby is employed, how solicitously careful he was, fully to
inform the people of all that God was pleased to reveal to him.

Ver. 8. And he cried, A Lion, etc.] That is, The Watchman before mentioned,
perceiving the military forces approaching to Babylon, cried out, Behold it is
a Lion; And this is commonly thought to be meant of Cyrus, or Darius, who for
his fierceness is compared to a Lion; as also Jer. 50.44. Behold, he shall come
up like a lion. But now the best of our Interpreters do read these words as it
is in the margin of our Bibles; And he cried as a Lion: and the meaning they
say is, That being frighted with the sight of such a potent enemy, ready to
break in upon Babylon, he cried out with an exceeding loud voice, like the
roaring of a Lion; thereby as it were to waken the sleepy Babylonians, and to
make them sensible of the danger they were in; that so they might presently
betake themselves to their Arms. Now the words that he spoke with such a loud
voice, are those that follow; My Lord, I stand continually upon the Watchtower
in the day time, and I am set in my ward whole nights. And he began with making
this profession of his constant vigilance and faithful discharge of his trust,
either to the Prophet that had set him in his Watchtower, or else to the Lord,
who had appointed Isaiah to do so (See the Note before, ver. 6.) that he might
the better clear himself from being any way guilty of neglect, if there came
any danger to the place where he was set to watch. And how this also did imply
the diligence and faithfulness of the Prophet, see in the foregoing Note.

Ver. 9. And behold here comes a Chariot of men, etc.] That is, a Chariot or
Chariots (taking the word collectively) wherein men use to ride; not a Chariot
or Wagon used only for carriage. Here the Watchman before mentioned, proceeds
further to tell what he had discovered, ( ver. 6.) concerning forces that were
marching against Babylon. Only some conceive that he speaks here, as if he
desired to make known (the more fully to set forth the certainty of Babylons
ruin) that the forces which he had before descried a far off, were, even
whilst he was speaking those few foregoing words to the Lord, drawn so high,
that they were now, as it were breaking in upon Babylon. And behold, here
comes a Chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen, see the Note before, ver.
7. Some indeed there are that do understand these Chariots and Horsemen, seen
by the Watchman, of the people of God, flying out of Babylon with bag and
baggage. But it is far more probable, that the Prophet does all along foretell
the Destruction of Babylon.

And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, etc.] Some think that
this is spoken by the Watchman, as giving Babylon for lost, upon the sight
which he had seen. But because of this word (answered) I do rather think, that
it was the man which the Watchman had seen in the Chariot, that spoke this, as
triumphing in the taking of Babylon: or, that it was the Prophet that had by
Gods appointment in his Vision, set this Watchman to watch upon his
Watchtower. But that which seems most probable, is, That it was the Lord
himself that answered this; thereby making known to the Prophet what the
meaning was of all this Vision which he had seen. Babylon is fallen, is fallen:
The redoubling of the word, seems to imply, both that it should be certainly
and suddenly done; as likewise what a matter of wonder and joy it would be to
those that heard of it, and with what attention it was fit to be hearkened to;
and all the graven Images of her gods, even those which Belshazzar had praised,
Dan. 5.4. he has broken unto the ground; to wit, God, or the Enemy which God
had brought upon them, the Mede and Persian; and that either by way of making a
prey of the Gold and Silver whereof they were made, or wherewith they were
adorned; or by way of triumphing over them, as desiring hereby to show, that
they had vanquished, not only the people of Babylon, but their Gods too. Now
this is added, not only to imply what was one great cause of Babylons downfall,
to wit, her horrid Idolatry, and why her ruin was proclaimed with so much joy;
but also as hinting to Gods people, that they should beware that they did not
ruin themselves by the same sin.

Ver. 10. O my threshing, and the Corn of my Floor, etc.] Some take this as
spoken in the name of God to Babylon; and that she is called his threshing,
that is, that which was to be threshed by him, even as corn is threshed in the
Floor (as appears by the second clause, and the corn of my floor; or as it is
in the Hebrew, the Son of my floor, that which comes out of the floor, which is
added to explain the foregoing words) by way, of foretelling how she was to be
beaten and bruised by the Medes and Persians, according to those like
Expressions, Chap. 41.14, 15. Fear not, says the Lord to the men of Israel,
Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing Instrument, having teeth: thou
shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the hills as
Chaff. And Mic. 4.13, Arise and thresh, O Daughter of Zion. Because the ruin
of that mighty Monarchy of Babylon might seem impossible in the Eye of Reason;
therefore the Lord speaks thus to her, O my threshing, etc. to imply, that if
God undertook to do it, (who is with respect hereto in the following words
called, the Lord of Hosts, and the God of Israel) it should soon be done; as if
he had said, O Babylon, as thou have threshed my people, and many other
Nations, so thou shall be now threshed thy self; Or, O Babylon, I will trample
thee under my feet, as the Corn is trodden on in the floor: for in those parts
they used to tread out the Corn by the treading of men and oxen, and the
drawing of Carts over it. And indeed in Jer. 51.33. we find the Destruction of
the Babylonians threatened under the very same figurative Expression, The
Daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor; it is time to thresh her; yet a
little while and the time of her harvest shall come. But yet I conceive it is
the Jews to whom this is here spoken, O my threshing, and the Corn of my floor.
And because the following words are clearly the words of the Prophet, That
which I have heard from the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared
unto you: therefore I conceive this must be taken, as spoken by the Prophet
too; and that in a way of pitying them for the sad Condition wherein they would
be, when they were Captives in Babylon; and yet withal, to cheer them up
against that time of their sore Calamity. O my threshing, and the Corn of my
floor; as if he should have said, O my much pitied Countrymen and Brethren,
that have been so often threshed, as Corn in the floor; and so are like to be
again when you are Captives in Babylon; know for your Comfort that this which I
have said concerning the Destruction of Babylon, shall certainly come to pass;
that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have I
declared unto you. And therefore you may be fully assured of it. Though God may
thresh you for a time by wicked men that shall tyrannize over you, purposely to
purge you from your straw and chaff, to cut off the wicked from amongst you,
and to cleanse you from your sins; yet the time shall come, when Babylon shall
be utterly destroyed, as it has been foretold. And it is a clear discovery of
Gods Love, that he is pleased thus beforehand to reveal this to you. Some, I
know, would have it, that the Prophet calls the Jews his threshing, only
because he had foretold how sorely they should be afflicted in Babylon;
according to that, Jer. 1.10. See, I have this day set thee over the Nations,
and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, etc. But
I think that which is before said, is sufficient for the satisfying of that
Scruple.

Ver. 11. The burden, etc.] See the Notes Chap. 13.1. and 2 Kings 9.25. of
Dumah, that is, the Inhabitants of Dumah. But now what place this Dumah was,
against which this burdensome prophecy was denounced, it is hard to determine.
Many hold that by Dumah here, is meant Idumea: As, say they, Aram, in a shorter
way of speech, is called Ram, 1 Chronicles. 2.9. and so likewise Abram, See the
Note, Job 32.2. so here Idumea is called Dumah; which may seem the more
probable, because in the following words wherein the Prophet begins to relate
the burdensome Vision which he had seen concerning Dumah, there is mention made
of Seir, which was in the Country of the Edomites, see the Notes, Genesis 32.3.
and Deuteronomy. 2.4. But now because in Genesis 25.14. we find, that one of the Sons of
Ishmael was called Dumah; and it is well known, that Ishmaels posterity seated
themselves in Arabia; therefore many of our best Expositors are of opinion,
that there was some part of Arabia that was called Dumah, after the name of the
Son of Ishmael; and that it was these Arabians, the posterity of Ishmael
inhabiting this Country of Dumah, against whom Isaiah did here prophecy. And
whereas it may be objected against this, with great show of Reason, That v. 13.
there follows another Prophecy particularly directed against Arabia. To this
they answer, That that might be against the Arabians inhabiting about Kedar;
and this against those that dwelt about Dumah. But whether it were the
Ishmaelites of Arab^a, or the Ed^mites, that are here meant (which last seems
to me most probable, because of the mention that is here made of Seir) the
reason why God was pleased by the Prophet to foretell the Jews these Judgments
that were to come upon these foreign Nations, may seem to be, That they might
hereby be assured beforehand, that those great charges, and overturnings that
were shortly to come upon all the Countries about them, were ordered and
appointed by Divine Providence; and perhaps also that when troubles came upon
themselves, they might not think, as they were apt to do, of flying to Dumah,
or elsewere, to secure themselves.

He calls, etc.] Here begins the Prophet's burdensome Vision against Dumah,
He calls to me out of Seir; as if he should have said, I hear the voice of
one calling to me out of Seir. And the most Expositors take these to be the
words of the Prophet, relating what he had heard in his Vision concerning
Dumah, as before he had related what had been revealed to him concerning
Babylon. But because these two short Prophecies concerning Dumah and Arabia
might well be revealed to him at the same time with that which he has before
related concerning Babylon, I see not why this may not be added, as in ralation
to that which went before, ver. 16. namely, as the words of that Watchman, whom
in his Vision God had appointed the Prophet to set in a Watchtower, who having
related before what he had seen concerning Babylon, does now also tell, that he
also heard one call to him out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman,
what of the night? Only indeed what is meant hereby (whether we take them as
spoken to the Prophet, or as spoken to that Watchman, or to any other) is very
questionable. The opinions of Expositors herein are very different and many; I
will only mention those that seem most probable. They that hold the
Ishmaelites, the inhabitants of Dumah, to be the persons against whom the
Judgment here threatened is denounced, can give no other reason why the Prophet,
or the Watchman (in the Prophets Vision) should say, That one called to him out
of Seir, but only this, that the Edomites are mentioned as making this enquiry,
either as a people ready armed and prepared to go out upon a design of invading
or surprising Dumah, and therefore longing for break of day, that they might be
upon their march; or else, because being near neighbors to these Ishmaelites
of Dumah, they were afraid of being involved in the same misery together with
them, and so were eagerly inquisitive to know what the Watchman had in the
night descried. But now if by the inhabitants of Dumah, the Edomites be meant,
then there can be no question made, why their miseries should be foretold by
the Prophet's or Watchman's relating what one said that called to him out of
Seir, and what he answered him. And indeed this makes me the more inclinable to
think, that it is the Idumeans that are here meant by the inhabitants of Dumah.
Only still it is questionable what was intended by these words he heard,
Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? Some hold, that this
was spoken to the Prophet himself, as one of the Jews Spiritual Watchmen, and
that Ironically, the words being redoubled to imply the greater derision,
Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the Night? As if they should
have said, Thou that professest thy self to be a Watchman, appointed by God to
look out from thy Watchtower, and foresee the evils that are to come upon us
and other Nations, what say thou of that night of great tribulation and
distress which thou, and other thy Fellow-Prophets, have often told us was
coming upon us? You have often threatened us with a dismal night of darkress and
calamity that should befall us, and yet we on the contrary do still enjoy a fair
Sun-shining day of Peace and Prosperity, and so have done ever since we cast
off the yoke of your King Joram, and have had a King of our own; (See the Note,
2 Kin. 8.20.) And therefore what say thou now? Have thou any farther tidings
of this night that is to come upon us? Again others hold, that this is that
which the Edomites said to the Watchman, whom the Prophet in his Vision had set
upon a Watchtower; and that hereby is represented in what continual perplexity
and fear they were, by reason of the enemies that were wasting their Country,
or were ready to break in upon them; for this which this Watchman relates as
spoken to him, is to set forth how the Edomites were continally calling and
crying thus to their Watchmen, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of
the night? That is, What have you seen concerning this Night? Has the enemy
attempted any thing against us? Or are they ready to assault us? Are we in a
better or a worse condition than we were? Or, What time of the night is it? Or,
as if they had said, fearing the enemy would by night break in upon them, When
will it be morning? Or, When will the morning of our deliverance come? Shall
the Enemy always thus make havoc in our land? Yea, some understand it, as the
cry of the Edomites being now carried away Captives by the Assyrians: Watchman,
what of the night? That is, When will our Captivity come to an end? Is there no
Daylight appearing? no hope of comfort? As for this redoubling of these words,
Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? I conceive that this
is done, Either, 1. after the custom of those that call to them that stand on
some high place far above, who are wont to repeat the questions they propound
to them, for fear at first they were not heard. Or, 2. to imply, That the
Inhabitants of Dumah, by reason of their great anxiety and terrors, should be
continually wearying the Watchmen with this question, sometimes one of them,
sometimes another; or that they should run up and down to make this enquiry of
them. Or, 3. the better to express their exceeding great fear and desire to be
satisfied of that, concerning which they enquired. And indeed this last
Exposition, that makes this enquiry of the Inhabitants of Dumah, to be an
expression of the great terror and fear they were in because of the enemy, I
judge most probable.

Ver. 12. The Watchman said, etc.] That is, The Prophet himself, or the
Watchman that in his Vision he had set in a Watchtower: See the Note above,
ver. 16. as likewise the foregoing Note; for upon the understanding of the
Question there propounded, Watchman, What of the Night? Watchman, What of the
Night? does the understanding of the Answer here returned much depend, The
watchman said, The morning comes, and also the Night, etc. They that
understand that as a scoffing Question propounded by the Edomites to the
Prophet, by way of deriding him, because he, and the other Prophets of Israel
had often foretold that there was a night of great tribulation and distress
coming upon the Edomites; whereas on the contrary they had enjoyed a fair
Sunshining day of Peace and Prosperity, ever since they had cast off the yoke
of Judah, a^ was foretold, Genesis 27.42. do accordingly understand this as the
Prophet's answer to them, The morning comes, and also the night; as if he
should have said, Look as there is a succession of night after day, first the
Morning comes, and then after that the Night comes also; so it will be with
you. It is true indeed that you have had a fair day of peace and prosperity;
but know withal, that now there is a dismal night of darkness and misery, which
as surely as the Night succeeds the Morning, shall shortly come upon you, to
wit, by the Assyrians that shall under the conduct of Sennacherib invade your
land; (for this was prophesied, say they, before that King brake into Judea, at
which time he also invaded the other neighboring Countries.) If ye will
enquire, enquire ye: return, come. That is, If ye will enquire of me concerning
the purpose of God toward you, do it seriously, and not in a flouting way:
Return from your evil ways, come and join your selves to us, God's peculiar
people. But now they that take the Question in the foregoing verse, Watchman,
what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? to be spoken to the Watchman
whom the Prophet in his Vision had set in his Watchtower, and that as a
representation of suchlike questions often propounded by the Ishmaelites or
Edomites, by reason of their continual fear of their enemies, do accordingly
thus understand the answer here returned by the Watchman, The morning comes,
and also the night; as if he had said, The morning indeed begins to dawn; but
what advantage will this be to you? Together with the morning, there will be
still a dark night of fear, and sorrow, and misery upon you: Or, you are still
wishing, Oh, that it were morning, hoping then to be rid of your fears: But
alas, you deceive your selves in this; your miseries are not like to be for a
day, but of long continuance. After the break of day has put an end to this
night, another night will come, and so it will be successively; and if you be
not undone this night, it may be you will the next; both by night and by day
you will still be in danger. If ye will enquire, enquire ye; that is, if you
will come to enquire of me day after day, and night after night, you may; but I
shall give you still the same answer: The same fears that do now perplex you,
will still be upon you. Return, come; that is, Go away, and come again to me as
often as you will, you will but lose your labor, I shall still say the same
thing, and shall be able to give you no comfort at all. Yet these last words
may be understood, as is before said, as an exhortation to Repentance, If ye
will enquire, enquire ye, that is, enquire of that which may be for your good;
as if he should have said, These fears and questions of yours are vain and to
no purpose; If you will enquire, let it be how you may pacify God's
displeasure against you: Return, come; That is, return to God by Repentance,
and join your selves to his people.

Ver. 13. The burden upon Arabia.] That is, The burdensome Vision which Isaiah
saw concerning the heavy destruction that was to come upon the Arabians. See
the Notes, Chap. 13.1. and 2 Kin. 9.25. And it may be meant either of Arabia in
general, whereof some think Dumah was a part; see the Note before, ver. 11. Or
else of that part of it which was possessed by the Kedarens, mentioned after
ver. 16. and that seem to have inhabited Arabia the desert or the rocky. See
chap. 12.11.

In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye traveling companies of Dedanim.]
It is most probable that these Dedanim were a people descended from Dedan, a
Grandchild of Abraham's by Ke^urah, Genesis 25.3. And that he speaks of the
traveling companies of Dedanim, because these Arabians used to travel in a way
of merchandising or otherwise, in great companies together; see Genesis 37.25. and
Job 6.19. However the meaning is, that for fear of the Assyrians breaking in
upon their Country, these Arabians should be glad to flee into woods and
forests, there to hide and secure themselves.

Ver. 14. The inhabitants of the land of Tema, etc.] A place in Arabia, so
called, as is generally thought, from Tema, one of the Princes of the
Ishmaelites, Genesis 25.15. brought water to him that was thirsty; that is, to the
Dedanims that inhabited some other part of Arabia, and that fled at that time
from the Assyrians; and therefore it follows, They prevented with their bread
him that fled; that is, of their own accord, without being sent to, they
brought them provision for their support; for by their bread may be meant,
either the bread of the Inhabitants of Tema, which they brought out of their
store for the relief of these their distressed Neighbors and Countrymen; or
such bread, such provision, as was necessary for such poor creatures, and was
indeed due to them in their distress. This may be read indeed, as it is in the
Margin of our Bibles, O ye inhabitants of Tema, bring ye water to him that is
thirsty, prevent with your bread him that flees; and so it may be taken,
either as spoken by God, exhorting the Inhabitants of Tema to relieve their
poor brethren; or as the words of the Arabians, that were fled from the
Assyrians, begging relief of those that dwelt thereabouts. But however, the
drift of the Prophet here is to foretell, into what extreme poverty the Arabians
should be brought by the invasion of the Assyrians; to wit, that having neither
bread nor water, either because they were forced to flee in such a fright, that
they could not stay to take any provision along with them, or because of the
desert places whereinto they fled, they must needs have perished with hunger
and thirst, (which was most like to afflict them in those hot and dry deserts)
had they not been relieved by their brethren. And if it were Arabia Petraea, as
is most commonly thought, that was invaded by the Assyrians, and that the
people that were driven from thence, did flee into Arabia the Desert, even this
circumstance is observable, that they were put upon being relieved by the
Inhabitants of that barren Country, that were themselves very poor and beggarly.

Ver. 15. For they fled from the swords, etc,] That is, For fear of the Swords
of the Assyrians.

Ver. 16. For thus has the Lord said unto me, etc.] Lest that which the
Prophet had foretold concerning the destruction of the Arabians should be
questioned, because they were such a numerous, strong and warlike people,
therefore is this added, that he spoke nothing but what God had revealed to
him. Within a year, to wit, after the imparting of this Prophecy to you,
according to the years of an hireling; See the Note before, Chap. 16.14. And
all the glory of Kedar shall fail, that is, of the Kedarens, a people descended
from Kedar, Ishmael's Son, that had seated themselves in some part of Arabia
Petraea, as that place seems to imply, Chap. 42.11. Let the wilderness and the
Cities thereof, the Villages that Kedar does inhabit; let the inhabitants of
the rock sing: But see also the Notes, Psalm. 120.5. and Cant. 1.5. And by the
failing of their glory is meant, that destruction of the flower of their
Nation, and the impairing of their huge multitudes by the slaughter which the
Assyrians should make amongst them. And indeed by the express mention that is
here made of the time when these calamities should come upon them, to wit,
mithin a year, it is most clear, that it must be understood of their being
destroyed by Sennacherib, at the same time when he invaded Judea, about the
twelfth or thirteenth year of Hezekiah. For the destruction that was brought
upon them by the Babylonians, whereof Jeremy speaks, Jer. 48.28. was above an
hundred years after the time of the Prophet Isaiah.

Ver. 17. And the residue of the number of Archers, the mighty men of the
children of Kedar, shall be diminished.] Archers are only mentioned, because
the Kedarens used and excelled most in this kind of Arms, being trained up it
seems from the first original of their Nation, in this way of fighting; because
it is expressly noted of Ishmael, their Progenitor, that He became an Archer,
Genesis 21.20. But the meaning of the place is, That the remainder of their men of
war, even all that were any way fit for any Military Service, should be very
small; there should be but a few left of them. Yet some think that this
expression, The residue shall be diminished, does import somewhat more, to wit,
that those few of their men of War that should be left after their first
overthrow, should be diminished more and more under the Tyranny of the
Assyrians, and other Calamities that should befall them.

CHAP. XXII.
VERSE 1. THE Burden, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 13.1. and 2 Kin. 9.25. Of the
valley of Vision; that is, of the Land of Judea, say some, or of the City
Jerusalem, say others. I think both are intended. For though the miseries here
foretold seem chiefly to be directed against Jerusalem; yet the threatening of
any calamity, that was coming upon Jerusalem, must needs be a burden to the
whole land, because they so much relied upon this, That God's Sanctuary there,
would be a Sanctuary to them all; and so by foretelling her misery, the
confidence of the whole Land herein must needs be sorely shaken. Judea might be
called a Valley, because it was compassed about with high Mountains; and so
might Jerusalem too. For though the Temple, and a chief part of the City, stood
on a Hill, see the Note, Psalm. 78.1. yet the City it self stood on a Plain, and
was compassed about with high Hills, Psalm. 125.2. As the mountains are round
about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people: and is therefore
expressly called a Valley, Jer. 21.13. Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant
of the Valley, and rock of the Plain. And a valley of Vision, both of them
might be called, Jerusalem especially, because God did, as it were, visibly
manifest himself to his people in his Temple there; and because of the many and
frequent Revelations and Visions, whereby God did there make known his Will to
his Prophets, who were thence called Seers, 1 Samuel 9.9. And some think
likewise, that there might be some allusion herein to the name of that City
Jerusalem, as signifying a place where God sees, or for which God will
provide, see the Note, Genesis 22.14. I know some add to this, that Judea or
Jerusalem is called a Valley, because this State was to be brought down from a
great height of prosperity into a very poor and low condition. But whether this
was intended or no, is very questionable. Rather it may be thought, that in
this title, The valley of Vision, there is covertly hinted a strange
contrariety betwixt this and other Valleys, in that other Valleys are the
darker, at least not so lightsome, because overshadowed by the Mountains about
them; whereas there was more light in this Valley than in other places, because
of the light of God's word, that shined there so brightly amongst the people.
And withal hereby might be implied, That this great privilege wherein they were
wont to glory, of having so many Prophets, and so much light of God's Word,
would not secure them from the judgments of God, but rather hasten them;
because they made no better use of this mercy, but stumbled so basely, even in
this Valley of Vision. But now whether this following burdensome Prophecy be to
be understood of the taking and sacking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, or of
the distress it was brought into by Sennacherib the Assyrian, in the days of
Hezekiah, it is very hard to determine. The most Expositors by far do
understand it of the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians. And indeed,
that which is here foretold from ver. 2. to ver. 8. does import far more
dreadful miseries that should befall Judea and Jerusalem too, than what they
endured by the invasion of Sennacherib; as we may see by that which is said
ver. 2. of her slain men's not being slain with the Sword in battle; and ver. 3.
of the flight of her Princes, and the captivity of all her people; and ver. 4.
of the desperateness of her condition, incapable of any comfort; and ver. 5. of
the breaking down of her walls, etc. all which was punctually fulfilled when
Jerusalem was laid in the dust by the Babylonians, and not when Jerusalem was
besieged by the Assyrians. But now on the other side, many of our best
Expositors do judge it most likely, that it is the distress and destruction
that befell the Jewish State and Jerusalem in particular, by the Invasion of
Sennacherib in the days of Hezekiah, that is here intended. And true it is,
that what is added from the 8th verse, and so forward, does so fully agree with
that which was done by Hezekiah, his Princes and people, for the defense of
Jerusalem against Sennacherib's Army, 2 Chronicles. 32.1, 2, 3, etc. that it cannot
well be questioned, but that our Prophet speaks there of that very time. The
conclusion therefore is, that I judge it most probable, that in this burdensome
Prophecy concerning The Valley of Vision, the Prophet does jointly speak both
of the sad condition Judea and Jerusalem were brought into by the invasion of
Sennacherib, and also of that utter ruin and desolation that was at last
brought upon them by Nebuchadnezzar. But now whether this was prophesied before
Sennacherib invaded Judea, and so that which is said ver. 9, ^^, etc.
concerning the preparations made for the defense of Jerusalem, is spoken of as
done already, only to imply how certainly it should be done: Or whether it was
prophesied after the invasion of the Assyrians, and so it be mentioned here, as
some think, only to show how just it would be with God utterly to destroy them
by the Babylonians, because the calamities they had formerly undergone by the
Assyrians, had done so little good amongst them. This I confess is still very
questionable.

What aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the house-tops?] To wit,
To see the Enemy lying in siege about Jerusalem; or rather, as flying thither
in a great fright to save or hide your selves from the enemy? But for this
flying to the house tops, see further in the Note before, Chap. 15.3. It is
clearly a Prophetical representation of some great distress the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem should be brought into; as if it had been said, What is the matter,
that instead of standing upon your guards to resist your enemies, you are all
fled to the house-tops? What is become of your former security and confidence,
when you made so light of all the threatenings of God's Prophets? But what the
distress is that is here intended, see the foregoing Note.

Ver. 2. Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous City, a joyous City, etc.]
This may be referred to the foregoing verse, and so may be understood as if it
had been said, Thou that art a City so full of people, and by reason hereof so
full of noise and tumult, stirring, and busling, and running up and down about
your several businesses and occasions; and withal a joyous City, secure and
fearless, and therefore full of Mirth and Jollity: How comes it to pass, that
having such multitudes to resist an enemy, yet ye are now fled all to the
house-tops, as it was there said, ver. 1? Does not this clearly show, that God
has taken away all courage from you? Or it may be referred to that which
follows, Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous City, a joyous City; That
is, Thou that were so, thou that were so fearless and full of all kind of
rejoicing, behold how thy condition is suddenly changed, Thy slain men are not
slain with the sword, nor ^ead in battle; to wit, as valiant men should be. And
they that conceive, that it is the besieging of Jerusalem by Sennacherib, that
is here intended, do accordingly understand this of the peoples being slain and
struck dead, as it were, with very affrightment and fear. But they that think
it is meant of the taking and sacking of Jerusalem (which seems most probable)
by the Chaldeans, do understand it thus, That being shut up within the walls,
and not daring to go forth against the enemy, they died there with Famine and
Pestilence; See the Note, 2 Kin. 25.3. Or else that, as is expressed in the
following verse, they fled basely out of the City, and so were taken and slain,
2 Kin. 25.4, 5, 6.

Ver. 3. All thy Rulers are fled together, etc.] As if he had said, Even thy
Princes, that should have hazarded themselves for the defense of thy people,
are fled for fear. And those that think the Prophet is speaking here of the
Assyrians invading the Land in the days of Hezekiah, do understand this of the
Captains and Rulers fleeing from all parts of the land, into other neighboring
Countries, or else to Jerusalem, there to shelter themselves. And accordingly
they also expound that which follows, They are bound by the Archers, that is,
They are surprised by the Archers, and bound and carried away prisoners; Or
they are so bound up with terror and fear of the Archers, that they dare not
stand to defend themselves: All that are found in thee are bound together, That
is, All thy Inhabitants, Princes as well as the ordinary people, are fettered
with fear, see the Note, Psalm. 76.5. Or they are here and there surprised and
imprisoned together: Which bave fled from far, That is, which are fled from the
remotest parts of the Country to sheltter themselves in Jerusalem, or
elsewhere. But now those that conceive the Prophet speaks here of the
calamities that were to be brought upon Jerusalem by the Babylonians, do
accordingly hold, that this, All thy Rulers are fled together, is meant, either
of that expedition of Nebuchadnezzar against Jerusalem, when Jehoiachim, and
his Princes and people were in great numbers carried away captive into Babylon,
2 Kin. 24.12, etc. Or else of that which is expressly recorded concerning that
last Siege, when Jerusalem was taken and destroyed by him, to wit, that
Zedekiah with many of his Princes and men of war did flee secretly out of the
City, even as far as the Plains of Jericho, see the Note, 2 Kin. 25.4, etc. and
were there taken, and either slain or carried into captivity; and therefore it
follows, They are bound by the Archers, that is, the Babylonian Soldiers, that
pursued and surprised them. And then the last words, I conceive, are meant of
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and those that were fled thither for refuge, All
that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from far. And indeed
I see not how the miseries here foretold can suit solely with that which
Jerusalem endured, when it was only straightened and affrighted by Sennacherib's
Army, as will be more evident in that which follows.

Ver. 4. Therefore said I, etc.] Some think this is spoken as in the person of
the land of Judea. But it is rather the Prophet that speaks of himself; and
that not only the better hereby to set forth the extreme miseries that were
coming upon Judea and Jerusalem, (as before in the case of the Moabites; see
the Notes, Chap. 15.5. and 16.11.) but also because he was indeed exceedingly
grieved for the doleful condition whereinto he foresaw the Church and People of
God would be brought; and that he might the more effectually move the Jews to
repent of their wickedness, which otherwise would bring such dreadful Judgments
upon them. Look away from me; as if he had said, Be gone, let me alone, I will
weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
daughter of my people; that is, my poor Countrymen, that are as dear to me, or
as dear to God, as a Daughter to her Father. See the Note also Chap. 1.8. It is
all one in effect, as if he had said, The condition of my people is desperate,
there is no place for comfort. Now all this seems still to import a more
desperate and comfortless condition, than that whereinto God's people were
brought by Sennacherib's Army, in the days of Hezekiah.

Ver. 5 For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity,
etc.] See the Notes 2 Kin. 19.3. By the Lord God of Hosts, see the Notes, Chap.
10.5, 6. In the valley of Vision, see the Note above, ver. 1. Breaking down the
walls, that is, the enemies breaking down the walls of Cities and houses. (And
they that understand this of the havoc made by Sennacheribs Army in the days
of Hezekiah, do apply it to the fenced Cities, which he took in the land of
Judah, before he came to Jerusalem, 2 Kin. 18.13. But others hold, that it is
chiefly meant of Nebuchadnezzars storming Jerusalem.) And of crying to the
mountains, that is, the shouting of enemies storming and sacking the City, that
shall ring even to the Mountains; or the shrieking of the poor Jews, as they
ran with great outcries to hide themselves in the Mountains; or that shall be
so loud, that they shall be heard even to the neighbor Mountains. Yea, some
understand this of men, who being in a desperate condition, shall cry to the
Mountains to fall on them, and to cover them, as it is expressed by our
Savior, Luke 23.30.

Ver. 6. And Elam bare the quiver, etc.] Here some of the Nations are
mentioned, that should be employed either by the Assyrians or Babylonians, in
their Expedition against Judea or Jerusalem. Elam bare the quiver; That is, the
Persians were there, (see the Note, Chap. 21.2.) who were especially famous in
those times for Archery; whence is that, Jer. 49.35. Behold, I will break the
bow of Elam, the chief of their might: (And observable it is, that this people
that did now serve, perhaps, the Babylonians against the Jews, were afterward
employed by Cyrus to destroy Babylon, Chap. 21.2.) As for that which is added,
With chariots of men, and horsemen, see the Notes, Chap. 21.7, 9. And Kir
uncovered the shield; That is, The men of Kir, the Medes, were also there with
their glittering shields: For Kir was a City situate in Media, see 2 Kin.
16.9. Amos 1.5. and the Notes before, Chap. 15.1. These it seems were as much
renowned for fighting with Sword and Target, as the Persians were for Archery.
And because they were wont to wrap up their Shields, when they used them not,
in cases or coverings, to keep them from dust and rust, which they pulled off
when they were to go forth to War, thence is this expression of the men of
Kir's uncovering their shields.

Ver. 7. And it shall come to pass, that thy choicest valleys, etc.] As if it
had been said, O thou Valley of vision, thy richest and pleasantest Valleys,
even those wherein happily thou had thy Gardens and Orchards, thine
Oliveyards and Vineyards, shall be full of chariots, lying in Siege about thee;
And the horsemen shall set themselves in array at the gate; to wit, by way of
blocking up the City, or laying Siege about it, or making ready for an Assault.

Ver. 8. And he discovered the covering of Judah, etc.] As this passage is
rendered in our Translation, it must needs be meant either of God, or the Enemy
that invaded Judea, of whom it is here said, That he discovered the covering of
Judah. And because of that which follows in the sequel of this Chapter, ver.
15. concerning Shebna, who is commonly thought to have been a chief Officer in
Hezekiah's Court, see the Note 2 Kin. 18.18. it is most probable that
Sennacherib the Assyrian, who besieged Jerusalem in his days, is the enemy here
intended. If we take it as spoken of God, then by his discovering the covering
of Judah, may be meant, either 1. that he would take away their covering from
them, and leave them naked, exposed to utter destruction, (for Prophetically he
speaks of that which was to be, as if it were done already;) and by their
covering may be meant, either that which might well have been a covering to
them, to wit, his own protection, had they not forced him by their wickedness
to withdraw it from them; or else that which they hoped would be a covering and
safeguard to them, as the City Jerusalem, (to which they fled from all parts of
the land to shelter themselves.) Or the Temple, (which they looked upon as an
invincible Sanctuary to them:) Or their Riches, or strong Fortifications, etc.
all which God threatens to strip them of. Or, 2. that he would discover their
covering, that is, he would cause them to discover it, and bring it forth to
light; to wit, by bringing an enemy upon them, that should cause them in all
haste to run to their Armory and Magazine, that had been long shut up, to open
it, and bring forth their Arms and Ammunition, wherein they hoped to secure
themselves from the attempts of their enemies against them. And thus
understanding the words, the following clause may seem to be added, the better
to explain this, And thou did look in that day to the Armor of the house of
the forest. Or, 3. that he had discovered and found out (wherein God may speak
of himself after the manner of men) what the covering of Judah was; that is,
what it was wherein they trusted, and wherewith they hoped to cover themselves
from this storm that was coming upon them, namely, their own strength, and the
outward means they would with all diligence use to oppose their enemies: And
this indeed we see is largely set forth in this and the following verses. But
now if we understand these words as spoken of the enemy, that he discovered the
covering of Judah; then the meaning must needs be, that he had taken away their
covering from them, to wit, by surprising and beating down, either their strong
holds, in the borders of their land; or the walls and gates, the rampirs and
other outwarks, with which they sought to cover and shelter the City Jerusalem.
And then for the next clause, And thou did look in that day to the armor of
the house of the forest, the drift of that I conceive is clear, to wit, that
when the enemy was marching against Jerusalem, their eye was presently upon the
Armory and Magizine which they had in that City; instead of looking to the
Lord, they looked to that as their main help and refuge. And that this was the
house of the forest, which Solomon built, is most probable, see the Note 1 Kin.
7.2. yet see the Note also Cant. 4.4. And however we must still remember, that
it is not the using of outward means for their defense, that is here condemned;
but their relying principally upon this, with neglect of God. But the great
question still is, What that day was, which the Prophet here intended, And thou
did look in that day to the armor of the house of the forest? To which I
answer, that most Expositors hold, that both here and all along in the
following verses, the Prophet speaks as of things done already; but only
intends thereby how certainly they would thus do, when the day of trouble and
treading down, threatened before, ver. 5. should by their enemies be brought
upon them. And those that understand hereby that woeful day, when Jerusalem
should be taken and sacked by the Babylonians, do add further, that the Prophet
does purposely express the busy buffing they should then make for the defense
of their City, after the same way that was taken in the days of Hezekiah to
defend it against Sennacherib's Army; purposely to intimate, that though they
would seem herein to imitate that which Hezekiah had done, 2 Chronicles. 32.2, 3,
etc. yet there would be in them nothing of that Faith and Piety, which was
found in Hezekiah, when he did so. But for the fuller resolving of this
Question, see the Note before, ver. 1.

Ver. 9. Ye have seen also the breaches of the City of David, that they are
many, etc.] That is, Hearing of your enemies marching against you, ye took a
view of your walls, and so took notice of the many breaches therein, which had
not been minded in times of Peace, that ye might repair them: yea, and that too
in the walls of the inner City, (as fearing the enemy might break in thither)
which because it was long since taken by David from the Jebusites, was
therefore more peculiarly called the City of David, see the Note, 2 Samuel 5.7.
And indeed of Hezekiah it is said, that when he feared that Sennacherib would
come and besiege Jerusalem, he built up all the wall that was broken, 2 Chronicles.
32.5. And that he gathered together the waters of the lower pool; to wit, both
that the enemies Army might be distressed for want of water, and that they in
the City might all the time of the Siege be furnished with water for all
occasions, see the Notes, Chap. 7.3. 2 Kin. 20.20. 2 Chronicles. 32.3, 4. and Neh.
3.16. But see the foregoing Note, ver. 8.

Ver. 10. And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, etc.] That is, say some,
the men, or the inhabitants of the houses, to wit, that they might by an equal
proportion appoint a set number of those that were fit to bear Arms, for the
several services of the Siege, for watching and warding, and for being upon the
Guards, and such like: Or that they might know what quantity of bread and other
provisions would be requisite against the Siege, in case they should be brought
to give out allowances to the several Families therein. But rather it is meant
of the houses themselves, that they took a strict account of the houses in the
Suburbs, upon and about the walls, that there might be none left standing that
might be advantageous to the Enemy to shelter themselves in, nor any way out of
which the Inhabitants might have any secret correspondence with them, or that
might be any way a hinderance to their repairing of the Walls, or to the
defense of the City; which the following words seem to imply, And the houses
have ye broken down to fortify the wall; That is, such houses as were not fit
to stand, ye pulled down, that there might be room for such companies of
Soldiers, as were to be in a readiness for the defense of the walls; and that
with the Stone and Timber of those they pulled down, the City-walls might be
repaired.

Ver. 11. Ye made also a ditch between the two walls, for the water of the old
pool, etc.] We read of two walls which Jerusalem had, Jer. 39.4. and which were
fortified by Hezekiah, for the better defense of that City against Sennacherib,
2 Chronicles. 32.5. Now between these two walls it is said they made a ditch, or a
pond, as a receptacle for the water of the old pool, called elsewhere the upper
pool, see the Note, Chap. 7.3. as likewise the foregoing Notes, ver. 8, 9. But
ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that
fashioned it long ago; That is, whilst ye were thus eagerly intent upon the
using of all outward means for the securing of your City, ye never minded nor
looked after God, who had long ago made it an holy City, an habitation for
himself to dwell in, and who had by his Providence raised it to that glorious
condition, wherein then it stood; ye took no care by calling upon him, and by
turning from your evil ways, to engage him to protect and defend your City, who
being the Maker thereof, would certainly have preserved the work of his own
hands, if ye had sought to him in a right manner. See the Note, 2 Kin. 19.25.
Some, I know, by the Maker thereof, etc. understand the Maker of the Pools and
Waterworks beforementioned, which God had provided for them: And others
understand it of the Lord, as the Author of those judgments, which according to
what he had determined long ago, were now to come upon them. But the former
Exposition I conceive is the best. Only, if we refer this to the times when
they made such preparations to defend Jerusalem against Sennacherib's Army, it
must be understood of the generality of the Princes and people, who might be
regardless enough of God, and rely wholly upon outward defenses, though
Hezekiah and other the faithful Servants of God, did chiefly look to God, as
their only sure refuge. And yet even of Hezekiah himself it might be truly
said, that his Faith was exceedingly shaken, when by his Ambassadors he begged
peace of Sennacherib upon such base terms, and pillaged the House of God, that
he might pacify him, 2 Kin. 18.14, 16.

Ver. 12. And in that day, etc.] See the foregoing Notes, ver. 1. and ver. 8,
9. did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning; to wit, by his
Prophet, who gave them warning of the Judgments that were coming upon them, and
invited them to Repentance, for the prevention of those evils; and likewise by
the Judgments themselves which God had brought upon them, and upon their
Brethren of the ten Tribes. And because the Jews were wont by public
Proclamation to invite the People to Fasting and Mourning, as it is said of
Jehoshaphat, that he proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. it
may well be that there is an Allusion thereto in this expression of the Lord's
calling them to weeping and to mourning. As for the following words, And to
baldness, and to girding with sackcloth, we must know, 1. That by baldness is
Hyperbolically meant bitter and passionate mourning, as when men did in that
case shave their heads, see the Note, Job 1.20. or tear off the hair of their
heads and beards, as it is said Ezra did, Ezr. 9.3. which though it were
forbidden God's people in their mourning for the dead, see the Note, Levit.
19.27. yet in case of public Calamities and Repentance, so that it proceeded
not from Despair and Impatience of Spirit, but from a vehement indignation
against sin, and contrition for sin, it seems to be approved and commanded,
Mic. 1.16. Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children; enlarge thy
baldness as the eagle, for they are gone into captivity from thee.

Ver. 13. And behold, joy and gladness, staying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating
flesh, and drinking wine, etc.] That is, instead of fasting and mourning, they
give up themselves wholly to jollity and feasting; Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die: as if they had said, The life of man is short, and is many
times gone on a sudden; we may perhaps die to morrow; and therefore let us be
merry, and take comfort in what we have whilst we may: Or, rather thus, The
Prophet tells us, that we have not long to live; an enemy will suddenly break
in upon us, that will destroy us all; let us therefore be jovial whilst we may;
and while we are yet alive, let us make a merry day of it. Thus they scoffed at
the threatenings of Gods Prophets. And because the not believing of that which
God has revealed to us concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, does work in
men the same profane security, the Apostle applies these words to them, 1
Cor. 15.32.

Ver. 14. And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of hosts, etc.] See the
Note, Chap. 5.9. Shure^y this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye
die, etc. as if he had said, God has in my hearing pronounced this doom
against you, that his judgments shall follow you all your days, till at last
you are cut off by Death. But see also the Note, 1 Samuel 3.14. in these words,
Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die. The Prophet
seems to upbraid them with that scornful speech of theirs, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall die.

Ver. 15. Thus says the Lord God of hosts, Go, get thee unto this Treasurer,
even unto Shebna, which is over the house.] This is a Prophecy against a
particular person, delivered, as it seems, at the same time with that which
went before, concerning the state of Judea or Jerusalem in general. And because
amongst the Nobles that were sent out by Hezekiah to treat with Sennacherib's
Captains, 2 Kin. 18.18. we find one Shebna mentioned, and likewise Eliakim the
Son of Hilkiah, (of one the Prophet speaks afterward, ver. 20.) therefore most
Expositors do hold, that these were that Shebna and Eliakim, that were
Hezekiahs great Officers, and that accordingly the foregoing Prophecy (some
part of it, at least, if not all) must be understood of the havoc made in
Judea, and the straits whereunto Jerusalem was brought by Sennacheribs Army.
And indeed they that understand the foregoing Prophecy of the taking and
sacking Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, have nothing to answer to this Objection,
but that, either 1. to gain the greater credit to that which the Prophet had
foretold, that was so long after to come to pass, here he foretells that which
within a few years after should be accomplished; Or else, 2ly. That this Shebna
and Eliakim, of whom the Prophet here speaks, were two other of the same name,
that lived in Jerusalem a little before the time of the Babylonians invading
Judea, which is altogether improbable. But if the Prophet speaks here, may some
say, of a Shebna and Eliakim, that were in Hezekiahs Court, why is it said
here, that Shebna was Treasurer, and over the house, that is, Comptroller, or
Lord High Steward of the King, house; whereas in that, 2 Kin. 18.18. it is
said, That Eliakim the Son of Hilkiah was over the household, and Shebna is only
called the Scribe or Secretary? To which may be answered, either that this
Shebna, against whom the Prophet here prophecieth, was not the same Shebna that
is mentioned 2 King. 18.18. (as is there noted) Or else rather, that though
Shebna was Treasurer, and over the house, when Isaiah was appointed to denounce
the following Judgment against him, yet before that time that Sennacheribs Army
came against Jerusalem, he had been by Hezekiah, upon some fair pretense,
removed from the place of being over the house, and put into a place of less
Dignity; to wit, that of being the Scribe or Secretary, and Eliakim advanced to
that place of being Lord Steward of the Kings house; and that this was the
beginning of Shebna's fall. However evident it is, that he was a rotten-hearted
man, altogether unworthy of that great place he held, advanced perhaps thereto
by Ahaz; and not therefore at first to be removed by Hezekiah: for that which
is mentioned in the following verse of his proud providing such a stately
Sepulcher for himself after he was dead, showed him to be one of those that
minded not the threatenings of Gods Prophets, but went on in his ways securely,
when the Land, the City and the whole people, were like to be brought into a
very sad Condition. And therefore I conceive these words, Go, get thee unto
this Treasurer, were spoken in a way of contempt and indignation; as if the
Lord had said, Go, get thee to this wicked wretch, this Treasurer, etc.

Ver. 16. What have thou here, etc?] That is, as some would have it, What have
thou to do here? This place of Honor is no way fit for such a one as thou art.
Or, What have thou here? and whom have thou here? That is, What possession of
Inheritance, or what Kindred, or Allies, have thou here in the Land of Israel,
that thou have hewed thee out a Sepulcher here; to wit, in Jerusalem, or in the
Land of Judea, as he that heweth him out a Sepulcher on high; that is, a lofty
Sepulcher, or a Sepulcher in some conspicuous and eminent place; and that
graveth an habitation for himself in a rock? that is, That builds himself
some strong and stately Palace that shall abide for many Generations, as being
built upon a rock; or, that heweth him out a gallant Tomb in a rock, the house
or habitation wherein he must dwell when he is dead, that it may remain as a
Monument of his Greatness amongst his Posterity for many Ages. He was, it seems
a Foreigner, at least a man of mean and obscure parentage, come up of nothing;
(which may seem the more probable, because in that, 2 Kin. 18.18. where the
three Princes are named, whom Hezekiah sent out to parley with the Assyrian
Captains; the other two have their parentage mentioned, but of Shebna it is
only said, that he was the Scribe) and so by this sharp expostulation, he is
taxed, 1. for his exceeding pride and arrogance, not in that he provided a
Sepulcher for his dead body beforehand, See Matthew. 27.60. but in that being
such a one as he was, he should provide such a Magnificent and Princely
Monument for his dead Corpse; as if he had been of great birth and ancient
descent. And 2ly. for his fond and presumptuous confidence, that he should
certainly live and die in Jerusalem, whereas it should be nothing so; God
having determined, that he should be deposed from his place of Honor, and be
carried into a far Country, where he should die, and be laid up in the earth,
far enough from that glorious Tomb which he had erected for himself, as is more
largely set forth in the following verses.

Ver. 17. Behold, the Lord will carry thee away, etc.] Some would have this
rendered, as it is in the Margin, Behold, the Lord who covered thee with an
excellent covering, and clothed thee gorgeously (which must be understood of
the Robes he wore proper to that place of Honor whereunto God had advanced
him) shall surely turn and toss thee; as it follows in the next verse. But
questionless the Translation in our Bibles is the best, Behold, the Lord will
carry thee away with a mighty Captivity. It is in the Hebrew, with the
Captivity of a man, but thereby is meant a mighty Captivity; and that, say many
Expositors, because men-Captives are commonly used more hardly, and carried
farther away, than those of the weaker Sex are. It is, as if he had said, Thou
make full account to live and die in Jerusalem, but God will certainly send
thee packing into a far Country, and there thou shall end thy days: he will
make thee famous in another manner, than that which thou affectest; and thou
shall not be buried in an ordinary way, but with contempt and disgrace; and
will surely cover thee; that is, he will even overwhelm thee with shame and
confusion. And herein there may be an Allusion to the Custom of Covering the
faces of those that were condemned to die. See the Note Esth. 7.8. And this, no
doubt, with all that which follows in this Prophecy, was in due time
accomplished; but how and when it came to pass, the Scripture does no where
express. Some think that he went out secretly and perfidiously to Sennacherib
upon a design of betraying Jerusalem to him; at which time the Assyrian Army
being miraculously destroyed, Sennacherib in a great rage carried him away with
him. Others conceive that he was carried away by the Babylonians together with
Manasseh. And others say, that he was banished by Hezekiah, or that he went
away of his own accord into Foreign parts, being displaced and cast out of the
Court, and there lived and died miserably. But all these are but Conjectures.

Ver. 18. He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large
Country, etc.] That is, as a ball being thrown with great strength in a large
plain, where there is nothing to stop it, will fly and run very far way; or may
be tossed up and down from one place to another, because the place is very
spacious every way; so the Lord will be sure to send thee far away from the
place of thy present abode, into the Territories of some great King, that has
large Dominions; and there thou shall be driven up and down from place to place
in an afflicted and restless Condition; there shall thou die in a strange land,
not in Jerusalem, where thou have provided thy self such a stately Sepulcher;
And there the Chariots of thy Glory shall be the shame of thy Lords house; that
is, say some, Thy former Glory shall be turned into extreme contempt, which
shall redound much to the shame of thy Lord, whilst it shall be said of him in
his poor and wretched estate, That once he lived as a Prince in Hezekiah's
Court; Or rather, thy rich and glorious Chariots wherein thou now ridest up and
down in great pomp and state, shall then tend to the dishonor of thy Lord, and
of his house too, over which thou art set; in that it shall be spoken of to his
disgrace, that such a vile wretch as he should be so highly advanced, and live
in so great Grandeur in Hezekiah's Court.

Ver. 19. And I will drive thee from thy station, etc.] This is spoken in the
person of God. Though thou think thy self firmly settled in Jerusalem, I,
says the Lord, will drive thee from thence, and from thy state; that is, thy
Office, and place of Dignity, shall he pull thee down, that is the King; yet it
may well be, as many others think, that even this also is meant of God, the
Prophets speaking here of God in the the third person. And for the place from
which Shebna was to be removed, See the Note above, ver. 15.

Ver. 20. And it shall come to pass in that day, etc.] To wit, when thou O
Shebna, shall be removed from thy place in the Court of Judah, that I will call
my servant Eliakim; that is, I will cause Hezekiah to advance him, that he may
in thy place serve me faithfully: and this was done before Rabshakeh summoned
Hezekiah to deliver up Jerusalem to him. See the Note, 2 Kin. 18 18. and the
Note above, ver. 15.

Ver. 21. And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy
girdle, etc.] To wit, the robe and girdle which belonged to thee, as Lord High
Steward of the Kings house. See the Notes Chap. 11.5. and Job 12.18, 21. he
shall be advanced to the place of Honor, which now thou enjoyest; for so this
Expression is explained in the following words, and I will commit thy
Government into his hand. All which was now made known to Shebna, the more
deeply to wound his heart; for though it must needs be sad tidings to such an
ambitious wretch, to hear of his being deposed from so high a dignity, yet it
is like enough, that it added to his vexation, to be told of the man that
should be honored with his place. And it may well be too, as some conceive,
That this Prophecy of Isaiah might hasten both the downfall of the one, and the
advancement of the other, and he shall be a Father to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah; That is, he shall with much Fatherly
Affection and Care govern the people of the land, to wit, as a prime Counselor
under the King, and they shall love and honor him as a Father.

Ver. 22. And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, etc.]
By the house of David is meant the King's Court or Household, see the Note,
Chap. 7.2. And it was commonly so called, because God had so often promised
that the Sovereignty and Kingly Power in that Nation should be settled in the
Family of David; and accordingly, by laying the key of the house of David upon
the shoulder of Eliakim is meant, that he should be made Lord High-Steward, or
Comptroller of the King's Court, and should have the Supreme Power, under the
King, of ordering and disposing all things in his house, and in governing his
Family. Because he that has the just command of the keys in a house, has
power to dispose of all things therein at his pleasure, and no man can come
into the house, or go out, but by his leave, (whence it is that the possession
of houses and the supreme command over Towns and Cities, is usually given unto
men, by the delivering up the keys to them;) therefore even in these times,
they that have chief Charge and Government in the Courts and Houses of Kings,
have usually a Golden Key, as the sign and badg of their Office. And some think
that it was so with Eliakim, at least that he wore the figure of a key made
with embroidered work upon his cloak, and that thence it is said, that the Key
of the house of David should be laid upon his shoulder: But these are mere
conjectures. The true reason why it is said, that this Key of Government should
be laid upon his shoulder, was to signify the great weightiness and burden of
that charge, which was hereby imposed upon him; see the Notes, Chap. 9.6. And
to hint, it may be, the abilities wherewith God had furnished him for so great
a service, that God had given him shoulders fit to bear such a burden. So he
shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open; that
is, he shall have absolute Power for the governing of the Royal Family, and for
the ordering of all things therein: Nothing shall be done without him, nor
shall any man have power to cross or hinder him, in what he will have done. And
herein was Eliakim a type of Christ; whence it is that St. John, clearly in
reference to this place, does set forth the Supreme Power of Christ in and over
the Church in these very terms, Rev. 3.7. He that has the key of David, he
that opens, and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man opens.

Ver. 23. And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, etc.] To wit, As a
nail, which men use to fasten surely in some wall or post, that they may
thereon hang their household Utensils; see the Note, Ezra 9.8. The meaning is,
that God would so settle him in that Office, whereto he was to be advanced,
that he should never be removed from thence, as Shebna should be: As he would
make him constanly just and faithful in his place, that he should no way
deserve to be removed, so he would also secure him from being injuriously or
causelessly thrust out: And he shall be for a glorious Throne to his Fathers
house; That is, he shall be an exceeding great honor to the Tribe of Judah, of
which he is, say some; or rather to all his Kindred and Family, and by his
means they shall live in very great splendour and glory, as great in a manner,
as if they were of the Blood Royal. And this is opposed to that which was
before said of Shebna, ver. 18. that he should be the shame of his Lords house.

Ver. 24. And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his fathers house, the
offspring and the issue, etc.] That is, All his Kindred and Allies, even they
and their Posterity, together with all the Honor and places of Dignity they
enjoy, shall wholly depend upon Eliakim, that nail in a sure place, (as he was
called in the foregoing verse) and they shall willingly acknowledge that all
their glory was derived to them from him. And then the more fully yet to
express how they should all, even to the meanest of them, receive some benefit
by his greatness in the Kings Court, following still the same metaphor, he
adds, all vessels of small quantity: from the vessels of Cups, even to all the
vessels of flagons; (or, as it is in the margin) instruments of viols, that is,
both Cups and Pots of several weights and sizes; and likewise all kind of
musical instruments. And the meaning is, that not only the greater ones in his
Family, that were of most note, and fittest for honorable Employments, should
be preferred and upheld by him; but that all of what rank and condition soever
they were, even to the very Servants of their Families, should receive some
advantage, either in some employment assigned, or some respect given to them,
by reason of their Relation to him, and dependence upon him. Those I know, that
by his Fathers house, do understand more generally the whole Tribe of Levi, do
accordingly expound these words in a larger extent; to wit, That all the
people, rich and poor* should depend upon Eliakim, and willingly submit to him;
and that he should uphold and defend, not the Nobles and Rich, and Great Ones
only, but even the poorest and meanest amongst them, and all that belonged to
them; and that the benefit that should redound to the people by his wise
ordering the Affairs of the Realm, should continue from one Generation to
another; the offspring and the issue. Again others would have the meaning to
be, That all the Officers at Court, even to the meanest of them, should depend
upon him, and be at his disposing, and be under his power and government. But
the former Exposition is clearly the most genuine.

Ver. 25. In that day, says the Lord of Hosts, shall the nail that is fastened
in the sure place, be removed, and be cut down, and fall, etc.] That is,
Shebna, that seems now to all men to be so surely settled in his place, that
there is no likelihood of removing him, even as a nail is nailed and fastened
in a sure place, and is himself most confident of it, as appears by the stately
Sepulcher he has in Jerusalem built for his dead body, ver. 16. even he shall
be thrust out of his Office, that Eliakim may succeed in his place; and the
burden that was upon it shall be cut off, that is, All that had their
dependence upon him, shall sink with him; and all the hopes of his wicked
faction, that rested and relied on him, shall together with him fall to the
ground.

CHAP. XXIII.
VERSE 1. THE Burden of Tire, etc.] See the Notes Chap. 13.1. and 2 King. 9.25.
Tire was a City in Phoenicia, lying upon the midland Sea, yea, in a manner
encompassed with the Sea, as Venice is; and so was a Port and Mart-Town of
greatest note in those times, Ezekiel. 27.3, 4. Say unto Tyrus, O thou that art
situate at the entry of the Sea, which art a Merchant for the people of many
Isles -- Thy borders are in the midst of the Seas. See also the Note Psalm.
45.12. when Canaan was divided by Joshua, this City fell to the lot of Ashur,
Josh. 19.29. and that it was not far from Galilee, is evident, because it is
said, Matthew. 15.21. That Jesus went thence into the Coasts of Tire and Sidon.
But it seems, being a place of exceeding great strength, (and therefore called
in that, Josh. 19.29. the strong City Tire. And in 2 Samuel 24.7. The strong hold
of Tire) The Israelites were afraid to attempt it, and so it continued still in
the possession of the old inhabitants. But now what the Judgment was, wherewith
this great City Tire is here threatened in this burdensome Prophecy, is very
questionable. Some hold it is meant of the great streights whereinto this City
was brought within a short time after, by Salmanasser and Sennacherib the Kings
of Assyria; which seems not to me so probable, at least that this was not all
that was here intended, because the Prophet speaks here expressly of this City's
being laid waste; whereas the utmost that any History reports concerning the
Assyrians attempts against Tire is, That they blocked it up for five years: and
some add too, That the Assyrians were at last overcome in a Sea Fight,
wherewith the Tyrians were exceedingly puffed up. Again others under the
calamity wherewith Tyrus is here threatened, do comprehend the taking, sacking
and destroying of Tire by Alexander the great; of whom indeed it is reported by
several Historians, that after a long and hard siege, he at length filled up
that branch of the Sea, that was betwixt the continent and Tire, that so his
Army might approach her walls, and by this means took it and utterly ruined it.
But it is not, I conceive, very probable that this is intended neither; and
that because ver. 15. of this Chapter there follows a promise, That seventy
years after the ruin here threatened, the Tyrians should recover their liberty
again, which we do not find was ever done after Alexander had destroyed it. And
therefore in the last place, the most of Expositors do understand it of the
desolation that was brought upon this City by Nabuchadnezzar, which indeed
seems most probable* 1. Because in Ezekiel's Prophecy against Tire, which
agrees in many passages with this, it is expressly said, Behold I will bring
upon Tyrus Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, etc. Because the seventy years of
the Syrians Captivity do suit so well with the seventy years of the Jews
Captivity in Babylon. And observable it is, that elsewhere two sins are
particularly mentioned, as the principal cause of the ruin that God here
threatens to bring upon this City, to wit, her excessive Pride in her riches
and great strength. And 2ly. her insulting over Jerusalem, when she was before
destroyed by the same King, see Ezekiel. 26.2. and 28.2. and Joel 3.4. etc.

Howl ye ships of Tarshish, etc.] Figuratively this may be spoken to the ships
themselves; but rather it is meant of those in the ships, Howl ye ships of
Tarshish, that is, mourn and lament bitterly, O ye Seamen and Merchants, that
are still passing in your ships, by way of trading between Tire and Tarshish,
and other foreign parts; and indeed Tarshish is expressly mentioned amongst
those that traded with Tire, Ezekiel. 27.12. but for the ships of Tarshish, see
the Notes 1 King. 10.22. and Psalm. 48.7. for it is laid waste; to wit, Tire and
the Island wherein it stood; and therefore all the Merchandise you left therein
is utterly lost, and the rich trading you had wont to have with that famous
City, is now at an end; so that there is no house, no entering in, that is, No
house to entertain you; no going in, or coming out by way of trading; from the
land of Chittim it is revealed to them, that is, They of the land of Chittim,
who being nearer to Tyrus, did first hear of it, revealed it to those of
Tarshish. And who are meant by those of the land of Chittim, See Numb. 24.24.
Other Expositions I know are given of that last clause; but according to our
Translation, that which I have given, seems the clearest.

Ver. 2. Be still ye inhabitants of the Isle, etc.] Some hold, that Isle is
here collectively put for Islands, and accordingly that it is the inhabitants
of the Islands of the Midland-Sea that are here advised to be still, that is,
to rest quietly in their several places, and not to think of making any more
voyages to Tire, that was utterly destroyed, or to sit down silent mourning
with her, and for her. But they are rather the Inhabitants of Tire, that are
here spoken to, which was an Isle, till Alexander the Great (as Histories
report) joined it to the continent, see the foregoing Notes. Be still ye
inhabitants of the Isle, that is, Boast not so proudly, O ye Tyrians, as you
had wont to do in your great riches, and the invincible strength of your City,
make not your City to ring with your revelling and rioting, as you have used to
do; but rather let the astonishment, horror, and grief that is befallen you,
stop your mouths, and make you sit down in silence, as mourners use to do, See
the Note Job 2.13. Or thu^, Be still ye inhabitants of the Isle; as if he had
said, There shall not be that tumult and noise amongst you, which there has
been, by reason of the multitude of shipping and trading you had formerly
there, because your City being laid desolate, there will be nothing but still
silence there; thou whom the Merchants of Zidon, that pass over the Seas, have
replenished, that is, Who art filled with Merchants and all kind of Merchandise
from beyond the Sea. And Zidon is particularly named, because being a
haven-Town, and near to Tire, and joined in strict League and Confederacy with
Tire (whence it is that in the Scripture they are still joined together, as if
they had been but one it ^e though they had indeed several Kings, Jer. 27.2.)
the Zidonian Merchants were still in greatest number there. The drift of these
last words is to imply, that notwithstanding her great state and riches, she
should be laid waste and desolate. But observable withal it is, that Ezekiel.
26.2. Tyrus is brought in insulting over Jerusalem, when she was destroyed;
with these very words, I shall be replenished now she is laid waste.

Ver. 3. And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river is her
revenue, etc.] Sihor is usually taken to be a small river that divided Egypt
from Palestina, Numb. 34.5. and Josh. 13.3. And accordingly some hold, that by
the seed of Sihor here, is meant the seed of Egypt, which is here called Sihor;
because this river Sihor was its utmost bounds. But now because it seems no way
probable, that Egypt should be called Sihor, only because of a small brook of
that name, that went through the skirts of that Country, and for several other
reasons that they give for it; many learned men do with much confidence affirm,
that it is Nilus that is here called Sihor (it may be with respect to a small
branch of it that ran out to the borders of Canaan, that was there called
Sihor) and that by the seed of Sihor here, is meant the several fruits, which
the seed sown in Egypt by the river Nilus, yields to them; as all kind of
Corn, Flax, and such like. And so the meaning of the words seems to be plainly
this, That the Wheat and other grain and fruit that either grew abundantly in
Egypt by the great waters of Nilus, the watercourse that were drawn from
thence (called therefore the harvest of the river) Or, that were transported by
the great waters of the Ocean-Sea, was the Revenue of Tire, wherewith her own
Inhabitants were maintained, and wherewith she traded into other Countries.
Though she had no grounds (comparatively) of her own, yet Nilus in Egypt
afforded her yearly a plentiful Crop and Harvest; and she is a mart of Nations,
that is, That great Mart-Town, whither all Nations, in a manner, far and near,
do daily resort for trading; as is largly set forth, Ezekiel. 27. All which is
here inserted to imply, That notwithstanding she was so rich, and abundantly
supplied with all kind of Provision, yet this should not save her from ruin.

Ver. 4. Be thou ashamed, O Zidon, etc.] To wit, either 1. because, as some
say, Zidon, who was the mother of Tire, had not defended that her daughter, but
was forced to sit still and look on, whilst she was laid waste by her enemies.
And indeed we find in some Historians, that the Zidonians being vanquished by
the King of Ascalon, did transport themselves by shipping to the Island of
Tire, and there seated themselves, and built that City. Or, 2ly. because the
same Desolation and Destruction that was fallen upon Tire, was fallen upon
them; the enemy was not like to spare such a considerable neighbor City and
Port-Town; nor were they likely to stand out against an enemy, that had subdued
the stronger City of Tire; and the same wickedness that had provoked God
against Tire, was also rife amongst them. And 3ly. because Zidon that had
gloried so much in Tire, as a Colony that of old had issued forth from her, and
that had rested so much upon her aid and defense, and had promised her self
such great matters by her trading with her, was now bereaved of all Glory, and
disappointed of all her hopes by that utter ruin that was come upon Tire. And
that this was intended, appears by the reason subjoyned, for the Sea has
spoken, that is, Tire that lay in the midst of the Sea, Ezekiel. 28.2. and as a
Queen had the rule and command of the Sea, even the strength of the Sea, that
is, the strongest of all Sea-Towns, as being built on a rock, and environed
with the Sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I
nourish up young men, nor bring up Virgins: that is, I am as if I had never
brought forth Sons and Daughters, being left desolate and waste, and all my
Inhabitants being cut off and destroyed, or carried away captives; I am never
like to send forth great Colonies into other Countries, as I have formerly done:
Or, it is all one with me, as if I had never brought forth Sons and Daughters,
there being none of them that have appeared in my defense.

Ver. 5. As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall they be shortly pained at
the report of Tire.] That is, As the neighbor Nations were of old sorely
troubled and affrighted at the report of Gods destroying Egypt in Moses's time
(for which see Exodus 15.14, 15, 16.) so shall all the great Cities and Kingdoms
near to Tire, be perplexed and terrified when they hear of the Destruction of
Tire. This is, I conceive the plain meaning of this place; yet some rather
think, that the Prophet speaks of a later Destruction of Egypt by the
Chaldeans, and so would have the words to be understood thus, That the
neighbor Cities and Countries should be as much disquieted and scared with the
report of Nebuchadnezzars taking Tire, as they would be afterward at the report
of his subduing Egypt; and that because thy esteemed it such an invincible
place, that they would be ready to conclude, that having taken that, no other
place could stand before him; but he would deal with them all, as he had done
with Tire. And indeed if it be Nebuchadnezzar's prevailing against Egypt that
is here intended, the words must be understood thus; for to be sure Tire was
subdued by him before Egypt, as is evident, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19, 20. where Egypt is
promised him as his wages for his great service against Tire.

Ver. 6. Pass ye over to Tarshish, etc.] This may be spoken to the several
Nations that used to come to Tyrus for Traffic, to wit, That Tyrus being
destroyed, they should now betake themselves to Tarshish, or some other
Mart-Town, to set up a way of trading there; or else to the Inhabitants of Tire
themselves, that as many of them as could, should flee away to Tarshish; and
see the Notes above, ver. 1. yea, why may not both of them be here intended?
And as for the following clause, Howl ye inhabitants of the Isle, See the Note
above, ver. 2.

Ver. 7. Is this your joyous City, whose antiquity is of ancient days? etc.] As
if he had said, Is all your jollity, and all your glorying in the Antiquity of
your City come to this at last? Thus does the Prophet upbraid the Tyrians for
their Pride and vain confidence in the antiquity of their City, as if there
could be no fear of any change, because she had continued so long in such a
prosperous Condition. And indeed we find, that Tire was of great Antiquity: In
Joshua's time it was called the strong City Tire, Josh. 19.29 But this was no
ground of security, when God would contend with her; and therefore is that
added, her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn, that is, Her proud
inhabitants that had wont to pass the Seas in their stately ships, and at other
times to be carried up and down in great pomp from place to place, shall be
glad to trot a foot, as poor slaves and beggars are wont to do, into some
remote Country; which may be meant, either of those that should flee away from
the enemy into Foreign parts, and there wander up and down in a forlorn
Condition whithersoever their feet would carry them; or of those that should be
carried away Captives, either into Babylon, or some of her Provinces, and there
be sold and driven away, it may be, further off, not being long suffered to
rest in any place.

Ver. 8. Who has taken this counsel against Tire, etc.] That is, who is of
that power and confidence, as to dare to undertake the subduing of such a
gallant, invincible City as Tire seemed to be, and that has continued so long
in such strength and glory; as if the Prophet had said, Who would ever have
thought, that this would have been done to this mighty City? the crowning City,
that is, say some Expositors, That by her wealth is grown up to be a Royal
City, Jer. 25.22. or that carries her self as a Princess or Queen over all the
Cities and Seaports round about her; or that has enriched other Cities so, as
to make them Royal Cities. But rather she is called the crowning City, because
she crowned her Merchants and Inhabitants, and those likewise that traded with
her, with exceeding wealth and magnificence, so that they lived more like
Princes, than men of ordinary rank; for so the following words seem to explain
this, whose Merchants are Princes, whose Traffickers are the honorable of the
earth, that is, whose Merchants lived in as great state, as Nobles and Princes
elsewhere used to do; yet some I know, would have this also included herein,
that even the Princes and great honorable men of other Nations used to
traffic with her.

Ver. 9. The Lord of hosts has purposed it, etc.] This is the answer returned
to the foregoing question, ver. 8. and it is all one in effect, as if the
Prophet had said, Wonder not that this should befall Tire; it is the Lord of
hosts that has undertaken it and done it, before whom no strength of the
Creature can stand. And withal he adds the reason why the Lord had done it, to
stain the Pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the Honorable of
the earth, that is, To punish and abase the Pride of all the great and
honorable ones that do arrogantly exalt themselves, by pulling them down as
unworthy to be in such a lofty estate, and laying their Glory in the dust, by
bringing them into a base and contemptible condition. And this is expressed in
these general terms, to stain the Pride of all Glory, and to bring into
contempt all the Honorable of the earth; not only to set forth, that all the
proud ones in Tire, and in other Countries that were advanced by trading with
her, should be brought down by this Judgment of God; but also to imply, 1. That
God did no more in the ruin of Tire, than what he had determined to do to all
the great ones of the World, that should proudly exalt themselves because of
their greatness. And 2ly. that by this Destruction of Tire, it would clearly be
discovered what poor and contemptible things all the great ones of the World
are, when the great God of Heaven comes to contend with them.

Ver. 10 Pass through the land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish, etc.] See
the Notes above, ver. 1. By the Daughter of Tarshish, I conceive is meant those
Mariners of Merchants of Tarshish, or other foreign parts, that were in Tire,
upon the account of trading there; and that with respect to the Judgment and
Ruin that was to come upon Tire, these men are here advised to pass through
the land, where at present they had their abode, and to pack away home to their
own Countries; as a river, that is, Speedily and without any delay, even as the
waters of a river, that falling down from higher grounds do pass away with a
swift Current, and run on without any intermission, any stop or stay, till they
come into the Sea. And some think too, That by this similitude of their passing
away as a river, there is implied also the thronging and breaking away of these
strangers that were in Tire, in great multitudes, like the huge heaps of waters
that run crowding away in some great flood. They indeed that hold it is Tire,
that is here called the Daughter of Tarshish (as conceiving that by Tarshish is
meant the great Ocean Sea, and that Tire is therefore so called, because she
lay in the Sea, and had all her dealing in the Sea, and all her Store and
Riches brought in by the Sea, as being the chief of all the Sea ports in those
parts) must needs accordingly hold, either that the Inhabitants of Tire are
here advised to flee speedily away as a river, somewhere else to seek a shelter
for themselves; or else that hereby it is foretold how they should be violently
hurried away out of their own land into Captivity, and so should be scattered
abroad like the waters of a river that overflow the banks. But the former
Exposition is far the clearest. As for the following clause, there is no more
strength, that is added as a reason why the Foreigners that were in Tire, are
called upon to pack away, and not to stay there, in hope that Tire would be
able to stand it out against her enemies; to wit, because Tire was certainly
lost, and would be no way able to defend her self; because in the Hebrew the
words are, there is no more girdle: therefore some would have the meaning to
be, That Tire was so rifled and plundered of all her rich Merchandise, that
there was not so much as a Girdle left in her, which was indeed a Commodity
wherewith the Merchants traded much in those times; See the Note, Prove. 31.24.
But questionless the intent of the words are, that there was no more strength
left in Tire, see the Note Job 12.21. only in the word Girdle there seems to be
an Allusion to her being bereft of all those defenses wherewith formerly she
had been begirt, her Walls, Bulwarks, Ditches and shipping; yea, the Sea it
self which did wholly encompass her, till the Enemy did by strange devices, and
incredible labor, join this Island to the Continent. And this agrees with that
which is elsewhere said of the taking and sacking of Tire, Ezekiel. 26.4. They
shall destroy the walls of Tire, and break down her towers, etc.

Ver. 11. He stretched out his hand over the Sea, he shock the Kingdoms, etc.]
That is, The Lord of Hosts, mentioned before, ver. 9. And again in the
following words in this verse, the Lord has given a Commandment against this
Merchant-City. And indeed because these last words, against the Merchant-City,
are in the Hebrew, against Canaan, therefore some think that the Prophet in the
foregoing words also speaks here of the great things that God did at the Red
Sea, and against the Kingdoms of the Canaanites, when he carried Israel out of
Egypt, to plant them in that land which he had promised them; and that the
reason why those things are mentioned here, is only to show, That the great
God, who then did such mighty things, would not find the ruining of Tire a work
too hard for him. But certainly the Prophet speaks here still expressly of the
Destruction of Tire it self; He stretched out his hand over the Sea, to wit, to
smite and destroy Tire that is encompassed with the Sea, see the Note ver. 4.
or more generally the Islands and Provinces that lay on the Seacoasts; he
shook the Kingdoms, that is, He shook and shattered the Kingdoms of Tire and
Zidon, and others thereabout, by the enemies he brought upon them: Or he
disturbed and terrified the neighbour-Kingdoms by the Destruction which he
brought upon Tire, partly through the grief that surprised them for the loss of
their gainful Trade with that City; and partly as being terrified, lest the
same ruin would come upon them, that was already come upon Tire; The Lord has
given a Commandment against the Merchant-City: It is in the Original, against
Canaan; but generally Expositors hold, that hereby is meant the Inhabitants of
Tire, which they say, is here termed Canaan, because it lay in the land of
Canaan, as is evident, Josh. 19.28, 29* where both Tire and Zidon are reckoned
amongst the Cities of Canaan; and likewise Matthew. 15.21, 22. where the Woman
that came out of the coasts of Tire and Zidon, is called a Woman of Canaan. And
indeed considering the word Canaan is sometime used for a Merchant (as we find
it translated, Hos. 12.7. where it is said of Ephraim, He is a Merchant, the
balances of deceit are in his hand) and that Tire was the chief Mart-Town for
Merchandising in those parts: I conceive it is best rendered in our Bibles, The
Lord has given a Commandment against the Merchant-City. And the meaning
however is, That God had given a Commission to her Enemies the Assyrians or
Babylonians, to pull her down; and therefore it was in vain to think, that her
great strength should secure her; to destroy the strong holds thereof, or, the
strengths thereof, as it is in the Margin, that is, whatever she had, which she
might hope would be a means to defend her.

Ver. 12. And he said, Thou shall no more rejoice, O thou oppressed Virgin
Daughter of Zidon, etc.] By the Daughter of Zidon here, most Expositors hold,
that Tire is meant, and that she is so called, because she was a Colony of
Zidons; see above, ver. 4. But according to the usual Language of the
Scripture, it is rather Zidon her self, or the Inhabitants thereof, that is
here called the Daughter of Zidon; a Virgin-Daughter she is termed, not only
with respect to the beauty of the City, and the delicacy of the inhabitants,
living at ease and pleasure; but also especially because she had never been
hitherto subdued and brought under by any hostile power; but withal an
oppressed Virgin, because now even Zidon was to be destroyed as well as Tire.
And this I conceive is that which is intended by this Expression, Thou shall no
more rejoice, O thou oppressed Virgin Daughter of Zidon; not that Zidon should
never after this, be in a flourishing and rejoicing Condition (for it is most
probable, that when Tire was restored again, as is here afterward foretold,
ver. 17. Zidon also, together with Tire, did also recover her former state) nor
that Zidon should no more rejoice in hope of her enriching and advancing her
self still more by her trading with Tire, because Tire was to be destroyed; but
that she should not any longer triumph and be in such jollity, as she had
hitherto been; and that because together with Tire even she should be also
destroyed. And thereupon to assure them of the certainty of this, he advises
the Zidonians to flee away, and to seek some place of shelter elsewhere, see
the Note above, ver. 10. or else foretells, that they also should be carried
away captives into Foreign parts; Arise, pass over to Chittim, see the Notes
before, ver. 1. there also shall thou have no rest, to wit, because even thence
they should be carried away as Slaves into remoter parts; Or, because even
those parts also should be invaded by the proud Conqueror.

Ver. 13. Behold, the land of the Chaldeans, etc.] Expositors differ very much
concerning the meaning of this verse. That which seems most probable is, That
to prevent any thought of the impossibility of Tyres being destroyed, because
it was a place of such exceeding strength, impregnable and invincible in the
eye of reason, and because it was a City of so great Antiquity, that had stood
unsubdued, and flourished prosperously for so many Ages, the Prophet does here
propound as considerable, that the Assyrian, a Nation far more ancient, and
more potent than the Tyrians, was at last subdued and ruined by the Chaldeans,
whom the Assyrian had raised to all their greatness; inferring from hence, that
therefore it was no wonder at all, though the Chaldean and Assyrian now joined
together, should destroy Tire. This I conceive is most probably the scope of
this place; and accordingly I understand the words thus, Behold, the land of
the Chaldeans, that is, Behold the people that now possess the land of Chaldea
(that very people by whom God means now to destroy Tire) this people was not,
that is, They had not the name of a people, no body made any reckoning of them,
till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness, that is,
Till the Assyrian gathered them together that after the Flood, or after the
Dispersion occasioned by the Division of Tongues, Genesis 11.11. were scattered
abroad here and there, and lived in the wilderness in waste and desolate
places, as a wild, rude people, not having any settled places of habitation, but
dwelling in Tents, and settled them to live together as one associated people in
the land of Chaldea; they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces
thereof, that is, The Assyrians brought them to live together in Townships and
Commonalities, which by degrees came to be stately Cities, and places of great
strength; and he brought it to ruin; that is, God ruined the Assyrian, this
ancient people that were the first Founders of that great Empire of Chaldea; or
rather the Chaldean, that was at first brought to be a people, and raised to
such a flourishing Condition by the Assyrian, did at length by degrees subdue
and ruin all the power of the Assyrians; and taking Niniveh, the chief seat of
their Empire, did translate the Empire from the Assyrians to themselves. Some I
know do hold, That it is the Babylonian or Chaldean that is here instanced in,
as the people, that being of greater strength and antiquity than Tire, was yet
at last subdued by the Assyrian that had raised them to their greatness. And
indeed we find that Babylon is mentioned 2 Kin. 17.24. amongst those Kingdoms
that had been subdued by the Assyrian; yea, and there are that take the last
clause as spoken prophetically with respect to the Persians subduing Chaldea;
and he brought it to ruin; that is, God, by the Persian will bring it to
ruin. And lastly some say, that the drift of these words is to show, that
though Tire did boast so much of her invincible strength and antiquity, yet she
should be ruined by a State more ancient and mighty than she was, to wit, the
Chaldeans; Behold, the land of the Chaldeans, this people was not; that is,
This people had not any form of a State or Common wealth, till the Assyrian
founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness; that is, till the Assyrian
founded it as a fit harbor for his shipping, and so brought in Colonies of
people that had formerly dwelt in wild and waste places; they set up the towers
thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; that is, the Assyrians or
Chaldeans were they that brought Tire to be such a strong and stately City; and
he brought it to ruin; as if the Prophet had said, And thus Tire is now like
to be destroyed by them that at first founded her. But the first Exposition
seems to me the best.

Ver. 14. Howl ye ships of Tarshish, etc.] See the Notes above, ver. 1. for
your strength is laid waste; that is, Tire, that was your strong harbor for
your shipping, and by trading with whom, you became so exceedingly enriched,
and made powerful and mighty, is ruined and destroyed.

Ver. 17. And it shall come to pass in that day, etc.] That is, At that time,
when this Prophecy against Tire shall be accomplished, that Tire shall be
forgotten seventy years, that is, just for so many years she shall lie in her
ruins desolate and forsaken, not minded nor regarded, either by God or man;
see the Note Psalm. 13.1. Because in the following verse Tire is compared to a
harlot forgotten of her Lovers; it may well be that in Allusion thereto it is
here said, That Tire shall be forgotten, that is, That her Merchants should no
more come at her for traffic. But yet the Expression may well be understood
more generally, as including also Gods disregarding of her, of whom it is
therefore said afterward, ver. 17. that he would visit her, as it were
remembering her again in mercy. As for the seventy years, the time here prefixed
for Tyres lying desolate, I question not, but that they must be counted from
the time that Tire should be taken by Nebuchadnezzar, unto the ruin of the
Chaldean Empire; and consequently that they are in a manner just the same with
the seventy years of the Jews captivity in Babylon; and that because we find
the Prophets foretold, that at the same time when Nebuchadnezzar should destroy
Judea and Jerusalem, he should also subdue the other neighboring Nations round
about, and particularly Tire; See Jer. 25.15. -- 22. and 27.2, 3. and Ezekiel.
26.7. And it is most probable, that as the Jews were restored to their liberty,
upon the breaking of the Babylonian yoke by the Persians, so it might be with
other Nations too, that were under the same bondage. And this being so,
observable it is, that Tire, who was punished for rejoicing at Jerusalems
Destruction, Ezekiel. 26.2. lay just as many years desolate as Jerusalem did. As
concerning those words that are added, that for seventy years Tire should be
forgotten, according to the days of one King. Some would have the ground of
this Expression to be, That threescore and ten years are commonly accounted the
time of a man's life that lives long; See Psalm. 90.10. and consequently also of
the life of one King; and so they would have the words to be the same in
effect, as if it had been said, according to the days of one man. But because
there is little or no strength in the Reasons they give, why it is said,
according to the days of one King, and not of one man, I cannot approve of this
Exposition. The true meaning of the words is, That Tire should lie desolate and
forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one King; that is, of one
Kingdom (so Dan. 7.17. by four Kings is meant four Kingdoms, or four different
successions of Kings; and Dan. 8.21. by the King of Grecia is meant a
Succession of the several Kings of Greece) and so that which is intended, is,
That Tire should lie waste so long as the Babylonian Empire should continue.

After the end of seventy years shall Tire sing as an harlot.] It is in the
Hebrew, It shall be unto Tire as the song of an harlot. But the meaning is
either, 1. That Tire, being rebuilt and become a famous Mart again, should be
as jocund and jolly, as ever formerly she had been, and as Harlots use to be
when they are singing and sporting themselves amongst their Lovers: Or, 2ly,
That she should by all the art and skill she could use, and by all the fair and
pleasing Invitations and Promises she could make, seek to win the Nations far
and near, to return to their old way of trading with her again, even as an
Harlot that having been forsaken of her Companions, by reason of some foul
Disease she lay under, or some such other occasion, does upon her recovery, by
singing and all kind of flatteries and wantonness, labor to entice and allure
her youngsters to return to her again: Or, 3ly. the meaning may be only, That
she should eagerly buckle her self again to her old way of Traffic; wherein
she is compared to a singing Harlot, not only, as I conceive, to imply her
eager intending her gain and profit, which is the only thing the Harlot minds;
but also the fair and flattering Speeches, the Frauds and Deceits wherewith
Traders are wont too often to put off their Wares, even as Harlots are wont to
entice men to be dealing with them.

Ver. 16. Take an harp, go about the City, thou harlot, that have been
forgotten, etc.] Persisting in the Metaphor began in the last words of the
foregoing verse, the Prophet speaks here to Tire, as to some forsaken Harlot,
because it was, it seems, usual with such Strumpets, thus to go playing and
singing up and down the Cities, thereby to entice their former Customers to
look after them again; Make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou may be
remembered; that is, That they may know thou art still living, and where thou
art to be had. But that which is intended hereby, is to foretell, that Tire
being raised again out of her Ruins, should, like such an Harlot, return again
to her old Trade, and use all the Devices she could, to bring in the Nations to
traffic with her again, as formerly, etc. See the foregoing Note. And it may
well be also, that the Prophet does the rather use these Expressions, Take an
harp, make sweet melody, and in Allusion to this City's being formerly much
addicted to such kind of Music; whence is that of the Prophet Ezekiel
concerning Tire, Chap. 26.13. I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease, and
the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard. See also Chap. 28.13.

Ver. 17. And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, etc.] See
the Note above, ver. 15. that the Lord will visit Tire, to wit, in mercy,
raising her up to a prosperous estate again, and she shall turn to her hire;
that is, She shall return to her old gainful Trade of Merchandising, and shall
commit Fornication with all the Kingdoms of the World, etc. that is, as a
Strumpet entertains all comers, so shall she have Commerce with all Nations
throughout the World, and shall as greedily pursue her old filthy Gain by
unjust and fraudulent Courses, as ever she did.

Ver 18. And her Merchandise and her hire shall be Holiness to the Lord, etc.]
This is by the consent of almost all Expositors, spoken of the times when the
Inhabitants of Tire should embrace the Christian Faith, to wit, That in those
times they should consecrate their Merchandise, and the Gain they got thereby,
to the service of God. In those words, Holiness to the Lord, there seems to be
an Allusion to that Motto that was engraven on the High Priests golden
Frontlet, Exodus 28.36. as there is also in Zach. 14.20. In that day shall there
be upon the Bells of the Horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; but the meaning is,
That the Tyrians should then bestow a great part of their Wealth for pious
uses, as might be most for Gods Glory, and for the good of his Church and
people. And indeed we find in the first spreading of the Gospel, the Apostle
Paul found some at Tire that had already embraced the Christian Faith, Act.
21.3, 4. See also the Note, Psalm. 87.4. It shall not be treasured nor laid up,
that is, they shall not covetously hoard up all they get, merely for
themselves, as formerly they have done; for her Merchandise shall be for them
that dwell before the Lord, that is, They shall lay out very much of their
Wealth for the relief and support of the Ministers of the Gospel, and others
the poor members of Christ: for though the Prophet expresses this according to
the Language of the Old Testament, for them that dwell before the Lord, as if
he had been speaking of the Priests and Levites, that did continually wait upon
the Lord in the Temple; yet his meaning is, That when the Tyrians were once
come into the Church, though they should not heap up Wealth by unjust ways as
formerly, yet what they got in an honest way, they should willingly expend it
for the support of the Lords special Servants, the Ministers that attend upon
him in his House, and others of his Household of Faith, who are indeed a holy
Priesthood to the Lord, and do continually endeavor to walk with him, and to
approve themselves to him in all their ways; yea, and this the Prophet says
they should do so freely and bountifully, that both the one and the other
should be comfortably and sufficiently supplied with Means and Maintenance both
for Food and good Raiment; for that is intended in those last words, to eat
sufficiently, and for durable clothing.

CHAP. XXIV.
VERSE 1. BEhold, the Lord makes the earth empty, etc.] This following
Prophecy some would have restrained to the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, and the
Desolation which Salmanasser was shortly to bring upon it; and others, to the
Land both of Judah and Israel, with respect to the Destruction thereof, first
by the Assyrians, and afterward by the Babylonians. But that this Prophecy is
more comprehensive than so, is evident by those Expresions, v. 4. The World
languisheth and fades away; and verse 21. The Lord shall punish -- the Kings
of the earth upon the earth. Nor yet can it be meant (as some others would have
it) of Gods destroying the whole World at the day of Judgment, because ver. 13.
the Prophet adds a passage concerning a remnant that should be delivered from
this common Destruction. It is therefore far more probably field by the most of
Expositors, that the Prophet having in the foregoing Chapters (from Chap. 13.
hitherto) denounced many sore Judgments against Judah and Israel, and the
neighbor Nations round about them severally, as the Moabites, the Syrians, the
Egyptians, etc. does here now denounce Desolation and Destruction against them
all jointly together; Behold, the Lord makes the earth empty, and makes it
waste, etc. as if he should have said, What should I speak any longer of the
Destruction of particular Cities and Countries? The Lord has purposed to bring
Ruin and Devastation upon the whole earth in a manner. It is true indeed, that
because the Prophet in foretelling this to the Jews, did more especially aim at
the awakening of them, and the calling of them to Repentance; therefore in this
general denuntiation, he inserts many passages with respect to them
particularly (who were included amongst the rest) as appears ver. 2, and 5.
where there is mention of their Priests, and Laws, and Covenant. But yet
questionless the Prophecy is intended concerning that havoc that was to be
made amongst the Nations before severally threatened; and it may be others also,
even all that were seated in those parts of the World, first by the Assyrians,
and then by the Chaldeans, and then after that by the Medes and Persians. There
is a Prophecy much like to this, Jer. 25.9. Behold, the Lord makes the earth
empty, and makes it waste, that is, He will empty the earth of the Inhabitants
thereof, and of all wherewith it is replenished and adorned; and leave it quite
desolate, See the Note Chap. 3.26. It is as if he had said, That the earth was
even over-burthened with an innumerable company of wicked wretches; and
therefore God would ease her of her burden, and turns it upside down; which
is in the Hebrew, and perverteth the face thereof; that is, It shall be so
ruinated, that it shall not have the face that formerly it had; and scatters
abroad the inhabitants thereof; that is, some fleeing, and some being carried
away Captives, they shall be dispersed abroad amongst several Nations.

Ver. 2. And it shall be as with the people, so with the Priest; as with the
servant, so with his master, etc.] That is, The Judgments threatened shall fall
upon all sorts and Conditions; none shall be spared in regard of any
pre-eminence they have above others.

Ver. 3. The land shall be utterly emptied, etc.] See the Note before, ver. 1.

Ver. 4. The earth mourns, etc.] That is, The Inhabitants of the earth; See
the Note above, ver. 1. Or, the earth it self, by reason of the sad plight
whereinto it is brought; See the Note Chap. 3.26. And fades away, to wit, as
plants that wither away; See the Note Chap. 1.30. The World languisheth and
fades away, that is, All the Nations round about Judea against whom the
foregoing Prophecies were denounced, lie desolate and forsaken; See the Note
upon the like Expression, Chap. 13.11. and see also Chap. 16.8. The haughty
people of the earth do languish, that is, The great and lofty ones amongst the
people, see the Notes Chap. 2.11, 12. yet because it is in the Hebrew, the
height of the people does languish; therefore some do understand hereby the
Jews, whom God had advanced by spiritual privileges above all other people.

Ver. 5. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, etc.] To wit,
by the Blood and Carcases of men slain; Or rather by the abominable
wickednesses that were committed by the inhabitants, as it is said of the Land
of Canaan, Levit. 18.25. that it was defiled by the horrid sins that were
committed therein by the Canaanites. In the Exposition there seems to be an
Allusion to those things that by the Law of God were to be looked upon as
polluted; because they had touched any persons or things legally unclean. By
the earth, some understand the Land of Israel and Judah particularly, placing
the Emphasis of the words in this, That this land had not been kept pure, as a
land so peculiarly consecrated to God ought to have been. But I see not why it
may not still be understood, as in the foregoing verses, of the whole earth
generally; yet indeed it is very clear, that though the Prophet does here
foretell Judgments that were coming upon all the Nations round about; yet all
along he does still turn his speech more especially to the Jews to whom he
directed his Prophecy. And so he seems to do in the words immediately
following, because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance,
broken the everlasting Covenant, that is, They have wittingly and willingly run
on in a way of doing whatever they listed themselves, without ever taking any
care to obey the Commandments of God; for though some would extend this to the
Heathens sinning against the Laws of Nature, which God had written in their
hearts; yet methinks this is clearly added with reference to Gods people in
particular. And though some by the Laws would have the negative Precept within
the bounds whereof they would not be kept; and by the Ordinance, the
affirmative Commandments, which they minded not to obey; yet more commonly by
the Laws, Expositors understand the moral Laws; and by the Ordinance, the
Ceremonial Statutes, which they are said to have changed, either because they
kept not to the rule therein prescribed, but changed and altered things as they
pleased themselves. However by the everlasting Covenant which they had broken,
is certainly meant that Covenant of Grace, which God had made with Abraham and
his Seed, and was to have been by them inviolably observed for ever.

Ver. 6. Therefore has the curse devoured the earth, etc.] That is, The Curse
and Wrath which God denounced against all that rebel against him, and which the
Israelites had imprecated upon themselves in case of disobedience, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
shall utterly consume both the Inhabitants of the earth, and all besides that
is thereon. Yet because in the following verses the Prophet speaks of the
miseries which the barrenness of the earth should bring upon them; therefore
some Expositors do understand this of the particular curse, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17,
18. and they that dwell therein are desolate, that is, They are left in a
desolate Condition, stripped of all their former Comforts and Enjoyments;
therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, that is, Destroyed with fire
and sword by hostile Invasions; or rather, consumed and destroyed by the
flaming fire of Gods wrath; See the Notes Chap. 9.18. and 10.16. yet some
understand it of their being burnt up with that heat and drought, which should
be the cause of the burning up of the fruits of the earth, whereof afterward
the Prophet speaks; and few men are left, the generality of the people being
cut off by Gods Judgments, or carried away into Captivity.

Ver. 7. The new wine mourns, etc.] This Expression is used to imply, either
1. That they should have a mournful Vintage, their Vineyard yielding them so
little Wine; or, 2ly. That their Wine should be wastfully spilt or swilled down
by the Enemy: And so the next, the time languisheth, implies, either 1. That
their Vines should fade away, and yield little fruit; or, 2ly. That they should
be cut or trodden down by their enemies; See the Note, Chap. 16.8. All the
merry-hearted do sigh, that is, all that having abundance, lived plensantly and
merrily, or all that used to be jovial and merry with drinking Wine, instead of
singing shall now sigh and mourn. And in all this now the Prophet does covertly
tax their former intemperance and excessive jollity; as if he should have said,
You that have spent your days in such immoderate pleasures and jollity, shall
shortly find, that the case will be sadly altered with you.

Ver. 9. They shall not drink wine with a song, etc.] That is, Their drunken
feasting and revelling shall cease; strong drink shall be bitter to them that
drink it; that is, Though they should have strong drink, they shall take no
delight in it for very anguish and sorrow of heart; their miseries and
Calamities will imbitter all their Comforts.

Ver. 10. The City of confusion is broken down, etc.] Some understand this of
Jerusalem particularly; because, say they, the Prophet does still seek to apply
the Judgments here denounced particularly to the Jews to whom he prophesied.
But it may better be understood collectively of the several Cities in those
Countries, against which the Prophet does here prophecy. And they may be called
Cities of confusion, either with respect to the base confusion and disorder
that was in them, there being nothing therein well ordered, as it ought to be;
or else with respect to that Confusion and Desolation that was coming upon
them; the City of Confusion is broken down, that is, Every City destined to
Confusion and Destruction, shall be broken down by the enemy; every house is
shut up, that no man may come in; that is, All houses are so blocked up with
the ruins of them, that there is no way to enter into them; or, they all lie
desolate, the Inhabitants being slain or carried away Captives, so that there
is no coming out, or going into them.

Ver. 11. There is a crying for wine in the streets, etc.] To wit, of people
bewailing the want of it, or the loss or spoiling of it by the Enemy; all joy
is darkened, etc. that is, Their joy shall be over-clouded with sorrows, or
turned into sorrows; See the Note, Chap. 13.10.

Ver. 12. In the City is left Desolation, etc.] That is, not only in the
Country, but even in the Cities too, there shall be nothing left but
Desolation; all that is therein shall be destroyed: and the gate is smitten
with Destruction, so that there is no going in, nor coming out there, but even
in the gates, where there used to be the greatest concourse of people, there
shall be utter Desolation.

Ver. 13. When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people,
etc.] That is, When there shall be such Desolation made, as is aforesaid, among
the people, both of Israel and the neighboring Nations round about them, there
shall be as the shaking of an Olive Tree, etc. See the Notes, Chap. 10.22. and
Chap. 17.6. where the same is said of the Jews, that is here said both of Jews
and Gentiles together. The drift of these words is to show, either 1. That the
Destruction made amongst these people should be so great, that there should be
but a very small remnant left undestroyed. Or, 2ly. That though there should be
such Desolation made in those parts of the earth, both Judea and the Countries
round about, yet there should not be such an utter riddance made of the people,
but that there should be a small remnant left and reserved, out of whose
Posterity God meant to gather a Church of his Elect, that should praise his
Name.

Ver. 14. They shall lift up their voice, etc.] That is, This little remnant
before mentioned, both in Judea and the Countries round about, that shall escape
that common Destruction and Desolation that is coming upon the whole earth in a
manner, in those parts of the World, shall with great joy of heart lift up
their voices to shout, and to praise God for their wonderful Deliverance; they
shall sing for the Majesty of the Lord, that is, They shall with songs of
Praise extol God, for the discovery that he has made of his glorious Majesty,
his infinite Power, and Justice, and Goodness, and Mercy, both in punishing
those multitudes that shall then be destroyed, and in preserving that small
remnant of them that shall escape in that common Destruction; they shall cry
aloud from the Sea, that is, From the Islands that are in the Sea; or from the
Countries beyond the Sea, even from the uttermost parts of the earth, the
shouting and singing shall be heard of those that with such a loud voice shall
praise the Lord for their deliverance. But now the great question is, Of whose,
and of what Rejoicing this is meant? Many learned Expositors there are, that do
understand it merely of those that should escape that general Destruction
threatened in this Chapter, both in the land of Judea, and all the Countries
about them. And some understand hereby those that were delivered from
Salmanasser, or Sennacheribs invasion in the days of Hezekiah; and others, far
more probably, of those that escaped when the Babylonians made such havoc,
both in Judea, and in all the Countries round about, that were overrun and
subdued by their victorious Armies. But because the Prophet seems here to
foretell, that the joy of the remnant that should be reserved, not only amongst
the Jews, but also amongst the Heathens about them, should be so exceeding
great, and (in the following verses, that they should in their joy praise the
Lord God of Israel which the Heathens never did, till they embraced the
Christian Faith;) therefore I conceive he intends here, not only the joy and
shouting, and singing of those that should be delivered from the general
devastation (whose joy might be said to be heard from the parts beyond the Sea,
because thither many of them might be sold for Captives) but also principally
the joy and singing of their Posterity, that should exceedingly triumph and
praise God for the wonderful discovery of his Majesty, his incomparable Power
and Mercy in the great work of man's Redemption by Christ, and in calling them
into the Kingdom of Christ by the preaching of the Gospel; as likewise their
lifting up their voice freely, and without fear, in spreading abroad the glad
tidings of Salvation far and near, wherever they had any opportunity to do it.
As for the last clause, they shall cry aloud from the Sea; some translate that,
they shall cry aloud from the West; (because the Mediterranean Sea lay on the
West of Judea) And accordingly they understand it, of the rejoicing of those
believing Jews, that spreading the Gospel in the Western parts of the World
(whither they fled upon the last Devastation of Judea by the Romans) did
exceedingly rejoice, when they saw the Roman Empire submit to the Scepter of
Christ. But it is hard to say, that this is here particularly intended.

Ver. 15. Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires, etc.] These may be the
words of the Prophet, stirring up Gods people to go on in praising God, as in
the foregoing verse he had foretold they should do; but yet they are commonly
taken to be the words of the remnant before spoken of, who escaping that
public Desolation that was coming upon the earth, should not only themselves
praise God with a loud voice, as was said in the foregoing verse; but should
also, as is here said, stir up others to do the same, even from the experience
of their deliverance. Some render the words, as in the Margin of our Bibles,
Glorify the Lord in the valleys; and they hold, that the valleys are named,
either because the Valleys are usually most inhabited, by reason of the
convenience of water and plenteous feeding that is there to be had; or else to
imply, that even in the darkest Corners of the earth, in the basest and
obscurest Countries of the World, the Praises of the Lord should be heard. But
they are best rendered, I conceive, as in our Translation, Wherefore glorify ye
the Lord in the fires; that is, Ye that are in the fires of great Tribulations
and Troubles, consider of this great work that God has done upon the earth,
and be thereby stirred up to glorify God, by trusting in him, and rejoicing in
hope of being delivered by him; and let all do this all the world over; which
is implied in the following words, even the Lord God of Israel in the Isles of
the Sea. See the foregoing Note.

Ver. 16. From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard Songs, etc.] As if
the Prophet had said, What do I speak of glorifying God in the Valleys, and in
the Isles of the Sea? We the people of God have heard Praises sung to our God,
even from the uttermost parts of the earth. Only we must know, that though the
Prophet speaks of this, as of a thing done already, to imply the unquestionable
certainty of it; yet his meaning is, That this should be done hereafter; the
time was coming when they should hear Psalms of Praise sung unto God, even from
the remotest parts of the earth. And though we may say, that there was an
initial accomplishment of this, when the Jews were delivered out of Babylon,
and other Nations were at the same time set free, that had been held in bondage
by the Chaldeans; yet I conceive, the full performance of this, was not till
the Gentiles were brought in to the Church, and so joined with the Jews in
singing Psalms of Praise unto God. And accordingly we must understand the
following clause, wherein the subject matter of those their Songs of Praise is
set forth, even glory to the Righteous, to wit, either 1. That they should
glorify the Righteous God, because he had by his righteous Judgments rescued
poor Prisoners and Captives from the bondage of their proud Enemies, that had
tyrannized over them; or, because he had manifested himself to be a righteous
God by performing his promises concerning Christ, and the calling of the
Gentiles: Or, 2ly as some would have it, That they should spread abroad the
Glory of Christ their Redeemer, who is indeed often termed the Righteous in the
Scripture, as 1 John 2.1. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. See also Isa. 53.11.

But I said, My leanness, my leanness, etc.] Some would have this rendered, as
it is in the Margin, My secret to my self, my secret to my self; and that the
meaning should be, That he concluded confidently of that which God had secretly
imparted to him; to wit, That the wicked should be destroyed, and the Righteous
spared; Or, that the Prophet durst not reveal that which was secretly made
known to him, but kept it to himself; namely, that of those that should thus
praise God and Christ, there should be so few of his own Countrymen the Jews,
the Gentiles being for the generality admitted to be Gods peculiar people;
which is altogether improbable. That Translation therefore, which we have in
our Bibles, is far the better, But I said, my leanness, my leanness. And so the
words contain a very pathetical Expression of the Prophets grief for the
desperate wickedness of his own people, and the wrath and vengeance which it
would certainly bring upon them; it is all one in effect, as if he had said,
that he did even continually waste and pine away with grief, notwithstanding
the great joy which he foresaw would accrue to that escaping remnant, of which
he had spoken, when he took notice how great the wickedness of Gods people was,
and how dreadful the Judgments were, which this would bring upon them, which is
the more evident by the following Complaint, Woe unto me, the treacherous
dealers have dealt treacherously, yea the treacherous dealers have dealt very
treacherously: which seems clearly to be meant of that peoples treacherous
dealing with God, to whom they stood obliged for so many singular mercies, and
to whom they had so often engaged themselves; yet I cannot but add, that it is
not altogether improbable, which some say, that those words, My leanness, my
leanness, etc. might be spoken as in the person of the Nation of the Jews, to
set forth what a thin and small company there should be of them amongst the
people of God, when the Church should be mightily enlarged by the flowing in of
the Gentiles; Or, that the Prophet might thereby bewail the sad Condition the
Church should be in, even in the days of the Gospel, by the base and
treacherous dealing of those that lay in her own bosom.

Ver. 17. Fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the
earth.] See the Note above, ver. 1. There seems to be in the words an Allusion
to that which was usually done in the hunting of wild beasts, wherein, first
the beasts are roused with a fright and fear, by the outcry and hallowing of
the Huntsmen, and the barking of the dogs; and then fleeing away, they fall
into some pit that was dug for them; or, if they escape them, they are taken
in some toils or snares that were set for them. But the meaning is, that God
would follow the Inhabitants of the earth with variety of Judgments (even while
he spared that small remnant, to whom, in the foregoing words he had promised
to show mercy) so that the generality of them should be utterly destroyed; if
they escaped one Judgment, another should surprise them, as is more fully
expressed in the following verse, And it shall come to pass, that he who flees
from the noise of the Jews, shall fall into the pit, etc. See the Note, Job
20.24.

Ver. 18. For the windows from on high are open, etc.] To wit, The windows of
heaven, as it was in Noah's deluge, Genesis 7.11. to which the Prophet seems here
to allude. The meaning is, That God would pour down his Judgments from heaven
upon them, as once upon the old World, or upon Sodom and Gomorrha; See the Note
Psalm. 42.7. and the foundations of the earth do shake, as it were for fear; see
the Notes 2 Samuel 22.8. and Job 9.6. Both Expressions joined together, clearly
imply, That God would arm both Heaven and Earth against them, so that his
Vengeance should break forth upon them, both from above and from beneath; and
therefore there would be no escaping for them.

Ver. 19. The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the
earth is moved exceedingly.] Having said in the foregoing verse, the
foundations of the earth do shake; with respect hereto he now adds, That the
earth and all things thereon should be utterly broken and shattered to pieces.
But the meaning is, That the Kingdoms and States of the earth, against which
the Prophecy in this Chapter is directed, should be utterly and irrecoverably
destroyed, and left wholly in Confusion and Desolation.

Ver. 20. The earth shall reel to and fro like a Drunkard, etc.] That is, It is
near to ruin; Or, the Inhabitants thereof are at their wits end, and know not
which way to turn themselves; See the Note, Chap. 19.14. and shall be removed
like a Cottage, to wit, like some Shed or Tent, which Travelers set up to lodge
in by night, and then in the Morning pull it down, and carry it away with them.
It may be meant of the Ruin and Overthrow of States, Towns and Cities, or the
carrying away of the people into Captivity; and the Transgression thereof shall
be heavy upon it, that is, Their grievous sins, the cause of all their misery,
shall bring heavy Judgments upon them; and it shall fall, and not rise again;
that is, it shall be utterly ruined, and shall never recover its former
Splendour and Glory.

Ver. 21. And it shall come to pass in that any, that the Lord shall punish the
host of the high Ones, that are on high, etc.] Some by the host of the high
ones, whom God would punish, do understand the Devils, whom the Apostle terms
spiritual wickedness in high places. Others understand hereby the darkning of
the Sun, and Moon and Stars, the Host of Heaven, or any prodigious signs in
them; thereby to strike the inhabitants of the earth with terror, of which the
Prophet speaks in the following verse; or Gods destroying the Idol-images of
these Heavenly lights, see the Notes Chap. 17. and 19.1. And again others
understand it of the Church and People of God, whom God had advanced on high
above all other Nations, and whom God would punish, as well as others. But
there is no just ground for any of these Expositions. That which is most
probable, and is approved by the best Expositors, is, that by the host of the
high ones, that are on high, is meant, either the Kings and Princes of the
earth in general, together with their forces, that are lifted up high above
other men, and that shine gloriously in the world, like the heavenly lights in
the Firmament (and then the following words, and the Kings of the earth, upon
the earth, seem to be added by way of explaining these) or else more
particularly, those proud Assyrian and Babylonian Monarchs and Potentates, such
as were Sennacherib and Nebuchadnezzar, with their mighty Armies, that were
Kings of Kings, as one of them is called, Dan. 2.37. And then by the following
words, And the Kings of the earth, upon the earth, are meant those petty Kings,
that were Vassals to the other; of whom the Prophet speaks, as of Princes that
had their Thrones on the ground, in comparison of the other, their great Lords,
that seemed to have their Thrones above the Clouds and the Stars. And so the
drift of the whole verse is to show, that there was none amongst the wicked so
high, but God would pull them down.

Ver. 22. And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the
pit, and shall be shut up in the Prison, etc.] That is, As Malefactors are
brought in from several places, and clapped up together in the Goal; so shall
these great ones, mentioned in the foregoing verse, be gathered together, and
kept in safe custody. And the meaning of this may be, either 1. That they
should be held and bound so fast by the Almighty Power of God, in that low and
base estate whereinto they should be brought, that they should be no more able
to extricate themselves out of it, than Prisoners are able to make an escape
out of some strong Dungeon, where they are laid together. Or, 2. that they
should be together carried Captives into Babylon; their multitude should no way
secure them. Or, 3. that they should be slain and laid up together in the
grave, the pit whereinto people are frequently in Scripture said to be
gathered. But now if the words should be understood this last way, then the
following clause, and after many days shall they be visited, must necessarily
be meant of a farther Visitation in wrath, to wit of God's delivering them up
at the Day of Judgment, when they should be raised out of the pit of the grave,
to the eternal Torments of Hell. Or else that clause must be read, as out of
Junius we have it in the Margin of our Bibles, And after many days shall they
be found wanting; that is, they shall no more of a long time be found lifting
up themselves in a way of enmity against God. All which being not improbable, I
doubt not but that this last clause is added as a promise of Grace and Favor,
And after many days shall they be visited, to wit, in Mercy. And it may be
meant, either, 1. Of the deliverance of those before threatened, from the
Babylonian bondage; to wit, that they or their Posterity should after many
years be set at liberty by the Medes and Persians; See the Note, Chap. 23.17.
Because they had long provoked, by their wickedness, therefore they should be a
long time kept there in sore Bondage; but yet at length, after many days,
deliverance should come. Or 2. of God's visiting their Posterity in wonderful
Mercy under the Kingdom of Christ, by sending him into the world, and causing
the way of Life through him to be made known to them by the Preaching of the
Gospel; for that this is here included, the following verse does clearly show.

Ver. 23. Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, etc.] That
is, When after this execution of Divine Vengeance on his enemies, in a manner
all the world over, God shall at last visit them in mercy, as was said in the
close of the foregoing verse, (which though it may be meant initially of God's
delivering his people out of Babylon, yet it must needs be principally meant of
God's gracious visiting his people under the Kingdom of Christ in the days of
the Gospel) with such exceeding glory and brightness shall the Greatness and
Majesty of God shine forth in this Kingdom of Christ, that the Sun and Moon
shall be ashamed to show their faces; their brightness shall be as no
brightness, yea as mere darkness in comparison of that; when the glory of this
Sun of Righteousness, and Dayspring from on high shall shine forth in the
world, it shall darken all the glory and magnificence of all earthly states and
worldly things, even as a greater light does darken the less; When the Lord of
Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients
gloriously; That is* when God in Christ shall in his Church, gathered out of
all Nations, (of which Zion and Jerusalem was a type) reign so gloriously, and
discover so much of his excellent glory in their protection, and spiritual
Government, the holiness which he shall work in them here, and the glory and
happiness which he shall clothe them with in Heaven hereafter; and his Saints
taking notice thereof, shall be still admiring it, and praising his name. For
though his ancients are only here mentioned, his Magistrates and Ministers; yet
under these, as their representatives, the whole body of God's people is
understood. See the Notes, Chap. 4.2, 3, 4, 5.

CHAP. XXV.
VERSE 1. O Lord, thou art my God, etc.] Some conceive this to be a Song of
Praise, uttered as in the person of God's Church and people; yea of the Church
of Believers in the New Testament, God's Elders or Ancients mentioned in the
close of the foregoing Chapter: But I see not why it may not be as well taken
as the Prophets own Doxology. Being deeply affected, and even transported with
the consideration of those wonderful works of God, foretold in the former
Chapter, concerning the dreadful Judgments he would execute upon the wicked,
both amongst his own people, and all the Nations about them, in a manner all
the world over; concerning his gracious preservation of a remnant, which he
would reserve for himself; and especially concerning the excellent discovery he
would make of his transcendent Majesty and Glory in the Kingdom of Christ (the
last thing mentioned in the foregoing Chapter) here on a sudden he leaves his
Prophetical Discourse, and breaks forth abruptly, as it were, into a Psalm of
Praise and Thanksgiving, as admiring the counsels and courses of God therein: O
Lord, thou art my God: as if he should have said, Whatever wicked men may do,
my soul shall wholly cleave to thee; I will exalt thee, I will praise thy Name,
see the Note, Psalm. 52.9. For thou have done wonderful things; he speaks of the
wonderful things which he had foretold should be done, as if they had been done
already; and see the Notes, Chap. 9.6. Thy counsels of old are faithfulness and
truth; that is, that which thou did long since foretell, or thy Promises and
Threatenings, wherein thou did reveal to thy people what from Eternity thou
had determined to do, thou have most truly and faithfully performed.

Ver. 2. For thou have made of a City, an heap; of a defenced City, a ruin,
etc.] There is no just ground why this should be restrained, as some would have
it, either to Jerusalem, or Samaria, or Babylon, or Rome, the seat of
Antichrist: It is rather meant generally of God's ruining the Cities, threatened
in the foregoing Chapter, for which see the Note there, ver. 10. A palace of
strangers to be no City, it shall never be built; that is, Thou have utterly
ruined the stately Royal Cities of the Heathens, the Seats of their great
Kings, and that irrecoverably too; so that they shall never be built again, at
least not for many generations, see the Note, Psalm. 37.18. Nor in their former
Splendour and Glory.

Ver. 3. Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee; the City of the
terrible Nations shall fear thee.] The meaning is, that because of these ruins,
which God should bring upon Kingdoms and Cities, either 1. the remaining and
surviving remnant of those ruined people should be forced to acknowledge God's
just hand upon them, and dread his mighty power. Or, 2. the neighbor Nations
should tremble and be afraid at the consideration of the Glory and Majesty of
the great God of Heaven and Earth, that had done these great things; yea even
the mightiest and most terrible of them; as perceiving that no strength of any
people could secure them from his wrath; and that this should tend much to the
Praise and Glory of God. Or, 3. the fierce and mighty Nations, that had before
carried themselves most proudly and rebelliously against God, being humbled by
these Judgments, should be converted to the Faith of Christ; and so becoming
God's people, should praise God for his mercy to them, and that not with their
lips only, but with their lives too, as being such as should unfeignedly fear
and serve him.

Ver. 4. For thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in
his distress, etc.] This is mentioned as another of the wonderful works of God,
for which the Prophet undertakes here to praise his Name; namely, that as he
had destroyed those mighty ones, ver. 2. so he had also protected and delivered
his poor, weak, afflicted people, where by their low condition they were also
made low in spirit, humbled, and so fit for mercy; and had been as a strong
Fortress to them, to secure them from their enemies. A refuge from the storm, a
shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against
the wall; to wit, that sorely shatters or overturns the wall, or at least beats
with such violence upon it, that it is likely to carry all before it. The
deliverance of Jerusalem from the siege of Sennacherib, and the Jews from their
Captivity in Babylon, were remarkable accomplishments of this Promise. But I
see no reason why the place should be restrained to either of these.

Ver. 5. Thou shall bring down the noise of strangers, etc.] That is, Thou
shall abate, or suppress and put an end to, the furious commotions and
triumphings of the Heathens, the enemies of thy people: As the heat in a dry
place; that is, as thou do many times abate and suppress the heat of the Sun
in some dry desert, where otherwise there would be no refreshing for the poor
Traveller, neither water to quench his thirst, nor shadowy tree to be a shelter
to him: Even the heat with the shadow of a cloud, That is, as thou do allay
or suppress the scorching heat of the Sun, by the interposition of some thick
Cloud, and sometimes by the cooling showers that fall from thence; so shall thou
abate and cause to cease the burning rage and heat of the enemies of thy people
against them; see the Note, Exodus 13.21. The branch of the terrible ones shall
be brought low. That is, their Posterity also shall be so ruined and brought
down, that they shall not be able to hurt God's people any more. This must
needs be the meaning of this last clause, according to our Translation. But
indeed many of our best Interpreters hold, that it should rather be rendered,
The Song, or, the triumph of the terrible ones shall be brought low.

Ver. 6. And in this mountain, etc.] The Prophet having ended his Hymn of
Thanksgiving in the foregoing verses, wherein he had praised God for those
wonderful things which he had foretold should be done by him, does here return
again to his Prophetical discourse, and shows what God would farther do in
those glorious times, whereof he had spoken, Chap. 24.13. And in this Mountain
shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a Feast of fat things; that is,
Cattle and Fowl fatted, usually esteemed the daintiest food; A Feast of Wines
on the lees, that is, old and strong Wines, not racked, but remaining still
upon the lees: This I conceive our Translation must needs intend. And true it
is, that the remaining of Wines upon the lees for some time does feed and
preserve them, and makes them the stronger and the more odoriferous; whence is
that, Jer. 48.11. Moab has been at ease from his youth, and he has settled on
his lees, and has not been emptied from vessel to vessel -- Therefore his
taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed. Yet some I know understand
hereby pure refined Wines, drawn off from the dregs and lees, and therefore not
muddy, but clear; and so hold that the next words are added to explain these,
Of fat things full of Marrow, of Wines on the lees well refined. But however
all this must be understood Spiritually, to wit, that in the Church of Christ
(that Mountain mentioned before, Chap. 24.13. whereof Zion was a Type, see the
Notes, Chap. 2.2, 3.) God would feast his people of all Nations; not Jews only,
but Gentiles too, 1. here in this life with the sweet comforts of Christ,
tendered them in the Gospel and Gospel Ordinances, together with the Gifts and
Graces of his Spirit, (for which see the Notes, Psalm. 22.26. and Prove. 9.2.)
with respect whereto our Savior himself does in like manner compare the
preaching of the Gospel to a great Supper, Luke 14.1^. and to a Feast made by a
King at the Marriage of his Son, Mat. 22.2. and 2. in Heaven hereafter with the
fullness of Happiness and Joy, wherewith they shall be there satisfied unto all
Eternity, which Apoc. 19.9. is called the Lambs Marriage Feast, and the Table
in the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 2^ 30. and Mat. 8.11. wherewith God shall for
ever feast his people. See ^^e Notes, Psalm. 17.15. and 36.8. Some, I know,
would have this underst^od of God's destroying his and his peoples Enemies. But
the Context show plainly, that this cannot be here intended. And though we
should yield ^^ that which others indeed more probably say, That the Prophet
might have some respect in that which is said here to the occasion which God
would give both the Jews and other Nations of exceeding great joy by their
deliverance out of the Babylonian Captivity, (and that in expressing this, he
compares God to some great King, making a Feast to his Nobles and Captains
after some great Victory obtained by him.) Yet certainly this was only looked
to as a Type of that greater Spiritual Feast, which is here principally
intended; namely, the Celestial Joy which he would bestow upon his people of
all Nations in and through Christ, first by the glad tidings of the Gospel, and
afterward by the enjoyment of himself for ever in his Kingdom of Glory.

Ver. 7. And he well destroy in this mountain, etc.] Here the Prophet begins to
recite the dainties they should have in the Feast promised in the foregoing
verse; that is, the benefits that should redound to them by Christ: And the
first he mentions is, that in his Church he will utterly destroy the face of
the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all
Nations; that is, he will free his people from that blindness and ignorance,
that vail of darkness which lies naturally upon the minds of all mankind, so
that they cannot find the way unto Life Eternal, and of which the Apostle
speaking, as with respect unto the Jews, says, Which vail is done away in
Christ, 2 Cor. 3.14. Some, I know, by this destroying the face of the covering
cast over all people, do understand Christ's destroying Death; and that in the
expression here used, there is an Allusion to the Face-cloth, wherewith the
faces of dead men are wont to be covered, Joh. 11.44. or to the custom of
covering the faces of condemned Malefactors, see the Note Esth. 7.8. But this
of Christ's destroying Death, is added in the next verse; and the former
therefore is rather here intended; namely, the freeing of his people from that
ignorance under which they lay by Nature, by the enlightening of the Gospel,
which was signified by the rending of the Veil of the Temple at the Death of
Christ. And all this is said should be done in this mountain, as before, not
only because it should be done in the Church, made up both of Jews and
Gentiles; but also because the Gospel, whereby this was to be done, was at
first to go out of Mount Zion. See the Notes Chap. 2.3.

Ver. 8. He will swallow up death in victory, etc.] That is, He will destroy
Death for ever, (as the word in the Original, here translated in victory, does
properly signify) so that it shall never more prevail over his redeemed ones;
but Christ shall reign, this his last Enemy being destroyed for ever and ever.
Now though this was done partly by the Death of Christ, whereby he abolished
Death, 2 Timothy 1.10. having by his suffering Death delivered his people ^^om
that Death which their sins had deserved, Heb. 2.15. yet it shall chiefly b^
accomplished at the Resurrection of the just, when they shall pass into Lif^
Eternal, after which there shall be no more death, Rev. 21.4. for so the
Apost^^ says expressly, 1 Cor. 15.54. When this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and the mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be
brought to pass that Saying ^^at is written, Death is swallowed up in victory:
And the like may be said of the following words, And the Lord God will wipe
away tears from off all faces, to wit, of his people; even as a tender Mother
wipes away the tears of her weeping little Child: For though God does this
partly by the comforts of his Word and Spirit here, yet it is not completely
done till they be taken up into Heaven; to which estate therefore this passage
is applied by St. John, Revel. 7.17. and 21.4. And so likewise in the next
clause, And the rebuke (or, reproach) of his people shall be taken away from
off all the earth; the meaning is, that God would free his people from that
extreme scorn and contempt which was cast upon them all the world over; and
from the worlds base and despightful usage of them, in their continual
afflicting and persecuting of them, as if they were a people not worthy to live
upon the face of the earth. But now the accomplishment of this here principally
intended, is the exceeding Glory whereunto God's people shall be advanced in
Heaven. For when God shall take them into this blessed and glorious condition,
then indeed all the Inhabitants of the earth shall be effectually taken off
from that vile and base esteem which they formerly had of them. Many good
Expositors do, I know, apply all this to the deliverance of God's people out of
Babylon. But it is only as looking upon that as a Type of this far greater
deliverance, promised to God's redeemed ones in and through the Lord Christ.

Ver. 9. And it shall be said in that day, etc.] That is, In that day when
these Promises shall be accomplished, the people of God shall say, to wit, with
wonder and exceeding great joy, (for this is, as it were, the language of the
Guests at the Feast mentioned before, ver. 6.) Lo, this is our God, we have
waited for him, and he will save us, etc. Which may be understood, 1. in the
Type, of the rejoicing of God's people at the Lord's delivering them out of
Babylon, which they had long expected, and came at last to pass according to
God's Promise and their earnest expectation. And taking it thus, observable it
is, that in this expression of their present joy and confidence in God, they do
withal covertly judge and condemn themselves; because before their being carried
into Babylon by their disobeying God's Laws, and seeking to foreign Princes for
help in their dangers, they had not carried themselves toward the Lord, as now
they found they should have done. Or, 2. of the people of God's owning Christ
at his coming in the flesh, and embracing him by Faith, when tendered to them in
the Gospel, as the true God, their Lord and Savior, long ago promised them,
with great joy, because of the peace made by him between God and them. Or, 3.
of the Churches triumphing in Christ, when he shall come to judge the world,
and to receive them into his Kingdom of Glory.

Ver. 10. For in this Mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest.] That is, His
powerful Providence shall be constantly and continually over his Church to
protect and bless them. See the Note; Psalm. 80.17. It is the same in effect
with that of our Savior, Mat. 28.20. And lo, I am with you always, unto the end
of the world.

And Moab shall be trodden down under him, etc.] That is, under his feet, Psalm.
110.1. Moab is here particularly mentioned, because none were more constantly
and more fiercely bent upon doing mischief to God's people than they were; but
under these by a Synecdoche all the wicked enemies of his people are intended.
Even as straw is trodden down for the dunghill, to wit, the worst of the straw,
not fit to be reserved for any other use. The word which we render trodden
down, some translate threshed, and accordingly they read this verse thus, And
Moab shall be threshed under him, even as straw is threshed in Madmenah; and
then take Madmenah to be a City of Moab, called Madmen, Jer. 48.2. and hold,
that because this City being situate in a rich Corn-country, where there was
abundance of straw, which was the less regarded, thence the Prophet uses this
expression here of straw threshed in Madmenah.

Ver. 11. And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that
swimmeth spreads forth his hands to swim, etc.] Some hold that this is spoken
of Moab, with relation to the last words in the foregoing verse, to wit, That
as the Swimmer stretches forth his hands to swim, so he being trodden down by
his enemies, should in the midst of them stretch forth his hands to beg for
mercy both of God and his enemies: Or, that he should, though in vain, strive
with all possible endeavors to save himself from utter ruin, even as a
ship-wrack'd man being fallen into the Sea, labors with all his might by
swimming to escape drowning. But clearly, as I conceive, this is spoken of God,
That he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth
spreads forth his hands to swim: And the meaning of this Similitude seems to
be, either that breaking in upon Moab he should with all earnestness, as with
both hands, lay on upon them on every side, and that again and again,
continually without intermission, not only in the skirts of the Country, but
even in the midst and heart of the Land. Yea, not giving over till he had
passed thorough it, and had every where executed his Judgments upon them, and
subdued the whole Land under his power. Or else, that he should easily and
without any opposition work his will upon that great and mighty people, even as
he that swimmeth does only stretch himself upon the water, and spreading forth
his arms does gently put away the waters before him, and so cuts his way
through the Sea or Rivers. And he shall bring down their pride, see the Note
Chap. 16.6. together with the spoils of their hands. That is, their wealth,
which by rapine and violence they had taken from others.

Ver. 12. And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down,
etc.] That is, Moab's high and strong walls, which they esteemed such a mighty
defense.

CHAP. XXVI.
VERSE 1. IN that day, etc.] To wit, when that shall be done for God's people,
which is before promised; that is, when they shall be delivered out of Babylon,
and so likewise when their Redemption by Christ from their spiritual Bondage,
whereof the deliverance out of Babylon was a type, shall be made known to them
by the preaching of the Gospel, see the Note, Chap. 24.9. shall this Song be
sung in the Land of Judah: to wit, at their return from Babylon, and in the
Church of Christ, whereof that Land was a Figure, see the Note, Deuteronomy. 31.19.
The meaning is, that the state of the times he now speaks of, should be such,
that they might well sing this Song: yea, and it may well be that this Song was
purposely composed, that in the Babylonian Captivity the faithful might hereby
cheer up themselves with hope of deliverance.

We have a strong City, etc.] This may seem to be spoken as in opposition to
that which was said ver. 12. of the foregoing Chapter, concerning the Lord's
beating down the Cities of Moab. Their mightiest Cities shall be laid in the
dust; but we have a strong City, to wit, Jerusalem, or the Church of Christ,
whereof Jerusalem was a Type, against which the gates of Hell shall not
prevail. As this is spoken with respect to the Jews, when they were come back
to Jerusalem from Babylon, it may import as much as if they had said, Though
our City may seem weak in comparison of what it was before the Babylonians
destroyed it; yet blessed be God, we can look upon it as a strong City:
Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks; that is, God's protection
and preservation will be to us instead of the strongest walls and bulwarks. And
as it is intended of the Church of Christ, the meaning is, that through God's
protection she shall be invincible. And some add too, that the Salvation
wrought by Christ shall be the cause and ground of this her safety.

Ver. 2. Open ye the gates, that the righteous Nation which keeps the Truth,
may enter in.] 1. As this has respect to the return of the Jews out of
Babylon, by the gates may be meant, either the gates of Jerusalem, (thereby to
imply the certainty of their return thither, and the multitude of those that
should return;) Or (as some) the gates of the Temple, which should be
re-edified by them, that there they might serve and praise the Lord; see the
Notes, Psalm. 24.7. and 118.19, 20. And this remnant returning may be called the
righteous Nation, which keeps the truth; that is, which faithfully in all
things keeps close to the truth of God's Word; both to imply what God
required of them upon their return, to wit, that they should not be a wicked,
rebellious people, as they had been, but a righteous holy Nation; and likewise,
because they should be at that time, partly through the cutting off of
multitudes of the former wicked generation, and partly through the Repentance
of great numbers of those that returned, a people very much reformed and purged
from their former dross. But, 2. as this has respect to the days of the
Gospel, it is clearly a Prediction of the multitude of the Gentiles that should
come thronging into the Church of Christ, together with the believing Jews, and
should not only profess the truth of the Gospel, but also be really a righteous
people, according to the Rule and Tenor of the Gospel.

Ver. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee;
because he trusts in thee.] That is, Thou, God, wilt constantly keep that man
in all manner of solid Peace and Prosperity, whose heart does constantly adhere
to thee, and rely and rest upon thee in all conditions whatsoever: Either God
will outwardly protect and prosper such, or in their troubles he will bear up
their hearts with inward comfort and peace. See the Notes, Psa. 32.10. and 119.
165.

Ver. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, etc.] That is, Constantly unto the end,
whatever be the outward Dispensations of God's Providence toward you. Thus
from that which is said in the foregoing verse, the faithful do mutually
encourage one another, For in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, to wit,
for the protecting and prospering of those that trust in him. See the Note,
Exodus 6.3. That which we render everlasting strength, is in the Hebrew, The
rock of ages, for which see the Note Deuteronomy. 32.4.

Ver. 5. For he brings down them that dwell on high, etc.] That is, The
mighty Potentates and Tyrants of the world, that dwell in lofty Palaces and
high-walled Cities, or that are in state exalted far above others, see the
Note, Chap. 24.21. And this is added also as a reason, why the righteous that
trust in God may expect to be delivered from the Oppression of their greatest
enemies. The lofty City he lays it low; that is, He ruinates their strongest
and best-defenced Cities, He lays it low, even to the ground, he brings it
even to the dust; see the Note, Chap. 25.2.

Ver. 6. The foot shall tread it down, even, the feet of the poor, etc.] That
is, Even God's poor afflicted people shall subdue those their high fenced
Cities under their power; or by way of contempt shall trample upon them.

Ver. 7. The way of the just is uprightness, etc.] That is, The ways and
courses of the faithful are in all conditions very just and upright: Thou, most
upright, do weigh the path of the just; that is, Thou, O Lord, who art most
upright thy self, do exactly know and consider the ways of just, upright men;
whereby is implied, Either 1. that God being most upright, and therefore
approving and liking the just and upright ways of his faithful servants, does
accordingly assist and prosper them in their ways, and make their way plain and
even before them, so that they may go on comfortably therein. Or, 2. that
comparing together the upright ways of the righteous, with the perverse and
false ways of the wicked, he does prosper the one, and destroy the other. Or,
3. that he does so afflict them by their enemies when they go astray, that he
is very ready to deliver them again from their enemies upon their Repentance. I
know many understand this whole verse, of God's making the way of his people by
his Providence fair and plain before them; and accordingly that word, which we
translate uprightness, they render evenness, or streightness, The way of the
just is evenness; and suitably they render also the following words, Thou, most
upright, do level the path of the just. But according to our Translation, the
meaning of the place seems clearly to be that which is before said.

Ver. 8. Yea, in the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee.]
Having spoken in the foregoing verse of the tender respect which God has
always to his righteous Servants, here he shows what their assured confidence
concerning this had wrought in them; to wit, that even in the way of his
Judgments, that is, under his forest chastisements, they waited upon God in
hope, that of his infinite Goodness and Mercy he would at last deliver them,
and receive them again into his favor. Now the afflictions which God had
brought upon his people he calls Judgments, because therein God seems to carry
himself as a Judge, punishing them for their sins; but yet in despensing of them
he does all with judgment and moderation, and wholly with a purpose to do them
good, according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.32. But when we are judged,
we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.
And this expression, In the way of thy judgments, is because it is God's usual
and constant way to afflict his people when they go astray, for their spiritual
advantage. I know some understand this thus, That the faithful waited upon God
in the Way of his Judgments, that is, in a way of constant obeying his
Commandments, or in a way which he had prescribed them in his word. But the
whole Context shows it is meant of the chastisements wherewith he had
chastised his people. See the Note above, ver. 1.

The desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee.] That
is, Even in our greatest troubles our affections were not taken off from thee,
(see the Note, Psalm. 44.17.) nor did we cast off our confidence in thee, but
still our thoughts were upon thee, thy word and promises: We still panted after
thy favor, and sought after, and waited for thy help and deliverance,
earnestly desiring that the glory of thy Name might thereby be advanced.

Ver. 9. With my Soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit
within me will I seek thee early.] That is, I have desired thy favor, thy
gracious presence and help at all times, even by night, whilst others slept,
and so still will do with all possible diligence. And this is spoken as in the
name of every several person amongst the righteous, that in this Song are
brought in praising God's Name. For when thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.] This is added to show how
they had been brought so to seek after God, as was said in the foregoing words;
namely by the Judgments they had lain under, mentioned before ver. 8. In the
way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee. It is as if they had
said, And indeed it is usual with men all the world over, to be brought by thy
Judgments to learn Righteousness. Yet the meaning is not, that all men are by
God's Judgments won to true Repentance; but that usually when Mercies do no
good upon men, yet Judgments bring them in, either seriously to repent and
amend their lives, or at least to make an outward show of doing so. See the
Note, Psalm. 83.16. which is farther set forth in the following verse.

Ver. 10. Let favor be showed to the wicked, etc.] Having said in the
foregoing verse what effect the Judgments of God do commonly work in men, to
wit, that thereby they are b^^ught to learn righteousness, (for which see the
foregoing Note) here they add, that indeed some wicked wretches will not be
brought to learn Righteousness, neither by Mercies nor Judgments. How little
Mercies prevail with them, is shown in this verse, Let favor be showed to the
wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness, in the land of uprightness will he
deal unjustly; whereby may be meant, either Judea, called the Holy Land, which
God had given as an inheritance to his own peculiar people, whom he required to
be a righteous, holy people; or the Church of Christ, where uprightness of Life
and Conversation is strictly required and practiced; but see the Note, Psalm.
143.10. And will not behold the Majesty of the Lord, that is, though the Lord
does by never so many wonderful works clearly discover the Glory and Majesty of
all his Divine Attributes, yet will they take no notice of it. See the Note,
Psalm. 28.5. And then how little they were bettered by God's Judgments, is shown
in the next verse.

Ver. 11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, etc.] That is,
Though thou do punish them never so sorely, with the strokes of a hand lifted
up; or rather, though thy Judgments be executed upon them in such a manner,
that it is most apparent that thou have a special hand therein, every one may
see that they are the strokes of Divine Vengeance; yet they will not take any
notice of it: But they shall see, that is, they shall be foreed to take notice
of it, and be ashamed for their envy at the people, or, toward thy people;
that is, their envying the welfare of God's people, and spiteful endeavoring
to do them all the mischief they could: Yea, the fire of thine enemies shall
devour them. That is, the vengeance wherewith, as with fire, thou art wont to
destroy thine enemies, shall consume them. See the Notes, Psalm. 21.9. and 97.3.

Ver. 12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, etc.] As if they had said,
Whilst thou destroyest our enemies, thou will order it so, that we thy people
shall be in a prosperous and happy condition: As thou have afflicted us, so
thou will now also ordain peace for us, see the Note above, ver. 3. and Chap.
9.6. For thou also have wrought all our works in us; that is, all the good we
have done or do, with respect whereto, we hope, thou will afford us this peace,
thou have wrought it in us by thy Holy Spirit. But indeed the most and best
Expositors would have this read, as it is in the Margin of our Bibles, For thou
also have wrought all our works for us; and accordingly they understand it
passively of the works that had been done for them; as if they had said, All
that has befallen us, all that has been done by our selves or others, tending
to our peace, all our preservations and wonderful deliverances, have been the
work of thy hands: And thus from the experience of what God had hitherto done
for them, they encourage themselves to hope in God, that he would yet further
do them good.

Ver. 13. O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us,
etc.] That is, Other Lords, besides thee, who art our Sovereign Lord, and
besides those whom thou have appointed to rule over us, have unjustly and
tyrannically usurped Dominion over us. And this, as it is spoken with respect
to the Jews, is meant of the Babylonians, and other foreign Tyrants, that had
ruled over them; and as it respects the Church of Christ, it may be meant of
all that at any time do tyrannically oppress them. But by thee only will we
make mention of thy Name. That is, by thy Grace only, as we have hitherto, so
we will still own our selves to be thy servants, and make mention of thee as
our true Lord and Sovereign, and worship and praise thy Name. Or, by thy Grace
supporting us, or by the confidence we have in thee alone, we will still make
mention of thy Name, as glorying in thee, as believing that out of respect to
thine own Name, thou will preserve us that we may honor thee and serve thee,
though for the present thou seem to neglect us, and as esteeming the bare
remembrance of thy Name to be sufficient to support our hopes. Or, though our
enemies have for a long time tyrannized over us, yet by thy free goodness only,
and by thy good hand of Providence over us in preserving and delivering us,
without which nothing else could have contributed any thing thereunto, we may
now, and will always, as we have just cause, own thee, and cleave to thee, and
praise thy Name.

Ver. 14. They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not
rise, etc.] As if they had said, Whilst thou have ordained peace for us, thine
own People, those our great Lords that did for a time tyrannize over us, are
irrecoverably destroyed; they shall never be able to rise again to their former
estate, to trouble and oppress thy People, no more than they that are dead and
laid in their graves are able to rise from thence, and to live again in the
world, as formerly they did; see the Note, Chap. 24.20. Or, they are slain and
dead, and shall never live upon earth any more. Therefore have thou visited and
destroyed them, etc. To wit, That they might be irrecoverably cut off from the
earth, and never more flourish in the world, and afflict thy People, as they
have done.

Ver. 15. Thou have increased the Nation, O Lord, thou have increased the
Nation, etc.] Some would have this understood of God's increasing and
multiplying the benefits he conferred upon his people. But according to our
Translation, it is the increase of their number that is here intended. And it
may be spoken either, 1. with respect to God's exceeding multiplying the Nation
of the Jews in former ages. Or more particularly of their increase in Babylon,
that even there the more they were oppressed, the more they multiplied; as was
seen by the multitudes of those that returned from thence to Jerusalem, whose
Inhabitants were by this means mightily increased. Or, 2. with respect to the
great increase of that his peculiar people, by bringing in multitudes of the
Gentiles, who joined themselves to the Church of the believing Jews, and became
one people with them. And as for the following words, Thou art glorified;
either it is meant of the glory that redounded to God, by the great multitudes
that returned to Jerusalem, and the destruction of their enemies, which made
way to their deliverance: Or by the great accession he made to his Church, by
the Conversion of the Gentiles. Or else of God's glorifying himself by his
chastisement of his own people, (See the Note, Levit. 10.3.) to wit, in causing
them to be carried captives into Babylon; of which that is clearly meant, which
is added in the last clause of the verse, Thou had removed it far unto all
the ends of the earth. See the Note, Chap. 6.42. The drift of this place
therefore seems to be, the setting forth of the Lord's different dealing with
his people and with their enemies; these he utterly destroyed; but though he
chastised his people sharply, yet the issue of their afflictions was good.

Ver. 16. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, etc.] As if they had said,
When thou, Lord, did visit thy people with the rod of affliction, then did
they visit thee, of whom they had been too forgetful, in a way of Repentance
and seeking to thee for mercy. They poured out a prayer, when thy chastening
was upon them, see the Notes 1 Samuel 1.15. and Psalm. 42.4. The word in the
Hebrew which we translate a Prayer, is properly a Spell, or a Charm, or a
secret Speech, as it is expressed in the Margin of our Bibles; the intent
whereof was to show, That in their Prayers, by reason of extreme shame and
grief for their sins, and the terrors of God that lay upon their spirits, they
could hardly speak or utter what they would say, as it was with Hannah when she
prayed, 1 Samuel 1.13. and Hezekiah, Chap. 38.14. they poured out their souls
with tears, sighs and groanings that cannot be expressed, as the Apostle calls
them, Romans 8.26.

Ver. 17. Like as a woman with child, that draws near the time of her
delivery, etc.] When the throws of a traveling woman are indeed sharpest and
hardest to be born; is in pain, and cries out in her pangs, see the Note,
Chap. 13.8. so have we been in thy sight, O Lord; that is, So extreme have our
sorrows and miseries been, as thou, O Lord, have seen and known. And this may
be added, as that which did greatly increase their sorrow, That God should look
on, and see them in such extreme misery, and yet afford them no help; even as
it must needs be a great grief to a Woman in travel, to see her friends stand
by, and never mind to lay hands on her, to afford her any help for the
furtherance of her delivery.

Ver. 18. We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were
brought forth wind, etc.] That is, With strong desires we groaned after
deliverance from those Oppressions and Miseries that we lay under; we had many
thoughts in our heads, how it might be brought about, and were ready many times
to conceive great hopes of what we desired, and labored what we could to
effect it; but all proved vain, and came to nothing: As a Woman that thought
her self to be in pains of travel, and finds at last that it was nothing but
wind she was tortured with, is no way eased (as they are that are delivered of
a true birth) but continues still in great torment, so has it been with us; we
are quite deceived of the fruit we expected, and so there is no end of our
sorrows, but out of one affliction we fall into another. And thus is this
explained in the following words, we have not wrought any deliverance in the
earth: That is, We have not effected any thing for the succor or deliverance
of our selves, or of our Country; neither have the inhabitants of the world
fallen, that is, We have not been able to subdue our enemies the heathen, who
in opposition to the Jews, Gods peculiar people, are called the inhabitants of
the world.

Ver. 19. Thy dead men shall live, etc.] Frequently in the Scripture men in
extremity of misery, and that seem to be in a lost Condition, past all hope of
recovery, are spoken of as dead men, yea, as men dead and buried, and turned
into dust, see the Notes Psalm. 31.12. and 22.15. and 88.5, 6. and accordingly
also the raising up men from such a sad, desperate and hopeless Condition,
putting them into a more comfortable Estate, is spoken of as a reviving of such
dead men, and a kind of Resurrection; see the Notes Psalm. 71.20 and 80.18. And
in this sense I conceive these words are spoken here, of the raising of Gods
faithful people out of a forlorn and lost condition (such as was that of their
deliverance out of Babylon) and bringing them again into a cheerful and
comfortable Estate; and that this is added as in opposition to that which was
said before of the irrecoverable Destruction of their Enemies, ver. 14. They
are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not rise. I know
that very many Expositors of great note, do understand this expressly of the
Resurrection of the faithful to life at the last day. And indeed, though it
were primarily meant of the deliverance of the Jews out of the Babylonian
Captivity (as was also that Prophecy of Ezekiels concerning the Resurrection of
dry bones, Ezekiel. 37.1, etc.) yet by the Expressions here used, it may seem most
probable, that there is at least an Allusion herein to that Resurrection of the
faithful at the day of Judgment; yea, if this song were intended to set forth,
as most Expositors hold, not only the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon,
but also that greater deliverance of our Redemption by Christ (whereof that
other was a type) as is before noted ver. 1. then I see not why under this
great work of the deliverance of Gods people by Christ, the raising of them up
to life at the last day should not be comprehended; which shall be the full
perfecting of that deliverance. The greatest difficulty in the words, is to
know by whom, and to whom they are spoken. Now to this I answer, 1. That they
may be taken as spoken to the Church and people of God, either in the person of
God, or in the person of the prophet, speaking to them from God. And if we
understand them thus, then we must suppose, that in the foregoing verse the
song is ended that began ver. 1. and that here, in answer to that which they
had said therein, there is a promise made to them from God in Christ, that he
would certainly raise them from that dead and hopeless Condition, wherein they
lay; Thy dead men shall live. And accordingly also we must then understand the
following words (as they are in our translation) together with my dead bodies
shall they arise, either of the dead body of Christ; as if it had been said in
the person of Christ, As sure as my dead shall arise out of the grave, so
surely shall thy dead men arise; or else of the whole body of his Church and
people, thereby to imply, that not one of them should fail to have their share
in this joyful Resurrection. But 2ly. the words may be taken as the words of
Gods people, and so as the close of the foregoing song, wherein they make
profession to God of their confident assurance, that he would revive them, and
raise them up from that forlorn and hopeless Condition, wherein at present they
lay; Thy dead men shall live; as if they had said, Thy poor people, that seem
to be now as so many men dead and buried, thou will revive again, and raise
them up out of this their low and seeming desperate Condition, even as at the
last day those that dye in thee, being true members of thy mystical body the
Church, shall be raised out of their grave; unto life eternal. And taking the
words thus, the following words must likewise be understood accordingly,
together with my dead body shall they arise, either of the City Jerusalem, as
some would have it, to wit, that as that their City that was at present as a
dead carcass, should be raised up out of the dust, so should Gods people also,
together with it; or of the whole body of the Church; or as if the Prophet had
set forth the unquestionable certainty of this promise, by comparing it with
his full assurance concerning the raising again of his dead body, see Job 19.25.

Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, etc.] That is, you that are as so
many dead carcases that have lain long in the Grave; for thy dew is as the dew
of herbs; which may be also taken, either as spoken by the Prophet to the
people of God, telling them, that their dew, that is, the love that God had
showed to them, would be to them as dew to the herbs; or else as the speech of
Gods people to God, rendering a reason why they expected such a mighty change in
their Estate, to wit, Because his favor would be a sure means to effect this,
as the dew is to quicken the dying and withering herbs; See the Note, Psalm.
72.6. it being as easy for God to raise up his people from their seeming
hopeless Estate to a comfortable and flourishing Condition, yea, to raise the
very dead out of their Graves, as it is by a dew that falls in the night to
revive the herbs, that were in a manner withered by the scorching of the sun,
and to cause them sweetly to sprout out again; and the earth shall cast out the
dead; that is, It shall give up her dead, even as the dew causes the dead
roots of herbs to sprout forth afresh as formerly.

Ver. 20. Come my people, etc.] The foregoing song of Gods people being ended,
the Lord does here by his Prophet advise them to take care to provide for the
sheltring of themselves from that general storm that was coming upon the world
before those joyful times, whereof he had hitherto spoken; and observable it
is, that this is expressed in such a manner, as if God would tender himself to
go along with them, and to conduct them to such a place of safety, Come, my
people, enter thou into thy chambers, that is, betake your selves in your fears
to the Chambers of my providence and protection, to wit, by a serious
Meditation of Gods promises, and his all sufficiency, goodness and
faithfulness, by renewing your Repentance by fervent prayer, and trusting in
him, and hoping for deliverance from him; for these are the secret hiding
places under which Gods people may in times of danger and fear, with much peace
and quiet of spirit, shelter themselves, and patiently repose themselves, and
wait for the Salvation of God. See the Notes, Job 29.4. Psalm. 27.5. and 31.20.
and 91.1, 2. and Pro. 91.10. There seems to be an Allusion in the words, to
men's keeping within doors in times of stormy weather, or to their fleeing to
their houses, and retiring there to the secretest and securest places they
have, and shutting the doors upon themselves in times of peril and dread: Or,
it may be, particularly to that charge which was given to the Israelites, Exodus
12.22. not to stir out of the doors of their houses, whilst the destroying
Angel passed through the land of Egypt. And to the same purpose is that which
follows, and shut thy doors about thee; that is, persevere constantly in the
use of these holy means, for the securing and quieting your selves, not
admitting any temptation that should disquiet or perplex your spirits; hide thy
self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be over-past, See
the Note Chap. 10.25.

Ver. 21. For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, etc.] As if he had said, There is
a great storm coming, and therefore you had need to hide your selves; the Lord
shall from heaven appear in his dreadful judgments, executing open vengeance
upon those that dwell on the earth, even as a King comes from his Palace to sit
in the Judgment seat for the punishing of Malefactors. Some I know, hold, That
it is the Temple that is here called Gods place, and so understand the words
thus* That though for a long time the Lord might seem to sit still in his
Sanctuary, and not to mind the wickedness of the men of the World, yet at last
he would come forth and show himself by punishing them for their sins. But I
rather understand it of Gods appearing from heaven, according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. And because bloodshed, especially the
shedding of the blood of Gods people, is a wickedness most hateful to God, and
which he does usually punish most severely; therefore is that added, the earth
also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain; that is, God
shall then call men to an account, and punish them for all the blood they have
shed, whether openly or in secret, which before seemed not to be minded, but to
be (as we use to say) quite forgotten.

CHAP. XXVII.
VERSE 1. IN that day, etc.] To wit, When the Lord shall go forth to punish the
Inhabitants of the earth for their wickedness, as was said in the last verse of
the foregoing Chapter, the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong sword,
that is, by his infinite power used with great severity, shall punish
Leviathan, that is, the Whale or Whirlpool, see the Notes Job 41.1. and Psalm.
104.26. the piercing serpent, or as it is in the Hebrew, the serpent crossing
like a bar; for the understanding whereof we must know, 1. That all Creatures
that glide along, whether by earth or water, with feet or fins, are by the
Hebrews called Serpents: and 2ly. That the Whale or Whirlpool is here called a
barlike serpent, either because it shoots swiftly from one side of the sea to
the other, even as a bolt shoots swiftly into the staple, or a bar from one
side of the door to the other; or because by reason of the huge bulk of his
body, and his mighty strength, he seems invincible, not to be overborn, moved,
or stirred by any strength of any Creature, no more than a gate or door can be
moved, that is shut up with bars of Brass or Iron: And 3ly. that this is
rendered by our Translators, the piercing Serpent; either with respect to his
swift piercing through the waves of the Sea, as is before said; or to his
devouring or breaking through any thing that stands in his way. And so likewise
he is called a crooked Serpent, because he passes through the waters wrigling
to and fro, with winding and crooking motions; and the Dragon, the better to
set forth his strength and terror, even Leviathan that crooked serpent; and he
shall slay the dragon that is in the sea. But now the great question is, who
this Leviathan was, that is here threatened. Clear it is, that this is meant
figuratively of some mighty and dreadful Enemy of Gods people. But all the
difficulty is in determining who this great enemy here intended was. Some
understand it of the King of Egypt, and that the rather, because he is
elsewhere termed Leviathan; See the Notes Psalm. 74.13, 14. and a whale in the
Seas, Ezekiel. 32.2. and a Sea-Dragon, Ezekiel. 29.3. The great Dragon that lies in
the midst of his rivers. Again some apply it to the King of Assyria, and others
to the Babylonian Monarch, whose Dominions lay upon the great River Euphrates.
And indeed, if we would restrain it to one particular, this last seems most
probable. But I rather think, that it is to be understood generally and
collectively of all cruel and mighty Tyrants, that are enemies to the Church,
who for their vast Dominions, wherein they rule at their pleasure, for their
Serpentine subtilty, their crooked irregular ways, and savage cruelty in
devouring and destroying men, are compared to these huge Sea Monsters. Yea,
considering, that the Prophet seems here to look beyond the deliverance of the
Jews out of Babylon, by the Medes and Persians destroying that Empire, even to
that greater deliverance of Gods People by Christ, whereof the other was but a
type, I see not, why the Devil may not be also mainly hereby intended, as he
makes use of wicked Tyrants, as his instruments (with respect whereto, the
expression is used by the Apostle, The God of peace shall bruise Satan under
your feet shortly, Romans 16.20.) who for his great power and subtilty, and his
Dominion over the wicked all the world over, may well be termed a Leviathan,
the piercing Serpent, and the Dragon, as he is called, Rev. 12.9. and the
crooked Serpent, because he winds and turns himself so many ways, to deceive
and destroy men. And taking the words thus, it is in effect all one, as if it
had been said, That Christ should destroy the Devil and his Kingdom, with all
his instruments.

Ver. 2. In that day sing ye unto her, etc.] That is, when God has destroyed
his peoples mighty enemies, as was said in the foregoing verse, then shall ye
with much joy, sing this following song concerning the Church, the Lord's
Vineyard; see the Notes, Chap. 5.1. A vineyard of Red wine; that is, the best
and most generous Wine: for such their red Wine was accounted in the land of
Judea; whence is that of Solomon, Prove. 23.31. Lo^k not thou upon the wine when
it is red; and those expressions, Genesis 49.11. and Deuteronomy. 32.14. where Moses
calls their Wine, the blood, and the pure blood of the grape; see the Note,
Psalm. 75.8. It is all one in effect, as if it had been said, Behold, the Lords
Vineyard, that before brought forth nothing but wild grapes (see the Note,
Chap. 5.2.) and has thereupon lain a long time desolate and trodden down, is
now become a Vineyard that yields the choicest Wine. And the meaning is, That
Gods people were now become a holy and a righteous people, yielding fruit very
acceptable to God; which may be meant, partly of Gods people after their return
out of Babylon, but especially of the Church of Christ in the days of the
Gospel. However, in the whole there seems to he an allusion to the custom of
those times, when at their Vintages they used to sing Songs with a great deal
of jollity, by way of extolling the excellency and the fruitfulness of their
Vineyards.

Ver. 3. I the Lord do keep it, etc.] That is, though of late I have seemed
wholly regardless of her, yet now I will watch over her, to keep and preserve
her; and I will water her with the gracious showrs and dews of my Word and
Spirit, Deuteronomy. 32.2. and with a constant supply of whatever is requisite to
bring her into a fruitful and flourishing Condition.

Ver. 4. Fury is not in me, etc.] As if it had been said, say some good
Expositors, My people being now humbled and reformed, my fury and anger against
them is quite over: who would set the briars and thorns against me in battle? I
would go through them, I would burn them together: that is, If any therefore
shall set themselves against my people, now under my protection, like pricking
briars and thorns, to ve^ and molest them, it will be indeed but as if so many
briars and thorns should be set against me in battle, that am a consuming fire;
I would soon not only break through them, and trample them down, but also burn
them up and destroy them; see the Note, Chap. 10.17. But I rather take this, as
spoken not of the enemies of his Church, but of his Church and People
themselves; and that it is added by way of preventing an objection that might
arise in their minds, concerning the Lord's tender care over his people, his
Vineyard, in his continual keeping it and watering it. Because they might
think, that this promise could not consist with that which the Prophet had so
often told them, concerning those sad calamities and devastations that were
coming upon them; to this the Lord answers, Fury is not in me; to wit, toward
my Church and People. It is, as if he had said, I am not in my self subject to
be transported with furious passions, and so prone, easily and without any just
cause, to break forth in wrath against men, and to be implacable therein; but
on the contrary, I am slow to anger, and very ready to show mercy: and
especially it is thus with me, in regard of my people; when I am offended with
them, it is with the anger of a loving Father; it is not in fury, and rage, and
implacable wrath; and therefore when I shall chastise you, it shall be with a
purpose to reform, and not to destroy you; so that this being effected in you,
I shall soon make good this promise to you. As for the next words, who would
set the briars and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I
would burn them together; the drift thereof is (I conceive) to imply either 1.
That if he were furiously bent against them to destroy them, they would be but
as so many briars and thorns before a consuming fire; he could easily make an
end of them; so that they might thereby see, that it was of his mercy and free
grace toward them, that they were not consumed: Or 2. That if he were
contending (which he had much rather) with the profane ones of the world, that
he esteemed no better than so many briars and thorns, his wrath should freely
break forth against them, and utterly consume them. But with his Vineyard, his
inheritance, his own adopted people, he would not, he could not deal thus. Or
3. That if he were to deal only with the wicked amongst his people, that were
as so many briars and thorns setting themselves in battel-array against him, he
would soon destroy them, and as willingly as the Husbandman destroys the briars
and thorns in his Vineyard; but with his beloved Vineyard he could not do so:
If he were purposed to destroy the briars and thorns amongst them, yet he would
be careful to do that so, that he might not destroy the Vines together with
them: Or 4. That if he should find none but briars and thorns amongst his
people, then indeed he should soon destroy them; but when they should be a
reformed people, he would be far from proceeding in such fury against them.

Ver. 5. Or let him take hold of my strength, etc.] 1. By taking hold on Gods
strength, may be meant a serious Consideration of the infinite strength and
power of God, either to destroy his enemies, or to bless his faithful Servants.
2ly. An apprehending this strength and power of God by faith, when men believe
it, and apply the truth hereof unto themselves: And 3ly. that using of all holy
means, whereby they may appease his wrath, and so stay his hand from smiting,
or burning them up, such as are repentance, and fervent prayer; and whereby
they may engage his strength to be put forth for their protection and benefit
in every regard. And this is required here, as a means of men's making their
peace with God, and preventing their being consumed with the fire of his
Indignation; and that with a promise that it shall be effectual thereto; that
he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me; and it may be
taken, as spoken either to his enemies, those wicked ones that were in his
sight as so many briers and thorns, that God would be reconciled even to them,
if they would thus stay his hand, and make their peace with him: Or else to his
own people, as an evidence that he was not furiously bent against them to
destroy them, because though he could easily burn them up, as so many briers
and thorns, yet he rather desired that they should thus stay his hand, and be
at peace with him.

Ver. 6. He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root, etc.] To wit, his
Israel, his Vineyard, the Posterity of Jacob, See the Note Psalm. 80.9. as is
further clear by the following words, Israel shall blossom and bud; and the
meaning is, That though this people should be for a time like a tree, that
seems in the winter to be dead and withered, only there is life in the roots;
yet like such a tree, it should at length grow up again and flourish
exceedingly, and fill the face of the World with fruit, to wit, the fruit of
her mighty increase; which though it were initially fulfilled at the
deliverance out of Babylon, yet not fully till the coming in of the Gentiles to
the Church of Israel.

Ver. 7. Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? etc.] That is,
Has God smitten his Israel, his people, as he smote those that were their
enemies, that smote them? as if it had been said, Certainly no: God does not
proceed with the same severity and rigor, when he contends with his people, as
he does when he comes to take vengeance on their enemies, whom he has used as
his Instruments to smite and correct his people. And the same is repeated again
in the next clause, though that be not so clear as the former; or is he slain
according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? that is, (say some)
Is his Israel slain according to the slaughter of those that are slain by him?
that is, The Babylonian, Isreal's enemy; as if it had been said, That God did
not slay his people with that cruelty or envy, as that great Leviathan, the
Babylonian, slew the Jews and others, against whom he prevailed: Or, as others
say, Is his Israel slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by
him? to wit, by Israel, that is, for his sake. But rather, by them that are
slain by him, is meant them that are slain by God; and so that which is
intended, is, That God had not slain his people according to the slaughter
wherewith he had slain his and their enemies (of whose slaughtering he had
spoken of before, ver. 1. and Chap. 26.14.) namely, in wrath and fury, utterly
to destroy them. The drift of all this is still to make good that which was
said, ver. 4. That God was not furious against his people.

Ver. 8. In measure, when it shoots forth, thou will debate it, etc.] Here is
shown wherein God deals otherwise with his vine, his own people, than with
their enemies, even when he does smite and correct his people for their sins;
he will do it in measure; that is, gently, and with much moderation, not
according to what he is able to lay upon them (See the Note Job 23.6.) nor
according to what their sins have deserved, Ezra 9.13. but with respect to
their strength, that their sufferings may not be greater or of longer
continuance than they are well able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. whereas when he
falls upon his and their enemies, he lays on without any regard, or stint, or
measure. As for those words, when it shoots forth, therein, as before, Gods
people are spoken of as a Vineyard: The words indeed may be read as they are in
the margin, In measure, when thou sendest it forth, thou will debate with it;
and so this expression may be used with respect to Gods sending forth his
people into captivity, to wit, that even then God would debate with this his
Vineyard moderately; though he seemed to have cast them quite off, yet he had
still thoughts of peace toward them: as it is with a Father that turns away
his Son, or a Husband, that for some offense dismisseth his Wife for a time,
when yet both the one and the other intend after a while to receive them back
again. But if we read the words as they are in our Bibles, In measure, when it
shoots forth, thou will debate with it; the meaning seems to be, that though
God may contend with his Vineyard when her branches grow luxuriant, or when she
is springing and growing up very fairly, yet he will do it in measure; though
he may cut off her branches, he will not grub her up by the root; yea, even in
pruning her, he will do it warily, so as not to spoil the heart of the Vines.
And to the same purpose tend the following words, he stays his rough wind in
the day of the east wind; that is, If he bring some terrible storm upon her,
like a rough East wind (which is particularly named, because that wind in those
Countries used to be most violent) yet he will so allay or slacken the
boisterousness of this Storm, that it shall not break up the Vines by the
roots, though it may beat down or break off some of her branches.

Ver. 9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, etc.] This is
mentioned as another great difference betwixt Gods smiting his people, and his
and their enemies, to wit, that whilst he smites their enemies merely in a way
of vengeance to destroy them, he smites his people out of pity and fatherly
love, that he may pardon and reform them; and this is all the fruit, to take
away his sin, that is, all the fruit that God propounds to himself in
correcting his people, and all the benefit that redounds to his people thereby,
is the reforming of them, when he makes all the stones of the altar as
chalk-stones that are beaten asunder; that is, when Jacob, Gods people, shall
manifest the truth of their repentance, by pulling down and breaking to shivers
with much zeal, even as men break Chalk-stones in pieces to make Lime, all
their Altars and other idolatrous Monuments; the Groves and Images, (or
Sun-Images) shall not stand, that is, they also shall be hewed and broken down.
But see the Note Chap. 17.8.

Ver. 10. Yet the defenced City shall be desolate, etc.] As if it had been
said, though God will not proceed, as is before said, with his people, as he
does with their enemies, in punishing them, but will only seek the reforming
of them; yet that they may be reformed, he will be forced to correct them with
great severity. The defenced City shall be desolate, that is, Samaria and
Jerusalem, and other the strong Cities, both in Israel and Judah, shall be laid
waste, and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness; that is, all
other their habitations in the Land shall be left without Inhabitants; there
shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, that is, Gods people shall be
cast out, and bruit Beasts shall be brought in to feed and dwell there in their
stead; and consume the branches thereof, that is, they shall browse upon the
Plants and Shrubs that shall grow up where their Houses and Cities had wont to
be. Some, I know, understand this of Gods proceeding in greater fury against
the enemies of his people, than against his people; but that does not suit so
well with our Translation. And again, some think that the state of Israel being
compared to a Vine, the destruction of the People is here intended, by saying
that Beasts should consume the branches thereof, according to a like figurative
expression, chap. 10.33, 34. for which see the Notes there. But methinks the
words in this place seem rather to set forth the desolation of their Country,
than the destruction of the Inhabitants.

Ver. 11. When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off, etc.]
According to what is noted in the foregoing Verse, some understand this also
figuratively of the withering, breaking off, and burning the boughs of Gods
Vine, his Israel. But rather this is added farther to set forth the desolation
of their Town and Cities, by showing, that as the Beasts should crop the Shrubs
that grew there, when they were green, (as was said in the former verse) so
being withered, the boughs thereof should be broken off for firing: as is
expressed in the following words, the women come and set them on fire.

For it is a People of no understanding, etc.] that is, a foolish People, that
will be made wise by nothing but stripes; See the Notes Chap. 5.12. and Deuteronomy
32.28. Probable it is, that this they are charged with, more especially with
respect to their brutish ignorance in forsaking the living God to go after
Idol-gods; therefore he that made them (See the Notes Chap. 22.11. and Deuteronomy.
32.6.) will not have mercy on them; and he that formed them will show them no
favor; that is, (say some who understand it of those whom God by this severity
intended to reform) God will not at all spare them, but will proceed with some
more than ordinary severity against them, even as far as the rigor of fatherly
chastisement may extend. But I rather think that this is spoken of the body of
the People of the Jews, upon whom God poured forth his wrath without any
mixture of mercy, though withal he showed mercy to a remnant amongst them, as
is shown in the following verse.

Ver. 12. And it shall come to pass in that day, etc.] to wit, when God shall
have proceeded with so great severity against his own People (as is said in the
two foregoing Verses) and shall have thereby in some measure reformed them;
(but see also the Note Chap. 11.11.) that the Lord shall beat off from the
channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, that is, from Euphrates (See the
Note Chap. 7.20.] unto the River Sihor, which lay before Egypt, Josh. 13.3. or
unto the River of Nilus, either of which may be meant by the River of Egypt,
See the Notes Chap. 23.3. and Genesis 15.18. And the meaning seems to be, that God
would sever and take out his People from the Nations amongst whom they were
scattered, in all those Countries that lay between Euphrates and Nilus, Assyria
and Egypt (for when the Jews were carried captives into Babylon, many of them
fled into Egypt, See the Note Chap. 11.11.) even as the Husbandman by beating
severs the Fruit from the Trees; or as by threshing he beats out the grain from
the ears and straw; or as by winnowing he beats out the corn from the chaff.
Some indeed do understand this of the Lords beating out the Israelites from
their dwelling places all over the Land of Canaan, (which we find sometimes
bounded by the River Euphrates and the River of Egypt) and others of the
beating over of all those Countries that lay between Euphrates and Nilus, by
the Medes and Persians, when they subdued Babylon. But the former exposition is
far the clearest, and best agrees with that which follows, and ye shall be
gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel, to wit, as Fruit is gathered up
that is beaten off the Tree, or as the Corn is gathered up when it is threshed,
and winnowed, and laid up in Garners: the meaning whereof is, that though they
were exceedingly dispersed, yet they should be gathered together into one body,
and placed again in their own Land. And this expression of their being gathered
one by one, is used purposely to intimate, 1. the paucity of those that should
be delivered, in comparison of those that were at first carried away and
scattered abroad; according to a like expression, Jer. 3.14. I will take you
one of a City, and two of a Family, and will bring you to Zion. And 2. the
exact bringing in of all that were to have a share in this deliverance, though
they were severed never so far asunder, that God would pick them up, one out of
one place, and another out of another, not one of them should be neglected and
lost, as it is said also Ezekiel. 39.28. I have gathered them unto their own land,
and have left none of them any more there. But withal we must know, that under
this bringing home of the Jews to their own Land, a greater mystery was
intended by the Prophet, whereof that was a type and shadow, even the bringing
in of God's elect People to the Church in the days of the Gospel, first the
Jews, and afterward the Gentiles, dispersed throughout the whole World, as was
said of Christ, Joh. 11.52. that he should gather together in one, the children
of God that were scattered abroad.

Ver. 13. And it shall come to pass in that day, etc.] See the foregoing Note:
that the great trumpet shall be blown; that is, As by the sound of trumpets a
King gathers an Army, or a Captain calls his Soldiers together that were
scattered abroad, so will I (says the Lord) gather my people together that are
dispersed in several Countries: which though it were primarily meant of God's
bringing home the Jews after the Babylonian captivity, into their own Country,
yet under this, (as is already said in the foregoing verse) the spiritual
gathering in of Gods People to the Church of Christ is chiefly intended. And
therefore as by the trumpet is meant the Proclamation which Cyrus made for
giving liberty to the Jews to return home into their own Country, Ezra 1.1, 2.
so also the preaching of the Gospel, that Evangelical Trumpet, which was to be
sounded all the World over, for the bringing in of Gods Elect to Christ, which
may therefore the more fitly be called a great Trumpet. And in this expression
there may be an allusion, either 1. to the silver Trumpets whereby the
Israelites used to be called together to the Tabernacle; or rather 2. to the
Jubilee Trumpet, by the sounding whereof there was liberty proclaimed to
Captives, and freedom for all to return to their Inheritances and Possessions,
which had been alienated for a time from them. Or 3. to that Heavenly Trumpet,
wherewith at the last day all Gods Elect shall be gathered together, to enter
upon the full fruition of their purchased inheritance, Mat. 24.31. As for the
following words, they set forth who they were, that amongst others should be
gathered in by this Trumpet, and they shall come which were ready to perish in
the land of Assyria; that is, that were in Assyria, (which yet may be also
meant of the Empire of Babylon) as a lost People, dispersed, without hope of
being ever restored to their own Country; and the outcasts in the land of
Egypt, to wit, such as fled thither, contrary to Gods express command, when
they were invaded and overcome by the Babylonians, as is said in the foregoing
Note; and see the Notes also Chap. 16.3. and Psalm. 14.7.2. and shall worship
the Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem, and not Idol-gods as they had formerly
done; and under this the coming in of Gods Elect to the Church of Christ is
comprehended.

CHAP. XXVIII.
VERSE 1. WOE to the crown of pride, etc.] Here begins a new Prophecy, Woe to the
crown of pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim; See the Note Psalm. 78.9. that is,
woe to the Prince-like pride, wherein the ten Tribes do so highly exalt
themselves; or rather, woe to the proud State and Kingdom of the ten Tribes, or,
woe to Samaria, the royal City of the Kingdom of Israel, that are even drunk
with prosperity, and so infatuated with the high conceit of their wealth and
strength, that like so many drunken mad men, they are fearless of all evil,
regardless both of God and Man, and carry themselves in every regard, as a
people void of all reason and understanding. This I conceive may be meant by
calling them the Drunkards of Ephraim. Yet it may well be, that as they are
here threatened for their pride (as often elsewhere, Hos. 5.5. and 7.10.) so
also for their Luxury and Drunkenness, as Hos. 7.5. In the day of our King, the
Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine. And this seems the more
probable, because of the following words, wherein the Prophet gives a hint why
he had denounced this woe against them, whose glorious beauty is a fading
flower, that is, the splendour and glory of whose State, wherein they do so
exceedingly pride themselves, is but like the beauty of a flower, that will be
quickly withered and gone, to wit, because the Assyrians were immediately to
invade them, who would soon put an end to all their gallantry and pride. (And
it may well be that in this expression there is an allusion to the Crowns and
Garlands of Flowers which they used to wear at their drunken Feasts) which are
on the head of the fat valleys; that is (say some) which flowers grow in the
best and chief of the Valleys, as if it had been said, The glory of these ten
Tribes is but like the beauty of those flowers, which are in those rich Valleys
wherein they dwell. But according to our Translation, this relative (which)
must needs be referred to the persons against whom this woe is denounced, which
are on the head of the fat Valleys of them that are overcome with wine, or, as
it is in the Hebrew, broken with wine, (to wit, as being by their excessive
drinking, becomes Fools and stupid, and made useless for any thing) that is,
which Drunkards of Ephraim dwell in the chief and principal part of the Vale of
Israel (for the main body of the Land of Israel may be spoken of as a Valley,
because it lay beneath Mount Lebanon, and was a very fat and fruitful Country)
or which abide in the Mountain of Samaria; for Samaria was built indeed on a
Hill in those fat Valleys, See the Note 1 Kings 16.14. And so the Prophet may
hereby seem to strike principally at the Princes and great Ones, that had their
residence in the Court and Royal City of Samaria. However, those words, on the
Head of the fat Valleys, are certainly used with respect to those in the
beginning of the verse, Woe to the crown of pride, etc.

Ver. 2. Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong one, etc.] to wit,
Salmaneser the Assyrian, which as a tempest of Hail and a destroying storm, as
a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the
hand; that is, shall suddenly and easily overthrow and destroy all the glory of
Israel, the fading flower, before mentioned (for with respect to that, he
compares the Invasion of the Assyrians to a tempest) even as a drunken man is
easily thrust down with the push of a hand; or, with the hand, that is, by main
might, with unresistable force and violence. And indeed the subduing and
destroying of Samaria and the ten Tribes, was effected with great speed and
violence.

Ver. 3. The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under
foot] that is, even this crown on the head shall with all possible scorn and
contempt be trampled under the feet of their proud enemies. But see the Note
before ver. 1.

Ver. 4. And the glorious beauty which is on the head of the fat valley, shall
be a fading flower, etc.] See again the Note above ver. 1. and as the hasty
fruit before the Summer; that is, say some, rathe ripe fruits, which is
commonly, as we use to say, soon ripe and soon rotten, and therefore not kept
long for store, but presently spent; or rather, as the early and first ripe
fruit, which for the novelty of it, because by many it is much longed for, and
earnestly desired, is commonly gathered betimes, and eaten greedily, many times
before it be thoroughly mellow: whence is the expression, Mic. 7.1. My soul
desired the first ripe fruit; for that this is meant, appears by the following
words, which when he that looks upon it, sees it, while it is yet in his
hand, he eats it up; that is, as soon as ever he spieth it, he presently
plucks it, and never lays it by, but immediately eats it up. And all this is to
set forth how soon the ten Tribes should be ripe for ruin; and how easily,
with what eagerness, delight, and speed the Assyrians should destroy them.

Ver. 5. In that day, etc.] to wit, When the ten Tribes shall be thus
destroyed, shall the Lord of Hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of
beauty unto the residue of his people; that is, He will be an exceeding great
ornament and honor to the Kingdom of Judah. This is opposed to that which he
had said of the ten Tribes, ver. 1. Woe to the crown of pride, etc. And the
meaning is, that whereas Gods People might seem to be brought to a very low and
contemptible condition, when ten of their Tribes should be destroyed, as is
aforesaid, God would be a sufficient honor and glory to the poor remnant of
his People in the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin; to wit, by his saving them
from being destroyed with the other, and continuing them to be his Church and
People, by that miraculous destruction of the Assyrian Army, when Sennacherib
should seek likewise to subdue them, and by a happy re-establishment of his
Church under Hezekiah; which last is farther set forth in the next verse.

Ver. 6. And for a spirit of judgment, etc.] Here the Prophet sets forth in
part the means whereby God would make the state of Judah so eminently
honorable and glorious, both in peace and war. And for a Spirit of judgment to
him that sits in judgment, that is, God will give their Kings, and other
subordinate Judges, that sit in the seat of justice, a Spirit of justice, an
ability to judge rightly of the causes that are brought before them; and
strength to them that turn the battle to the gate; that is, and so likewise
courage and strength to them that go out to withstand an invading enemy, so
that they shall not only vanquish them, and drive them back, but also pursue
them to the very gates of their Cities and other strong holds, whither they
shall flee to shelter themselves, and there block them up, and it may be take
their places of defense, as Hezekiah did to the Philistines, 2 Kings 18.8. And
all this now is added for the comfort of the faithful amongst the Jews, that
they might not be overwhelmed with grief and fear, when they should see their
brethren in the neighbor kingdom of Israel, as had been now foretold, wholly
destroyed and carried away Captives.

Ver. 7. But they also have erred through wine, and through strong dring are
out of the way, etc.] That is, though they have had so fair a warning by the
destruction of the ten tribes; though Gods Mercy was so wonderful in preserving
them from being overrun by the same overbearing enemies that destroyed Israel,
and though they had Gods Word and Worship continued amongst them, which the
other tribes had not; yet even they of Judah also (the Prophet speaks it with a
kind of Admiration) have trod in the same steps of wickedness, wherein the
Israelites had gone before them; for this may be understood either of their
brutish stupidity, by reason whereof they carried themselves like so many
drunken men void of understanding; or rather literally of the sin of
drunkenness it self; see the Note above, ver. 1. The Priest and the Prophet (to
wit, their false Prophets) have erred through strong drink, see the Note, Prove.
20.1. They are swallowed up of wine, that is, as we use to say, they are
drowned in drink; they have swallowed up wine so long, that at last they
themselves are swallowed up of wine, and cease to be reasonable Creatures; they
are out of the way through strong drink, they err in vision, they stumble in
judgment; the first is meant principally of their Prophets, and the second of
the their Priests, see Deuteronomy. 17.9. And the Note, 2 Chronicles. 19.8.

Ver. 8. For all Tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no
place clean.] That is, they spue on their very Tables; and all places where
they sit, and revel together, are bespitted and bespawled, and every way
defiled; for the word here translated filthiness, does properly signify or dure
or dung, so that all tends to show into what a height of excess and impudency
they were grown in regard of this sin.

Ver. 9. Whom shall be teach Knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand
Doctrine? etc.] To wit, God: of whom mention was made before, Ver. 5.6. The
Lord of hosts shall be for a Crown of Glory, and for adiadem of beauty unto the
residue of his People, etc. But rather this is spoken indefinitely, and is
added as another sad effect of their excess and sensuality; as if the Prophet
had said, the generality of the men of Judah, both Priests, and Prophets, and
People, being become such drunken sots, so stupid and desperately wicked, how
can any man hope, by, teaching them to do any good upon them? them that are
weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts, as if he had said, one had as
good undertake to teach Children a while a go weaned from the breast, as to
teach such a blockish and self-willed People as these are become.

Ver. 10. For precept must be upon precept, percept upon precept, line upon
line, line upon line, here a little and there a little.] That is, As it is with
such young Children, that are taught to read, or to write; they must have the
same directions and lessons repeated again and again, and one day after
another; if they be taught to read, they must be taught letter by letter, and
line by line, a little at one time, and a little at another, and the same thing
over and over many and many times; and if they be taught to write, the Master
must lead their hand letter by letter, and line by line, and they must write
over the same Copy many times, and yet when they have thus wearied their
Teachers, it is little or nothing which they learn; so it is with this People,
what ever course be taken with them, whatever diligence is used in teaching
them, all will be to no purpose.

Ver. 11. For with stammering lips, and another tongue will he speak to this
People.] This is otherwise read by some, as it is in the margin, For with
stammering lips and another tongue he has spoken to this People; and they make
the meaning of the words to be either, 1. that God by his Prophets had spoken
to them, as Mothers and Nurses use to speak to their little Children (for
still, say they, the Prophet goes on in the similitude used in the foregoing
verses) that is, he had made known his will to them in a plain and familier
manner, stooping to their Capacity, even as Mothers and Nurses are wont to use
new devised words, most easy to be pronounced, and to speak in a kind of
stammering imperfect way, as Children use to speak, that they may the better
teach their Children to speak, and that they may the better be understood by
them. Or, 2ly, that such was thesottishness of the Jews, that in all that God
had spoken to them, he had been to them as one that stutters or stammers, or as
an outlandish man, that speaks in an unknown Tongue, (neither of which are
understood by those that hear them) meaning, that they were stupid and brutish,
and regarded his word no more than if they had not understood one word of what
was spoken to them. Or, 3ly, that by way of punishing them for their
wickedness, he had caused their land to be invaded by nations whose language
they understood not. But now reading it as it is in our Traslation, as a
commination of what God would do, for with stammering lips, and another tongue
will he speak to this People, the meaning must needs be, either, that since the
word that God had spoken to them by his Prophets, had done no more good upon
them, by reason of their stupidity, than if one should undertake to teach
new-weaned Children, therefore the Lord would take another course with them,
and speak to them in a rougher way, namely, by bringing in the Babylonians upon
them, a nation whose language they should not understand, as was long since
threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.49. Or, 2ly, that he would give them over to such a Spirit
of stupidity, that no instruction should for the time to come do any good upon
them. And indeed either of these may well agree with that of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 14.21. (where he seems to cite this place) In the Law it is written, that
is, in the Old Testament, With men of other Tongues and other Lips will I speak
unto this People, and yet for all that will they not hear me; for the aim of
the Apostle there being to dissuade them from an inordinate desire of hearing
those that had the gift of Tongues, rather than those that Prophesied, yea even
then, when there was none that did interpret what they spoke; he alleges this
place to prove, that herein they did ambitiously affect that, which God
threatened as a curse.

Ver. 12. To whom he said, etc.] This is added farther to set forth how the
Word of God had been to them without all good effect, as if God had spoken to
them in a language they did not understand; or else to show why God would speak
to them with stammering Lips and with another Tongue, it was because they were
obstinate, and would not be instructed. To whom he said, that is, to which
stupid People, that regarded not the instructions and warnings they enjoyed,
the Lord said, to wit, by his Prophets, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause
the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing. That is, this which I require of
you, that you should obey the word of my Prophets, is the only means whereby
you may procure rest and refreshing for your selves, your Country and People,
from those many miseries, troubles and calamities wherewith you have been
wearied a long time together; Yet they would not hear, that is, though the Lord
showed them plainly the way to rest and happiness, they would not hearken to
it: Whereby is also implied, that their stupidity, in being like little
Children that could not be taught, proceeded from their obstinacy; it was from
mere wilfulness and stubborness that they were so ignorant.

Ver. 13. But the word of the Lord was unto them precept upon precept, etc.]
That is, say many Expositors, instead of obeying the words of the Prophets,
they mocked at their words, repeating those words, ver. 10. in a flouting way,
Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, etc. As if they
should have said, Our Prophets deal with us as with young Children, we must
have precept upon precept, etc. And indeed that which follows, ver. 14.
Wherefore hear the word of the Lord ye scornful men, seems to favor this
exposition. But I rather think that the Prophets intention in these words was
to show, that after God had so plainly made known his will to them, and taught
them what might have been for their peace and rest, yet still they were as dull
as ever, Gods Word was still to them only as an empty sound striking their
ears; they were still as unteachable as new-weaned Children: That they might go
and fall backwards, and be broken, and snared, and taken. That so (through the
just Judgment of God upon them) by this their stupidity they might come to fall
and be ruined under those Judgments which God had threatened against them. It is
probable that this expression of their falling, may be used with reference to
that sin of drunkenness wherewith he had charged them, ver. 7. And that it is
particularly said, That they might fall backward; Either because that way of
falling is most dangerous; or to imply that their not minding Gods Prophets
would bring them to fall under those Judgments, which, though foretold, they
would not foresee. And so likewise by their being broken, the utter cutting off
some may be intended; and by their being snared and taken, the Captivity of
others.

Ver. 14. Therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this
People which is in Jerusalem.] This is meant of the whole Nation of the Jews,
only he calls them this People which is in Jerusalem, because thither they used
to resort to Worship God, as his People; and to imply, that their scorning was
the greater sin, because they pretended to be Gods peculiar People.

Ver. 15. Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with Death, and with
Hell are we at agreement, etc.] That is, because you think your selves so
secure, as if ye had made a Covenant with Death and Hell. Or, because you run
on so boldly in your wicked ways, slighting the vengeance of God, denounced
against you, that it is all one in effect, as if you should openly say, We are
not frighted with your threatenings of Death and Hell; We have made a Covenant
with them both, and therefore are sure they will do us no hurt. This I conceive
the Prophet intended by these words. Yet it may well be, that the wicked
wretches of those times did use to say thus to the Prophets, not as thinking
they could make an agreement with Hell and Death, but only in a way of
derision; as if they should have said, Think not to scare us with the
threatenings of Death and Hell; alas, we have made a strict league of friendship
with Death, and with Hell or the grave, and therefore may well be fearless in
regard of them both. Yea, some think, that by saying they had made a Covenant
with Death and the Grave, they might intend that Death and the Grave would do
them good, rather than hurt, namely because they would take them out of harms
way, before those evils which the Prophets threatened were like to come upon
them; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through (to wit, which you the
Prophets tell us is coming upon the land) it shall not come near us. And hereby
might be intended, either the Assyrians invasion, whereby the ten Tribes were
utterly ruined (and if this be intended, it implies an exceeding height of
presumptuous security in these men, that when they saw the land of Israel
overrun thereby, yet could promise themselves, that it should not reach them)
or else that of the Chaldeans, which was often beforehand threatened by the
Prophets. For we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our
selves: as if they should have said; Those things which you call lies and
falsehood, things that will surely deceive us, we doubt not will prove a
sufficient refuge and shelter to us. Add hereby they might mean either, 1.
their false gods, on whose help they much relied, though the Prophets often
cried out against them as lying vanities, as Chap. 44.20. A deceived heart has
turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his Soul, nor say, Is there not a lie
in my right hand? Or, 2ly, the respect which in some things they pretended to
have to Gods law, and to his service and worship in the temple; which was
indeed no better than mere hypocrisy and a lie. Or, 3ly, their subtle shifts,
their crafty dissembling, and treacherous compliance with the enemy, wherewith
they might vainly hope to secure themselves, what ever became of others. Or,
4ly, the outward means they had for their defense, and whereby they did
foolishly hope to safeguard themselves, as their great riches gotten by lies
and falsehood, their leagues with foreign Princes, and the wise Councels and
Contrivements wherewith they had plotted to strengthen themselves against any
invasion. It cannot be thought that any men would say these very words, For we
have made lies our refuge, etc. unless it were in a way of flouting those to
whom they spoke it: Only hereby the Prophet intended to turn them from their
folly in trusting to those things that would certainly deceive them, and prove
no better than lies and falsehood.

Ver. 16. Therefore thus says the Lord God, etc.] Having in the foregoing
verse laid down the cause of Gods high displeasure against the Jews, namely,
because they did so obstinately and securely despise and deride all the
threatenings of Gods Prophets, glorying in their safe condition, as if there
were no fear of any evil that should come upon them; Because ye have said, We
have made a covenant with death, etc. that which one would think should next
follow, should be the making known, how severely God would proceed against them
to destroy them. And this indeed is added in the following verse. Only first,
the Lord premiseth this glorious promise concerning the Messiah, Behold I lay
in Zion for a foundation a stone, etc. and that 1. hereby to cheer up the
faithful amongst them against the wrath which was coming upon their State and
people, by putting them in mind of that foundation-stone which he had provided
for the support and preservation of his Church, on whom whilst they relied by
Faith, they should be sure to be upheld and secured in the midst of all those
grievous judgments that should come upon that Nation. And 2. to hint unto those
profane wretches that were so confident, that no evil threatened by the
Prophets should come upon them; that he had indeed provided a Rock in Zion, on
whom relying, they might have assured themselves of all peace and safety; but
because they had despised him, and run on in ways of rebellion and wickedness,
all these vain stays whereon they relied with so much confidence, would surely
deceive them; Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone; see the Note,
Psalm. 118.22. a tried stone; that is, a sure Savior, on whom poor sinners may
safely rely; a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation, according to that,
Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it, Mat. 16.18. he that believes, shall not make haste; that is, they
that believe this promise, and do by faith rest upon this rock, to wit, God in
Christ, will wait patiently upon God for the accomplishment of it, both as to
the coming of this promised Messiah, and as to the deliverances expected from
him; though the promised mercy should be deferred and delayed for a time, yet
they will not be impatient, and grudg that it is not done, nor use any unlawful
means to help themselves, but will contentedly wait, as being fully persuaded,
that in due time God will make good what he has promised. In Romans 9.33. the
Apostle following the Septuagint, seems to cite this place otherwise than we
find it here in the Prophet, As it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a
stumbling-stone, and rock of offense: and whosoever believes on him, shall not
be ashamed. But this is the same in effect; and it is usual with the Apostle in
citing places out of the Old Testament, not so much to regard the words as the
matter; because they that make haste, and will not wait patiently for the
accomplishment of Gods promise, are sure to miscarry, and so in the conclusion
to be ashamed of their folly; whereas those that wait patiently for the
accomplishment of Gods promises, are sure never to be disappointed, and so
never to be ashamed: therefore the Apostle instead of these words, shall not
make haste, uses the same in effect, shall not be ashamed. And besides, that
which others answer, is very probable, to wit, that as the Apostle in the first
words of that place, Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling-stone, and rock of
offense, does join with the words here, another place of our Prophet, namely,
that Chap. 8.14. so in the latter clause also, with the words here, he seems to
take in that also, Chap. 49.23. they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

Ver. 17. Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the
plummet, etc.] See the Note 2 King. 21.13. God expresses himself here in terms
suitable to the figurative expression he had used in the foregoing verse, of
laying a stone to be a sure foundation for his Church; and the meaning seems to
be, That having laid such a sure foundation, as Christ was, for the safety and
peace of those that would believe in him, he would proceed in judging his
people with all judgment and righteousness, in as exact and precise a manner,
as Carpenters and Masons are wont to do, when they carry on their work by line
and level; against the wicked he would proceed with all just severity,
punishing them exactly according to their sins, though withal he would be very
wary to preserve his faithful ones, and to carry on the building up and
reforming of his Church, which a company of wicked wretches had brought into
confusion; and the hail (he alludes to that mentioned before, ver. 2.) shall
sweep away the refuge of lies; that is, All your vain hopes, and all things
whereon you vainly grounded such great hopes; and the waters shall overflow the
hiding place, that is, Your hopes of hiding your selves from the Judgments that
are coming, shall not secure you. Both Expressions are used with reference to
that vaunting speech of theirs, ver. 15. We have made lies our refuge, and
under falsehood have we hid our selves. And the judgment here intended, whereby
this should be done, may be the great havoc that was made amongst them by the
Chaldeans, if not, which some rather think, their far geater Destruction and
Desolation by the Romans.

Ver. 18. And your Covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement
with hell shall not stand, etc.] This is spoken by way of deriding that
scornful speech of theirs, ver. 15. We have made a covenant with death, etc.
and implies both that their present security should be turned into extreme
dread and terror; and that notwithstanding all their vain confidence, they
should certainly be destroyed; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through,
then ye shall be trodden down by it; that is, it shall not pass away so
suddenly, but that ye shall be overborn and destroyed by it.

Ver. 19. From the time it that goes forth, it shall take you, etc.] That is,
When it once begins to break in upon you, it shall not stay till it has
surprised you. Whereas they had said, ver. 15. When the overflowing scourge
shall pass through, it shall not come unto us (for which see the Note there) to
this the Lord by the Prophet here answers, That they did but in vain flatter
themselves, it should certainly seize upon them; for morning by morning shall
it pass over, by day and by night, that is, It shall come speedily, suddenly,
and unexpectedly upon you, when you think least of it (even as a man that is
surprised early in a morning, when he is as yet sleeping in his bed) and being
come, it shall continue long upon you, pursuing you incessantly, not giving you
any rest, either by day or by night; and it shall be a vexation only to
understand the report, that is, The alone fame and report of the enemies
approach, shall be a sore terror and vexation to you. Some, I know, understand
it thus, That even to those that felt no part of these miseries, but only heard
of them, it should be a vexation. And again others by the report, do understand
the doctrine of Gods Prophets, according to that, Chap. 53.1. Who has believed
our report? and so reading the words as they are rendered in the margin of our
Bibles, and it shall be a vexation only, when he shall make you to understand
doctrine; they would have the meaning to be this; That when the miseries now
foretold, were come upon them, thereby God would bring them to understand that
doctrine which now they would not understand, the truth of what the Prophets
foretold, and the folly, of their present security; only indeed it would then
be too late: their understanding this then, would be only for their greater
vexation, not for their conversion. But the first Exposition is, I conceive,
the best.

Ver. 20. For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it,
etc.] This proverbial speech may imply, 1. the great penury and streights they
should be brought into, when those miseries came upon them which the Prophet
had now foretold; that they should be in continual distress, not knowing which
way to turn themselves, nor able any way to ease or relieve themselves, as it
is with a man that lying on a bed that is too short for him, must needs be as
in Little-ease, and as it were cripled thereby. And 2ly, the insufficiency of
those lying vanities, in the confidence whereof they were so secure, for the
affording of them any ease or comfort; for which, see the Note before, ver. 15.
And the like may be said of the following clause, and the covering narrower
than that he can wrap himself in it; for this may imply also the comfortless
condition whereinto they should be brought; and withal, what poor things they
would all prove, for the covering and sheltering of them from the storms that
were coming upon them, whereon they grounded all their hopes. And it may well
be also, that in these Expressions the Prophet might covertly strike at the
luxury of those men that did thus scornfully slight and deride the threatenings
of Gods Prophets, who lived in all ease and jollity, stretching themselves on
their rich beds, that were furnished with rich and costly coverlets, see Amos
6.4.

Ver. 21. For the Lord shall rise up, as in mount Perazim, etc.] See the Note 2 Samuel 5.20. He shall be wroth, as in the valley of Gibeon; to wit, When Joshua
slew the Canaanites there, Josh. 10.10. at which time it is said, ver. 11. That
God slew them with hailstones from Heaven; in regard whereof, this story suits
the better with that storm of hail threatened before, ver. 17. The drift of this
threatening is to show, That God would now proceed with the Jews that professed
themselves his people, but were indeed his real enemies, no otherwise than he
had formerly proceeded in their defense against the Canaanites and Philistines,
both his and their professed enemies. And this the Prophet calls his strange
work, and his strange act; that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring
to pass his act, his strange act; either 1. as some say, because the work of
destroying men, is, as it were, strange to God, who is rather willing to show
mercy, and to pardon, than to punish, Lam. 3.33. and Ezekiel. 33.11. Or, 2ly.
because Gods proceeding in a way of destroying his people, was strange and
unusual, that God should fight against those, in defense of whom he was wont to
fight against their enemies, this was strange and wonderful. As a Fathers
whipping of his Child, whom he so dearly loves, is a strange work; so for God
to destroy his peculiar people, to whom he had been formerly so good and
gracious, was very strange. Or, 3ly. because the Judgment he intended now to
bring upon them, was extraordinary and unwonted, strange, wonderful and
dreadful, above what in his greatest severity he had formerly done to them. For
though he had often brought sore Judgments upon them in their own land, yet he
had never caused their City Jerusalem, and the Temple therein, to be burnt, and
the people to be generally carried away captives into strange Countries, as he
meant now to do.

Ver. 22. Now therefore be ye not mockers, etc.] That is, Mock not at the
threatenings of Gods Prophets, as you have done; see the Notes before, ver. 13.
and 15. lest your bands be made strong; that is, lest for this God should make
the judgments he brings upon you the sorer, and of the longer continuance; from
which otherwise, if you would have repented, you might have been loosed and
freed. Punishments inflicted upon men for sin, are called bands, because they
are painful to flesh and blood, and do restrain and bind up men from living as
they list themselves. And as beasts of prey, being taken in snares, are the
faster entangled and bound, the more they struggle and strive to get away; so
the more wicked men do strive against God, when he begins to contend with them,
the heavier the judgments usually are which he pours forth upon them: for I
have heard from the Lord God of Hosts a consumption even determined upon the
whole earth; that is, the whole land of Judea, to wit, except ye repent. But
see the Notes, Chap. 10.22, 23.

Ver. 23. Give ye ear and hear my voice; hearken and hear my speech.] As if the
Prophet had said, I will convince you by an unanswerable argument, taken from
that which you see commonly done amongst men, that you have no cause to
question, but that God will at last certainly do what he has threatened by his
Prophets; and that you do foolishly flatter your selves with hopes that you
shall always go unpunished, because he has spared you so long; and therefore
attend diligently to what I shall now say.

Ver. 24. Does the plowman plow all day to sow? etc.] The drift of this
passage, to the end of the Chapter, is to show, that if the Husbandman, by the
wisdom wherewith God has endewed him, does not spend all his time in plowing
and harrowing his ground, never going any further (which would be mere lost
labor), but when he has done that, then he sows his several seeds in the
grounds thus prepared by plowing and harrowing, and that with great wisdom, not
confusedly throwing in all together, but sowing them severally in several
grounds, allotting to each that seed which he knows the soil is fittest for,
and which is most likely to thrive in it, and dispersing it in such quantities
as may best promote the growth of it; and when he has done that, then he
proceeds orderly in the following works of his Husbandry, as weeding and
reaping his Corn when it is harvest, and such like, till at last he comes to
separate his Corn from the Straw and Chaff, which he does also with much
prudence in different ways, according to the strength or tenderness of the
grain; much more may any rational man think, that God, the fountain of all
wisdom, and by whom therefore the Husbandman is enabled to carry on his work so
wisely, will order the dispensation of his providence toward his people (his
spiritual Husbandry) with greater wisdom; that he will not be always plowing
and harrowing you by the Ministry of his Prophets, threatening you, and
denouncing his judgments against you, thereby to break your hearts, and to fit
you to receive the word and instruction of his servants, but that at last he
will come to the executing of those judgments upon you, of which he has often
forewarned you, beating you, and threshing you by enemies, he will bring upon
you, though differently, according to the different degrees of your sins. This
I conceive is in general the drift of this whole passage. And accordingly he
begins, first with the Husbandman's plowing and harrowing, Does the plowman
plow all day to sow? that is, will he be continually plowing it, that it may be
fit to receive the seed? does he open and break the clods of his ground, to
wit, continually? will he be always breaking the clods with a Mallet, or with a
Harrow, and never proceed any further? As if the Prophet had said, Doubtless he
will not do so.

Ver. 25. When he has made plain the face thereof, etc.] That is, When he has
laid the land even, by breaking the greater clods, he does not stay there, but
then does he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in
the principal wheat, and the appointed barley, and the rye (or sp^lt, another
kind of grain) in their place? That is, he does then sow his several seeds, the
choicest and the best he can get, in their several grounds, according to the
nature of the soil, and that in a due measure and proportion. Some indeed read
the last words as they are in the margin, the wheat in the principal place, and
the barley in the appointed place: But the difference betwixt these two
Translations is not great; they both imply the same thing.

Ver. 26. For his God does instruct him, etc.] Some read this as it is in the
margin, And he binds it in such sort as his God does teach him; and
accordingly they understand it as another expression, whereby the Husbandman's
wisdom is set forth in the ordering of Husbandry; to wit, that having thus
prudently sown his several seeds, afterward when Harvest comes, having cut it
down, he binds it up in sheaves and bundles, that he may carry it and house it,
and in due time thresh it and winnow it out (And some also conceive, that this
is spoken with reference to what was said before, ver. 22. be ye not mockers,
lest your bands be made strong). But according to our Translation, for his God
does instruct him to discretion, and does teach him; the drift of the words is
clearly to show, that it is God that gives this wisdom to the Husbandman,
whereby he is enabled to order all his affairs so prudently, as is here both
before and afterward related; and from hence to imply, that therefore it might
well be concluded, that God, the fountain of all wisdom, would not, nor could
not fail, to order all the dispensations of his providence toward his people
with infinite wisdom. But however, observable it is, that in setting down this,
the Prophet uses this expression, his God does instruct him. God is no less
the Plowmans God, than the God of Nobles and Princes.

Ver. 27. For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument; neither
is a cart-wheel turned about upon the cummin, etc.] As if it had been said, As
the Husbandman shows much wisdom in the sowing his seed, as is before said,
ver. 25. so also in the beating out of his grain, when it is cut down; to wit,
in that he does not beat out the tenderer seeds, the fitches and the cummin, as
he does the harder corn, the wheat, and barley, and rye, which was usually in
those Countries done by cart-wheels, or sleds (the threshing instrument happily
here intended) that were drawn over them, or by the Hoofs of their Horses or
Oxen; see the Note, Deuteronomy. 25.4. but the fitches are beaten out with a staff,
and the cummin with a rod. And this is added to imply, that God does not punish
all men in a like manner for their sins, but differently, according to the
different quality of the offender, or of their offenses: Some he afflicts more
gently, beating them as with a rod; upon some he brings more tearing judgments,
as he finds their sins greater, and their hearts harder.

Ver. 28. Bread-corn is bruised, etc.] I confess I cannot see how this
Translation of this first branch of the verse can stand with the following
words, because he will not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of
his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen. For what is this less than to make
the last words contradict the first; Bread-corn is bruised by the Husbandman,
because he will not ever be bruising it? Some to avoid this, understand the
first words, of bruising the bread-corn, wheat, and rye, and barley, by
grinding it in the mill; and so they understand this verse thus, that
bread-corn is bruised, to wit, by grinding it in the mill, because the
Husbandman would not be ever threshing it, or drawing cart-wheels or sleds over
it, or treading it out with the feet of Horses or Oxen, seeing this would quite
mar it, and make it good for nothing. But it seems not probable, that the
Prophet is speaking here, of grinding corn in the mill. I rather therefore
think, that the negative expressed in the former verse, is here again to be
understood (as it is very well observed in the large Annotations of our Divines
on this place), as if it had been expressed thus, As the fitches are not
threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon
the cumm^n; so (by the same wise care of the Husbandman) neither is the
bread-corn quite bruised and beaten, as it were to dust, though more violent
ways are used to beat out that from the straw and chaff; and that 1. because
the Husbandman will not be always threshing it, nor will overlong suffer the
cart-wheels to be drawn over it, nor the beasts to be trampling upon it. And 2.
because he is careful, that neither by the cart-wheel or sled drawn over it, or
the horsemen (to wit, the men that lead, or ride upon the Horses that draw the
carts or sleds), it shall be quite battered and spoiled with the crushing and
bruising of it. Thus I conceive this passage may most fitly be expounded: For
clearly the drift of the Prophet is to show, that as the Husbandman, even when
he uses rougher means to beat out the hard grain, is however careful, not to
do it so incessantly, or in such a manner, as to mar and spoil his corn
thereby; so neither will God, even when he punishes his people more severely,
contend with them for ever, or proceed to the utter destroying of them; see the
Note, Psalm. 125.3.

Ver. 29. This also comes from the Lord of hosts, etc.] Some of our best
Expositors refer the word (This) here, to the destruction threatened above, ver.
22. and so would have this to be the conclusion and explanation of the
foregoing similitude; as if the Prophet had said, As the Husbandmans discreet
ordering his affairs from the beginning to the end, in plowing, sowing, and
beating out his grain, is from God, who gives him this wisdom; so is the ruin
and destruction which I have told you shall come upon you from the Lord, who
does with infinite wisdom all things that he does in the world. But more
probably, methinks, it seems to have reference to the words immediately
foregoing, ver. 28. and so the meaning to be this, That as the Husbandman's
skill in ordering his seed (whereof mention was made before, ver. 24, 25.) so
this also of his beating out his grain, as is before described, is from God.
But however, that which is principally intended is, as is before noted, that if
the Husbandman, by the wisdom wherewith God has endued him, does thus wisely
and prudently beat out his several grain, much more will the only wise God
himself with infinite wisdom, order those judgments which he brings upon his
people. And thereupon are those words added in the close of this similitude,
which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working; and that to imply,
amongst other things, the wonderful wisdom of God, in that whilst he destroyed
the wicked amongst them, yet he would at the same time be so careful to
preserve a holy remnant; and in that whilst he seemed to proceed against his
people with such bitter hatred, yet all that he did to them, should be done out
of love, and with respect to their good and welfare.

CHAP. XXIX.
VERSE 1. WOE to Ariel, etc.] This seems to be another Prophecy, distinct from
that which went before, and directed particularly against Jerusalem; though
indeed, by consequence, in the evils denounced against her, the whole land of
Judah was deeply concerned. It may be read as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, Oh Ariel, Ariel, as spoken by way of lamentation, the word Ariel being
twice repeated to express the more grief, as in the like mournful lamentation
of our Saviors over Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, etc. But the most Interpreters render it as it is in our
Bibles, Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, etc. Ariel is by interpretation, a mighty Lion,
or, as it is in the margin, the lion of God; see the Note, Psalm. 104.16. Many
of the Hebrews hold, that it is the Temple in Jerusalem, against which this woe
is particularly denounced; and that the Temple was called Ariel, the Lion of
God, because the figure of the Temple did somewhat resemble that of a Lion,
being broad before, and narrow behind. Others say, it is the Altar in the
Temple, that is here called Ariel: And indeed we find in Ezekiel. 43.15. that the
Altar of burnt offerings, is in the Hebrew expressly called Ariel; and that by
the common consent of most Expositors, because this Altar that was consecrated
to God, seemed as a Lion to devour the bodies of those beasts that were daily
sacrificed thereon. But I rather think with others, that it is Jerusalem that
is here termed Ariel; and that the following words are added, to make known
what the Prophet intended by Ariel; Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the City where David
dwelt. And though there are several Reasons given by Expositors, why Jerusalem
is so called, as because she had been fierce against God, and against his
Prophets and Servants, whom she had cruelly slain, according to that, Jer.
12.8. Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest, it cries out against
me; or because it was a very strong City, and by the valor of her inhabitants,
had made great havoc amongst the Neighbour-Nations; yet I rather think, that
Jerusalem is here so called, with respect to the Temple and Altar therein (and
so the woe is denounced against all three together), and that purposely to
imply, that though they looked upon Jerusalem as a strong and invincible City,
the lion of God, that need not fear any people, and that because of the
presence of God amongst them, as his peculiar vovenant people (whereof the
Altar was a sign) yet this should no way secure them from the judgment now
denounced against them. To which purpose those words are added, the city where
David dwelt: For this also is to imply, that though they gloried much in the
promises that God had made, concerning the perpetuity of David's Kingdom, yet
all this would do them no good; even that which was the Roya City of that
glorious King, being quite degenerate from what she had been, should now be
laid in the dust.

Add ye year to year: let them kill sacrifices.] Some hold, that the Prophets
intention in these words, was to make known, that within a few years, or more
particularly within two years, there should be an end of their sacrificing. But
the words seem to be clearly an Ironical taunt; as if the Prophet had said, Go
on year after year, to keep your solemn feasts, and in each of them to kill and
offer up your appointed sacrifices, and feed your selves with vain hopes, that
thus year after year ye shall still continue to do: alas! all this will do no
good; and that because God abhors your sacrifices, and will shortly put an end
to them. And indeed, if this Prophecy were delivered, as some think it was, at
some one of their feasts, when they were very busily intent upon slaying and
offering their sacrifices, it must needs be the more seasonable to discover the
folly of the great confidence they had in that their hypocritical service.

Ver. 2. Yet I will distress Ariel, etc.] That is, Though you go on in a formal
way of offering sacrifices to me; and though for some years the judgment
threatened may be deferred, yet at last (says the Lord) I will certainly, by
enemies I shall raise up against you, bring both your City and Temple into
great streights, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow; that is, instead of
your present jollity, when you are offering up a multitude of sacrifices at
your solemn feasts, you shall then be sorely over-pressed with grief; and it
shall be unto me as Ariel; see the foregoing Note. The meaning is, either, 1.
That God would cause Jerusalem to be besieged by enemies, even as Shepherds and
Hunters are wont to gather together, and beset some fierce raging Lion, that
they may destroy him. Or 2. That she should be surrounded with enemies, even as
the Altar, called Ariel, Ezekiel. 43.15. used at their solemn feasts to be
compassed about on every side with beasts, brought thither for sacrifices, and
with the people that brought them; see the Note, Psalm. 26.6. Or 3. (which seems
most probable) That the whole City should be just like the Altar of
burnt-offerings in the Temple, in that it should be all on a light flame, and
covered all over with gore blood; and in that the streets thereof, and the
Country round about should lie full of slaughtered men and women (sacrificed
(as it were) to the satisfying of Divine Justice), even as the bodies of
beasts, slain for sacrifices, used to lie scattered round about the Altar.

Ver. 3. And I will camp against thee round about, etc.] This I conceive, was
meant of the Babylonians besieging Jerusalem; for which see the Notes, 2 Kings
25.1, 2, etc. Yet I see not, but that it might also be spoken with respect to
the same done afterward by the Romans: for our Savior in foretelling that
siege, may seem to allude to this place of the Prophet, Luke 19.43. Thine
enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, etc.

Ver. 4. And thou shall be brought down, etc.] That is, Thou that do now so
proudly exalt thy self, shall then be humbled and pulled down, and shall speak
out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust; as Prisoners
and Captives are wont to do, that lie prostrate upon the ground before their
enemies; or those that are brought low to the very dust, according to that,
Chap. 47.1. Come down and sit in the dust, O Virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on
the ground: And to the same purpose is that which follows, and thy voice shall
be as of one that has a familiar spirit, out of the ground, etc. for which see
the Note, Chap. 8.19. The meaning is, That the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that
had wont to talk so highly and proudly, and to roar like a Lion against God and
his Servants, should then speak submissively enough, as men overwhelmed with
fear and grief are wont to do. Yea, some understand this, of their lying in
dust and ashes, beging mercy of God, when this Judgment, now denounced, was
come upon them.

Ver. 5. Moreover, the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and
the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passes away, etc.]
Some understand this of the foreign Forces that should invade Jerusalem; and so
take it to be inserted as a promise, for the comfort of the faithful amongst
the Jews; to wit, that when they should be humbled (as was said in the
foregoing verse), though their enemies should be never so many, even like the
small dust or chaff, yet like so much dust or chaff, they should soon be
scattered and driven away. And some of these think this is meant of the
destruction of Sennacherib's Army, that should besiege Jerusalem in the days of
Hezekiah; and others, of the Babylonians; to wit, that when they had ruined
Jerusalem, even they should within a while flee away, like so much dust o^
chaff, before the Medes and Persians. But because in the following Verses the
Prophet proceeds still in a way of denouncing judgments against Jerusalem, I
rather think with others, that this also is of the same tenor, and that
Jerusalem is here threatened, That her strangers, and terrible ones, that is,
her Garison-Souldiers, hired from other Nations, and those Auxiliary Forces
which should from Egypt, or elsewhere, be sent in to her aid, in whom she
gloried much, because of their number and valor, should be no defense at all
to her, but should be soon scattered and driven away, as the dust and chaff is
driven before the wind. And accordingly the last clause is to be understood
likewise, yea, it shall be at an instant, suddenly; to wit, of the sudden
flight of those foreign Forces, on whom they so much relied, rather than of the
flight and dispersion of their enemies, as they understand it, that take this
to be a promise, as is before said.

Ver. 6. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with thunder, and with
earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring
fire.] That is, God will execute his judgments upon thee, O Jerusalem, with
great terror and unresistable violence, and that on a sudden; see the Notes,
Chap. 13.13. and 2 Samuel 22.8, etc. And this, I concieve, is meant of the
Babylonians invading and storming the City, 2 Kings 25.14. and the expression
here used, seems to refer to what was said in the foregoing verse, that their
Auxiliary Companies from foreign parts, should be like small dust, and as chaff
that passes away; implying a reason why it must needs be so, to wit, because
God would break forth upon them, as with a terrible storm, and devouring fire,
before which they must needs be as so much dust and chaff.

Ver. 7. And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, etc.]
That is, against Jerusalem; see the Notes above, ver 1, 2. even all that fight
against her and her munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a
night-vision. They that understand that which was said before, ver. 5. as a
promise, inserted for the comfort of the faithful amongst Gods people,
concerning the speedy ruin of the foreign enemies that should come up and fight
against Jerusalem, do accordingly also understand that which is said here,
either 1. of the disappointment of their vain hopes, that they should be as a
dream of a night-vision; that is, that it should be with them, as it is with a
man in a dream; they should feed themselves with vain hopes of taking the City,
and of satisfying their rage in the destruction of the people, and their
covetous desires in their swallowing up all the wealth of the City; but in the
conclusion it should be nothing so; they should be frustrated of their
expectation, as it is with a man that in a dream fancies he is eating, and
filling his belly, but when he awakes, there is no such matter. And this they
conceive, was meant of the frustrating of the confident hopes of Sennacherib
and his Assyrians, concerning their subduing the City Jerusalem: Or 2. of the
sudden scattering and perishing of all their Power and Forces, that they should
be as a dream of a night-vision; to wit, in that, as a dream does suddenly
vanish away out of the minds of men, so all their great Armies and Power,
should be suddenly wasted and consumed, and brought to nothing, according to
that of the Poet, par levibus ventis, voluerieque simillima somno. And this
likewise some apply to the sudden destruction of Sennacherib's Army; and
others, though not so fitly, to the destruction of the Babylonians, within a
while after they had ruined Jerusalem, by the Medes and Persians. But it seems
far better to suit with the context, That as in the foregoing verses, so here
still the Prophet should proceed on in threatening the Jews. And they that
understand it so, do accordingly hold the meaning of the expression here used,
to be, either 1. That the multitude of the Nations that fight against
Jerusalem, should be as a dream of a night-vision; to wit, to the Jews, in that
they should be so secure and fearless, either of their invasion, or of their
prevailing over them when they invaded them, that it should come unexpectedly
upon them, and seem incredible to them, as if it were a dream, rather than
really done: Or 2. rather, That the enemies that should fight against
Jerusalem, should be as men in a dream; to wit, in regard of their insatiable
covetousness and cruelty, as is explained in the following verse.

Ver. 8. It shall even be as when a hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats;
but he awaketh, and his soul is empty, etc*] That is, As a hungry man in his
sleep, when he dreams he is eating (as it is usual with men in such a condition
to do), does in an instant devour all which seems to be set before him; but
when he is awakened, the man is as hungry as ever he was before; so shall it be
with the enemies that fight against Jerusalem; they shall greedily and speedily
devour Jerusalem; but when they have so done, all they have done, shall be to
them as if they had done nothing; they shall still be as eager in their rage
against you, as hungry and thirsty after your blood and ruin, as they were at
the first: When they have glutted themselves (as one would think) with your
blood, they shall be no more satisfied, than a dreamer is with what he eats or
drinks in his dream. This Exposition agrees best with that which went before.
Yet some understand it of the disappointment of the hopes of the enemies,
concerning the ruin of Jerusalem: for which see the foregoing Note.

Ver. 9. Stay your selves and wonder, etc.] It is clear, that the Prophet does
here enter upon a very sharp invective against the strange security and
stupidity of the Jews, in their not minding the dreadful judgments which God
had threatened to bring upon them. And because the following words are rendered
by some (as they are in the margin of our Bibles), take your pleasure, and
riot; therefore they hold, that the Prophet speaks here to these secure
wretches, Stay your selves, and wonder; as if he should have said (speaking
ironically), Persist in your slighting what is spoken, hold off still from
hearkening to my words, and only through Infidelity make a wonderment at what
is threatened, as esteeming them strange, and altogether unlikely things; and
thereupon take your pleasure, and riot, as no way fearing that any such evil
will come upon you. Alas! all this proceeds from a senseless spirit; they are
drunken, etc. But I rather think, that this is spoken to the people in general,
or to the faithful amongst them; Stay your selves and wonder; that is, Stay
long in your thoughts and meditations upon that which I have spoken, concerning
the sore judgments that are coming upon you; or that which I say at present,
concerning the security and stupidity of this people, and wonder and be
astonished at it; as if he should have said, The more you muse of it, the more
cause you will find to wonder at it; but that will be all you will be able to
do; you will be able to do nothing for the helping of your selves; cry ye out,
and cry; to wit, for the sad condition you are in, and the grievous miseries
that are coming upon you: they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger,
but not with strong drink; that is, they are stupid, and senseless, and mad, and
mistake and miscarry in all their counsels and courses, like so many drunken
men; see the Notes, Chap. 19.14. and 24.20. and 28.7, 8.

Ver. 10. For the Lord has poured upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has
closed your eyes, etc.] That is, The Lord, for your obstinacy, has smitten you
with judicial blindness and stupidity; by reason whereof, ye mind things no
more than those do, that in a Lethargy are stricken with a deep sleep; see the
Note, Chap. 6.10. and see also Romans 11.8. the prophets and your rulers, the
seers has he covered; to wit, with a mist or veil of spiritual blindness; see
the Note, Chap. 25.7. By the Prophets here, are meant their false Prophets, who
were also called Seers, see the Note, 2 Samuel 15.27. and then for the following
words, and your rulers, the seers, either thereby is meant, the most seeing,
wise and prudent amongst their rulers; or their Seers are called their rulers,
because in those times of confusion, their false Prophets would intrude upon
matters of Government; for which see Jer. 26.8. However, these are mentioned
particularly, either only to show, That not only the common sort of people, but
even the wisest amongst them, should be thus blinded; or else, to set forth,
how great and unavoidable the blindness and ignorance of the people must needs
be, when their Teachers, by whom they were to be taught, and to be brought to
understanding, should be as blind and stupid as others.

Ver. 11. And the vision of all is become unto you, as the words of a book (or
letter) that is sealed, etc.] The drift of this passage, in this and the
following verse, is to show, that by reason of this judiciary blindness,
wherewith God had stricken the Jews, neither the learned nor the unlearned;
that is, neither their Priests, Prophets and great men, nor the simple
unlettered people, would reap any good by his, or any other of the Prophets
making known the will of God to them, though it were done never so plainly: To
the learned it would, through the just judgment of God, be as a book that is
sealed, which is set forth in this verse; and then for the unlearned, it would
be to them as a book, which though open, yet is all one as if it were sealed,
because they cannot read it; which is set forth in the following verse.

Ver. 13. Wherefore the Lord said, etc.] Here the cause is shown, why God had
delivered them up to this blindness and stupidity of mind. 1. It was for their
hypocrisy and formality in the worship of God: for as much as this people draw
near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed
their heart far from me; that is, forasmuch as they make a fair outward
profession of great respect they bear to me, and seem outwardly very forward
and zealous for the performance of the several duties of my worship and
service, whereas indeed there is no such thing in their hearts. And 2. for
their hypocrisy and superstition jointly together, in those last words, and
their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men: For though one thing
intended thereby was, that even when they did those things in Gods worship,
which God had enjoined in his word (see the Notes, 2 Kings 17.32, 33.) yet they
did it not out of any reverence they bore to God, or out of conscience of
obeying his command, but only out of respect to Humane Authority, because their
religious Kings, whom they durst not disobey, enjoined those things to be done;
yet another thing jointly intended thereby was, that they pretended to worship
God by those ways whereof there was not the least mention in Gods word, but
which were only devised, and taught, and enjoined them by men; as is evident by
our Saviors pressing this place for the reproof of the Scribes and Pharisees
burdening the people with their Traditions, Mat. 15.7, 8, 9. Ye hypocrites,
well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, This people draws nigh unto me with
their mouth, -- But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
commandments of men.

Ver. 14. Therefore behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work amongst this
people, even a mavelous work, and a wonder, etc.] That is, Because of this
grievous wickedness of my people, the judgment shall be strange and wonderful
wherewith I will now punish them; for the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish; that is, they shall be infatuated, and be as so many fools; to wit,
both in regard, 1. of their not understanding the word of God (see the Note
above, ver. 11.) 2. of their thinking to please God with that worship which he
abhorred. And 3. of their foolish managing their State Affairs; or their doing
of those things under a pretense of great wisdom, which in the conclusion
should come to nothing, but be found to have been foolishly contrived. And the
same is said again in the following clause, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid; that is, no understanding shall be found in them: for
so the Apostle cites this place, 1 Cor. 1.19. I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.

Ver. 15. Woe unto them that seck de^p to hide their counsel from the Lord,
etc.] There is an allusion in these words, to the practice of those that are
wont to dig deep in the earth, that they may there hide any thing under ground,
which they desire to keep secret, that no body may find it out. And many there
are, that understand it generally of those Hypocrites amongst Gods people, that
being void of all true fear of God in their hearts, and closely wicked in their
lives, did in the mean season, by an outward profession and show of godliness,
and much devotion in the duties of Gods worship, dig deep, as it were, to hide
their wickedness from God and good men. But oothers understand it more
particularly, either, 1. of those Statesmen, that deriding all the threatenings
of Gods Prophets, did securely rest and rely upon those Plots and Devices which
they had in their Heads, wherewith they doubted not to secure themselves
against all dangers (such as might be their intentions to call in foreign
Princes to their aid, or any other counsels of the like nature); which was all
one in effect, as if they hoped, that these secret contrivances of theirs,
should be hidden from God; and so should frustrate the evil which God had
determined to bring upon them; see the Notes, Chap. 28.14, 15, 22. Or else 2.
of those that did secretly plot any mischief against the Cause and the Servants
of God. However, clear it is, that the woe here denounced against them is, That
God would certainly punish them, and thereby clearly discover their folly in
hoping to hide their wickedness, or their crafty secret designs, from an
all-seeing Gods of which that also is spoken which follows, and their works
are in the dark; that is, in secret they work wickedness; or they apprehend
their Devices are carried on so closely, that no eye can take any notice of
them: and they say, Who sees us? and who knows us? That is, they said so in
their hearts; or they carried themselves as securely, as if they thought so.

Ver. 16. Surely your turning of things up-side down, shall be esteemed as the
potters clay, etc.] 1. By their turning of things up-side down, may be meant,
their endeavoring to hide their wickedness from the eye of God, by a show of
piety, and of a seeming devout care to perform the outward duties of Gods
worship; and likewise their close carrying on of their Plots, for the securing
of themselves; whereby they hoped to evade the judgments threatened; as if they
could hide their contrivements from God, as men are wont to turn a dish or
vessel up-side down, that so they may hide that which is whelmed under it from
being seen. And if we take it thus, then the meaning is, that their turning of
things up-side down, should be esteemed as the potters clay, in that, whilst
they sought thus to hide their wickedness, their Plots or Projects from God,
they lay as open to Gods eye, as the clay is to the Potter, when he is
fashioning of it upon the wheel; and that it was as gross a piece of folly to
think, that they could hide themselves, their thoughts or designs from God, as
it would be to think, that the clay should be hidden from the Potter. And to
this purpose is that which follows; for shall the work say of him that made
it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed, say of him that framed it, He
had no understanding? That is, for men to think, that they, their counsels or
ways, can be hidden from God, is all one as if one should think, that the
Potter did not see the clay whereof he makes his Pots; which would be the same
in effect, as if he should say, that he made it not; or that in making it, he
did he knew not what: For if a man acknowledges, that God made him, he must
needs acknowledge, that God sees him, and that he sees and understands all that
he thinks or does; see the Notes, Psalm. 33.15. and 94.8, 9, etc and 139.7, 8,
9. But 2. By their turning of things up-side down, may be meant, their turning
of things up and down in their thoughts, when they were plotting how to secure
themselves from judgments threatened, or contriving any mischievous designs
against the Cause of God, or the Servants of God. And if we understand it thus,
then by saying, Surely your turning of things up-side down, shall be esteemed
as the potters clay, the Prophet seems to intend, that in all these their
contrivances, they should be as the clay in the hand of the Potter; to wit, in
that 1. All their contrivances should be in the eye of God, as the clay is in
the eye of the Potter. And 2. That whilst they were winding and turning things
up and down in their minds, sometimes casting them into one shape, and
sometimes into another, as the clay is molded now in one fashion, and by and by
in another: they were all this while under the power and government of Divine
Providence; so that they could not do what they pleased themselves, but only
what God would have done; and it was in the power of God to destroy them, even
whenever he pleased. And this suits well too with that which follows, for
shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? etc. the drift thereof
being to show, that for men to think they can do any thing without God, or
against his Decrees, who are in Gods hand as the clay is in the hand of the
Potter, is all one in effect, as if they should deny they were his creatures.

Ver. 17. Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon, etc.] Here, for the
comfort of the faithful amongst Gods people, the Prophet closes this sad
Prophecy, as usually he does elsewhere, with many comfortable promises, of much
good that God would do for them, shortly after the execution of the judgments
before threatened; to wit, after the devastation of the land by the Assyrian
Army, or after their return from the Babylonian captivity, which comparatively,
might be well called a very little while. And first he begins with a promise of
the great exceeding fruitfulness wherewith God would bless their land; Lebanon
shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed
as a forest; that is, those places that lie untilled, wild and waste, like a
forest, as Lebanon did, shall become as fertile, and yield as much fruit, as
those that are at present the most fruitful fields; and those that are at
present the most fruitful fields, shall then become so much more fruitful, than
at present they are; that in their present condition they may be esteemed as
wild forests, in comparison of what then they shall be: or rather, that the
corn thereon should grow as high and thick as a forest; see the Note, Psalm.
72.16. I know indeed, that this place may admit of several other Expositions
which are given by Interpreters: For because it is in the Hebrew, Lebanon shall
return to Garme^, and Carmel become as a wood or forest, therefore some
understand it, as a farther threatening denounced against the Jews, either 1.
concerning the great devastation that should within a little while be made in
the land by the Assyrian or Babylonian Army; to wit, that Lebanon should become
like the plain fields of Carmel, all the goodly trees therein being hewn down;
and that the fruitful fields of Carmel should become wild, being overgrown
with bushes, like a wood or forest; see the Notes, Chap. 7.23, 24. Or else
mystically, concerning the rejection of the Jews, and the calling in of the
Gentiles in their stead, in the days of the Gospel (which indeed very many
learned Expositors do think is here intended); to wit, that the Gentiles, that
had been as Lebanon, a fruitless forest, should by spiritual manuring become as
Carmel, by reason of the multitude of believers amongst them, abounding in the
fruits of holiness and righteousness; and that the Jews on the other side, that
had been as Carmel, a fruitful field, should become as a wild and fruitless
forest, according to that, Mat. 21.43. The kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof; which they say,
is here foretold, as a change that should shortly come to pass, because many
hundred years are with God but as a very little while. And again, others
understand it, as spoken figuratively; to wit, that the Assyrians, that were
exalted like Lebanon, should lie low like Carmel; namely, when their Army was
destroyed by the Angel of the Lord, and the afflicted Jews should lift up their
heads like the lofty trees of the forest of Lebanon. But in regard the very
same words, in a manner, are repeated again, Chap. 32.15. and are there clearly
a promise, I cannot conceive, that they are here to be taken as a threatening.
And for the latter of the two Expositions before given, that does no way suit
with our Translation. And therefore that which is mentioned first, concerning
the great fertility of the land, I conceive, was first and principally here
intended by the Prophet. And if it be taken, as spoken in a mystical sense, it
must then surely be understood, of the great abundance of Grace that should be
in the Kingdom of Christ.

Ver. 18. And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, etc.] That
is, say some, In that day, when Ariel shall be besieged, when the judgments now
foretold, shall come upon Judah and Jerusalem, they that were deaf and blind,
as to the word spoken by Gods Prophets, and to whom therefore the word of God
was a book sealed, or which they could not read, as was before said, ver. 11,
12. shall then be constrained to yield to the truth of what has been spoken.
But those are clearly promises of mercy. And therefore the meaning rather is,
that in that day, when after the accomplishment of these judgments threatened,
God shall begin to show them mercy again, many of those that were deaf to the
word of God, should attend to understand, believe and obey it; and the eyes of
the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness; that is, they shall
be cured of their spiritual blindness. Yet though this was partly fulfilled in
those that were in those times reformed by the judgments that God brought upon
the land, this Prophecy might have respect to a fuller accomplishment of it in
the days of the Gospel (see the Note, Chap. 9.2.) and that especially with
respect to the conversion of the Gentiles.

Ver. 19. The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, etc.] That is,
The humbled faithful ones amongst Gods people (see the Note, Psalm. 22.26.)
shall exceedingly rejoice, and that many several ways, they shall have joy upon
joy; to wit, for saving Grace wrought in their hearts, for Gods preserving them
in those public judgments that had been upon the land, and for their freedom
from those wicked ones that had formerly tyrannized amongst them; and the poor
among men, shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel; see the Notes, Chap. 1.4.
The meaning is, that the poor that had been oppressed, and those especially
that were spiritually poor, should rejoice in Gods salvation.

Ver. 20. For the terrible one is brought to naught, etc.] That is, Those that
were formerly a terror unto my people, shall be destroyed. And this may be
meant, either of their foreign enemies, the Assyrians or Babylonians (see the
Note above, ver. 5. and Chap. 16.4.) or rather of those oppressors amongst
themselves, that had been a great terror to Gods poor faithful Servants in the
land: and the scorner is consumed; that is, they that scoffed at the words and
threatenings of Gods Prophets: and all that watch for iniquity, are cut off;
that is, that being eager and intent to do mischief, do watch for an
opportunity for the doing of it.

Ver. 21. That make a man an offender for a word, etc.] That is, That are wont
for a word which slips from men unawares, or which they pervert or misconstrue
otherwise than they intended that spoke it, do accuse them, and bring them into
trouble, and cause them to be censured and punished, as if they were offenders.
But now though this may be thus understood, of their dealing in this kind
injuriously and mischievously with any men in general; yet I confess, it is by
most Expositors understood more particularly of their dealing thus with Gods
Prophets; to wit, that when they faithfully preached the word of God to them,
they were ready to carp at their words, and to accuse them of Sedition, and
such like offenses, as it is expressly said of Amos, Chap. 7. 10. The land is
not able to bear all his words, and that because of the word; that here follow;
and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate; for this is clearly meant
of those that lay at the catch, to ins^are Gods Prophets, and to bring them
into trouble, who used indeed to prophecy in the Gates (where there was still
the greatest concourse of people, because all public Affairs were for the most
part there managed), and boldly there to reprove even the Judges and Rulers of
the People, as well as others; see Jer. 17.19. and thence is the like
expression used by Amos, Chap. 5.10. they hate him that rebukes in the gate.
And much to the same purpose is the last clause, and turn aside the just for a
thing of naught; that is, they over-bear the righteous in judgment, so that
they cannot have justice done them; yea, many times they cause them to be
punished as delinquents, and that for a thing of naught; that is, upon mere
vain pretenses, without any just cause; or for something that is no
considerable advantage to them; see the Note, Chap. 10.2. and Amos 5.12. where
the same expression is used; they turn aside the poor in the gate from their
right.

Ver. 22. Therefore, etc.] The drift of these words, is still to comfort the
faithful amongst Gods people, against that sad condition whereinto they were
shortly to be brought; whereof he had spoken in the beginning of this Chapter;
and further to set forth that blessed and joyful state whereinto God would
bring them, after their enemies were destroyed, both foreign, and those amongst
themselves, that had so sorely oppressed them (whereof he had began to speak,
ver. 17, 18, etc.) Therefore thus says the Lord who redeemed Abraham,
concerning the house, the posterity of Jacob; that is, Thus says the Lord who
rescued and delivered Abraham (see the Note, Psalm. 107.2.) to wit, out of Ur of
the Chaldees, from an idolatrous place and people (see the Notes, Josh. 24.2.)
and afterward from many dangers and streights he was in; and so entering into a
covenant with him, promised grace and salvation to him and to his seed (which
is purposely premised to imply, that the God who had redeemed their forefather
Abraham, could also redeem them: He who did at first raise the Church of Israel
from such a mean beginning, could also raise up them that were his posterity,
from the lowest and most desperate condition whereinto they could be brought);
Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale; that is,
say some very learned Expositors, Though the Israelites have been so extremely
wicked, and brought into such a sad and desolate condition, by the just
vengeance of God upon them for their wickedness, that if their father Jacob had
been alive to see them, he would have been ashamed of them, and extremely
grieved for them; yet now it shall be no longer so; Jacob shall not now be
ashamed, etc. But I rather think, that by Jacob here, is again meant the
posterity of Jacob; and that of them it is here said, that God having made good
to them the promises before mentioned, they should no more now be ashamed of,
and grieved for their being in such a sad condition as formerly; or that the
faithful amongst them should not then be ashamed of the confidence wherewith
they had waited upon God.

Ver. 23. But when he sees his children, etc.] Here the bliss, promised the
Jews, is farther set forth, by showing them, with what a large increase of a
holy seed God would in those times bless them. But when he sees his children;
that is, when Jacob, to wit, the Jewish Church and State, the posterity of
Jacob, shall see the several members of the Church, the true race of Jacob (see
the Note, Psalm. 24.6.) the work of mine hands in the midst of him; that is,
those whom in this Church I have wonderfully delivered, and redeemed to my self
to be my people, and whom I have regenerated by my Spirit, making them new
creatures; see the Note, Psalm. 95.6. they; that is, Jacob with his children,
shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the holy one of Jacob (the same thing is
twice repeated for the greater vehemence); that is, they shall own the great
things that have been done for them, to be my work, and shall praise my name
for it; and by their holy lives, shall bring glory to my name, which was
formerly polluted by the wickedness of the people; and shall fear the God of
Israel; that is, they shall serve him, and trust in him; see the Note, Chap.
8.13. And this indeed very many understand of that spiritual seed which from
all Nations should be brought in to the Church by the preaching of the Gospel.

Ver. 24. They also that erred in spirit, shall come to understanding, etc.]
That is, They that were before blind and foolish, shall be enlightened with
sound knowledge. It is much the same with that which was said before, ver. 18.
for which see the Note there: and they that murmured, shall learn doctrine;
that is, they that were wont to murmur against the teaching of my Prophets,
shall willingly embrace their Doctrine. And some understand it also of the Jews
ceasing at last to murmur against the calling and conversion of the Gentiles.

CHAP. XXX.
VERSE 1. WOE to the rebellious children, says the Lord, etc.] It is clear by
the words in the following verse, that walk to go down into Egypt, etc. that
the aim of the Prophet in this and the following Chapter, is to reprove the
Jews, and to denounce the judgments of God against them for their fleeing to
Egypt for help, either by sending to them for aid, or by going thither there to
shelter themselves. And this is that for which the Prophet here terms them
rebellious children (a Rebellion of all other most execrable, Chap. 1.2. I have
nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me), not so
much because they had rebelled against the King of Assyria, or Babylon
(concerning which see the Note, 2 Kings 18.7.) as because they were rebellious
against Gods command, whose children they professed themselves to be; and that
particularly in this business, of their seeking to Egypt for help, as appears
by the following words; Woe to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that
take counsel, but not of me; which is said, either because in their streights
they consulted amongst themselves what to do, but never asked advice from God,
by enquiring of Gods Prophets, or otherwise; or else, because they were so far
from that, that they therein disobeyed the command of God by his Prophets. And
to the same purpose is that which follows, and that cover with a covering, but
not of my spirit; that is, that seek to shelter themselves against approaching
storms, and to possess the people with great hopes, that they shall be covered
and sheltered from them; but it is not by means which I approve of, and which I
by my Spirit, in the mouth of my Prophets, have advised them to; it is not by
turning to me by repentance, and by calling on me for counsel and help, but by
ways of their own projecting; yea, contrary to what I have commanded; see the
Notes, Chap. 4.5, 6. and 28.15, 20. that they may add sin to sin; that is, that
to their sin, in revolting from those Heathen Kings, to whom they had yielded
themselves to be Tributaries (see 2 Kings 18.7.) did now add the sin of
neglecting God, and fleeing to Egypt for help: Or that to their sin, in calling
in the Assyrians to their help, formerly in the days of Ahaz, 2 Kings 16.7. did
now add this sin of running to Egypt, to desire their help against the
Assyrians. Or rather, that to the wickedness wherewith they had provoked God to
bring the Heathen upon them, they might add this new sin, of seeking to shelter
themselves from this vengeance of God by unlawful ways.

Ver. 2. That walk to go down into Egypt, etc.] It was usual with this people,
when they were in danger of being invaded by any foreign enemies, to fly to
Egypt for help. Thus Hoshea sent to the King of Egypt, 2 Kings 17.4. And thus
it seems in Zedekiah's time, they had procured the King of Egypt to come and
help them against the Chaldeans, Jer. 37.5, 7. and after the Chaldeans had
carried the Jews into Babylon, they that were left in the land of Judea fled
into Egypt to shelter themselves, Jer. 43.5, 7. But yet I rather think, that
here the Prophet speaks of what was done in his own time, when Sennacherib
invaded Judea, and sent his Captains to besiege Jerusalem. For though in the
story, there be no express mention of their sending then to Egypt for aid, yet
because we find before that Isaiah had forewarned the Jews of their folly, in
resting at that time upon the aid of the Egyptians; see the Notes, Chap. 20.1,
6. And because in the latter end of this Chapter, ver. 31. there is a
prediction, for the comfort of the faithful, of the Assyrians d^wnfall, it
seems most probable, that Hezekiah's Princes did at that time send secretly to
the Egyptian, to procure him to come in to their aid (and that perhaps not
without Hezekiah's consent); and that hereupon our Prophet did denounce this woe
against those that walk to go down into Egypt (and have not asked at my mouth);
see the foregoing Note, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh (of
whose exceeding Puiffance and power, it seems they had a very high opinion),
and to trust in the shadow of Egypt; see the Note, Chap. 18.1. And indeed, how
unlawful it was for them to seek to Egypt for help especially, see the Notes,
Deuteronomy. 17.16.

Ver. 3. Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, etc.] To wit,
when they should find, that instead of helping them, they should not be able to
defend themselves against the Assyrians; see the Note, Chap. 20. ver. 1, 6.

Ver. 4. For his Princes, etc.] That is, Hezekiah's, were at Zoan; see the
Note, Chap. 19.11. and his ambassadors came to Hanes, elsewhere called
Tahapanes, Jer. 2.16. and Tahpanhes, Jer. 43.7. This is spoken in a way of
derision, to set forth how eager and busy they were to seek for help from
Egypt to no purpose at all.

Ver. 5. They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them, etc.]
See the Note above, ver. 3.

Ver. 6. The burden of the beasts of the South, etc.] By the beasts of the
South here, are meant, either the young asses and camels, afterward mentioned;
on which the Jews carried the great Treasures and Gifts wherewith they meant to
hire the Egyptians to come and aid them against the Assyrians, into Egypt, and
thorough the Desert, by which they were to go into Egypt, both which lay
Southward from the land of Judea (as upon the same account, Jer. 13.19. the
Cities of Egypt are called the Cities of the South): Or else the Jews
themselves, who are termed beasts, either because, like so many beasts, they
traveled along Southward, with burdens on their backs, the great presents
they had provided for the Egyptians; or because they were so brutishly foolish,
as to disobey and forsake God, that they might seek help from Egypt. And
accordingly in these words, The burden of the beasts of the South, the intent
of the Prophet might be only to show, that he would now declare, how in seeking
to procure aid from Egypt, these beasts of the South went with great burdens on
their backs, as Chap. 46.1. he tells us, how the Babylonian Idols were a burden
to the weary beast that carried them: Or else, which most Expositors hold, by
the burden of the beasts of the South, is meant, a heavy Prophecy denounced
against the beasts that went laden with great burdens of Treasure Southward,
from Judea, into the land of Egypt; see the Note, Chap. 13.1. And it may be
taken, as spoken with reference to that which went before, or that which
follows after; and that in a way of descanting upon the word burden; as if the
Prophet had said, Since you will needs go with such burdens of Treasures into
Egypt, to get Auxiliary Forces from thence, for your defense, lo I tell you of
another kind of burden that God has provided for you, The burden of the beasts
of the South; that is, a burdensome Prophecy, concerning the beasts of the
South. But however, if we understand this Prophecy, as denouncing evil against
the beasts, on which they carried their Presents for Pharaoh, we must know,
that hereby his aim is to inveigh against the Princes themselves that went
along with them, deriding their folly and madness, in taking so much pains, and
being at so much cost to undo themselves; and that he directs his Prophecy
against the beasts, to imply, that it was in vain to speak to the men that were
deaf to all that God could say to them, but that the beasts should feel the
accomplishment of that which the men themselves would not mind nor regard. And
as for the following words, into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence
come the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent: they will
carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon
the bunches of camels, to a people that shall not profit them; we must know,
that by the land of trouble and anguish, may be meant, either 1. Egypt, so
called, because it had been to their forefathers a land of sore oppression and
trouble, and so was like to be also unto them; which may seem the more
probable, because the word that in the Hebrew is used for Egypt, has some
affinity with that Hebrew word which is here rendered trouble. (And most that
understand it thus, think that by the lion and viper, and fiery flying serpent
coming from thence, is meant, the Egyptians, or their cruel and mischievous
Soldiers, as harmful to the Jews as such cruel beasts are). Or else rather 2.
That vast wilderness on the South of Judah, thorough which they were to pass,
as they went into Egypt, wherein there was abundance of these harmful
mischievous creatures (see the Notes, Deuteronomy. 8.15. and 32.10.) and particularly,
fiery flying serpents; of which see the Note, Numb. 21.6. So that the drift of
adding these words, seems to be, 1. to imply their fond eagerness in seeking to
Egypt for help, in that they were not afraid to hazard themselves in such a
dangerous journey: And 2. to set forth their unhappiness therein, in that this
people, whose aid they did so ambitiously desire, should do them no good at
all; see the Note above, ver. 3. which is farther also declared in the
following verse.

Ver. 7. For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose, etc.] To wit,
In that though they should attempt to do it, yet they should not be able to
effect it. Therefore have I cried concerning this; that is, I the Lord (the
Prophet speaking now in the person of God), or I Isaiah, by the Lords command,
have often, with much earnestness, advised my people concerning this their
running to Egypt for aid. Or, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, therefore
have I cried to her; that is, to Jerusalem, or to the daughter of my people, as
the Prophets used to speak, Their strength is to sit still; that is, that which
will be most for their strength and safety is, not to run out for help, either
to Egypt or elsewhere, but quietly to wait upon God, and to rely on his help.
And it is well observed by a learned Expositor, that hereby it may be well
inferred, that this Prophecy was not intended concerning Zedekiah's seeking to
Egypt for help, because though they were told, that Egypt should not relieve
them, yet they were not enjoined to sit still, and wait upon God for help, but
to go out, and yield up themselves to the Babylonian, Jer. 38.2, 17, 18.

Ver. 8. Now go, etc.] These are the words of God to the Prophet: Now go, write
it before them in a table, and note it in a book: as if he should have said,
Since I have so often warned them in vain; go now and write it before them; to
w^t, this which thou have prophesied to them; or that foregoing sentence, ver.
7. Their strength is to sit still; or that which is added in the following
verses, that this is a rebellious people, lying children, etc. in a table; to
wit, to be hung up in some public place, that every one might read it. The
very same thing we find enjoined the Prophet Habbakkuk, Chap. 2.2. but see the
Note before, Chap. 8.1. that it may be for the time to come, for ever and ever;
that is, that it may be a memorial and testimony to them and their posterity in
all succeeding Ages, both how carefully and faithfully I warned them, and
taught them what to do, and how obstinately they refused to hearken to me.

Ver. 9. That this is a rebellious people, lying children, etc.] That is,
either 1. such as are not the true children of God, but false and counterfeit
children: Or 2. such as are not what by covenant they had engaged themselves,
and what they outwardly professed themselves to be, according to that, Rev.
3.9. which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; see the Note, Chap.
29.13. children that will not hear the law of the Lord, that is, the word of
God, and the teaching of his Prophets. Some think, that they are charged here,
not only with not obeying, but also with not enduring to hear the instructions
of Gods Prophets. Yea, and some conceive it is spoken with particular respect
to that Law, Deuteronomy. 17.16. wherein they were forbidden to go down into Egypt.

Ver. 10. Which say to the seers, See not, etc.] See the Note, 2 Samuel 15.27.
and to the prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things; speak unto us smooth
things, prophecy deceits. Some understand this, of their silencing Gods
Prophets, and their enjoining them not to preach to the People, unless they
would give over that tartness and bitterness which they ordinarily used in
their preaching. But the words are far more comprehensive than so. Nor can it
be probably thought, that the people were so foolish and impudent, as in
express terms to say these things with which they are here charged. But the
Prophets meaning is, that these things were secretly in their hearts; see the
Note, Job 21.14. By their rage against Gods Prophets for their faithful
reproofs and threatenings, it was evident, that they would have been glad their
mouths might have been stopped, unless they would have flattered them. And what
was this, but to desire they might be deceived?

Ver. 11. Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, etc.] That is,
Give over this rough and bitter way of prophesying which we continually hear
from you. And if you say, We speak what God has given us in charge; we preach
in the way that God has prescribed us; then we answer, Get you then out of the
way; for this is a way of prophesying which we cannot, nor will not endure:
cause the Holy one of Israel to cease from before us; that is, speak no more to
us of the Holy one of Israel; let us no more hear that ringing so often in our
ears. Because the Prophets (and Isaiah it may be more especially) in reproving
this people for their sins, and pressing them to holiness, did often suitably
mention God under this name of the Holy one of Israel (see the Note, Chap.
1.4.) therefore they are brought in here thus in a scoffing way expressing
themselves; as if this name of God were of all others most odious to them, and
that they desired not to be wearied any longer with the frequent repeating of
this name to them. But for this also see the foregoing Note.

Ver. 12. Wherefore thus says the Holy one of Israel, etc.] As if he should
have said, Though you flout at this holy name of the Lord God, and though it be
never so odious to you, yet shall not I fear still and still to preach to you
in his name: and take notice therefore, I say, what this holy one of Israel
says concerning you, Because ye despise this word; to wit, that before
mentioned, ver. 7. The Egyptians shall help in vain, etc. Or rather more
generally, this word of Gods command, that you should not seek unto Egypt for
help, but rely wholly upon God (as indeed many will pretend a willingness to
obey the word of God, who yet when it comes to it, will not obey the word which
God speaks to them), and trust in oppression (or fraud) and perverseness, and
stay thereon; that is, say some, and trust in your riches, formerly gotten by
oppression and fraud, and other unjust courses, as hoping herewith to hire the
Egyptians to help you. But I rather conceive, that by the oppression and
perverseness wherein they are here said to trust, is meant, their furious and
froward carrying on their designs of sending to Egypt for help, contrary to
Gods command, not without a violent over-bearing of those that opposed it; yea,
even the Prophets themselves, that by warrant from God did reprove and forbid
it.

Ver. 13. Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall,
swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant.]
That is, This your sin in trusting in your wealth so unjustly gotten, and in
the aid of Pharaoh, which you hope to procure thereby, shall be the cause of
your utter and sudden ruin; see the Note, Psalm. 62.3. The bulking or swelling
out of a wall, especially of a high wall, whose weight must needs help forward
its ruin, is a sure sign of its approaching ruin: so the pride and arrogance of
the Princes of Israel (for to them the Prophet chiefly speaks), who are looked
upon as a wall of defense to Jerusalem, was a certain forerunner of their
sudden fall and destruction, Prove. 16.18. And as men's leaning on such a
bellying wall, is like to hasten its fall; so the peoples resting on these men,
and their politic designs, in seeking to Egypt, was like to hasten their
speedy ruin.

Ver. 14. And he, etc.] That is, God, or the enemy, shall break it; that is,
the design you have of calling in the Egyytians to your aid (the iniquity
before mentioned, ver. 13.) or the State of Judah, or the City Jerusalem, as
the breaking of the potters vessel, that is broken in pieces; that is, utterly
and irrecoverably; see the Note, Psalm. 2.9. he shall not spare, etc. as if he
should have said, As the owner of an earthen pitcher, or other vessel, does
with great violence dash it against a wall, or throw it upon the pavement,
purposely to break it into shivers, not caring what becomes of it; so that
there shall not be found in the bursting of it, a sheard to take fire from the
hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit, so will the Lord deal with
you: he will utterly destroy you, without entertaining any thought to pity or
spare you. Here therefore more is threatened than in the former verse. A wall
fallen down, may be built up again; but an earthen vessel being once broken to
pieces, cannot be set together again. And hereby therefore the State of Judah
is threatened with irreparable ruin. Now though this befell them not in the days
of Hezekiah (the Lord having great respect to him, and other his righteous
Servants in his time), yet because afterward, in the days of Zedekiah, they
offended again in the same kind, by fleeing to Egypt for help, that which is
here threatened was then fully accomplished, their State being then utterly
ruined by the Chaldeans.

Ver. 15. For thus says the Lord God, the Holy one of Israel, etc.] That is,
This is that which he has and does advise you to do; see the Note above, ver.
12. In returning and rest shall ye be saved; that is, If you repent and turn
from your evil ways, and particularly, from that of seeking to Egypt for help,
and rest upon God for help, God will save you from your enemies: in quietness
and in confidence shall be your strength; see the Note, ver. 7. and ye would
not; that is, you would not herein hearken to God.

Ver. 16. But ye said, no; for we will flee upon horses, etc.] That is, say
some, If the Assyrians do prevail over us, we will flee away upon Horses; or we
will go to Egypt, that we may thence furnish our selves with Horses (see the
Notes, Deuteronomy. 17.16. and 1 Kings 10.28.) which, in regard of their strength and
swiftness, will be of great use for us, both for the assailing and pursuing of
our enemies, and for escaping away by flight, should we be overcome by them.
But I rather think, that hereby is meant, that they would not only not wait
upon God, but would with all the speed they could, post away into Egypt, to
procure aid from thence: And therefore in opposition to this which they said,
the Prophet adds, therefore shall ye flee: as if he had said, The event of this
your fleeing into Egypt for help, shall be only this, that ye shall flee before
your enemies the Assyrians. And to the same purpose is that which follows;
whereas they said, and we will ride upon the swift; that is, swift beasts, to
wit, Horses or Dromedaries, God hereto answers, therefore shall they that
pursue you be swift; that is, they shall match you, if not exceed you in
swiftness. Many, I know, understand this of the flight of Zedekiah, and his Men
of War, Jer. 39.4. and the flight of the remnant that was left after the
Babylonian Captivity, Jer. 43.5, 7. But I see not why it might not be as well
intended concerning the Jews fleeing before the Assyrians, when Sennacherib
made such havoc in the land before he besieged Jerusalem. And the same may be
said for the following verse.

Ver. 17. One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one, etc.] That is, At the
assault of one, or at the shouting of one, when he comes to make an assault
upon you: at the rebuke of five shall ye flee; that is, a poor inconsiderable
number of your enemies shall make you all flee; till ye be left as a beacon
upon the top of a mountain (or as it is in the margin, a tree bereft of
branches and boughs, or a mast); that is, say some, like some high pole,
resembling the mast of a Ship, set up on a hill, to be a Way-mark for
Travelers or Seamen; or to give warning to the Country about of the approach
of Enemies, or some other such like public service; or as a mast of a Ship is
seen a far off, standing up alone by it self, when no part of the Ship besides
is seen: and as an ensign on an hill, to wit, set up there, as a Trophy of some
Victory there obtained; or a sign to show Soldiers that are gathering together,
whither they should come. The meaning is, that being overcome by their Enemies,
there should be very few of them left alive; or at least, left in a Company
together; but that they should be dispersed and straggle about, here one, and
there another; or that they should be so generally carried away Captives, that
there should be but a few of them left in the land; and that their destruction
should be notable and conspicuous; so that they should be a gazing-stock to all
Nations, for the strange judgments inflicted on them, as such a beacon or mast
used to be gazed at by those that pass by it. But now some understand this of
Jerusalem; to wit, that any other Cities of Judea round about her being
destroyed, she should be left alone on the hill whereon she stood, as a beacon
or a mast of a Ship. And indeed if this were spoken with respect to that havoc
which Sennacherib should make in the land (for which see the Note), this
Exposition may seem the more probable.

Ver. 18. And therefore, etc.] Here the Prophet begins to comfort the faithful
amongst his people; And therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious
unto you. But yet the meaning of the words is questionable. 1. Some understand
it of the Lords waiting by way of forbearing a while to bring that ruin upon
them before threatened, to see if they would repent and turn unto him, that so
he might be gracious to them, according to that which is said, 1 Pet. 3.20.
that the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a
preparing. And thus they conceive that a Reason is here given, why the
judgments here threatened were not presently executed upon them: It was because
God was pleased to wait for their repentance; And therefore will the Lord wait
that he may be gracious unto you: as if he should have said, Do not flatter
your selves, that you shall never see this come to pass, because you see it not
presently done; therefore only will the Lord suspend the judgment threatened for
a time, that he may wait for your repentance, and so then may receive you again
into his favor. But then 2. Some understand it (and I think upon better
grounds) of Gods deferring to come in to their help, when their enemies did so
far prevail over them, and so sorely distress them; to wit, that therefore the
Lord would suffer their enemies to proceed so far, and to bring them to so low
an ebb, that he might wait for a fit opportunity, when he might most seasonably
appear for their deliverance; as namely, when they being broken with these
evils, were humbled and brought to repent of their evil ways, and to turn unto
the Lord; or when it might be done with most advantage of glory to himself,
good and joy to them, and shame and confusion to their enemies. And much to the
same purpose is that which follows; and therefore will he be exalted, that he
may have mercy upon you: For though some understand by Gods being exalted, his
withdrawing himself, as it were, into the Heavens above, his hiding himself and
standing aloof from the help of his people, purposely that he might take a fit
time to show mercy to his people: Yet I rather think, that hereby is meant,
that God would be exalted, either 1. by the strange and wonderful destruction
wherewith he meant to destroy the Assyrians; or 2. by his peoples humbling
themselves, and abandoning their sinful ways, and turning to the Lord: Or 3. by
those judgments upon them, whereby he would bring them to be so reformed: his
end in all these being chiefly this, that he might be gracious and merciful to
them.

For the Lord is a God of judgment, etc.] That is, When God punishes his
people, he is not transported with rage and fury, as men are, but does it with
moderation and judgment, so as it may do them good; according to that, O Lord
correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger, etc. Jer. 10.24. Blessed are
all they that wait for him; to wit, as knowing, that God, as is before said, is
wont to wait to be gracious to his people.

Ver. 19. For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem, etc.] This may be
added, as a proof of that which was said in the close of the foregoing verse;
blessed are all they that wait for him. And though some understand it, as a
promise of the Jews dwelling again at Jerusalem after their return out of
Babylon; yet I conceive it is primarily meant of that which was more shor^ly to
be accomplished; to wit, that Sennacherib should not prevail against Jerusalem;
but that the people of God should continue to dwell safely and peaceably there
(though I would not deny, but that the other may be included also): in Zion at
Jerusalem; that is, say some, not only in that strong Fort of Zion, but also in
the City Jerusalem: thou shall weep no more; that is, thou shall give over
weeping; or thou shall not weep as formerly thou did* he will be very
gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry, etc. to wit, when thou art besieged
by the Assyrians; or, as others, when thou art in captivity in Babylon.

Ver. 20. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity and the water of
affliction, etc.] See the Note, 1 Kings 22.27. yet shall not thy teachers be
removed into a corner any more; which though some understand barely as a
promise that they should not be destitute of faithful Teachers to instruct
them, though they might suffer great harship in regard of their bodily food,
they should be, however, well provided for spiritual food yet more seems to be
intended hereby, to wit, that thenceforth they should not despise and persecute
their Teachers, and drive them into corners to hide themselves, as they had
formerly done (this those words any more seems to imply); see the Notes before,
ver. 10, 11. but thine eyes shall see thy teachers; to wit, with great content
and delight, intentively fixing thine eyes upon them when they are instructing
thee. Thou shall eagerly look after them that before were but eye-sores to
thee. Now all this I conceive is mentioned, as an effect that should follow
upon the Reformation which the judgment inflicted on them should through grace
work in them. And therefore we need not limit it, as many do, to the great
streights they were in, either when Jerusalem was besieged by Sennacherib, or
after their return out of Babylon.

Ver. 21. And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the
way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the
left.] That is, say some, in all thy ways, whithersoever thou go. Or rather,
when ye are about to turn some way or other out of the right way. And by this
word behind them, may be meant, both 1. the word of their Teachers, mentioned
in the foregoing verse, whereby God would be continually ready to direct them
in the right way, and to keep them from going astray. (There seems to be in
this expression, an allusion to Schoolmasters, who following their Scholars,
as they go along, the better to watch over them, are wont to call to them, and
mind them of their way, when they do not regard it as they should; or to
Shepherds, that coming behind their sheep, use to whistle them in, when he sees
them begin to straggle). And likewise 2. the voice of Gods Spirit, whereby he
does secretly speak to their Hearts, and persuade them to follow the direction
of their Teachers. Yea, and 3. that God would follow them with the admonitions
and persuasions of his Word and Spirit, even then when they turned their backs
upon him, not giving over until he had prevailed with them. For those words,
thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, seem to imply, that as God would give
them Teachers, so he would also give them ears to hearken to, and obey their
Teachers.

Ver. 22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and
the ornament of thy molten images of gold, etc.] The meaning is, That after God
had humbled them by the judgments before mentioned, and after the great
deliverance he had wrought for them, before promised, they should take the
Plates of Silver and Gold, wherewith their Images were covered, or the rich
Garments and Ornaments wherewith they were attired; or rather their Images
themselves, covered and over-laid with Leaves or Plates of Silver and Gold, and
should break or tear them in pieces, as filthy things, and dispose of them in
some common, profane and disgraceful way; see the Notes, Chap. 2.20. and 2
Kings 23.8. Thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say
unto it, that is, to each of the things before mentioned, Get thee hence.

Ver. 23. Then shall he give the rain of thy seed that thou shall sow thy
ground withal, and bread of the increase of the earth, etc.] As with reference
to that which was said before, ver. 20. concerning Gods giving them the bread
of adversity and the water of affliction, here the Prophet promises, that upon
their repentance God would cause their Land to yield them a rich increase (and
this should abundantly make up all the damage they had received by the
Assyrians); and it, thy Grain or Bread-corn, shall be fat and plenteous; see
the Notes, Deuteronomy. 23.14. And see also the Note, Genesis 27.28.

Ver. 24. The oxen likewise, and the young asses that ear the ground, shall eat
clean provender, etc.] That is, Thou shall have such abundance of Corn, that
thou shall give thy Cattle clean provender; to wit, provender of pure Corn,
without any mixture of Chaff; which has been winnowed with the shovel and with
the fan; that is, with either of them, or with both, one after the other.

Ver. 25. And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high
hill, rivers and streams of waters, etc.] That is, So great shall the showers
of Rain be, mentioned before, ver. 23. that from the Mountains and Hills,
streams of water, like Rivers, shall run down into the Valleys, which shall
make the whole land yield great increase: yea, even those Mountains and Hills
that used to be dry and barren. In the day of the great slaughter, when the
towers fall; that is, at the time when God shall make a mighty slaughter
amongst your Enemies, the Assyrians, that had brought you into so great
streights, wherein, amongst others, even their great Nobles and Princes shall
fall, the over-topping Towers here meant; see the Note, Chap. 2.15. So that
this is added, purposely to set forth, how exceeding great the mercy of God to
them at that time should be; and how exceeding great their joy thereupon would
be (which he farther enlarges in the following verse), when at the same time
he should make such havoc amongst their Enemies, and withal bless their Land
with so great an increase. Many, I know, understand this of the great slaughter
of the Babylonians by the Medes and Persians; and by the Towers that should
fall, many understand the Towers of Babylon, or the high Towers which the
Assyrians had built for the besieging of Jerusalem. But the former Exposition
does far better suit with the sequel of this Chapter.

Ver. 26. Moreover, etc.] This in this verse is added, to set forth those
raptures of joy wherewith the Jews should be transported, when on a sudden God
should so miraculously destroy their proud Enemies the Assyrians, and thereby
deliver them from from all those fears and dangers they were in, and out of
which it seemed impossible they should ever escape. Moreover the light of the
moon shall be as the light of the sun. The Prophet (say some) begins with this,
because this slaughter of the Assyrians was made in the night: and the light of
the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of the seven days; that is, the Sun
shall shine with as much brightness on that day, as if seven Suns were shining
together; in the day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and
heals the stroke of their wound; that is, when the Lord shall heal the State
of Judah of all the breaches and wounds made therein by the Chaldeans, or
rather by the Assyrians. Light is usually put for joy in the Scripture (see the
Notes, Esther 8.16. and Psalm. 112.4.) and darkness for sorrow. And hence it is,
that as the Heavenly Lights are said to withdraw their light from men, when
they are in extreme darkness and sorrow; see the Note, Chap. 13.10. so here on
the contrary, to set forth what exceeding joy there should be amongst the Jews,
when the Chaldeans should be vanquished by the Medes and Persians, and Cyrus
should set them free from their bondage; or rather (as is often noted before)
when Jerusalem should be so suddenly and strangely delivered from the invasion
and siege of the Assyrians, it is said, that the Moon should shine as bright as
the Sun, and that the light of the Sun should be sevenfold more than at other
times it is. The meaning is, that the Heavenly Lights should seem to
congratulate them for their happiness, in their being so miraculously delivered
out of the very jaws of death; and that they should think the light of that
day, through the excess of their joy, sevenfold brighter than any day they had
seen before. Some, I know, understand this of the glorious condition of the
Saints in Heaven: Yea indeed, most Expositors understand it of the exceeding
great joy and glory of the Church upon Earth, in the days of the Gospel, when
Gods people should be healed of all the wounds and breaches which sin had made
in their Souls, by that great work of Christ's Redemption, by the pardon of
their Sins, and the Sanctifying of their Nature; to wit, that the glory and joy
of the Church then, should be sevenfold greater than ever it had been in the
days of the Old Testament; yea, sevenfold greater than the brightness of the
Heavenly Lights. And indeed, because those great deliverances of the Jews,
before mentioned, were types and shadows of this our greater deliverance by
Christ, there is no question to be made, but that this which the Prophet says
here, may be justly applied thereto. But yet I say, primarily and properly it
is meant, of that great deliverance of the Jews from the Tyranny of the
Assyrians.

Ver. 27. Behold, etc.] Here the Prophet begins more largely to set forth the
destruction of the Assyrians; in the day of the great slaughter, mentioned
before, ver. 25. Behold the name of the Lord comes from far; that is, the Lord
comes from Heaven; even as we use to say, His Majesty is coming, when we
intend thereby the King himself. But why does the Prophet use this expression?
I answer, that there are Reasons given by Expositors for this, that are
considerable; as 1. That he says not, The Lord comes, but The name of the
Lord comes; either 1. by way of slighting the contempt of the Heathen, who
were wont to deride the Jews for worshipping only the Name of a God, an
imaginary God, whereas they had the Images of the Gods whom they worshipped,
according to that which one of them said of that people, Qui puras nubes, and
coeli Numen adorant: as if the Prophet had said, even that invisible God of
Israel, who has revealed himself to us only by his Name, will come and be
revenged on you for the wrong ye have done his people: Or 2. to imply, that he
told them of that, the report whereof he had heard from a far: he had heard
glorious things spoken of the coming of the God of Israel against them, whose
Name was famous and great throughout the world: Or 3. to signify, that the
Angel, by whom the Assyrians should be destroyed, should do it in Gods Name,
and by Commission from God. And 2. That he says, Behold the name of the Lord
comes from far; to imply, that however God had seemed, both to his people and
to their enemies, to stand a far off, yet now he would come in suddenly and
unexpectedly to the deliverance of his people, and to the ruin of their
enemies. As for the following words, burning with his anger; and the burden
thereof is heavy: or as it is the margin, and the grievousness of flame; the
meaning thereof is, that the Lord would come against the Assyrians in the heat
of great and flaming fury; and that this his anger would, in the vengeance he
would pour upon them, prove a heavy and intolerable burden to them upon whom
it should light. And so in the last words; his lips are full of indignation,
and his tongue as a devouring fire, the Lord is set forth after the manner of a
man full of wrath, whose lips seem to tremble and swell with anger, and whose
words sound nothing but terror and threatenings. And it is well observed by a
learned Expositor, that the Prophet does the rather express Gods anger by the
words of his mouth, to imply, that however they despised his word, yet his
threatenings would have their effect, and the sentence that proceeded out of his
mouth, would be a fire to consume his enemies.

Ver. 28. And his breath as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of
the neck, etc.] That is, It shall bring the Assyrians into a dangerous
condition, as that man is in a stream of water up to the midst of the neck.
Before, Chap. 8.8. it was said of the Assyrian, that he should overflow the
whole Land and State of Judah, even to the neck: and here now, perhaps in
relation thereto, it is said, the torrent of Gods wrath should overflow the
Assyrian, even to the midst of the neck; to sift the nations, to wit, those
that served in Sennacherib's Army, with the sive of vanity; that is, to
distress and trouble them, till they were all scattered and cast out, and
utterly destroyed. By a sive of vanity, the Prophet seems to intend, a sive
that lets all things run thorough it till there be nothing left; and therefore
that which is meant here is, that tho the Nations came with the Assyrian in
never so great multitudes, yet God would turn them off, and scatter them like
so much chaff, till they were brought to nothing. And to the same purpose is
the next figurative expression also; and there shall be a bridle in the jaws of
the people, causing them to err; that is, for the remainder of them that are
not destroyed by the Angel of the Lord, God would carry them away, which should
be quite contrary to what they designed, even as the Rider turns the fiercest
Horse with a bit and bridle; namely, in that instead of going to Jerusalem, he
would cause them to fly back to their own Country; or at least, cause them to
wander up and down in a scattered manner, now one way, and then another, till
they perished. And this is just what the Lord by our Prophet said to Hezekiah
concerning Sennacherib, 2 Kings 19.28. I will put my hook in thy nose, and my
bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came.

Ver. 29. Te shall have a song as in the night, when a holy solemnity is kept,
etc.] That is, when God shall have thus destroyed your enemies, as is before
said, ye shall then sing for joy in a holy manner, giving praise and glory to
God, who has done this for you, even as you are wont to do the night before
your solemn festivals; to wit, those three great festivals, when all their
males went up to the Temple; see the Note, Exodus 23.17. the solemnity whereof
began always the evening before the festival day: and gladness of heart, as
when one goes with a pipe, to come into the mountains of the Lord, to the
mighty one of Israel: which is said, because they that went up to the Temple
which stood on Mount Zion, from other parts of the land at these solemn feasts,
used, it seems, to go along singing and playing upon musical Instruments, for
joy that they were going to meet with their God in his holy Sanctuary; see
Psalm. 42.4.

Ver. 30. And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, etc.] That
is, say several learned Expositors, The destruction of your enemies shall be
such, that it shall be as plainly perceived, that it is the judgment of God
upon them, inflicted by his command, as if an audible voice had been heard from
Heaven, enjoining it to be done; and shall show the lighting down of his arm,
to wit, from Heaven upon your enemies, with the indignation of his anger; that
is, he shall make it apparent, that it is the Lord that smites them, and that
in great wrath (which must needs terrify them); and so they shall feel how
heavy his hand is, when he strikes in fury. And so, say they, the Prophet
proceeds on in the following words, to set forth the breaking out of Gods wrath
against them figuratively after the mannet of a tempest; and with the flame of
a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones; see the Note,
2 Samuel 22.8. and that to show, that their destruction should be sudden and
violent. Yet because thunder is often called the voice of the Lord (see the
Note, Psalm. 29.3.) and Job 37.4. the voice of his excellency; and the whole
verse here, seems to set forth a mighty storm and tempest: I see not, why it
may not be well thought, which some Expositors hold, that when the Angel of the
Lord made a slaughter in Sennacherib's Army, 2 Kings 19.35. it was partly done
by such a hideous storm raised by the Ministry of the Angels, and that of this
the Prophet here speaks. And indeed the like is said concerning the destruction
of Pharaohs army in the Red Sea, see the Notes, Exodus 14.24.

Ver. 31. For through the voice of the Lord, etc.] See the foregoing Note,
shall the Assyrian be beaten down, that is, say some, Nebuchadnezzar; (and
indeed it cannot be denied, that the Kings of Babylon were also called Kings of
Assyria, because Assyria also was under their dominion, see 2 Chronicles. 33.11. And
so likewise were the Kings of Persia, see the Note, Ezra. 6.22.) or rather
Senacherib, he and his army shall be destroyed: And then in the next words,
which smote with a rod, there is an imitation of the just vengeance of God; He
that had wont to smite others with a rod, (he alludes to what was said before
concerning the Assyrians smiting Judea, Chap. 10.5, 24.) shall be now smitten
himself.

Ver. 32. And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which the
Lord shall lay upon him, it shall be with Tabrets and Harps, etc.] By the
grounded staff here, some understand the Assyrian, the rod or staff of Gods
anger, mentioned in the foregoing verse, wherewith the land of Judah should be
smitten: And that this staff is called the grounded staff, because it was
certainly appointed for their correction by the decree of God, who should bring
it upon them: And accordingly they take the meaning of that place to be this,
that in every place of Judea, where this staff the Assyrian, (it is an
expression just like that Chap. 28.18. The overflowing scourge shall pass
through) should pass, the inhabitants should afterward make merry and rejoice
exceedingly, to wit, when God had routed and destroyed that proud insulting
army; for so they expound those words, it shall be with Tabrets and Harps, that
is, that place, where the Assyrian formerly made such havoc amongst the Jews,
shall be full of piping and dancing, for joy at his destruction. But because
the Prophet is all along speaking here of Gods destroying the Assyrian, I
rather think that by the grounded staff here, is meant that rod or staff of
Gods indignation, wherewith he had threatened in the foregoing verse that the
Assyrian should be beaten down; that Judgment, whether the tempest before
described, or what ever else it was, which, as it is said here, the Lord shall
lay upon him, or, as it is in the Hebrew, cause to rest upon him, and wherewith
he was to be utterly ruined and destroyed; and that it is called a founded or
grounded staff, either, 1. Because it was surely founded on Gods decree, and
could not therefore be hindered. Or, 2. Because it should be stable and
permanent, and should stay and rest upon them: wherein there is a difference
put betwixt the rod of correction, wherewith God chastises his Children, which
does not rest always upon the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125.3. and the rod
of Iron, which is for the punishment of his enemies, and destroys for ever.
Or rather, 3. Because the strokes thereof should not be light, giving their
skins only a gentle gliding touch, but should pierce deep, and stick by them,
entering the very flesh, and leaving sore wounds and bruises behind them. Now if
we understand the grounded staff thus, the meaning of the place seems to be
this; that in every place where this staff of divine vengeance should fall upon
them, whether it were in the camp, far or near, as it lay spread abroad, or in
any place whither they were fled, yea, though they were gotten home to their
own Country (which was the case of Sennacherib, 2 Kings 19.36, 37.) it should
be with Tabrets and Harps, that is, with great triumphant joy for their ruin
and destruction. Indeed those words, it shall be with Tabrets and Harps, are
many other ways expounded by those that have undertaken to show the meaning of
this passage; as 1. That this Judgment should come upon the Assyrians when they
were in great jollity, piping and dancing, not in the least thinking of being
so surprised and destroyed. 2. That it should be brought upon them, rather by
the Sacrifices that should be offered by Hezekiah, and the People (which they
say is intimated in those words with Tabrets and Harps, because their
Sacrifices used to be accompanied with some kind of solemn music) than by
fighting and weapons of War. And thus too they expound also that which is said
in the following clause, concerning Battles of shaking, understanding thereby
their Shake-Offerings, or Wave Offerings: Or, 3. That in allusion to the custom
of going forth to battle in those times with Tabrets and Harps, (as we do now
with Drum and Fife) those words do import, that God would fight against the
Assyrians in another manner; to wit, with thunder and lightning, and
hailstones, those should be Tabrets and Harps. But the first exposition is
most genuine, as well as most common. As for the following clause, that is
added farther to set forth the severity of Gods proceedings with them; and in
battles of shaking will he fight with it; that is, the rod, the Assyrian,
mentioned before, ver. 31. or against them, as it is in the margin; that is,
the Assyrians. And the dreadful judgment wherewith God would contend with them,
are called battles of shaking, either with respect to the terror wherewith they
should strike them; or with particular respect to the dreadful convulsion of
the tempest before described, wherewith, as with a sive of vanity, as was said,
ver. 28. they should be shaken to nothing.

Ver. 33. For Tophet is ordained of old, etc.] There was a place so called, in
a Valley on the South Side of Jerusalem; concerning which see the Note, 2 Kings
23.10. Now because it seems not improbable, that when Sennacherib came to
besiege Jerusalem, he encamped with his Army, at least, some part of it, in
this place, therefore some think that it was in this place that the Angel of
the Lord slew such multitudes in the Assyrian-Camp; or at least, that here the
Jews buried or burnt the carcasses of those that were so slain: For (say they)
when Hezekiah in the beginning of his Reign, beat down the Idols, and removed
the high places that were in Judea, it is most likely that he defiled this
place (as Josiah also afterward did, 2 Kings 23.10.) and so it became a common
lay-stall, into which all the filth was cast out of Jerusalem). And with
respect thereto, the Prophet does here foretell what in this place should be
done to the Assyrians; for Tophet is ordained of old; that is, it was appointed
of old by God for this purpose; or it was before time fitted for this service,
to wit, by Hezekiah, when he defiled it, as is before said; and so made it as
fit for this use, as if it had been designed thereto: yea, for the king it is
prepared; that is, for the King of Assyria's Army, even the great Commanders
therein, called before, Kings; see the Note, Chap. 10.8. he has made it deep
and large; to wit, as being a Valley capacious enough every way for the
multitudes that shall be slain there; the pile thereof is fire and much wood;
that is, they shall be suddenly destroyed there, as if they were burnt up in a
huge fire (and it may be this may be spoken too with relation to the many fires
that were made there for the burning of the hundred fourscore and five thousand
of that Army that were slain there, 2 Kings 19.35.) the breath of the Lord,
like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it; that is, the Lord in great wrath
and fury shall utterly consume them. It is an expression much like that before,
ver. 28. And his breath, as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of
the neck. And it may be the brimstone mentioned, may also have respect to the
thunder and lightning in that grievous tempest before described, which are
known to have a sulphurous savor. Thus, I say, considering the conclusion of
these words with that which went before, they must (I conceive) be first and
literally understood of that very Tophet, in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom,
where the Assyrian Army was to be destroyed, or their carcasses burnt. But then
secondly, and yet withal principally, By the general consent almost of all
Expositors, the Tophet wherewith the Assyrians are here threatened, is Hell, so
called with respect to the lamentable torments, the shrieks and cries of the
poor children that were there offered up in sacrifice to Moloch; see the Notes,
2 Kings 23.10. As Heaven, in allusion to that pleasant Garden where Adam was at
first placed, is called Paradise, Luke 23.43. so Hell, in allusion to the
filthy abominableness thereof, and the tormenting burnings that were therein,
is called Tophet. And indeed the description here given of Tophet, does well
suit herewith. 1. It was ordained of old, decreed and appointed by God from all
eternity, and made from the foundations of the earth in the first creation, for
the punishment of the wicked. 2. Yea, for the King it is prepared; that is, the
greatest on earth, such as was blaspheming Sennacherib, as well as the meanest.
And observable it is, that the same expression is used concerning Hell, Mat.
25.41. where it is said to be prepared for the Devil and his angels. 3. He has
made it deep and large, capacious enough for the receiving of those innumerable
multitudes that are to be cast into it, and out of which they can never get,
being once thrown into it. 4. The pile thereof is fire and much wood; that is,
the torments thereof shall be exceeding bitter, and withal endless; and
therefore called everlasting and unquenchable fire. And 5. The breath of the
Lord, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it; that is, by the decree and
command of God, pronounced in great wrath and indignation against the wicked,
it shall be still kept burning for ever and ever: with respect whereto, Hell is
often called in Scripture, the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, as
in Rev. 21.8.

CHAP. XXXI.
VERSE 1. WOE to them that go down to Egypt for help, etc.] See the Note, Chap.
30.2. And stay on and trust in Chariots, because they are many; and in
Horsemen, because they are very strong: See the Note there also, Ver. 16. But
they look not unto the Holy one of Israel* See the Notes, Chap. 1.4. Neither
seek the Lord, to wit, whom they had so often found a sure defense to them,
even against their strongest enemies.

Ver. 2. Yet he also is wise, etc.] As if he had said, as in a way of derision,
You applaud your selves in your Wisdom and Policy, and think it is the only
wise course you can take for the securing of your selves from the Assyrians, to
call in the Egyptians to your help; and that it were palpable folly in you to
do what God by his Prophets has enjoined you to do, namely, to rely wholly
upon God, and not to send to your neighbors the Egyptians for aid. Well, as
wise as you think your selves, do you judge your selves wiser than God, whose
counsel you despise? Surely he also is wise, yea infinitely wiser than your
wise Egyptians can be, on whom you so much rely (See the Notes, Chap. 19.11.)
And therefore knows many ways how to disappoint all your politic designs,
whereby you oppose his commands. Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, that
is, he will bring that evil upon you, which you think to keep off by the
Egyptians help; and will not call back his words, to wit, which he has spoken
by me, concerning the evil which the Assyrians shall bring upon you: But will
arise against the house of the evil doers, that is, against the wicked Jews,
the rebellious People before spoken of Chap. 30.9. And against the help of them
that work iniquity, that is, against the Egyptians; that shall come into the
aid of this wicked People.

Ver. 3. Now the Egyptians are men, and not God, etc.] And therefore able to do
nothing without God, and much less against God Almighty, when he sets himself
to punish his People for their wickedness; And their Horses, flesh, and not
Spirit; that is, not to be compared in regard of power to a spirit; When the
Lord shall stretch out his Hand; as if it had been said, if he does only
stretch out his Hand, that alone will be enough, both he that helps shall
fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and they all shall fail together,
See the foregoing Note. It is spoken in a way of deriding them for their hoping
so much in the help of Egypt. And that which is here threatened came to pass,
when the Assyrian for a while made such havoc in the Land of Judah.

Ver. 4. For thus has the Lord spoken unto me, etc.] Here a promise is
inserted, that however the Lord would certainly, as he had said, destroy both
those that would need seek to Egypt for help against the Assyrians, and the
Egyptians likewise that helped them; yet he would as certainly preserve
Jerusalem from being surprised by the Assyrians, and so would save a remnant of
his People from being destroyed. And the drift of this is to make it clear to
them, how safely they might have rested upon him alone, without ever looking
after the Egyptians for help. Like as the Lion and young Lion roaring on his
prey, when a multitude of Shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be
afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them; to wit, by
letting go his prey, or fleeing from them; So shall the Lord of hosts come
down, to wit, from Heaven to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof,
that is, the hill Morias, where the Temple stood; which is particularly
expressed, to imply Gods tender care over the place where he was worshipped.
The drift of the similitude is to set forth, that Jerusalem should find the
Lord as able, and as earnestly intent to save her out of the hand of the
Assyrians, though their army were never so numerous, as a Lion is to hold fast,
and not to part with the prey he has gotten, though never such a multitude of
Shepherds be gathered together against him.

Ver. 5. As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem, etc.]
That is, say some, God will so defend Jerusalem, that she shall be as safe as
birds are when they are flying. But rather the meaning is, either, 1. That God
would come in to the help of Jerusalem, when the Assyrians should come against
her, with as much speed as Birds are wont to flee to the defense of their young
ones, when they see them in any danger: Or, 2. That God would with as much
affection and tender care and earnestness provide for the securing of Jerusalem
from the Assyrians, as birds are wont to show toward their young ones, when
they flutter over them to shelter them; or flee up and down, to beat off those,
as well as they can, who they fear would annoy them. So that in this comparison
there may be an allusion to that which Chap. 10.14. is said of the Assyrian's
boasting of his victories, implying, that though he had bragged how he had
surprised the several Nations of the Earth as a birds-nest, and spoiled them of
their riches, none daring to peep or to wag the wing; yet when he came to
Jerusalem he should not find it so. As for that which follows, defending also
he will deliver it, and passing over he will preserve it; those words passing
over may be used as with respect to the similitude he had used of Birds flying,
to signify that Gods Eye would be upon them to preserve them, according to the
care that Birds have of their young ones when they fly this way, and that, over
them to secure them. Or it may import only the suddenness of their deliverance,
that God would but pass over them, and they should be presently delivered. But
most generally it is thought by Expositors, that in those words there is an
allusion to the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, to wit, that as
then an Angel passing over the Houses of the Israelites did in one night slay
all the firstborn of the Egyptians: So it should be now; an Angel passing over
them should in one night make a mighty Slaughter in the Assyrian's Camp, and so
Jerusalem should be delivered.

Ver. 6. Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply
revolted.] That is, You that hope to have a share in this promised deliverance,
repent and turn unto the Lord, from whom the body of this people (who will yet
needs glory in the name of the children of Israel) have deeply revolted, to
wit, as by other heinous sins, so more particularly by your incredulity and
forsaking of God, and seeking to Egypt for help. This expression, that they had
deeply revolted, we have also Hosea 9.9. they have deeply corrupted themselves:
the meaning whereof is, that they had greatly or extremely apostatised from
God, as we use to say, that such a man is deep in such a Treason, or other
Villainy, when he has had a great hand in it. But the drift of this expression
here, might be to hint unto them, that though they had thus dangerously
revolted from God, yet if they would now have been as deep in their sorrow, as
they had formerly been in their sin, God would remember his covenant made with
their fathers, and show them mercy, and own them for his children.

Ver. 7. For in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver, etc.]
Some think, that is mentioned as an effect of their sincere repentance, upon
the Assyrians invading of their Land; or upon the wonderful destruction which
God would bring upon the Assyrian Army. But the word (for) does plainly show,
that this is added as a motive to press them to hearken to the foregoing
exhortation to repentance: Repent, says he, and turn to the Lord; for in that
day, to wit, when the Assyrian shall make such havoc in your land, being
convinced of the vanity both of your Idol-worship, and of your resting upon the
aid of the Egyptians, every man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his
idols of gold (see the Note, Chap. 2.18.) which your own hands have made unto
you (see the Note, Chap. 2.8.) for a sin; that is, that you might therewith sin
against God, and thereby draw down his vengeance upon you.

Ver. 8. Then shall the Assyrian fall, etc.] That is, Sennacherib's Army shall
be destroyed with the sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean
man, shall devour him; that is, not by the sword of any man, one or other, but
by the sword of Divine vengeance, laid on by the Ministry of an Angel, 2 Kings
19.35. but he shall flee from the sword; that is, Sennacherib himself shall
flee from the sword from Heaven, wherewith he shall find his Army destroyed;
or, as it is in the margin, for fear of the sword, to wit, as not knowing how
that havoc came to be made in his Army: and his young men shall be
discomfited; that is, those of the youth and flower of his Army, that by reason
of their youth use to be most hot and furious, and that shall escape the stroke
of the Angel, shall be glad to flee for their lives. It is in the Hebrew, and
his young men shall be for melting; the meaning thereof must needs be, either,
that their multitude melted away, as it is said, 1 Samuel 14.16. or that their
hearts, through fear, fainted and melted away; see the Notes, Josh. 7.5. As for
the Translation in the margin, and his young men shall be tributaries, I know
not what can be probably intended thereby, unless it be, that after this defeat
the Assyrians should in process of time become tributaries to the Chaldeans,
and so afterward to other Nations. For we do not find, that upon this
overthrow of Sennacherib's great Army, the Assyrians became tributaries to the
Jews.

Ver. 9. And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, etc.] It is in the
Hebrew thus, And his rock shall pass away for fear: and therefore some
understand the place thus, that the remainder of his Army, or his Princes and
Commanders (the chief rock and strength whereon he relied), should flee away
for fear. But according to our Translation, the meaning is plain, that
Sennacherib should flee into his own Country, and betake himself to his strong
holds there; or rather to Niniveh, his best fortified City, not daring to stay
any where till he came thither, 2 Kings 19.36. and his princes shall be afraid
of the ensign; that is, either 1. That they should be afraid, as men are wont
to be, when they see their enemies marching up against them with displayed
Ensigns: Or 2. That they shall be so afrighted, that if they saw an Ensign,
though it were when they were come into their own Country, or though it were
only some Ensign set on the top of some Watchtower by the way, they would be
afraid, as if some Troops of their Enemies were pursuing them: Or 3. rather,
that they should be afraid of the Ensign or Standard which God had, as it were,
by his Angel lifted up against them, when he fought against their Army, and
made such dreadful havoc amongst them. And then for the last words, his
princes shall be afraid of the ensign, says the Lord, whose fire is in Zion,
and his furnace in Jerusalem; the meaning of that is, either 1. That in that
City was the house wherein he dwelt continually to wit, the Temple, where he
had his fire continually burning upon his Altar; and therefore he would not
suffer himself to be turned out of doors by the Assyrians: Or 2. That there his
people were constantly waiting upon him in the duties of his worship; their
sacrifices and their incense were still burning upon his Altar; and that
therefore he was engaged in point of Honor to appear for their defense: Or 3.
That God was there as a consuming fire, to burn up the enemies that should come
upon them to destroy them. As in Zion he had his fire and furnace for the
trying and purging of his people, so also for the utter destroying of his and
their Enemies, against whom, if they attempted to wrong his people, his
vengeance would be still ready to break forth as a devouring fire; see the
former Notes, Chap. 10.17. and 30.30.

CHAP. XXXII.
VERSE 1. BEhold, a king shall reign in righteousness, etc.] It is not certain,
whether this be a new Prophecy, distinct from that which went before, or
whether rather it be not added as a farther supplement to that. Many Expositors
hold, that primarily and literally Hezekiah is the King here intended; and that
as he was a type of Christ. But with one consent, all Christian Expositors
hold, it is Christ that is here principally and mystically meant under the type
of Hezekiah. Taking it to be a distinct Prophecy by it self, I see not why it
might not be prophesied in the days of Ahaz, purposely to comfort the people
under his abominable tyranny, with a promise of a better King shortly to come;
and that therefore this particle of admiration, Behold, was prefixed, it being
a thing very remarkable, that the Son of such a wicked Father, should prove
such a good, just and gracious King. But if we do take it as prophesied, even
when Hezekiah sat already in the Throne, there is no incongruity in saying of
him, Behold, a King shall reign in righteousness, and his Princes in judgment,
to wit, with respect to that far greater care which he and his Princes should
take to govern the People with all possible righteousness and judgment, after
the Lord had wrought that wonderful deliverance for them by the destruction of
the Assyrian Army. But however, most exactly and clearly was this accomplished
in the Lord Christ: Behold, a King shall reign in righteousness; that is, he
shall govern his people with perfect righteousness; see the Notes, Chap. 11.5.
Psalm. 45.6, 7. and 72.1, 2. and his Princes shall rule in judgment; that is,
they that shall minister unto Christ in the Government of his Church, shall do
it most justly, according to the Rule of the Gospel. But see the Note also,
Psalm. 45.16.

Ver. 2. And a man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a covert from
the tempest, etc.] To wit, Hezekiah, that man before spoken of; or more
indefinitely, Hezekiah and each one of his Princes, shall be as a place where
one may cover himself from the violence of some rough wind, or as a haven where
ships may be sheltered from all damage in great storms and tempests. The
meaning is, that by the righteous and wise government of Hezekiah, and his
Princes, the People should be defended from all violence and oppression; and
that their government should be as welcome and acceptable to the Subjects, as
such a hiding place is wont tribe to men in such tempestuous times. Yea, this
might be spoken with particular respect to the destruction of Sennacheribs
army. For such a hiding place was Hezekiah to the poor Jews in those stormy
days, when by his prayers he prevailed with God for the breaking of that army;
and so Jerusalem was secured, and the enemies were kept from making such havoc
all the land over, as they had done in some parts of it. And so likewise the
following words set forth how chearing and comforting, yea, how abundantly
comfortable this government should be unto them, as Rivers of water in a dry
place, which do not only moisten the parched ground, and make it pleasant and
fruitful, but also yield great refreshing to the thirsty traveller; that is,
the wronged and oppressed, who are wont earnestly to thirst to have Justice
done them, shall be exceedingly joyed by the relief the Magistrate shall afford
them; as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, See the Note, Psalm. 63.1.
It shall be as great a refreshment to them, as it is to one that travelleth in
the scorching heat of the Sun thorough a desert, where there are no houses or
trees to shelter him, to get within the hollow cave of some great rock, or to
stand under the shadow of it. But now this is principally meant of the man
Christ: He is a hiding place by his merits, from the wrath of God, Satan, Sin,
Death and Hell. And so likewise he shelters and safeguards his people in the
windy days of affliction and persecution, of outward troubles and inward
temptations, from all dangers and evils, and discouraging fears and terrors: He
is as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land; to wit, in that by his grace he cools and suppresseth the distempered
heats of all sinful passions and corruptions in them and refresh their scorched
consciences with the promises of the Gospel, and the comforts of his Spirit.

Ver. 3. And the eyes of them that see, shall not be dim; and the ears of them
that hear, shall hearken.] That is, they shall not be spiritually blind and
deaf to the hearing of Gods word, as they were before; see the Note, Chap.
29.18. (for this is now opposed to the judgment before threatened, concerning
the blinding their eyes, and deafning their ears, Chap. 6.9, 10.) And this, I
conceive, is principally meant of the enlightening of mind, and teachable frame
of Spirit, which Christ would work in his people in the days of the Gospel.

Ver. 4. The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, etc.] That is,
They that were heady and rash (as all foolish and unregenerate persons are,
doing inconsiderately whatever their own carnal hearts, or others, as foolish
as themselves, shall suggest to them, without ever advising, whether it be good
or evil, safe or perilous), shall become understanding, prudent and discreet
persons. Though none are more hard to be taught than such giddy-headed and rash
persons, yet even they shall learn to be serious and well advised in all their
ways. So that here again, the knowing and understanding heart now promised, is
opposed to the fat and stupid heart before threatened, Chap. 6.10. Yea, and
observable it is, that the knowledge here promised, is ascribed to the heart:
The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge. The knowledge and
understanding of the natural man, is only in his mind and head; but that which
is here promised, is such as shall be accompanied with the fear and love of
God, and other holy affections wrought in the heart.

And the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.] Or
elegantly, as it is in the margin: That is, They that before were able to speak
of the things of God, and the truths of his Word but weakly, and as it were,
stammeringly and doubtingly, shall be then able to speak of them plainly, and
fully, and excellently, and withal sincerely; as when they confess their sins,
they shall do it freely and fully; and when they make profession of their
faith, they shall do it clearly and plainly, etc.

Ver. 5. The vile person shall be no more called liberal, etc.] That is, The
vicious worthless man, or the base sordid miser; which agrees best with that
which follows: nor the churl said to be bountiful. The meaning, as many
think, is, that in the better part of Hezekiah's Reign (to wit, when God had
delivered Jerusalem from that dangerous invasion of the Assyrians, and himself
from a very dangerous sickness), there should be such a reformation in the
land, that such wicked wretches, and covetous churls, should neither 1. be
soothed up by false Prophets in their vile ways, as they had been: Nor 2. be
admired, applauded and extolled by the people, as very good men, and liberal,
bountiful men, when it was done merely out of fear or flattrery, because they
were rich or great in the world: Or 3. much less be advanced to, or continued
in places of Honor and Magistracy, as it had been in the days of Ahaz; of whom
it may be some had continued too in their places, during the former and more
unsettled time of Hezekiah's Reign. And the ground of this last is, that amongst
the Jews, Princes and men in high places, had usually these Titles of Honor
given them, liberal and bountiful, and benefactors, as we find it, Luke 22.25.
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise
authority upon them, are called benefactors: whence it is, that the word in the
Hebrew, here translated liberal, is often in the Old Testament used for
Princes, as Prove. 17.7. and Mal. 1.8. But now understanding this, as we must,
mystically, of the days of the Gospel, then the meaning seems to be, either as
before, that in those days men shall be esteemed as they are: Vice shall not be
counted Virtue, nor vicious men be admired and advanced: Or rather, that Christ
by the Gospel should so clearly discover what is good and what is evil; and so
powerfully convince the consciences of men, that the fair shows and pretenses
of wicked men should not serve their turn; and that the godly being in esteem,
should have the more liberty and power to restrain the petulancy of ungodly men.

Ver. 6. For the vile person shall speak villainy, etc.] In this and the
following verse, a Reason is given of that in the foregoing verse, to wit, why
vile wickked persons, or base covetous churls, should not be admired or
extolled as liberal bountiful men by the people; or should not be in places of
Dignity, and Power, and Authority (especially (say some) when the Gospel Light
should come to make a clear discovery of men); namely, because such persons
would, both by word and deed, make it apparent what they were; no way fit to be
so admired, or so advanced. For the vile person will speak villainy; that is,
his tongue will vent the wickedness and villainy that is in his heart: and his
heart will work iniquity; that is, in his heart he will be still plotting and
contriving wickedness and mischief; to practice hypocrisy; that is, even to
cover over his wicked practices with fair pretenses of Religion and Justice,
which makes his wickedness the more abominable: and to utter error against the
Lord; that is, to pronounce unjust sentences in judgment, or to say any thing
to cause them to be pronounced contrary to the law and command of God. (This, I
conceive, is the meaning of this expression. For though thereby might be meant
also, all his blasphemous and Atheistical speeches against God and his
Providence, his flouting at Gods Word, and Worship, and Prophets, all Religion
and Piety, and all profane speeches, as are with such men; yet I rather think
that particular before mentioned is here, at least, principally intended,
because this suits best with that which went before, and that which follows
after): to make empty the soul of the hungry; and he will cause the drink of
the thirsty to fail; that is, to oppress the poorest amongst the people, and to
bereave them of those things wherewith their lives should be sustained. Some, I
know, do understand those words, and to utter error against the Lord, of the
wicked man's spreading false Doctrines amongst the people, whereby they are led
into error: and accordingly they also expound the following words; to make
empty the soul of the hungry, etc. of his withholding the Doctrine of Life and
Salvation from the people, that spiritual nourishment wherewith their hungry
and thirsty souls should have been refreshed. But this is not the usual sin of
the vile person, and the churl, of whom the Prophet is here speaking,

Ver. 7. The instruments also of the Churl are evil, etc.] That is, say some,
All those he imploys as his instruments for the effecting of his wicked
practices, his Servants and Ministers, are as base and vile likewise as he is:
he makes use of no other but such as himself is; Or rather, all the tricks and
artificial devices and means he uses to effect his designs, are stark naught;
for so this seems to be explained in the following words, he devises wicked
devices to destroy the poor with lying words; that is, By false Informations
and Witnesses, or by unjust Censures, proceedings wherein Justice is pretended,
when nothing but injustice and oppression is intended; even when the needy
speaks right, that is, When his cause is just, and he desires and pleads
nothing in his defense but what is most equal and just. Indeed this last clause
may be read as it is in the Margin, when he speaks against the poor in
judgment; and then the meaning is, That the Churl will not stick to destroy the
poor with lying words, even when the poor man stands before Judgment seat,
which should be a Sanctuary for innocent persons.

Ver. 8. But the liberal devises liberal things, etc.] That is, The charitable
man is continually studying and contriving how to do good bountifully; for this
is added in opposition of what was said before of the covetous Churl, See the
Notes before, ver. 5, 6, 7. Indeed some would have it understood of such a
Prince as really deserves the title of bountiful and liberal. But it is clear,
that our Translators did intend it of all liberal persons in general; and by
liberal things shall he stand, or, be established, that is, The more liberal he
is, the surer he shall stand, the more firmly he shall be settled in a
prosperous condition.

Ver. 9. Rise up, ye Women that are at ease, etc.] Having in the foregoing part
of the Chapter promised a time of mercy and deliverance to the faithful, here
the Prophet returns again to threaten the Jews with those grievous Calamities
that should come upon them, before those comfortable times should come, of
which he had now spoken, Rise up, ye Women that are at ease, hear my voice ye
careless Daughters, etc. Some by the Women here spoken to, understand the
Cities of Judea; and by the Daughters, the Villages belonging to those Cities.
But I see not why it should not be understood literally of the Women amongst
the Jews, and those especially that living in great plenty, idleness and
luxury, were most void of all care and fear; for to these the Prophet might
purposely address his speech; 1. Because such are apt to live most at ease, and
to be most secure. 2ly. Because Women are most likely to be affrighted with the
prediction of approaching Calamities, and would be most unable to bear what in
such times they were like to endure. And 3ly. especially to imply, the
greatness of the vengeance that was coming upon them, wherein the very Women
should not be spared; no, the greatest or richest of them, though best provided
to make an escape, should be able to get out of the enemies hands, but should
suffer with the common sort. As for that expression, Rise up ye Women that are
at ease, it is used to imply, either 1. with what great attention and reverence
it was fit they should hearken to what he would say to them, as being of
matters of great concernment, and given him in charge by the Lord their God,
See the Note, Numb. 23.18. Or, 2ly. the folly of their security in a time of so
great danger. It was no time for them to sit still; as fearless and careless as
they were, it would not belong ere God would rouse them up.

Ver. 10. Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless Women, etc.]
That is, ye that are now so careless and fearless, shall then be piteously
troubled. And because it is said of the Judgment here threatened, that it should
continue a long time (many days and years) therefore many Expositors hold, That
a long succession of several calamities is here intended; and so that it must
not be restrained only to Sennacheribs invading of Judea, and blocking up
Jerusalem, but must be extended to the destruction of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, and the seventy years of the Babylonian Captivity, yea, to the
utter desolation that was afterward brought upon this land and people by the
Romans. And indeed some of the following passages must necessarily be
understood in this large extent, for the vintage shall fail, the gathering
shall not come; to wit, Either because of the havoc the enemy should make in
their Country, or because it should afterward lie desolate and untilled, and
without inhabitants; See the Notes, Exodus 23.16. and Levit. 26.34.

Ver. 11. Tremble ye women that are at ease, be troubled ye careless ones,
etc.] As if he had said, As fearless as ye are now, ye shall be troubled and
tremble; Strip ye, and make ye bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins; that
is, put off your ordinary attire, and clothe your selves with sackcloth, as
mourners use to do: yet this last clause may be intended as by way of
foretelling how they should be used by their enemies, when they prevailed over
them.

Ver. 12. They shall lament for the teats, etc.] That is, Because the Women's
breasts (and some would extend it also to kine and sheep) were dried up for
want of food, and so they wanted milk for their little ones. And so indeed it
was, when Jerusalem was besieged by the Babylonians, Lam. 4.3, 4. Even the
Sea Monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones; the
daughter of my people is become cruel, like the Ostriches in the wilderness.
The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of his mouth for thirst,
etc. But yet very many Expositors by the teats here, do understand their fields
and vineyards, the two breasts which did continually yield plenty of
nourishment to the inhabitants; and thus, say they, the Prophet explains
himself in the following words, for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.
But this may be added, as a further cause of their sorrow, to wit, That they
should mourn, as for the dryness of their breasts, so also for the want of the
fruit of their Fields and Vineyards.

Ver. 13. Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briars, etc.] The
Expression here used, seems to intend, That the land of Judea should be wholly
overgrown with briars and thorns, See the Notes Chap. 7.23, 24* and that,
notwithstanding it was the land which God had appointed to be the inheritance
of his peculiar people; so that there was no cause upon that account to flatter
themselves that it should not be so; yea upon all the houses of joy in the
joyous City; that is, even in those places where those gallant houses stand in
the City of Jerusalem (see the Note, Chap. 22.2.) where there is nothing now,
but pleasure, and mirth, and great jolity, shall briars and thorns grow up, the
houses themselves being burnt down by the enemy. And indeed some read this last
clause so, burning upon all the houses of joy in the joyous City; which how it
was accomplished when Jerusalem was taken by the Babylonians, we may ^ead 2
King. 25.9.

Ver. 14. Because the palaces shall be forsaken, etc.] That is, The stately
houses of their Kings, Princes, and other great men; the multitude of the City
shall be left, that is, say some, They shall be left without a King or other
Princes to defend them. But there is rather here an inversion of words, the
multitude of the City shall be left, for the City shall be left of its
multitude, according to that sad complaint, Lam. 1.1. How does the City sit
solitary that was full of people! See the Notes also, Chap. 6.11, 12. The forts
and towers, (or the clifts and watch-towers) of which see the Note 2 Chronicles.
27.3. shall be for dens for ever, that is, For a long time, as indeed during
the Babylonian Captivity it was so for seventy years; a joy of wild asses, See
the Note, Chap. 13.21. a pasture of flocks, see Chap. 17.2.

Ver. 15. Until the Spirit, etc.] By affixing this period to the desolation
before threatened, the Prophet returns again to the comforting of his faithful
Servants. This desolation shall be in the land of Judah, says he, until the
Spirit be poured upon us from on high, that is, Until God from heaven do by his
quickening Spirit, abundantly poured forth upon us, restore his people to a
comfortable and flourishing estate and condition. And this seems to import, 1.
That whereas they were in as hopeless a condition, as so many dead men (as it
is said of them, Lam. 3.6. He has set me in dark places, as they that be dead
of old) God would breathe a spirit of life into them, and quicken them again;
which is that Ezekiel foretold in his Prophecy, Chap. 37. concerning the
Resurrection of the dead and dry bones. 2ly. That whereas they were like trees
or plants that seem in winter to be quite dead, God would make them alive
again, and cause all things to be with them in a flourishing condition again,
as it is with the Creatures, Psa. 104.30. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they
are created, and thou renewest the face of the earth; concerning which, see the
Note there. And 3ly. That whereas they were spiritually dead in sin, God would
by his spirit of Grace revive and quicken them, and make them a holy people: So
that as the desolation before threatened may be understood to have been
accomplished gradually at several times; (See the Note before) so this period
set for the reviving of them again by the pouring forth of the spirit upon them
from on high, may be understood likewise of several times; as 1. partly of the
reviving and the reformation of the state of Judea in Hezekiahs days, after God
had so wonderfully destroyed Sennacheribs Army. Or, 2ly. more fully and clearly
of that strange quickening and reviving of the Jewish State, when that people
were set free out of Babylon, and coming home again to their own Country,
Jerusalem was rebuilt and reinhabited with multitudes of people as in former
times: Or, 3ly* and principally, of the glorious change that was wrought in the
Church in the days of the Gospel, when God did so abundantly pour forth of his
Spirit, first upon the Apostles, and afterward upon the whole body of his
people that embraced the faith of Christ according to that promise, Joel 2.28.
And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all
flesh, etc. whereupon the Church did spring up and flourish again after an
unusual and unwonted manner. As for that which is mentioned in the following
words, as the effect of this pouring forth of Gods Spirit upon them; and the
wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest,
See the Note Chap. 29.17. understanding it of Gospel Times, the meaning seems
to be, That after that plentiful effusion of Gods Spirit upon his people, those
that were before as a barren wilderness, shall become fruitful; and they that
before had some beginnings of Grace wrought in them, should bring forth fruits
in such abundance, that their former life should seem but as a wilderness,
where no fruits were.

Ver. 16. Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain
in the fruitful field.] That is, Justice shall be duly executed, and men shall
carry themselves justly toward those with whom they converse (which also
implies the true fear of God) all the land over; see the Note, Chap. 29.17. But
if we will take it as spoken mystically concerning the days of the Gospel, then
the meaning seems to be, that both amongst the Gentiles, that were as a barren
wilderness, and among the Jews that had been for many years his peculiar
fruitful field, where he was only known and worshipped, when they were gathered
into the Church of Christ, both the righteousness of faith and the
righteousness of works should be continually found.

Ver. 17. And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever.] That is, The fruit of this
righteousness amongst Gods people, shall be all manner of peace (inward and
outward, with God and with men, as far as is good for them), and so withal a
quiet recumbency upon God, in the assurance of his love and provident care over
them; and that not for some little while only, as it is with the peace of the
wicked, but constantly and for ever; see the Notes, Chap. 26.3, 4. Psalm. 72.2,
3. and 119.165.

Ver. 18. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure
dwellings, and in quiet resting places.] That is, By reason of Gods protection,
they shall dwell safely and without fear wherever they are: see the Note, Prove.
1.33.

Ver. 19. When it shall hail, coming down on the forest, etc.] This, according
to our Translation, must be referred to that which was said in the two
foregoing verses, to wit, thus, that Gods people should enjoy that peace and
safety there promised, even when it shall hail, coming down on the forest; that
is, when the judgments of God shall be poured forth upon the Heathens, or the
wicked of the world round about them, that were as a wild and fruitless forest.
But yet, they that understand the foregoing promises of the peace and quietness
of spirit which Christians should enjoy in the days of the Gospel, do
accordingly also understand this, when it shall hail, coming down on the
forest, either of a storm of divine wrath, that should then fall upon the
Nation of the Jews, who had been Gods fruitful field, but were then become a
forest: Or else mystically, that whilst true Believers enjoyed such wonderful
peace, the Gospel should pour forth a storm of dreadful terrors and vengeance
upon the consciences of those to whom it should prove a savor of death unto
death, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. As for the next clause, If we read it, as it is in
the margin, and the city shall be utterly abased, then the intendment of it
must be the same with that which went before; to wit, either that Gods people
should be safe and fearless, when the Cities of Gods and his peoples enemies,
or Babylon in particular, should be utterly ruined; see the Note, Chap. 26.5.
or that the Church of Christ should enjoy the peace promised them, when other
places should be like Cities levelled with the ground. But if we read it, as it
is in our Bibles, and the city shall be low in a low place, the words seem to
be added as a farther illustration of the safety and peace of Gods people;
namely, that they should not need to build their Cities on high and steep
places, as men use to do, that they may be made the more defensible, because
even in those Cities that were in Plains and Valleys, and seemed to lie most
open to invasion, they should be, through Gods protection, safe and without all
fear of danger.

Ver. 20. Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, etc.] This may be
understood, 1. literally, as spoken by way of admiring the great plenty
wherewith the Prophet foresaw God would bless the land of Judah, after those
times of peace, of which he had now prophesied: Blessed are ye that sow beside
all waters: As if he should have said, Happy shall they be that shall live to
see that day, when your land, that was wasted by the Assyrians, or that lay
overgrown with briars and thorns, during the Babylonian Captivity, shall be so
fruitful, that it shall yield as rich Crops to those that sow their seed
therein, as those grounds usually do, that lie by great Rivers, or are any way
best watered; that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass, to wit,
to till, and plow, and harrow the Grounds; and so to fit them for the sowing of
seed in them, or to tread out their Corn, after it is reaped, with the feet of
those Cattle: Or the meaning may be, that their land should yield them such
plenty of Corn, that they should not need to spare it to grow up for Harvest;
but should turn out their Cattle to ^eed in their Cornfieldsd, as in their
Pasture-grounds; or at least, that they should put in their Cattle to crop it
for a time, because it should grow up so exceeding rank. But 2. It may be
understood mystically, as spoken with respect to Gospel Times: Blessed are ye
that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the
ass: that is, Blessed shall they be, that shall in those days be sent forth to
sow the seed of the Gospel; and that because they shall, to their great joy,
find the hearts of the people, where their seed is sown, to be as fat and well
watered ground, that shall bring forth fruit abundantly. Some indeed, by sowing
beside all waters, do understand, sowing the seed of the Gospel among all
Nations. But I conceive it is only the fruitfulness of the soil that is implied
by that expression.

CHAP. XXXIII.
VERSE 1. WOE to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled: and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee, etc.] Some
understand this of the Babylonian; and the rather, because the same words, in a
manner, are before spoken of the Babylonians: see the Note, Chap. 21.2. But it
is rather the Assyrian, and it may be Sennacherib particularly, over whom the
Prophet does here insult, denouncing a War against them, because they had
wasted and destroyed so many Countries, and of late the land of Israel, being
no way provoked thereto by any injury which those Nations had offered to them;
and because they had dealt perfidiously with those that had no way dealt so
with them. And this last some would have to be purposely added, with respect to
Sennacherib's proceeding on to waste the land of Judea, after he had taken a
great sum of money of Hezekiah, to withdraw his Army. But for that see the
Notes, 2 Kings 18.7, 14, 17. The woe denounced is set forth in the following
words: when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou
shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with
thee: that is, when God shall put an end to thy rapine and treachery, the same
shall be done to thee which thou have formerly done to others. And that which
is said of others dealing treacherously with him, may be looked upon as
accomplished, when Sennacherib was slain by his own Sons, as he was worshipping
in the house of Nizroch his God, 2 Kings 29.37.

Ver. 2. O Lord, be gracious unto us, etc.] The Prophet having foretold the
destruction of the Assyrians, or other the enemies of Gods people, does here
suddenly, as not able any longer to contain himself, break forth into a prayer,
either as in his own name, or the name of the Church in general, desiring the
speedy performance of that destruction upon the enemy which he had now
foretold. And this he does, as foreseeing the great misery and danger his
people would be in, until this deliverance came; and withal, as acknowledging
the just hand of God therein upon them; and showing, that it was by praying
unto God for mercy, that the deliverance promised must be obtained: O Lord, be
gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: see the Note, Chap. 8.17. be thou
their arm; that is, their mighty defense and strength for the subduing of their
enemies; see the Note, Psalm. 89.21. every morning; that is, constantly, and
without delay; see the Notes, Job 7.17. and Psalm. 73.14. our salvation also in
the time of trouble; to wit, say some, as thou have been to thy people in
former times.

Ver. 3. At the noise of the tumult the people fled, etc.] Here the Prophet
returns again to speak of the destruction threatened before, ver. 1. speaking of
that which was to be, as if it were done already. Some understand it of the
tumult raised amongst the Babylonians by the Medes and Persians, when they
ruined that great Monarchy. But the most of Expositors by far, understand it of
the ruin of the Assyrian Army, 2 King. 19.36. At the noise of the tumult the
people fled, that is, At the noise of the tumult raised in the Assyrian Camp,
when the Angel came upon them in such a dreadful manner (See the Note Chap.
30.30.) and struck them with a pannick fear, and made such a slaughter amongst
them; they that were not yet slain, fled away; at the lifting up of thy self,
that is, say some, When thou did ascend thy Tribunal to pronounce sentence of
Judgment against them, or when thou did appear in thy mighty power to execute
vengeance upon them, having before seemed to sit still, and not to mind them;
the Nations were scattered, to wit, the several Nations that served in the
Assyrian Army. But see the Note Psalm. 68.1.

Ver. 4. And your spoil, etc.] That is, The spoil which you, O Assyrians, have
plundered and taken away from other Nations, like so many Caterpillars,
devouring all things where you come, and whereof you also are now like to be
spoiled; Or, the spoil which you the people of God shall find in the Assyrian
Camp, shall be gathered like the gathering of the Caterpillars; that is, say
some, As easily as the Caterpillars do gather and eat up all green things where
they come. But rather the meaning is, That the Jews should gather up the spoil
in the Assyrian Camp, with as much ease, and in as great abundance, as
Country People, even Children amongst others, are wont to gather Caterpillars
in a time when they abound, and to throw them in great heaps into pits, which
they have dug for the burying of them; as the running to and fro of locusts,
shall he run upon them; that is, say some, As the locusts run to and fro in the
fields, eating up, and destroying all as they go, so shall the Angel of the
Lord break through the Assyrian Army, making dreadful havoc amongst them
wherever he comes. But rather this also is spoken of the spoils before
mentioned; and so the words are to be understood thus, as the running to and
fro of locusts, shall he run upon them; that is, As when God sends a Plague of
Locusts upon any place, the inhabitants are wont with much eagerness to get out
from every house, old and young, and to run up and down in their Gardens,
Fields, and Vineyards, and gather up and destroy innumerable multitudes of
these harmful Creatures; so shall every one of the Jews run up and down in the
Camp of the Assyrians to gather up the spoils they shall find there; Or rather,
(for that suits best with the Expression here used, as the running to and fro
of Locusts) As the Locusts run to and fro in the field, so shall each man that
goes out of Jerusalem, run up and down to gather what spoils he can find in
the Camp of the Assyrians.

Ver. 5. The Lord is exalted, etc.] That is, He will be exalted, to wit, by the
dreadful Judgment which he will execute upon the Assyrians; See the Note Chap.
2.11. for he dwells on high, and so has all things both in heaven and earth
under his command, and can therefore destroy the great ones of the World when
ever he pleases; see the Note Psalm. 115.3. He has filled Zion with Judgment
and righteousness, that is* He will there abundantly discover, That he is a
just and a righteous God, by delivering his people according to his promise,
and executing Judgment upon his and their enemies; and they shall every where
extol God for these things. Or, by these things he will cause Jerusalem, that
was formerly full of all injustice and unrighteousness, to abound with judgment
and righteousness; to wit, in the days of Hezekiah, when this shall be done,
See the Note Chap. 32.16. yet this may be extended also to the days of the
Gospel.

Ver. 6. And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and
strength of Salvation, etc.] That is, Thy times, O Hezekiah! for here the
Prophet directs his speech as if he had been speaking to him, in whose days the
great things now foretold were to be done. And the meaning is, That the true
Wisdom and saving Knowledge of God that should abound in his times, and more
especially his own particular Wisdom and Knowledge, and the exercise thereof in
that pious and prudent managing the affairs of the Realm, should be the means
to establish the peace and prosperous condition of their state, and a strong
safeguard to them in every regard, during his reign; which agrees with that
which Hezekiah said to Isaiah, 2 King. 20.19. Is it not good, if peace and
truth be in my days? And indeed in his Son Manasseh's days all fell into
Confusion again; the fear of the Lord is his treasure, that is, His piety and
care for the worship of God shall be dearer to him, than any Treasure; Or, he
shall be in this regard, richer than any Treasures could make him; yea it shall
be the means too of advancing his Wealth exceedingly; See 2 Chronicles. 32.27, 28,
29.

Ver. 7. Behold, their valiant ones, etc.] The Prophet does here set forth the
sad condition wherein the Jews should be, before God destroyed the Assyrian
Army; thereby the more to magnify the greatness and the seasonableness of the
following deliverance; and withal to fore-arm the faithful against their being
overmuch disheartened, when they should see the land brought into such distress;
Their valiant ones shall cry without, that is, Their valiant Garison-soulders
shall with a loud voice, and that openly in the very streets, bewail their
extreme danger. Or, (if we read it, as it is in the Margin) their messengers
shall cry without, that is, Either the Messengers which the King and State of
Judah did at first send to Sennacherib to desire terms of peace from him, 2
King. 18.14. or those they sent afterward to Rabshakeh to parley with him, and
to see if they could any way appease him, ver. 18. shall without the City, as
they return back, or in public in the streets, cry out for very anguish of
spirit, because of the succeslesness of all their endeavors, and the
desperateness of their dangers. And thus this first clause is the same with
that which follows, the Ambassadors of peace, that is, That were sent to see if
they could make peace; (and some add too, That they were men that were all for
making peace with the Assyrian, and that they did at first bring back word,
that there was great hope of peace, to wit, when Sennacherib agreed to stay his
hand upon condition of their paying him a certain sum of money, 2 King. 18.14.)
shall weep bitterly, to wit, when they shall see all their endeavors come to
nothing: which how it was accomplished, we may see 2 King. 18.37. where it is
said, that these Messengers returned to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, etc.

Ver. 8. The highways lie waste, etc.] This may be taken as the sad report,
which the Messengers before mentioned, sent to Sennacherib, made of the
miserable condition wherein the land lay, or as a further relation hereof by
the Prophet, The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man cease, to wit, no
man daring to travel in the common roads, because they were so pestered with
the Assyrian soldiers; See the Note, Judge. 5.6. he has broken the Covenant,
that is, Sennacherib has broken the Covenant he made with us. And this I
conceive he is charged with, not so much because the Kings of Judah, and
particularly Ahaz the Father of Hezekiah, had made a Covenant with the
Assyrian, that he should help the Jews against their enemies, as because he had
agreed with them at this very time, that upon the payment of such a sum of
money by way of Composition, which himself assigned, he would withdraw his
Army; and yet when he had gotten the money from them, he proceeded in the same
hostile manner against them, as he did before; for which see the Notes, 2 King.
18.14, 17. I know some would have this understood of the people of Judah's
breaking Covenant with God; and others would have it to be a complaint of the
people concerning Gods breaking Covenant with them. But it is clear the Prophet
speaks this of the Assyrian; and so likewise that which follows, he has
despised the Cities, to wit, in that in a boasting way he slighted their
strength, and rejected their Messengers when they sued to him for peace, and
made nothing of destroying them utterly, and levelling them with the ground,
not caring to preserve them for himself or his people; he regards no man,
that is, He neither fears any man, nor pitieth any man, but as a man void of
all humanity makes havoc of all where he comes. And it may be, as some think,
that in this last clause the Prophet had particular respect to Sennacheribs
speaking so reproachfully of Hezekiah, and to the scorn he put upon his Nobles,
when having received that great sum of money of them, which Hezekiah had sent
him for the purchase of his peace, he sent them away in a disgraceful manner,
without doing that which he had promised; See 2 King. 18.14, 17, 22. etc.

Ver. 9. The earth, etc.] That is, The whole land of Judea, mourns and
languisheth, to wit, as being laid waste by the Assyrians, See the Note, Chap.
24.4. Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down, that is, It is ashamed because all her
lofty trees are hewn down; Sharon (See the Note, Cant. 2.1.) is like a
wilderness, to wit, as being in a manner wholly left desolate without man or
beast; and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits, that is, They are as a
tree that is left bare, and has lost her fruit by reason of the great waste
the enemy has made there. The end of the Prophet in naming these particular
places, was certainly to imply, That all the most goodly and fruitful places in
the kingdom, should be thus destroyed. And if that could be made good which
some say, That Lebanon was in the utmost North parts of Judea, and Carmel in
the South, Basan in the East, and Sharon in the West; we might well think, that
these places were purposely singled out to show that the whole land should be
left desolate and waste. Some indeed say, That the two last here named, were
not in the Kingdom of Judah, but in that of the ten Tribes; and therefore hold,
that by Bashan and Carmel here, are figuratively meant, the exceeding fruitful
and pleasant places in Judea, such as Bashan and Carmel were. But it is clear,
that there was a Bashan in Judah's portion; See the Note, 1 Samuel 25.2. And then
besides, considering that the whole Kingdom of Israel had been already
destroyed in a great measure by the Assyrians, the Prophets aim being to show,
that the whole land God had given to be the portion of his people, should be
thus overrun, it is no wonder, though some places are named that were in the
Kingdom of Israel.

Ver. 10. Now will I rise, says the Lord; now will I be exalted, now will I
lift up my self.] That is, Now, that my people are brought into such seeming
desperate extremities, and now their enemies are grown so exceeding insolent,
now will I arise and glorify my self in the destruction of their enemies; see
the foregoing Notes, ver. 3, 5. and Psalm. 68.1.

Ver. 11. Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble, etc.] This is
spoken to the Assyrians. And the words may be understood two several ways,
either, 1. that the Plots which they had conceived against Jerusalem and
against Gods people, were foolish, and the event should be accordingly vain and
to no purpose, like chaff and stubble, nothing worth, as if they had sown
chaff, and stubble had grown up instead of Corn. Or else 2. that their designs
against Jerusalem should prove the occasion of their own utter ruin. Chaff and
stubble are very combustible matter: and therefore by saying they should
conceive chaff, and bring forth stubble, is meant, that they should plot and
bring forth that which should be the means of consuming them. And hereto agrees
that which follows; your breath, as fire, shall devour you: that is, as a man
by blowing, kindles a fire; so you by the rage which you breathe forth against
God and against his people, shall by provoking Gods wrath against you, bring
destruction upon you; and so the fire which you thought to kindle for the
burning of others, shall consume your selves; see the Note, Job 15.35.

Ver. 12. And the people shall be as the burnings of lime, etc.] That is, As
hard Chalk-stones are burnt in Kilnes till they become Lime, so shall the Lord
consume the stoutest of the Soldiers that serve in the Assyrian Army: as thorns
cut up shall they be burnt in the fire; that is, they shall be easily and
suddenly destroyed, even as thorns, not growing and green, but cut up and
sear, will soon take fire, and are speedily burnt and consumed; which is meant
of the sudden destruction of the Assyrian Army, 2 Kings 19.35. But see the
Notes, Chap. 27.4, 11. and 2 Samuel 23.6.

Ver. 13. Hear ye that are far off, what I have done, etc.] This may be meant
of those Nations that dwelt in Countries far remote from Judea, to whom the
report should be brought of this great work of God, in destroying the
Assyrians, and delivering Jerusalem. And then in the following clause, and ye
that are near, acknowledge my might; by those that are near, is meant, those
neighboring Nations that being nearer to them, might have fuller and clearer
information and assurance of what God had done. Or else by those that are far
off, may be meant all foreign Nations; and by them that are near, the Jews that
were eyewitnesses of this work of wonder. The drift of these words is to
imply, that the vengeance which God would execute upon the Assyrians, should be
talked of with admiration, far and near, all the world over; see the like
expression, Chap. 18.3.

Ver. 14. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites, etc.] That is, those wicked wretches in Jerusalem, that professing
themselves Gods people, had yet formally slighted and derided Gods Prophets
when they foretold the Judgments that were coming upon them. When the evil
threatened did come upon them, then these secure men were overwhelmed with
terrors; who among us, say they, shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among
us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? And some think they are supposed to
speak this upon occasion of that dreadful slaughter which the Angel of the Lord
did in one night make in the Assyrian Camp, 2 Kings 19.35. which many hold was
done by thunder and lightning from Heaven; to wit, that being terrified
herewith, as being conscious to themselves of their own disobedience and
rebellions against that great God that had done this, they began to think how
dangrous it was for them that must enjoy constant communion with a God that was
so zealous of his glory, so severe against sinners, and so continually ready to
break forth in his wrath as a consuming fire to devour them here; yea, and to
punish them with everlasting burnings in hell heareafter: who among us, say
they, shall dwell with that devouring fire? etc. But I rather think, that this
is intended concerning the terrors wherewith these sinners in Zion should be
surprised, upon the marching of the Assyrians against Jerusalem. Yet withal,
this must be added, that the fire wherewith these wicked wretches profess
themselves to be so exceedingly frighted, was not simply the Assyrian Army, as
concluding, that they would come and burn the City Jerusalem, and lay all waste
before them, as they had done wherever they came: but the wrath of God (who
upon this ground is indeed called a consuming fire; see the Note, Deuteronomy. 4.24.)
breaking forth, and clearly discovering it self in this invasion of the
Assyrians, and their carrying all before them with unresistable violence; which
as it had before consumed the Ten Tribes, and at this time a great part of the
land of Judea, so their guilty consciences made them apprehend it would now
likewise devour them in Jerusalem, and would never leave burning, till all was
consumed by it: who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst
us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? And indeed it is evident, that by
everlasting burnings here, the fire of Hell cannot be meant, because in the
following verse it is said, that the righteous man shall without fear dwell
with this fire; He that walks righteously, etc. It was, I say, the wrath and
vengeance of God in the fury of the Assyrians, which these sinners feared would
be a consuming fire to them: And observable it is, that in this their
complaint, they charge all their danger upon Gods extreme severity, and not
upon themselves.

Ver. 15. He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly: he that
despises the gain of oppression, that shakes his hands from holding of
bribes, etc.] That is, that rejects them with loathing and detestation; that
stops his ears from hea^ing of blood, that is, that will not endure to hear
any motion made of any violence or injury to be offered to the life or
livelihood of his brethren; see the Note, Chap. 1.15. and shuts his eyes
from seeing evil: that is, from the sight of any thing that should entice him
to evil; or that is so far from doing evil himself, that he cannot endure to
see others do it. This is the answer that is returned to that doleful
exclamation of the wicked distrustful hypocrites amongst the Jews in the
foregoing verse: Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? etc. Why,
says the Prophet, He that walks righteously, etc. He that will live a holy
righteous life, may safely dwell with God, though he be a consuming fire to
wicked ungodly wretches. And thus he gives them to understand, that if the
wrath of God were so terrible to them, they must charge it upon their own
wickedness, not upon Gods severity. A good and a righteous man needs not fear
it.

Ver 16. He shall dwell on high: his place of defense shall be the munitions of
rocks, etc.] That is, Such a man shall be as safe and as fearless, as if he
dwelt in some impregnable Fort, built upon inaccessible Rocks: the Church of
God shall be as munitions of Rocks to him: bread shall be given him, his waters
shall be sure; that is, he shall not want meat and drink, nor any thing
necessary for the support of his life, no not in the time when Jerusalem shall
be besieged by the Assyrians.

Ver. 17. Thine eyes, etc.] This is a farther promise made to the righteous
man, of whom the Prophet had spoken in the two foregoing verses. Thine eyes
shall see the King in his beauty; that is, Hezekiah. Though he may be for a
time in a very sad and forlorn condition (as he was indeed when the Assyrians
had wasted the greatest part of his Kingdom, and he was glad to crouch to an
insolent Tyrant, and beg Conditions of Peace of him, 2 Kings 18.14. and yet
could not prevail, but was only abused and scorned by him, and at last besieged
by his Forces in the City Jerusalem; and when upon this occasion he went up to
the Temple to implore Gods help, having rent his clothes, and covered himself
with sackcloth, 2 Kings 19.1.) yet shall he afterward Reign in greater Majesty
and Glory than ever he did formerly; to wit, after God had so miraculously
destroyed the Assyrian Army, after which it is said, that many brought presents
to Hezekiah, so that he was magnified in the sight of all nations from
thenceforth, 2 Chronicles. 32.23. they, that is, thine eyes, shall behold the land
that is very far off. The meaning is, that the time should come when they
should no longer be cooped up in Jerusalem, because the besiegers being all
destroyed, they might safely and securely go abroad whither they would, and
travel peaceably into the remotest parts of the land; yea, if their occasions
did so require, into foreign Countries. Many learned Expositors do otherwise, I
know, understand this last clause; as 1. that they should see Ambassadors come
to Hezekiah from a far Country, to wit, the Babylonians; for which see the
Note, 2 Kings 20.12. Or 2. that they should see Hezekiah's Kingdom enlarged, by
the bringing of foreign Countries under his Dominion. Or 3. that the Fame of
Hezekiah should be carried into Countries a far off. But the words of the Text
will very hardly bear either of these Expositions. And so likewise that which
others say, that in this whole verse the Prophet speaks to Shebna (of whom
mention was made before, Chap 22.15.) telling him, that he should see Hezekiah,
whom he slighted and despised, Reigning in great Majesty and Glory; and that
himself should be banished, or carried away Captive into a land a far off, it
no way suits with the tenor of that which the Prophet is speaking of in this
place. That which others say is far more probable, to wit, that under the type
of Hezekiah, the seeing of Christ in his Glory is here promised to the
faithful. Though for a time he should live in a low and despised condition, and
should at last be hanged up between two Thieves upon the Cross (when that was
fully verified, Chap. 53.2. he has no form nor comeliness; and when we shall
see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him), yet afterward the eyes
of his Servants should see this their King in his Beauty and Glory, to wit,
when as the only begotten Son of God, he rose triumphantly out of the Grave,
and ascended into Heaven: but especially when he shall come again at the last
day in exceeding great Glory, sitting on his Throne to judge the world. As for
that of their seeing the land that is very far off, some understand it of the
enlarging of Christ's Kingdom, even to the remotest parts of the world; others
of their seeing the land of rest, which in the highest Heavens God has
provided for the inheritance of his people.

Ver. 18. Thine heart shall meditate terror, etc.] First, This may be
understood of the terrors wherewith they should be perplexed, whilst the City
Jerusalem should be blocked up by the Assyrians (the Prophet putting them in
mind hereof, purposely to render them the more thankful for the following
deliverance); to wit, that in that time of danger their minds should be
continually running upon those things, the thought whereof must needs be
terrible to them; as namely, either that they should be still thinking of the
heavy pressures and Taxes that would be put upon them, when the Assyrians had
taken the City, and brought them into bondage. And so the words following may
be added, to represent the fear they should be still in of these exactors
coming upon them, to peel them of what they had: Where is the Scribe? to wit,
the Officer that kept the Roll of the Captives, and of the Tribute and Taxes
they were to pay: where is the receiver? that is, he that gathered the Tribute
or Taxes: where is he that counted the towers? that is, the Officer that was to
take a survey of the houses, that so taking notice of the fairest and
stateliest houses, he might set the greater Taxes upon them: Or else, that they
should be continually musing with themselves, how little hope there was that
they should be able to defend the City against so mighty an Army, they having
neither Soldiers to muster, nor Money to pay them, nor Forts fitted to keep off
the Enemy: where is the Scribe? or, as we say, the Muster-master: where is the
receiver? that is, the Treasurer or Play Master, that is to pay the Soldiers:
where is he that counted the towers? that is, the Officer that is to take a
view of the Towers, and other parts of the City, that by pulling down some, and
fortifying others, the City might be made the more defensible; for which see
the Note, Chap. 22.10. But 2. It may be likewise understood (and I think more
probably) of their calling to mind, after God had destroyed the Assyrians, the
terrors wherewith they had been formerly perplexed, Thine heart shall meditate
terrors, that is, When God has cut off those enemies that were such a terror
to thee, then thou shall often with some contentment, sit meditating on those
terrors, which in those times of thy distress were so dreadful to thee. And
accordingly the words following, Where is the Scribe? etc. may either be taken
as a representation of the despairing Speeches they uttered when they were so
distracted with fear, according to the Expositions before given of them; Or
else, as an insultation over those enemies that had a while since been such a
terror to them; Where is the Scribe? where is the Receiver? that is, Where are
your Muster-masters, and your Pay-masters? where is he that counted the towers?
that is, the Engineer, whose office it was to view the towers of Jerusalem,
that so order might be given against which part of the City their batteries
might be made; or what Towers or Galleries were to be raised in the Camp, for
the battering and assaulting them; as if it had been said, What is now become
of all the great Officers in Sennacheribs Army? they are all now gone, and
shall be no more a terror to us, as it follows in the next verse. Neither is it
improbable, that the Apostle does at least allude to this place in that
Expression of his, 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe, etc?

Ver. 19. Thou shall not see a fierce people, etc.] That is, This fierce people
the Assyrians, God will destroy and scatter, so that thou shall be quite rid of
them, neither shall they return any more to be a trouble and a terror to thee;
a people of a deeper speech than thou can perceive, of a stammering tongue,
that thou can not understand; See the Notes, Chap. 28.11. and Psalm. 81.5.

Ver. 20. Look upon Zion, etc.] Having in the foregoing verse assured the
faithful Jews, that they should never more see those enemies that were such a
terror to Jerusalem; here he triumphs in the preservation of that City, Look
upon Zion the City of our solemnities, that is, The City where God has
appointed his people to meet together to worship him in a solemn manner; thine
eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, that is, Free from the
disturbances that were formerly therein, the inhabitans living safely, and
without fear; a tabernacle that shall not be taken down, to wit, as other tents
and tabernacles used to be, and then to be removed to other places. And
therefore we must know, that Jerusalem is called a Tabernacle, with respect to
Gods dwelling there in the Temple, in the same manner as formerly he did in the
Tabernacle made by Moses; and withal to imply, that though it were in it self a
weak place, that might as easily be destroyed, as a Tabernacle may be taken
down; yet through Gods protection it should be preserved, as being chosen of
God to be his settled dwelling place unto the coming of the Messiah, See the
Notes Psalm. 78.68, 69. and 1 King. 9.3. And to the same purpose is that which
follows, not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any
of the cords thereof be broken. But now under this type of Jerusalem, the
perpetual peace and safety of the Church of Christ is intended, that therein
Gods people shall enjoy a peaceable and quiet habitation, See the Note Chap.
9.6. That God would so preserve it here in this World, that the gates of Hell
should never be able to prevail against it; and that at last she should be
triumphantly settled in an unchangable estate of happiness in Heaven. The
Tabernacle of the earthly Zion was removed, Lam. 2.6. He has violently taken
away his Tabernacle, as if it were of a Garden; it is in Heaven only that God
has promised his people a continuing City.

Ver. 21. But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers
and streams, etc.] As if the Prophet had said, Though Jerusalem be not
compassed about with any great River, as Babylon, and Niniveh, and many other
Cities are, but has only a small brook or two for the watering of it, yet that
shall be no hinderance to our preservation, because the Lord is with us, and he
w^ll be unto us instead of many such broad rivers and streams, securing us so
that no enemy shall come at us to hurt us; See the Note, Chap. 26.1. Yea,
whereas such great Rivers, that are in some regard a great defense to Cities,
have yet this discommodity in them, that thereby ships do usually come in to
besiege and batter those Cities, it shall not be so with us, because the Lord
will be such a River of defense about us, wherein shall go no galley with ^ars,
neither shall gallant ship pass thereby; that is, No ship or galley great or
small, shall be able to break through to assail or hurt us; See the Note, Chap.
8.6.

Ver. 22. For the Lord is our Judge, etc.] That is, he has taken us to be his
peculiar Covenant people, and therefore as our supreme Lord he will surely
protect us. And observable it is, that looking upon this as a sure ground of
comfort, he repeats it in a triumphant manner three several times, the Lord is
our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King; and then concludes,
he will save us; that is, As our Sovereign he will safe guard us, if we
continue Loyal to him, and live in obedience to his Laws.

Ver. 23. Thy tacklings are loosed, etc.] Having said ver. 21. That God would
be as a broad river about Jerusalem, through which no ship or galley should be
able to pass, to do them any mischief; here now, keeping to the former
metaphor, he addresseth his speech to the Assyrian, or in particular to
Sennacherib, as to one that was coming in some great gallioun, or with some
huge navy of ships against Jerusalem, assuring them that they should be all
certainly shipwracked and destroyed; Thy tacklings are loosed, that is,
Unfastened, or broken, Or, (reading it as it is in the Margin) They have
forsaken thy tacklings, that is, The mariners mind not thy tacklings; they
could not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail; that is,
The tacklings being loose and broken, could neither keep up the mast steady and
upright, nor spread or turn the sail, as occasion required. The drift of all
these Expressions is to make known to the Assyrians, that their condition
should be just like that of a ship, when the Mariners, desparing of safety, do
give over all care of ordering their tacklings; or where tacklings, and mast,
and sails are useless and broken, and so the ship must needs be driven up and
down by the wind and waves, till at last it be swallowed up of the Sea; that
is, They should be all certainly broken in pieces and destroyed: then is the
prey of a great spoil divided, that is, Then shall the inhabitants of Jerusalem
go forth and seize upon the spoil of the Assyrian Camp, even as when some great
ship is cast away, that was laden with rich Commodities; the people that dwell
on the coasts where this is done, are wont to make a prey of all that by the
Sea is driven on shore. And it is called a great spoil, partly because of the
multitude of them that were slain by the Angel in the Camp, an hundred
fourscore and five thousand, 2 King. 19.35. and partly because the Assyrians
had before that wasted and plundered in a manner the whole land of Judea; the
lame take the prey; the most impotent among them shall be able to take the
spoil; there shall be no difficulty in it, the enemy being all fled or lying
dead before them; See the Note, 2 Samuel 5.6.

Ver. 24. And the inhabitants shall not say, I am sick, etc.] That is, None of
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall have the least cause to complain of any
sickness or weakness, which the siege or the invasion of Sennacherib has
brought upon them; or more generally, The inhabitants of Jerusalem (and under
this type all the members of Gods Church are intended) shall through Gods
favor, live in a prosperous and comfortable condition, free from all things
hurtful to them. Yet I know many understand it, as spoken with respect to that
which was said in the foregoing verse, That the inhabitants of Jerusalem should
run out with all alacrity to seize upon the prey in the Assyrian Camp; no man
should withdraw himself from going forth under a pretense of being sick or
weak: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity; and so
God being reconciled to them, all shall be well with them; God will proceed no
more in a way of wrath and vengeance against them.

CHAP. XXXIV.
VERSE 1. COme near, etc.] This Chapter seems to be a Prophecy of the dreadful
vengeance which God would execute upon all the enemies of his Church and
people; amongst whom, ver. 5. the Edomites are particularly mentioned. And
accordingly in the first words, Come near ye Nations to hear, and hearken ye
people, either these Nations are summoned to hear the Judgments here denounced
against them, or else all Nations are called upon to take notice with
admiration, in what a terrible manner he meant to proceed against the enemies
of his people; let the earth hear, and all that is therein; in the Hebrew it
is, and the fullness thereof, for which see the Note, Psalm. 24.1. the world and
all things that come forth of it; See the Notes, Chap. 1.2. and Deuteronomy. 32.1.

Ver. 2. For the indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his fury upon
all their armies, etc.] That is, It will certainly fall upon them; See the
foregoing Note: he has utterly destroyed them, he has delivered them to the
slaughter, that is, It shall as certainly so be, as if it were done already;
the decree and sentence is gone out against them.

Ver. 3. Their slain also shall be cast out, etc.] To wit, in away of
detestation, and there left like the carcases of beasts, to rot above ground
without burial: Or, there shall be such multitudes slain, that those that are
left alive shall not be able to undertake the burial of them; and their stink
shall come up out of their carcases, that is, It shall ascend up and in^ect the
air; and the mountains shall be melted with their blood; that is, blood shall
run down from the Mountains, as if the very Mountains were melted into blood.
It is an Hyperbolical expression, whereby is hinted, 1. That even the Mountains
should not save those that fled thither for shelter. 2. That abundance of blood
should be shed there. And 3. that thus it should be with the Mountains, as it
were, out of fear of Gods wrath: see the like expressions, Psalm. 97.5. and Amos
9.13.

Ver. 4. And all the host of heaven, etc.] See the Note, Genesis 2.1. shall be
dissolved: that is, they shall melt and wither away. But the meaning is, that
by reason of the dreadfulness of Gods judgments, then inflicted on the enemies
of Gods people, it should be with them through extreme anguish and fear, as if
there were no such lights in the Heavens (see the Notes, Chap. 13.10, 13.) as
if they apprehended the whole frame of Heaven would break in pieces, and fall
upon their heads. And indeed it is usual with the Prophets to set forth
extraordinary judgments after the manner of the terror of the last judgment,
when the whole fabric of Heaven and Earth shall be dissolved, as we find it
foretold, Mat. 24.29. and 2 Pet. 3.10. and the heavens shall be rolled together
as a scrole: that is, they shall seem to pass away, so that the lights therein
shall be no more seen than the writing in a Parchment-scrole can be seen when
it is rolled up together; and see the Note, Psalm. 102.26. and all their host
shall fall down as the leaf falls off from the vine, and as a falling fig
from the fig tree, to wit, when they are withered, and so are easily blown down.

Ver. 5. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven, etc.] That is, In Heaven it is
decreed, that my sword shall be bathed with the blood of mine enemies; see the
Note above, ver. 2. and Psalm. 119.89. Or the meaning may be, that God from
Heaven would cause a sword to be drawn against them that should be bathed in
their blood, according to that of the Apostle, the wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness, Romans 1.18. behold it shall come down upon
Idumea; that is, upon the Edomites, and all the Churches deadly enemies: For
these are particularly named, only because they were always most bitter enemies
to the Jews, and their Country borde^ed upon Judea; and upon the people of my
curse; that is, even upon this people whom I have accursed; or, and upon all
other people whom I have destined to destruction; to judgment; that is, in a
way of taking Vengeance on them.

Ver. 6. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with
fatness, etc.] That is, It shall be filled with blood, etc. to wit, by reason
of the multitudes of them that should be slain and devoured thereby. And their
blood and fat are expressly named, in allusion to their Sacrifices, where the
blood and the fat were still offered. And upon the same respect is that next
expression used; and with the blood of lambs and g^ats, with the fat of kidneys
of rams; where he terms those that were to be slain, Lambs, and Goats, and
Rams, to imply, that the slaughtering of them, should be to them as a sweet
smelling Sacrifice, acceptable to God; see the Note, Exodus 32.29. Only I
conceive, that by these lesser sort of Sacrifices, the inferior and common sort
of people are meant, of several ages and conditions, young and old, the poorer
and richer sort. For the Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah, which was then the
Metropolis of Idumea, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea; that is, he
has determined to keep a solemn Festival-day there; which is said, because on
such days they used to offer a multitude of Sacrifices, 1 Kings 8.63.

Ver. 7. And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the
bulls, etc.] That is, Together with the inferior sort of people, of whom he had
spoken in the foregoing verse, their great, and strong, and mighty ones, their
Princes and Nobles, Captains and men of War, fierce, cruel, untameable men,
shall be knocked down and slain. And observable it is, that amongst these
greater sort of Cattle appointed for Sacrifices, he mentions Unicorns, that
never used to be sacrificed, purposely to hint unto us, that what he speaks
here of Sacrifices, was to be understood figuratively: and their land shall be
soaked with blood, and their dust made fatness; that is, their land, even the
driest part of it, shall be battened, as with dung, by their blood, and the fat
of their carcases.

Ver. 8. For it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompense
for the controversy of Zion.] That is, It is the set time which God has
appointed for taking vengeance on those his enemies, and for recompencing
abundantly into their bosoms, all the wrongs they had done to his people. For
by the controversy of Zion here, is meant, the controversy which the Jews had
with the Edomites for the mischief they had often done them; or the
controversy which God would have with them on his peoples behalf.

Ver. 9. And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust
thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch.] That
is, the streams, or the land of Bozrah or Idumea. In this Rhetorical
description of the devastation of this Country, there is certainly an allusion,
as often elsewhere, to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha; see the Notes,
Chap. 13.19. and Deuteronomy. 29.23. And the meaning seems to be, either 1. that their
Cities being set on fire, should burn like pitch and brimstone: Or 2. that the
land should be left desolate, the inhabitants, and all therein, being as it
were burnt up; that is, utterly consumed and destroyed: see Obad. 1.8. Or 3.
that their whole Country, even the most fruitful and best watered places
thereof, should be dry and parched, as if it were all pitch and brimstone, or
burnt up with showers of fire and brimstone, as Sodom and Gomorrha were: see
the Notes, Job 18.15, 16.

Ver. 10. It shall not be quenched night nor day, etc.] That is, The burning of
this land shall not be quenched. It is an Hyperbolical expression, signifying,
that the wrath of God should continually burn against them, like an
unquenchable fire: the smoke thereof shall go up for ever; that is, continually
for a long time: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; that is, for
many generations: none shall pass through it for ever and ever; that is, it
shall be no more inhabited, but shall be desolate for ever.

Ver. 11. But the cormorant (or the pelican) and the bittern shall possess it;
the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 14.
23. and Psalm. 102.6. and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion,
and the stones of emptiness; that is, the plummet, or level of emptiness: the
ground of which expression is, that in those times they used to hang a stone
upon the line of the level, as we now do a plummet of lead. The meaning is,
either 1 that God would order it so, that it should never be built again: they
that should undertake it, should find the issue of their labor to be nothing
but confusion and emptiness, according to that of the Prophet, Mal. 1.4.
Whereas Edom says, We are impoverished; but we will return and build the
desolate places: thus says the Lord of hosts, They shall build, but I will
throw down. Or 2. that God would lay their whole land utterly waste and
desolate. The expression here used, of doing this by line and level, is taken
from workmen, either that being to pull down some part of a building, are wont
by line and level to mark out how far it must be pulled down; or else, that
having quite pulled down a building, do use those instruments to see the ground
be laid level. But see the Note, 2 Kings 21.13.

Ver. 12. They shall call the Nobles thereof to the Kingdom, etc.] That is,
They that are left of the Edomites, shall invite the Nobles, or look out for
some of the Nobles, to take the Kingly Government upon them, that so they might
be ordered and defended by them: but none shall be there; that is, there shall
be none of their Nobles to be found (as being all destroyed); or at least, none
that will undertake the Government; see the Notes, Chap. 3.6, 7. and all her
Princes shall be nothing; that is, they shall be all found to be slain and
destroyed; or so poor and contemptible, that they shall be found as nothing for
the undertaking of such a Dignity. And thus the Prophet does covertly deride
their former vaunting in the glory of their Kingdom, telling them, that now
they should have a Kingdom without a King.

Ver. 13. And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the
fortresses thereof, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 32.13, 14. and it shall be an
habitation of Dragons; see the Note, Job 30.29. and a court for Owls, or
Ostriches; to wit, where their Princes had wont to keep their Courts; see the
Notes, Chap. 13.21, 22.

Ver. 14. The wild beasts of the desert, shall also meet with the wild beasts
of the island, and the Satyr shall cry to his fellow, etc.] See the Notes,
Chap. 13.21, 22. the shrich-owl also shall rest there, and find for her self a
place of rest; to wit, because there shall be no body there to disturb her.

Ver. 15. There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and
gather, etc.] That is, her young ones: under her shadow; that is, say some,
under the shadow of those ruins where she has made her nest; or rather, under
the shadow of her wings; all which imports, that these creatures should have
their settled abode there; and consequently, that this desolation of Idumea
should continue for a long time.

Ver. 16. Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read, etc.] Some understand
this of the book of Gods Law, wherein it is often said, how tenderly careful
God would be of his people, and how surely and severely he would punish their
enemies: and so they take this to be all one, as if the Prophet had said,
Observe whether God has not there threatened, that such desolations shall come
upon the wicked enemies of his people, as I have foretold. Again, others
understand it of the whole Scripture then written; and that because there are
many Prophecies therein, concerning the destruction of the Edomites; see Numb.
24.18. Psalm. 137.7. Amos 1.11, 12. But now the most of Expositors, and upon
better grounds, do understand it of the book of the Prophets; or rather
particularly, of the Prophecy of Isaiah, which he wrote by the guidance of Gods
Spirit; as if it had been said, When the time shall come, of which I have now
spoken, take the book of the Prophets, and read the relation of this which I
now prophecy, and you shall find, that every thing will exactly come to pass
which I have now foretold: no one of these shall fail; that is, no one of these
beasts and fowl before mentioned: none shall want her mate; which implies, that
they should breed, and fill the land; for my mouth it has commanded; as if he
had said, I have commanded my Prophet to foretell this; or I have ordered it to
be done. And then (speaking in his own person) he adds, and his spirit it has
gathered them; that is, God, according to what he foretold, has by a secret
instinct, or by his Almighty power and word of command, gathered these
creatures together.

Ver. 17. And he has cast the lot for them, etc.] That is, The wild beasts and
fowl before mentioned. God has given them the Land of Idu^^a for their settled
habitation, and they shall enjoy it without disturbance as men do an
inheritance that is by lot assigned to them: and his hand has divided it unto
them by line; that is, to each one their several portion; see the Notes, Psalm.
16.5, 6. they shall possess it for ever; from generation to generation shall
they dwell therein; see the Note before, ver. 10.

CHAP. XXXV.
VERSE 1. THe wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them, etc.]
That is, For the destruction of the enemies of Gods people, related in the
foregoing Chapter; and conseqently for the deliverance of his people thereby.
And the same is intended in the following clause; and the desert shall rejoice
and blossom as the rose. But now whereas some would have the meaning to be,
that the very deserts in Judea should rejoice at this so great a mercy; as if
the Prophet had said, that the very senseless Creatures should triumph; for this
see the Note, Psalm. 65.12. I rather think, that by the wilderness, the solitary
place and the desert, is meant, the land of Judea, which was by Sennacherib
laid waste like a desert (see the Note, Chap. 33.9.) and much more afterward,
when the Jews were carried captive into Babylon; and consequently, that the
promise here made, that this wilderness and desert should be glad and rejoice,
must be understood of the flourishing and joyful condition whereinto this land
should be brought, when the Assyrians first, and the Babylonians afterward
should be destroyed. Only we must know, that under this type a greater mercy is
promised, to wit, That the Church both of Jews and Gentiles under Christ, that
were in their natural estate, as a dry and barren Wilderness, void of all
goodness and grace, should be brought into a blessed, flourishing and joyful
Condition spiritually and initially in this life, but perfectly hereafter in
Heaven; See the Notes, Chap. 32.15, 16. And thus even the Edomites, that were
threatened in the foregoing Chapter, to be turned into a wilderness, are a part
of that desert that should thus triumph in Christ's vanquishing of their
spiritual Enemies. To be sure many Expositors hold, That in this mystical
sense, the Gentiles are principally, if not solely intended. However ever even
in this promise may be included also, That when Christ shall destroy the
enemies of his Church, she that was under those persecutions laid waste as a
desert, shall then be brought into a flourishing and triumphant Condition.

Ver. 2. It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing,
etc.] That is, The Wilderness before mentioned: See the foregoing Note: the
glory of Lebanon shall be given to it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon.
They that understand this of the very deserts of Judea, say, that hereby is
shown how they should rejoice and sing, to wit, by becoming as gloriously
fruitful, as the most fruitful places of the Land, which then must needs be
taken hyperbolically, But now understanding it of the Church under Christ, this
Expression might be intended to set forth both her exceeding great Glory in
general, and more particularly that all the Glory and glorious privileges
which the Church of the Jews formerly enjoyed, should be transferred upon her;
as namely those mentioned by the Apostle, Romans 9.4. the adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, etc. they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the
excellency of our God, that is, The Wilderness and Desert before mentioned, or
the faithful people of God, that were before as a Desert and Wilderness. Some
understand this also, as that before, as spoken in a hyperbolical way of the
Deserts themselves. But it is rather meant of Gods people, to wit, that in Gods
destroying their enemies, and delivering them, when they were in such a forlon
Condition, they should through faith experimentally see and own the glorious
power and other excellencies of God as clearly discovered to them; See the
foregoing Note. And observable it is, with what joy the Prophet expresses
this, as with respect to their peculiar interest in God; and the excellency of
our God. But now, if we understand this of the Church under Christ, then by
these words, they shall see the glory of the Lord, etc. may be meant, That
they, even the blind Gentiles also, with the rest, should see and acknowledge
both the Glory of Christ's person (according to that, John 1.14. And we beheld
his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father) and likewise of
that great work of Redemption, which he came to perform.

Ver. 3. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.] See the
Note, Job 4.3. Having told them how God would destroy his peoples enemies and
deliver them; this is added to encourage them hereupon against all base
incredulous fears. And it may be taken, as spoken either to the Prophets in
those times, that they should cheer up the people, whose hearts were ready to
sink for fear of their enemies, and to the Teachers in the Church in
Gospel Times, that they should comfort afflicted, trembling Consciences; or
else to the faithful people themselves, that they should hearten one another,
or cheer up their own fearful hearts. And indeed in this last sense the Apostle
seems to apply these words, Heb. 12.12. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees.

Ver. 4. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be ye strong, fear not, etc.]
That is, as some would have it, Say so to your own fainting hearts. But for
this, see the foregoing Note, Behold, your God will come with vengeance, as if
he had said, However your enemies deride you for your confidence in your God,
yet your God will surely come to take vengeance on your enemies, to wit, the
Assyrians, or Babylonians; even God with a recompense, See the Note, Chap.
34.8. he will come and save you, that is, say some, He will not save you from
the Assyrians by the Ethiopians, as you expect, but by his own immediate hand
from Heaven. But now referring this to the days of the Gospel, there is more
implied in these words: for, behold your God will come with vengeance, etc. may
be understood not only of Christ's taking vengeance on those that persecute and
oppress his Church and people, but also of his first coming into the World for
the Redemption of his people, that he might vanquish, and be avenged on their
spiritual enemies, Sin, Satan, Death and Hell, that so his people being
delivered out of the hands of these their enemies, might serve him without
fear, Luke 1.74. See the Note, Chap 9.4. and see also 1 John 3.8. Ephesians. 4.8. and
Col. 2.15. And as this has respect to the Gentiles, there is a special
Emphasis in those words, Behold your God will come with vengeance, as if he had
said, He that will be now your God as well as ours, he will come and save you,
that is, Even he himself in his own person.

Ver. 5. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf
shall be unstopped.] How this is to be understood of the holy change that
should be wrought in the Jews, after the vengeance executed upon the Assyrians
or the Babylonians, and the deliverances of Gods people that followed
thereupon; See the foregoing Notes, Chap. 29.18. and 32.3. But questionless
under this type, there is a Prophecy couched of the miraculous cures that
Christ should work (and therefore we find, that the accomplishment of this is
alleged by our Savior, as a clear proof that he was the promised Messiah,
Matthew. 11.4, 5. Go and show John again those things which ye do hear and see.
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, etc. And likewise of that
greater wonder he should work in curing those that were spiritually blind and
deaf, by the preaching of the Gospel. And indeed Christ's miraculous Cures upon
the bodies of men, were but pledges of the spiritual Cures which Christ was
come to work upon the souls of Believers.

Ver. 6. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb
sing, etc.] To wit, for Joy. This may be understood as hyperbolically spoken of
the joy that would be amongst the Jews, upon the slaughter made in the Assyrian
Army, or upon their return out of Babylon. But withal under this type is
foretold the miraculous Cures of Christ, the punctual accomplishment whereof we
find in the Cripple's leaping, when he was cured of his lameness, Act. 3.8. and
with all the spiritual Cures that should be wrought upon men by the Ministry of
the Gospel; to wit, That they that were before cripled and lame for doing any
thing that was truly good, should with all cheerfulness run in the ways of Gods
Commandments; and that those that were before dumb for speaking of spiritual
and heavenly things, should discourse freely of such things, and gladly sing
forth the praises of God: for (this is added to show the reason of such
exceeding great joy) in the wilderness shall water break out, and streams in
the desert; that is, Judea that was as a wilderness, shall become as a fruitful
and well watered land; and that which is implied is, that there shall be a
blessed and joyful change in their state, and no want of any thing they could
desire. And then also under this type is signified how exceeding fruitful and
happy the state of the Church should be at the coming of Christ, and that by
the abundant pouring forth of the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit upon them,
which we find often compared to streams of water in the Scripture; as Joh.
4.10. etc. and 7.38. and may be here compared to waters breaking forth in a
wilderness, as in allusion to the waters that gushed out of the Rock, which
Moses struck in the wilderness. But for this, see the Notes, ver. 1, 2. and
Chap. 12.3.

Ver. 7. And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land
springs of water, etc.] See the foregoing Note; in the habitation of Dragons,
who delight in desert and dry places where such lay, shall be grass with Reeds
and Rushes, which always grow in moist and watery places, Job 8.11. So that the
meaning is, That the most desolate and waste places should flourish again. But
now if we take this as a prediction of the blessed change that should be
wrought amongst men in the days of the Gospel; the meaning seems to be, that
the most savage and brutish people, men given up to all kind of vices, no
better indeed than dens of Devils, should be made Temples of the Holy Ghost,
richly furnished with the Graces of Gods Spirit, and abundant in good works.

Ver. 8. And a highway shall be there, and a way, etc.] That is, In this land,
of a wilderness become a fruitful well watered land, there shall be a highway,
that is, a fair common-road-way for those that travel with beasts and
carriages; and a way, that is, a smaller pathway for foot-Passengers; Or, a
highway, that is, a Cawsey or Castway (as there uses to be in watery
Countries, such as he had spoken of in the foregoing verse) and a way, that is,
another ordinary way. But that which the Prophet intended hereby, is either
that the Jews should have a free and safe passage without encumbrance or
molestation in their return from Babylon to Jerusalem; or else rather, That
their Country that had lain waste and desolate like a wilderness, should then
be quietly and peaceably inhabited again. Whereas in Wildernesses and Deserts,
there is usually no path to be seen, it shall not be so with the people of God,
when God shall have wrought this happy change for them, their ways shall be
kept fair and fit for all sorts of Travelers, and shall not lie desolate, as
before (See the Note, Chap. 33.8.) but be continually frequented with
multitudes that pass up and down in them: they shall freely travel from all
parts of the land to the Temple and back again, and so likewise to other
places; See the Note, Chap. 33 17. and it shall be called the way of holiness,
to wit, because the people that went up and down in it should be a holy people,
a people that should be much in frequenting the Temple, Gods holy place, and
such as should live as becomes those that are a holy people to the Lord (all
which may be said too, if we understand it of the way of the Jews return from
Babylon to Jerusalem) the unclean shall not pass over it, that is, The land
shall not be in the possession of impure Infidels of foreign Nations, as
formerly; nor shall the people of God that are there, be a sinful, wicked
people, as formerly they have been (he alludes in this Expression to that law
that forbad the coming of any persons that were legally unclean, into the
Temple) but it shall be for those, those holy ones, with respect to whom it was
before called the way of holiness; those regenerate ones upon whom those
spiritual Cures should be wrought, mentioned before, ver. 5, 6. I know these
last words may be read as in the margin, for he shall be with them; and then
the meaning is clear, to wit, That God would be with them, as once he went
along with the Israelites in their traveling through the wilderness to Canaan,
Exodus 13.21. to protect, conduct and prosper them, by which means they should
be preserved in purity and holiness. And thereupon it follows, the wayfaring
men, though fools, shall not err therein; that is, it shall be so plain, so
direct and easy a way, that the simplest that are (such as Solomon speaks of,
that know not how to go to the City, Eccles. 10.15. See the Note there) shall
not miss of it. But now if we understand all this of the days of the Gospel,
whereof the other was a type, then the way here promised is Christ, John 14.6.
Or, the way prescribed in the Gospel for poor sinners to attain that life and
salvation which is tendered in Christ, the way of faith and holiness; of which
therefore it is said, That it shall be called the way of holiness, because it
is the way that leads to the Holy of Holies in Heaven; and because none go in
that way, but those that are sanctified and justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; 1 Cor. 6.11. This way to life eternal is
for those and no other; for without holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14.
And then of this way it is said also, That the wayfaring men, though fools,
shall not err therein, because it is so clearly discovered in the Gospel, that
the simplest that are, need not miss the way, unless they will wilfully do it;
and because men are naturally very fools before by the Gospel they are brought
in to Christ, Tit. 3.3. But when they are once brought to believe in Christ,
they are sure by the guidance of his Spirit, not so to err in their way, though
they be never so simple, as to miss of life eternal.

Ver. 9. No Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon: it
shall not be found there, etc.] The meaning is, That in their return from
Babylon, or in their passing up and down in their own land, they should not be
annoyed with any ravenous wild Beasts, to wit, such as he had threatened should
possess their land, Chap. 34.13, 14. when it lay waste as a Desert. But here
again under this type is meant, That Christ would secure and protect his in
their way to Heaven; neither Satan, nor any other of their spiritual enemies
should make a prey of their souls; neither should their wicked enemies, the
Instruments of Satan, be able to hurt them; he would carry them on safely in
their way, till he had lodged them in Heaven; but the Redeemed shall walk
there, to wit, the faithful Jews, whom God shall deliver out of the hands of
their enemies; and so likewise those whom Christ shall redeem from the Estate
of sin and death.

Ver. 10. And the ransomed of the Lord, etc.] That is, His redeemed ones; See
the foregoing Note, shall return and come to Zion, that is, from those places
whither they had fled to hide and shelter themselves, either within the Land,
or in foreign parts; when the Assyrian first invaded the land, hearing of the
destruction of the Assyrian Army, they shall come back to Jerusalem, or to the
Temple in Zion, there to praise God for their deliverance (or it may be meant
as well of their return from the Babylonian captivity; and so the main intent
of the words might be to signify, that God having brought them out of Babylon,
would not leave them, till he had brought them safe to Jerusalem) with Songs,
and everlasting joy upon their heads, that is, Joy of long continuance, such as
happily was a refreshing to those that were joyed with it so long as they lived;
or joy that should be for ever remembered in their anniversary Festivals. But
withal, observable is this expression, and everlasting joy upon their heads;
for though by their heads may be meant only the several persons of Gods
redeemed ones (as usually elsewhere, see the Notes, Job 29.3. and Prove. 25.22)
yet I rather think, that here this Expression is used to imply, that their joy
should be discovered in the cheerfulness of their countenances, their going up
and down with their heads lifted up, and perhaps with Crowns and Garlands ever
green upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and
sighing shall flee away; that is, Their former grief and mourning shall vanish
quite away, as if they had never been. But now most fitly may all this be
applied to that great work of our Redemption by Christ, whereof those
deliverances of the Jews were types and shadows; as namely, That all Christ's
redeemed ones, turning from their sins, shall first come in and join themselves
to his Church with exceeding great joy, yea, with everlasting joy, joy that
shall overcome and swallow up all their sorrows, and which no man shall ever be
able to take from them; Joh. 16.22. And then again, that Christ having thus
called them to himself, would never leave them, till he had lodged them in the
heavenly Jerusalem, where indeed their joy shall be everlasting, and without
any mixture of sorrow, Rev. 21.4.

CHAP. XXXVI.
VERSE 1. NOw it came to pass, etc.] Here the Prophet inserts an Historical
relation of Sennacheribs invading the land of Judah, and of the wonderful
deliverance of Jerusalem by Gods miraculous destroying the Assyrian Army; and
that purposely to show how exactly all came to pass herein, according to what
he had long before foretold concerning these things as they are set down in the
foregoing Chapters of this his Prophecy; that so this might be a seal to
confirm his Prophetical Office to the people, and might let them see with what
assurance they might expect that all other things which he had foretold, or
shall foretell hereafter, even those things which concern Christ, and the days
of the Gospel, should certainly also be accomplished in their season. We have
the very same relation, almost word for word, in 2 King. 18.13. etc. (which
makes it very probable, that this part of that History was composed by Isaiah)
and the chief thing requisite to be known, for the understanding thereof, may
be found in the Notes there; or in 2 Chronicles. 32.1, etc. Only in that which is
said here concerning the time of Sennacherebs invading Judea, that it was in
the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah; this is further observable, that it was
therefore within a while after this good King had made such a Reformation in
the Land, as never any King before him had made, that this grievous storm fell
upon him and his Kingdom, which must needs be both a great trial, and a great
stumbling block to many. But see, I say, the Notes, 2 King. 18.13. etc.

Ver. 2. And the King of Assyria sent Rabshakeh, etc. and stood by the Conduit
of the upper pool, in the high way of the Fullers field.] For this place see
the Note before, Chap. 7.3.

Ver. 3. Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiahs son, which was over the
house; and Shebna, the scribe, etc.] What is noted before concerning these two,
Eliakim and Shebna, we may see Chap. 22.15. and 2 King. 18.18. Questionless
this Eliakim was the same of whom the Prophet had before prophesied, that he
should be surely settled in that place of high preferment in Hezekiahs Court,
which now it seems he was in, Shebna that was formerly in it being removed, See
Chap. 22.20, 21. etc. And we may well think what a shaking it was to the faith
of this good man concerning this promise, when he was now to go out to beg
terms of peace of the proud Tyrant Sennacherib, ready in a manner to yield to
any Conditions almost, which he would be pleased to put upon them. As for
Shebna here mentioned, I conceive as before, that it was not Shebna, into whose
place Eliakim was put, because it seems not very probable, that Hezekiah would
employ such a wicked wretch, so likely to be discontented, and so justly
therefore to be suspected, in such a weighty service as this was.

Ver. 4. And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus says the
great King, the King of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou
trustest?] That is, What confidence is it that has emboldned thee, first to
rebel against me, and now to stand out against me when I am come with such a
mighty Army to reduce thee under my power?

Ver. 5. I say (say thou) (but they are but vain words) I have counsel and
strength for war.] In 2 King. 18.20. this passage is expressed thus, Thou
say (but they are but vain words) I have counsel and strength for the war;
and therefore there it is clear, that Rabshakeh charge Hezekiah with boasting
to the people, that they should be well enough able to defend the City against
Sennacheribs forces, as being sufficiently furnished both with Counsel and
Strength for War; and withal tells him, that these were but vain words; that
is, such as Hezekiah himself knew were but mere boasting words, that had no
ground of truth in them, and therefore would be of no avail for the saving of
the City. And so likewise if we read that passage in the History of the Kings,
as it is there rendered in the Margin of our Bibles, Thou talkest (but they are
vain words) counsel and strength are for the War; according to that Translation
of the words it is also clear, that Rabshakeh told Hezekiah, that he talked at
a high rate, and uttered many big words, thereby to hearten and encourage the
people, as namely, that the Egyptians would come in to their help; or that
however the Lord Jehovah would surely deliver them, if the people would
earnestly call upon him for help; and that withal he added, That all this was
to no purpose, such vain words would not defend the City, there was more
requisite for the guarding of the City than so; counsel and strength are for
the war. Well, but why is this passage rendered here, not as there, Thou say,
but I say, etc? I answer, That though it be Rabshakeh that says here, I say,
yet he speaks this in the person of Hezekiah; as if he should have said, I know
well enough what thou talkest and pratest; to wit, I say, I have counsel and
strength for war; but these are but vain words. And therefore indeed those
words (say thou) are for the clearing of this, well inserted by our
Translators, I say, say thou, etc. now on whom do thou trust, that thou
rebellest against me? as if he should have said, If it be not a vain confidence
of thine own sufficient strength whereon thou reliest, on whose help is it then
that thou trustest, in the hope whereof thou have emboldned thy self to rebel
against me?

Ver. 6. Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt, etc.] He
terms Egypt, or the King of Egypt a staff of reed, by way of allusion to those
Reeds, and Canes of Reeds, which grew abundantly on the banks of Nilus, and
were famously known in foreign Countries whither they were carried. But withal
observable it is, That the people that would not mind Gods Prophet, when he
from God did so often threaten them for their confidence in Egypt (see the
Notes, Chap. 30.2. and 31.1.) are now to their greater vexation, brought to
hear themselves upbraided with this by an insulting Adversary.

Ver. 7. But if thou say to me, We trust in the Lord our God: is it not he
whose high places, and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away, and said to Judah
and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?] Though it was in
obedience to Gods Command, that Hezekiah had pulled down these high places and
altars, yet there was much cunning couched in this objection of Rabshakeh's;
both because many of the people, whose hearts were not yet wholly taken off
from their former Idolatry, would be ready to close with this, and to conclude,
That God in his wrath against Hezekiah for this, had brought these enemies upon
their Land; as also because there was some colorable pretense of reason in
this, which carnal men might soon approve, that it was a wrong and dishonor to
God thus to limit his worship to one place; and that it was some vain glorious
or covetous design in Hezekiah to order it so, that all the Sacrifices which
the people would offer to their God, should be offered where he kept his Court,
and had his constant residence.

Ver. 8. Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the King of
Assyria, etc.] To wit, That thou will perform the Conditions I shall propound
to him; namely, That if he gave him, as in the next words he promises, two
thousand horses, he would then come out to fight with him; (he gives him to
understand, that he should not need to send to Egypt for Horses, he should have
them of him) or else rather, that if he were not able to find men fit to ride
and manage them, that then he should restore the Horses again; and withal, that
they should submit to his Master upon such Conditions as he should be pleased
to impose upon them.

Ver. 9. How then will thou turn away the face of one Captain of the least of
my Masters servants? etc.] And thus he hints to them, that there was no reason
why they should stand out, because Sennacherib was not yet come thither with
his whole army; he alone, though the least of his Masters Servants, being able
enough to subdue them.

Ver. 12. But Rabshakeh said, Has my Master sent me to thy Master and to thee
to speak these words? Has he not sent me to the men that sit upon the wall?
etc.] To wit, The people that in their turns are appointed to be on the walls
for the guarding of them, and for the defense of the City, that they may eat
their own dung, and drink their own piss with you; as if he should have said,
And who indeed are appointed to be there, that the City by a long siege might
be brought to such streights, that through famine both they and the people
might be brought to eat their own dung, and drink their own piss. And thus he
would make a show of pitying the people; and withal seeks to stir them to
discontent against Hezekiah and his Princes, that cared not to what they
exposed the poor people, only to uphold themselves in their greatness.

Ver. 13. Then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice, etc.] That is, He
lifted up himself as high as he could (for he stood before, ver. 2.) and that
perhaps in some more eminent place, which he had chosen for that purpose; and
then lifting up his voice together therewith, he spoke aloud, that the people
on the wall might the better hear him.

Ver. 14. Thus says the King, Let not Hezekiah deceive you, etc.] He says
not, Let not your King Hezekiah deceive you, as not being willing to put them
in mind of that Allegiance which, as Subjects, they did owe to their King.

Ver. 17. Until I come and take you away to a land like your own, etc.]
Observable it is, how cunningly here Rabshakeh avoids that harsher expression
of carrying them away Captives, and speaks only of it, as if they were
peaceably to be transplanted from one Country to another; and that (to imply
his respect to their good) though he durst not call the land whither they were
to go, a better land than that of Canaan; yet he tells them, that it was a land
like to their own, a land of Corn and Wine, a land of Bread and Vineyards; and,
which is added 2 King. 18.32. a land of oyle-Olive and of honey. But withal
considerable it is also, how little this was like to move those that did not so
much prize the land of Israel for the outward plenty and fruitfulness of it, as
for the spiritual privileges that appertained thereto, as it was the
inheritance of Gods peculiar people, the Temple and the Communion which they
then enjoyed with God in his Ordinances.

Ver. 19. Where are the Gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the Gods of
Sepharvaim, etc?] As if he should have said, say some, Where were they when
they should have saved those that worshipped them, and the Cities they dwelt
in? But rather he speaks of their gods, as destroyed together with the Nations
that served them; See the Note before, Chap. 10.9. and have they delivered
Samaria out of my hands? that is, The gods of Samaria; for that must
necessarily be understood from the foregoing words. It was indeed his Father
Salmanasser that took Samaria, but he might be present with his Father in that
Expedition. However it is no whit strange, that speaking of the Conquests
achieved by the King of Assyria, he should ascribe to himself that which his
Father had done before him.

Ver. 20. Who are they amongst all the gods of these lands, that have delivered
their land out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my
hand?] As if he should have said, If the gods of other Nations were not able to
deliver them, their Countries and Cities out of my hands, why should you think
the Lord Jehovah, your God, able to deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? And so
this passage is expressed 2 Chronicles. 32.14.

Ver. 21. But they held their peace, etc.] That is, say some, The men that were
sent forth to treat with Rabshakeh. But I rather think it is meant of the
people on the wall, to whom at last he addressed his speech. And so it is
expressly said, 2 King. 18.36. But the people held their peace, etc.

Ver. 22. Then came Eliakim, etc. with their clothes rent, etc.] See the Notes,
Genesis 37.29. and 2 King. 18.37.

CHAP. XXXVII.
VERSE 1. ANd it came to pass when King Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his
clothes, etc.] To wit, as his Messengers had done, that brought him report of
what Rabshakeh had said; See the Notes Genesis 37.29. and 2 King. 18.37. and
covered himself with sackcloth. See the Note, Psalm. 30.11. and went into the
house of the Lord, to wit, the Temple; that he might there pour forth his soul
in Prayer before the Lord. But see the Notes for this Chapter, 2 King. 19.

Ver. 2. And he sent Eliakim, etc.] To wit, because they had been ear-witnesses
of the Blasphemies of Rabshakeh, and the Elders of the Priests, covered with
sackcloth, who were joined with the other, the better to represent the
weightiness of the business they were come about, and the sad condition of all
the Servants of God that were in the City; unto Isaiah the Prophet the Son of
Amos, See the Note, Chap. 1.1. namely, both to engage him to join with Hezekiah
and the people in praying to God for help; and likewise that he might from him
be informed of what God would be pleased to reveal to them concerning the great
streights they were in; and therefore there is express mention made here of his
prophetical Office, he sent unto Isaiah the Prophet; for though this Prophet
had formerly given them several promises from God, that Jerusalem should be
delivered (see the Notes, Chap. 33.17.) yet Hezekiah being conscious to himself
of the weakness of his faith, and the overbearing power of his fears, was
desirous further to be confirmed herein.

Ver. 3. And they said unto him, etc.] To wit, delivering the message which
Hezekiah had given them in charge; Thus says Hezekiah (where some observe that
they do not say, Thus says King Hezekiah, as being desirous, without minding
any thing of State, to express themselves in the humblest manner, suitable to
the sad condition whereinto they were fallen) This day is a day of trouble, and
of rebuke, and of blasphemy; for the children are come to the birth, and there
is no strength to bring forth: that is, say some Expositors, into so sad a
plight the whole land is, that Women with child fall into travel for fear
before their time and dye; because when the child comes to the birth, they have
not strength to bring forth. But for this whole verse, see the Notes, 2 King.
19.3.

Ver. 4. It may be the Lord thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, etc. and
will reprove the words which the Lord thy God has heard, etc.] Those words,
the Lord thy God, which are twice here repeated, were doubtless used, in
relation to that special interest which Isaiah had in God, as he was a Prophet,
and that special respect which upon that account the Lord had to him, and to
his prayers; wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left: that
is, Cry aloud unto God for them; whereto agrees that which is said, 2 Chronicles.
22.20. for this cause Hezekiah the King, and the Prophet Isaiah the Son of
Amos, prayed and cried to Heaven.

Ver. 5. So the Servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.] That is, Thus, as is
before related, they went and delivered their message to Isaiah. And this is
again here inserted to make way to the following answer which the Prophet
returned to their Message.

Ver. 6. And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall you say unto your Master, etc.]
As if he should have said, Thus shall you say to our King, who sent you his
servants with this message to me, Thus says the Lord, Be not afraid of the
words that thou have heard, wherewith the servants of the King of Assyria have
blasphemed; as if he had said, Alas! they are but words: he shall not be able
to do what he threatens to do. And as for the blasphemies they have belched out
against me, fear not, I will take care to be in due time avenged on them for
that.

Ver. 7. Behold, I will send a blast upon him, etc.] That is, He shall be
struck with a pannick fear; yet I see not why it might not be meant of the
terrible tempest which some think God brought upon the Assyrian Army when it
was destroyed; See the Note, Chap. 30.30. But of this and that which follows,
and he shall hear a rumor, and return to his own land; See the Note, 2 King.
19.7. and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land, that is, He
that now makes such havoc with the sword amongst foreign Nations, shall ere
long be slain with the sword amongst his Subjects in his own Country; yea, by
the hand of his own Sons, as is related in the close of this Chapter.

Ver. 8. So Rabshakeh returned and found the King of Assyria warring against
Libnah, etc.] If this Libnah bordered upon Egypt, as some say it did, it is
likely that Sennacherib left Lachish (when perhaps he had taken it) and sat
down before Libnah, that he might the better keep off any auxiliary forces
which the Egyptians might bring to the aid of Judea; or particularly, that he
might the better oppose Tirhakah the Ethiopian, of whose coming against him he
had heard. Or if it lay nearer to Jerusalem than Lachish, it is then probable,
that his design was only to draw up the residue of his Army still nearer to
Jerusalem; for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish, from whence
Rabshakeh was at first sent against Jerusalem. But see the Note, 2 King. 19.8.

Ver. 9. And he heard say concerning Tirhakah King of Ethiopia, He is come
forth to make war with thee: and when he heard it, he sent messengers to
Hezekiah, etc.] See the Note, 2 King. 19.9. It is not expressed whether this
was a true or a false report; yet it is most probable that it was so, because
we find that God foretold by Isaiah, that the King of Assyria should vanquish
the Ethiopians with the Egyptians, and so deprive the Jews of that aid which
they expected from them: See the Notes, Chap. 20.1, 3, 4.5. And this in
likelihood he did not long after he had again sent Messengers with a second
summons for the delivering up of Jerusalem to him.

Ver. 14. And Hezekiah received the Letter from the hand of the messengers, and
read it, etc.] For though God had promised to destroy Sennacherib, yet Hezekiah
would not therefore carry himself the more insolently, nor neglect to accept of
any fair treaty with his enemy; and Hezekiah went up into the house of the
Lord, and spread it before the Lord; that is, In the Temple. But see the Note,
2 King. 19.14.

Ver. 15. And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord.] Here again observable it is, that
though God had already assured him, that Sennacherib should be destroyed, and
Jerusalem delivered, yet he would not give over using the means of praying to
God for mercy, and that especially that he might withal show himself sensible
of the horrible reproaches which the proud enemy had cast upon his great name.

Ver. 16. O Lord of Hosts, etc.] See the Note, Genesis 2.1. God of Israel, that
dwell between the Cherubims; as if he had said, Manifest, O Lord, that thou
art present amongst us as thine own peculiar people, ready to help us, and to
hear our Prayers, of which thine Ark covered with Cherubims is a visible sign
to us, by delivering us out of the hands of this blaspheming Tyrant; and let
him see what a bold attempt it is in him, to endeavor to dispossess thee of
thy dwelling place.

Ver. 17. Incline thine ears, O Lord, and hear; open thine eyes, O Lord, and
see.] That is, Hear the blasphemous speeches which these wretches have belched
out against thee, and see the blasphemies that are in this Letter I have spread
before thee.

Ver. 18. Of a truth, Lord, the Kings of Assyria have laid waste all the
Nations and their Countries.] So also is this expressed, 2 King. 19.17. Here
indeed it is in the Hebrew, all the lands and their Countries; but therefore by
lands are meant the Nations inhabiting those lands, as we find it explained 2 Chronicles. 32.13, 17.

Ver. 21. Then Isaiah the Son of Amos sent unto Hezekiah.] Most probable it is,
that this he did by the Messengers whom Hezekiah had sent to him, to enquire
whether he had received any further word of answer from God.

Ver. 22. This is the word which the Lord has spoken concerning him, etc.]
That is, concerning Sennacherib, The Virgin, the Daughter of Zion has despised
thee, and laughed thee to scorn; See the Notes, Chap. 1.8. and 23.12. but
especially 2 King. 19.21. the Daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at
thee, See the Notes Job 16.4. and Psalm. 22.7. as he had before shaken his hand
at her, See the Note, Chap. 10.32.

Ver. 23. Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom have thou
exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? etc.] To wit, as every way
discovering his pride and insolence; See the Note, Chap. 10.12. It is all one
in effect as if he had said, Little do thou think or consider against whom it
is that thou have thus arrogantly advanced thy self; even against the holy one
of Israel, that is, The holy God of Heaven and Earth, that has chosen Israel
to be a holy people to himself; See the Note, Chap. 1.4. It is he whom thou
have blasphemed, yea, in the reproaches thou have cast upon Hezekiah, his
anointed, and upon his people, thou have indeed reproached the Lord their God.

Ver. 24. By thy Servants have thou reproached the Lord, etc.] In 2 King.
19.23. it is, By thy messengers; and then it follows, and have said, By the
multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the Mountains, to the
sides of Lebanon: that is, I have got over all the hills and mountains that lay
in my way, even the loftiest of them, such as Mount Lebanon was, and that not
with my foot-forces only, but also with my Chariots, which must needs be a work
of great difficulty, and only to be mastered by a mighty Army; as namely, by
cutting out and levelling their way where the ground was steep and rocky, and
full of trees, that obstructed their passage. And this may be meant both of the
hills and mountains they climbed, that they might take the Towns and Forts that
stood thereon, and of those also which they were necessarily to pass over, that
they might get into the Countries that lay beyond them. And it might be that he
might herein have special respect also to those Mountains that were about
Jerusalem, Psalm. 125.2. and I will cut down the tall cedars thereof, and the
choice fir-trees thereof; that is, Having thus far subdued the land before me,
I shall easily do so still; their Cedars and Fir-trees he would cut down at his
pleasure, either to clear his way for his Army to pass, or for other uses; See
the Note, Chap. 14.8. That which he intends is this, That nothing should hinder
him in his approaches to Jerusalem. But withal observable it is, that whilst
Sennacherib here threatens to hew down the lofty trees of Lebanon, God had
before threatened and foretold, that his Lebanon, that is, his mighty Army
should be hewn down; See the Notes, Chap. 10.33, 34. and I will enter into the
height of his border (in 2 King. 19.23. it is, into the lodgings of his
borders) and the forest of his Carmel, or, as it is in the Margin, the forest
and his fruitful field. Now by the height of his border, or the lodgings of his
borders, some understand the tower of Lebanon, Cant. 7.4. which according to
our Translation, I will enter into the height of his border, seems not so
probable, because it is before said, That the Assyrian had already marched over
that Mountain. And others again understand thereby Jerusalem, the Metropolis
and chief place of the Kingdom, which being taken, there would nothing else in
a manner remain to be done; and by the forest of his Carmel, they understand
the Country thereabout, because for the pleasantness and fruitfulness of it, it
was like another Carmel, and with the abundance of Fruit Trees and Vines
growing therein, it showed like a forest. Indeed, having compared this place
with that in 2 King. 19.23. this seems to be the most probable Exposition, that
by the height of his border, is meant the City Jerusalem, together with the
forts and holds on the frontiers thereabouts; and by the forest of his Carmel,
the goodly and pleasant Country in that part of Judea. But see the Notes in
that, 2 King. 19.23.

Ver. 25. I have dug and drunk water, etc.] In 2 King. 19.24. it is, I have
dug and drunk strange waters; and it follows as here, and with the sole of
my feet have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged places; for which see
the Note, 2 King. 19.24. The Expression here used of drying up great Rivers
with the sole of his feet, is doubtless an hyperbolical vaunt; as if he should
have said, That his Army was so numerous, that with their feet alone they were
able to dry up all the waters where they came; or rather, That though the
Rivers were never so great, his soldiers and their beasts were able to drink
them all dry. However, that which is intended hereby, was, That the waters
could no where keep him off from any place which he meant to assault; either by
diverting their waters some other way, or by some such like policy, he could
take a course that their waters should be no hinderance to him. Now thus
considering the words, there may be therein a threatening covertly couched, to
wit, that he could soon deprive Jerusalem of her waters, which Hezekiah had
been so careful to secure for them, whereby they must needs be forced to yield,
or else must perish with thirst.

Ver. 26. Have thou not heard, etc?] Sennacherib had said, ver. 11. Behold,
thou have heard what the Kings of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying
them utterly; and to this now God replys, Have thou not heard long ago, how I
have done it, and of ancient times that I have formed it? that is, That all
that thou and thy Ancestors have done, was indeed done by me, by my decree, and
all-ruling providence (which accordingly therefore I did long ago make known by
my Prophets, as Chap. 10.5. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, etc.) and that
you therefore were but the instruments in mine hand to do what I would have
done; and shall the ax boast it self against him that heweth therewith? etc.
Chap. 10.15. Now have I brought it to pass, that thou should be to lay waste
defenced Cities into ruinous heaps. But for this whole verse, see the Note, 2
King. 19.25.

Ver. 27. Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed
and confounded, etc.] See the Notes for this and the following verse, 2 King.
19.26, 27. they were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb; See the
Note, Psalm. 102.4. as the grass on the house tops, which the higher it stands,
the sooner it is burnt up and withered; See the Note, Psalm. 129.6.

Ver. 29. Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine
ears: therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, etc.] In these words there
seems to be an Allusion either to fish-hooks wherewith when they have struck
some great fish through the nose, they use to draw it along this way and that,
to the end that having thus wearied it, they may the better take it up (for the
proof whereof that passage is usually alleged, Ezekiel. 29.3, 4. I am against
thee, Pharaoh, King of Egypt, the great Dragon that lies in the midst of his
rivers -- But I will put my hooks in thy chaws; or else to those rings which
men are wont to put into the noses of Bears and Bufales, that they may the
better over-master them, and carry them up and down which way they list. It is
all one in effect, as if God had said, Because thou ragest against me like some
furious wild beast, therefore I will use thee like a beast; therefore will I
put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back
by the way which thou came. And indeed, because men mad with rage, are wont
to discover their fury by the puffing of their nostrils, and the foming of
their mouths, it may well be that in reference hereto, the Lord does the rather
use this Expression, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in
thy lips.

Ver. 30. And this shall be a sign unto thee, etc.] That is, To thee, O
Hezekiah: ye shall eat this year such as grows of it self, and the second
year that which springs of the same; and in the third year sow ye and reap,
etc. Now though it cannot well be questioned, that this was given as a sign for
the strengthening of his and the peoples faith concerning the foregoing promise
of the destruction of the Assyrian, and the deliverance of Jerusalem; yet
withal it is clear, that this tended also to the comforting of them both
against the fear of Sennacheribs returning again with a fresh Army, because
they are hereby assured, that after his departure they should live peaceably
and quietly in the land; and likewise especially against that great distress
they must needs be in, thinking how they should be provided for food, if they
were rid of their enemies, when they had so far spent their old store, and the
enemy had spoiled that which was growing in the field, and had, it may be,
hindered them that year from sowing their seed, which might have yielded them a
Crop at harvest-time. But for this sign, and how it must be understood, see in
the Note, 2 King. 19.30. and see also the Note before, Chap. 7.14.

Ver. 31. And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah, shall again
take root downward, and bear fruit upward.] That is, They shall multiply
exceedingly, and being settled in the land, shall prosper and flourish, both in
their outward estate, and spiritually too, which was indeed accomplished in the
remainder of Hezekiahs reign. But see the Note, 2 King. 19.30.

Ver. 32. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape
out of mount Zion, etc.] As if it had been said, As for Jerusalem in particular
(of which the Assyrian had said, that God himself should not defend it) they
that were shut up in her, shall go out freely and fearlesly wherever they
please; they that were fled thither, shall return to their own habitations; and
the rest, whithersoever their occasions shall call them; yet it may also have
respect to their going forth to gather the spoils of the Assyrians, See the
Notes, Chap. 33.23, 24. and to those that should be sent forth from Jerusalem
to repair the great ruins that had been made in many Cities in the land. And
how this may be also mystically applied to that small remnant that should go
out of Zion in the days of the Gospel, to increase the number of Gods Israel
amongst the Gentiles, we may see in the Note, Chap. 1.9. the zeal of the Lord
of hosts shall do this; that is, the zeal of God Almighty, who can do what he
pleases, will do this. But see the Notes, 2 King. 19.31.

Ver. 33. Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the King of Assyria, etc.]
To wit, because the Lord is thus resolved to preserve his people, He shall not
come into this City, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields,
nor cast a bank against it; the meaning is, that he should never come to make
any assault upon it, nor so much as to lay siege to it. By coming before it
with shields, is meant, drawing up men that were to scale the walls, and to
enter the City, who used to be armed with shields, therewith to cover and
shelter themselves from any thing that might be cast upon them, or any strokes
that might be made at them by those on the wall. And by banks cast up, may be
meant, those banks which the soldiers cast up under the Covert, whereof they
were to make their approaches to the City; or Mounts cast up, out of which they
were to shoot into the City. But see the Note, 2 King. 19.32.

Ver. 34. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return.] To wit, with
great dishonor and disgrace; with shame of face, as it is expressed 2 Chronicles.
32.21. as indeed it must needs be a matter of great reproach to him, to flee
away with a few scattered Troops, through those very parts by which he had a
while before marched in so great State and Fury, with such a gallant and
numerous Army.

Ver. 35. For I will defend this City, to save it, for mine own sake, etc.]
That is, For mine own Glory; because I have taken them of mine own free grace
to be mine own Vovenant People, and determined that Jerusalem shall be the
settled place of my Worship; and that I may vindicate mine own glory from the
blasphemous Aspersions of the Assyrian; and for my Servant David's sake; that
is, For the love I bear to his seed for his sake; and that I may make good the
promise I made to him, and not because the inhabitants of Jerusalem have
deserved any such favor at mine hands. But see the Note, 2 King. 19.34.

Ver. 36. Then the Angel of the Lord, etc.] In 2 King. 19.35. it is, And it
came to pass that night (which makes it more than probable, that this was done
the very night after the foregoing promise made Hezekiah concerning the
Destruction of Sennacheribs Army, and the deliverance of Jerusalem) that the
Angel of the Lord went out, to wit, from Heaven, or from the Lord (as it is
said, 2 Chronicles. 32.21. That the Lord sent an Angel) and smote in the camp of the
Assyrians, an hundred fourscore and five thousand; See the Note, 2 King. 19.35.
Why this was done in the night, we may easily conceive; namely, that this
Judgment might come upon them the more suddenly, and with greater terror; and
so likewise why it was done by an Angel, to wit, that they might clearly see,
that it was by the immediate Sword of God, for the horrible contempt they had
cast upon him; for which see the Note, Chap. 31.8 A more difficult question is,
Where the camp of the Assyrians was, when the Angel made this slaughter amongst
them? Now though concerning this, we may upon clear grounds determine 1. That
it was in the land of Judah, according to that, Chap. 14.25. I will break the
Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot; for which see
the Note there. And 2ly. That Sennacherib had not then besieged Jerusalem; for
above, ver. 33. it is expressly said, That he should never do that; yet in what
particular place he lay encamped with his Army, I find no where expressed. Some
think it was at Libnah, where Rabshakeh found him, ver. 8. when he went back to
him from Jerusalem. And again others hold, that it was at Nob, a Town not far
from Jerusalem; which I judge the more probable, because Chap. 10.32. where our
Prophet seems to describe the manner of Sennacheribs marching from one place to
another, when he went up against Jerusalem, Nob is mentioned as the last place
where he pitched his Camp; and from thence it is said, That he shaked his hand
against Mount Zion, as by way of threatening, that he would now presently be
with her; See the Note in that place. So that I say, it is most probable, that
whilst Sennacherib made a stand there, that he might put all things in a
readiness for the siege of Jerusalem, there it was that his Army was
miraculously destroyed by an Angel. Only withal it is most likely too, which
others say, That this slaughter was made, not only in Sennacheribs Camp
wherever it was, but also amongst those forces which Rabshakeh had from the
first left to block up Jerusalem. And accordingly of both places, that must be
understood which follows, and when they arose early in the morning, that is,
The Inhabitants of Jerusalem that looked every moment for the coming of
Sennacherib, or rather those few of the Assyrians that God would have escape
the sword of the Angel; and behold, they were all, that is, Their whole Army,
in a manner, dead corpses; that is, Not sick and dying, but stark dead. By what
manner of death they were destroyed, it is no where expressed: only some places
elsewhere in this Prophecy seem to import, That a mighty and terrible tempest
fell upon the Camp of the Assyrians at that time when this Havoc was made
amongst them; for which, see the Note, Chap. 30.30.

Ver. 37. So Sennacherib King of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and
dwelt at Niniveh.] That is, He with those few that were not slain by the Angel,
fled away home into their own Country. And thus God was pleased to order it by
his providence, that he should escape, and not fall by the Sword of the Angel;
1. That he might to his greater confusion see the dreadful power of the God of
Israel, whom he had despised and blasphemed, clearly discovered in that strange
and horrid Judgment which he found executed upon his Army. 2ly. That he might
to his exceeding vexation flee back in so disgraceful a manner the very way
that he came; See the Note before, ver. 34. And 3ly. that he might be reserved
to a death far sadder in many respects, than that of his being slain by the
Angel, as is related in the following verse. As for Nineveh, that was at
present the chief City of Assyria; See Genesis 10.11. that strong hold, whereunto
the Prophet had before foretold he should flee, See the Notes, Chap. 31.8, 9.

Ver. 38. And it came to pass as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his
god, that Adramelech and Sharezer his Sons smote him with the Sword, etc.] As
the Prophet Isaiah had before foretold it should be, ver. 7. And some conclude
from the Apochryphal Book of Tobit, Chap. 1.21. That it was not above five and
fifty days after the Destruction of his Army in Judea that this was done.
However, just it was with God, that he that had blasphemed the true God, should
find his Idol-god unable to defend him; and they escaped into the land of
Armenia, and Esarhaddon his Son reigned in his stead; who is also called
Asnappar, Ezra 4.10. and Tobit 1.21. Sarchedonus; and by other Writers, as some
conceive, Sardanapalus, in whose days, ten years after Sennacheribs death, the
Chaldeans overcame the Assyrians by Merodach their King.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
VERSE 1. IN those days was Hezekiah sick unto death, etc.] See the Notes, 2
King. 20.1. Because ver. 6. there is a promise made of delivering the City
Jerusalem from the King of Assyria; therefore many learned men think that
Hezekiahs sickness was before the ruin that fell upon Sennacherib and his Army.
But the series of the History is clear; and how that promise ver. 6. must be
understood, See the Note, 2 King. 20.6.

Ver. 2. Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the
Lord.] To wit, As still trusting in the goodness and fatherly love of God to
him, notwithstanding he had heard so severe a Sentence so absolutely pronounced
against him from the Lord. But see the Note, 2 King. 38.2.

Ver. 3. And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, etc.] As if he had said, And therefore do not cut off my
life in the midst of my days. That this was that which by these words of his he
intended to beg of God, is evident; because in that promise that is afterward
made to him, ver. 5. of lengthning out his days, God is said to grant him that
which he had prayed for: And therefore we may well think that the reason why he
did not go on and express this in his Prayer, was, because he was not able to
speak any longer for weeping, as it is immediately added in the Text, and
Hezekiah wept sore: And so what he could not, or perhaps was afraid to ask in
words, because it was contrary to what God had said should be, his tears spoke,
and God heard them. But see the Note, 2 King. 20.3.

Ver. 4. Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying.] To wit, as it is
expressed in the Book of Kings, before Isaiah was gone out into the middle
court; (so near was the sick bed of this good King to the Throne of God in
Heaven,) even his sighs and groans God heard, and was presently careful to have
him comforted with a promise of longer life; and that for the better
strengthening of his faith by the same Messenger that had made known to him the
Sentence of Death, that God had pronounced against him. But see the Note 2
King. 20.4.

Ver. 5. Go and say to Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord God of David thy Father,
etc.] By these words he makes known to Hezekiah, that he was mindful of the
Covenant he had made with David, concerning his continuing of the Kingdom of
Judah to his Posterity; I have heard thy Prayers, I have seen thy tears,
behold, I will add to thy days fifteen years; that is, To the days thou have
already lived. In 2 King. there is another particular inserted in the promise
here made, to wit, That on the third day he should go up to the House of the
Lord. But for this and the following verse, see the Notes, 2. King. 20.6.

Ver. 7. And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, etc.] In 2 King.
20.8. It is said, that Hezekiah desired a sign of the Prophet Isaiah to assure
him, that this which he had promised him should certainly be (which the Prophet
has likewise noted in the close of this Chapter) and that hereupon God by the
Prophet made him this promise of a sign; for which see the Note there.

Ver. 8. Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the Degrees which is gone
down in the Sun-dial of Ahaz ten degrees backward, etc.] In 2 King. 20.9, 10.
it is said, that when Hezekiah desired a sign of Isaiah for the strengthening of
his faith, the Prophet tendered to him two different signs, leaving him to his
choice which of them he would take; namely, That the shadow on the Sun-dial
should either go forward ten degrees, or go backward ten degrees; and that when
Hezekiah answered, That it was a light thing for the shadow to go down ten
degrees; and desired rather that the shadow might return backward ten degrees
(for all which see the Notes in that place) hereupon this promise was made him
of bringing back the shadow ten degrees; the accomplishment whereof is related
in the next words, so the Sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was
gone down, to wit, after the Prophet had prayed that it might be so; for this
is expressly inserted, 2 King. 20.11. And Isaiah the Prophet cried unto the
Lord, and he brought the shadow ten degrees backward, etc. for all which see
the Notes there. Yet withal this also is here observable, that those words, so
the same returned ten degrees, may well induce us to think, that the miracle
now wrought, was not, as some would have it, in the going back of the shadow in
the Dial of Ahaz, whilst the Sun kept on its course, but in the retrograde
motion of the Sun it self. And indeed how else could they in Babylon take
notice of this Wonder? See the Note 2 King. 20.12. And beside, the Analogy
between the sign and the thing signified, depends much upon this. Princes are
in their Kingdoms as the Sun in the World. The bringing back therefore of the
Sun, when it was hasting to its setting, and the lengthning of the day thereby
beyond its natural time, was most fit to signify, that after the same manner,
how impossible it might seem, considering the desperateness of his disease, and
the Sentence of Death by God himself pronounced against him, Hezekiah should be
brought back from the Grave, whither he was posting, and his life be lengthned
out beyond expectation.

Ver. 9. The writing of Hezekiah King of Judah, when he had been sick, and was
recovered of his sickness.] That is, The Song of Thanksgiving which he composed
and committed to writing, even as his Father David used to do, intending to
leave it to posterity, as a Monument of his own fainting heart in the time of
Gods mercy in recovering him out of his sickness, and his hearty thankfulness
for it.

Ver. 10. I said in the cutting off of my days, etc.] That is, When I perceived
partly by the violence of my sickness, but especially by the sentence of death
which the Prophet had pronounced against me, that God was now hewing me down in
great displeasure; I began to think within my self, or I concluded fully within
my self as I lay upon my sick bed, I shall go to the gates of the grave, that
is, I am now a dead man. See the Note, Psalm. 9.13. I am deprived of the residue
of my years, that is, the years I might have lived by the ordinary course of
nature. Thus in the first place he acknowledges his own weakness, and the
terrors wherewith he was surprised, when he saw himself likely to be cut off by
an untimely death in the flower of his age (the reasons whereof see before in
the Note 2 Kin. 20.3.) the more hereby to magnify the mercy of God to him in
his recovery.

Ver. 11. I said, etc.] See the foregoing Note, I shall not see the Lord, to
wit, in his Temple; See the Notes, Psalm. 27.4. and 42.2. even the Lord; it is
twice repeated to set forth how vehemently he was afflicted herewith, in the
land of the living; see the Note, Psalm. 27.13. And indeed his particular
expressing of this, when he desired a sign of his recovery, ver. 22. What is
the sign that I shall go up to the house of the Lord? does plainly show, that
this was one main thing that troubled him, when he lay under the terrors of
Death, I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the World; that is, I
shall no longer live amongst the Children of men here in this World: Or, as I
shall no more behold God in his Ordinances, so I shall also be cut off from the
Communion of the Church of the living; and so I shall not do that good to the
people of God, that were under my charge, that I desired to do.

Ver. 12. Mine age is departed, etc.] The time of my life and abode here in
this World is at an end and gone; and is removed from me as a Shepherds tent,
who use not to stay long in a place, but to remove their tents from one place
to another; See the Note, Job 27.18. I have cut off like a Weaver my life; that
is, I resolved with my self that my life was cut off; or by my sins I have
provoked the Lord to cut off my life, even as a Weaver cuts off his web from
the Loom when he has finished it, and sometimes too (which some think is here
intended) before he has made an end of it; he will cut me off with pining
sickness; or, as it is in the Margin, from the Thrum (which is the loose
threads of the Woof fastened to the Weavers beam) that is, God will utterly cut
me off; from day even to night will thou make an end of me: that is, All the
day long from morning even to night thou will be hewing me down, so that there
is not a moment wherein I am not in fear of death: Or, thou will speedily and
presently dispatch me, this very day before night there will be an end of me;
See the Note, Job 4.20.

Ver. 13. I reckoned till morning, that as a lion so will he break all my
bones, etc.] That is, All the night long, from evening even to the morning, I
lay thinking with my self, and made full account with my self, that partly by
the torturing pain and sickness I endured in my body, and partly by the inward
terrors wherewith my mind was perplexed, God would as a lion tear and devour me
both flesh and bones, and so make an end of me. This I conceive is the plain
meaning of these words; yet some, I know, think further, and that not
improbably, that this is spoken with relation to what he had said in the
foregoing verse, and so that the meaning is, that though he lived out the
foregoing day, which he thought he should not have done, yet when the Evening
came, all the Night long he was so torn and broken with the extremity he was
in, that he reckoned for certain that he should dye before morning, or that he
could not hold out another day. And therefore, say they, he repeats here that
again, which he had said in the foregoing verse, from day even to night will thou make an end of me; and that by reason of the extreme anguish and fear he
was in; as if he should have said, I shall dye, I shall dye, I cannnot long
subsist in this woeful plight wherein I now lie.

Ver. 14. Like a Crane or a Swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove,
etc.] Some take the meaning of this to be, that he was so weakened and perplexed
in mind, that he could hardly speak, and did therefore pour out his complaints
and prayers before God with a low, muttering hoarse and interrupted voice; much
to the same purpose with that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.4. I am so troubled,
that I cannot speak. But the meaning rather seems to be, that the violence of
the pain and sickness he endured in his body, and the terrors he endured in his
spirit through the fear of present death, made him lie groaning, and sighing,
and sobbing, the confused noise whereof was much like that of the fowls here
mentioned, especially when the young ones do want their meat, or when the Dams
have their young ones taken from them: mine eyes fail with looking upward, to
wit, with looking up to God for help; See the Notes, Psalm. 119.82. and Job
11.20. O Lord, I am oppressed, that is, so heavily overpressed, that I am not
able to endure it any longer: undertake for me, to wit, as a surety; as if he
should have said, This sickness has arrested me to carry me to deaths
Prisonhouse; rescue me out of its power, as sureties do those they engage for;
See the Note, Psalm. 119.22.

Ver. 15. What shall I say? he has both spoken unto me, and himself has done
it, etc.] Many learned Expositors hold, that Hezekiah does still here proceed
in bewailing himself, and setting forth the hopelesness of his Condition; What
shall I say? that is, What shall I say further? What need I say any more? he
has both spoken unto me, and he also has done it; that is, It was God that
said to me by his Prophet, Thou shall die and not live; and what he has said,
he has done; it is he that has brought me to this extremity, that I am now no
better than a dead man; and therefore it is in vain for me thus to complain, to
mutter against, and strive with my Judge; yea, to what purpose is it to call
upon God to undertake for me, to ease and help me? if he have resolved that I
must dye, there is no seeking to have it otherwise, I must stoop and yield; See
Psalm. 39.9. And indeed such Expressions of impatience and despair, That it is
in vain to pray to God, and to hope for any favor from him, may sometimes flip
from the best of Gods servants in desperate dangers, and great discomposures of
spirit. Thus, I say, many do understand these words. But indeed I see not how
this can suit with the following clause, I shall go softly all my years in the
bitterness of my soul, if we take it as they do, as a complaint that he should
go drooping ( softly, that is, Mournfully; See the Note 1 King. 21.27.) all his
years; for how could he speak of living years in that condition wherein he
concluded that he should not live a day to an end? Rather therefore we may
think that Hezekiah, having in the foregoing verses set forth the low and
hopeless Condition wherein he lay for a while, does at these words begin to
relate the wonderful mercy of God to him in his recovery. What shall I say? as
if he had said, But alas! how shall I be able to express the wonder of Gods
love to me, in rescuing me out of this danger? Sure I shall never know how to
show my self thankful enough for such a mercy: he has both spoken unto me, and
himself has done it; that is, He was pleased by the same Prophet, by whom he
pronounced the sentence of Death against me, to send me a promise that I should
recover out of this sickness; and what he has promised, he has accordingly
done: I shall go softly all my years; that is, Deliberately and considerately,
say some, or gently and easily, say others; in the bitterness of my soul; that
is, In the constant remembrance of that bitterness of soul, which I have
undergone in this time of my sickness. So that the meaning may be, either 1.
That he would be all the remainder of his life often and seriously calling to
mind the bitterness of this his late condition, that he might be the more
thankful to God for his deliverance: Or, 2ly. That being comforted with the
experience of Gods favor to him, he would go on quietly, fearlesly and
cheerfully all his life long, though he should be assailed sometimes with the
fear of death, or any other bitter affliction, as not questioning but that God
would out of his wonted love be a sure refuge to him. Or, 3ly. That by the
remembrance of that bitterness he had been in, and Gods great goodness to him
in raising him upon his Prayers to him so speedily out of so sad a Condition,
he would be careful to walk all his days as became a true Penitent, softly,
that is, Pensively and mournfully as to his bewailing the sins wherewith he had
displeased God; or softly, that is, Warily and circumspectly as to his care for
the avoiding of every thing whereby he might offend and displease him for the
time to come. Neither indeed can I see how this last clause, as it is in our
Translation, can be any other way probably understood.

Ver. 16. O Lord, by these things men live, etc.] This verse is several ways
translated by Interpreters. But according to our Translation the meaning is
clearly this, O Lord, by thy favor, and promises, by the word of thy command,
and by thy providence accomplishing what thou have spoken, is the life of men
continued to them, or prolonged as thou please, yea, even to those that were
at the brink of the Grave, or that happily had before the sentence of Death
pronounced against them (for this is spoken with reference to that in the
foregoing verse, he has both spoken unto me, and himself has done it) See the
Note, Deuteronomy. 8.3. and in all these things is the life of my spirit; that is, And
by these things does my soul still continue within me, cheerfully and
comfortably enlivening my body; so will thou recover me, and make me to live;
that is, And so by thy will it is that I am recovered and do live; or so thou will perfect the work of my recovery which thou have begun, and make me to live
that remainder of years thou have appointed for me.

Ver. 17. Behold, for peace I had great bitterness, etc.] Or, on my peace came
great bitterness; that is, When I was healthful and well, and had not the least
fear of any distemper of sickness that was coming upon me; yea, when by Gods
miraculous destroying the Assyrian Army, both my self and the whole Kingdom
seemed to be in a way of settled peace; and thereupon I began to promise my
self, that I should now live the remainder of my days in prosperity and peace,
on a sudden I was surprised with this bitter affliction; but thou have in love
to my soul, delivered it from the pit of corruption; that is, Out of thy
fatherly love to me (See the Note, Psalm. 3.2.) thou were pleased to recover me,
even from the very grave; for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back, to
wit, as things loathsome to thee, which yet thou were pleased to forget and
forgive, so as never to charge them upon me. And Hezekiah that had before
alleged, that he had walked before God in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
done that which was good in his sight, ver. 3. does yet withal acknowledge here,
That his sins had been many, and the cause why God had visited him with his
late dangerous sickness; and does not so much rejoice in his recovery, as in
Gods love and pardoning mercy, which was better than a thousand lives to him.

Ver. 18. For the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee, etc.]
See the Notes, Psalm. 6.5. and 30.9. and 115.17. Hereby Hezekiah intends to
intimate, that he knew that Gods end in restoring him to his former health,
was, That here in this World he might set forth his praise; and that this
therefore he would certainly do, yea, that upon this account he chiefly
rejoiced in his recovery.

Ver. 19. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day, etc.]
The repetition of this word, the living, the living, is very Emphatical, and
amongst other things does clearly discover how full of joy his heart was upon
the thought of this, that by his recovery he should have so fair a season
afforded him to speak good of Gods name; the fathers to the children shall make
known thy truth, that is, Thy faithfulness in performing thy promises, as thou
have now done unto me; they shall teach their Children what great things thou
have done, and how they ought upon such occasions to extol thy name; and so thy
Praises shall be continued from Generation to Generation: yea, these words may
seem probably to imply, that Hezekiah had it now in his thoughts, that by Gods
gracious lengthning out of his days, he might come to have a Son to succeed him
in his Throne, whom he might instruct to live to Gods praise and glory.

Ver. 20. The Lord was ready to save me, therefore we will sing my songs to the
stringed instruments, etc.] That is, I will do it with and in the public
Assemblies of thy people (as indeed Hezekiahs recovery was a great blessing and
a just cause of thankfulness to all the people) and he says, we will sing my
songs, either as intending the Psalms which he meant to compose, or else those
Psalms of Thanksgiving which he and the people used to sing upon such occasions.

Ver. 21. For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, etc.] See the
Note, 2 King. 20.7.

Ver. 22. Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the
house of the Lord?] See the Note above, ver. 7. In 2 King. 20.8. it is, What
shall be the sign that the Lord will heal me, and that I shall go up into the
house of the Lord the third day? But the last clause is here only mentioned,
because this implies how earnest his desires were, that he might go up to the
Temple to praise God for his recovery.

CHAP. XXXIX.
VERSE 1. AT that time Merodach-Baladan the Son of Baladan King of Babylon,
sent Letters and a present to Hezekiah, etc.] To wit, by the consent and advice
of his Princes; whence it is that these Messengers are called the Ambassadors
of the Princes of Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. But see the Notes for this whole
passage, 2 King. 20.12. etc.

Ver. 2. And Hezekiah was glad of them, etc.] To wit, as being vain-gloriously
joyed with thinking how renowned he was become, even in remote Countries, and
withal happily as chuckering himself with a conceit that by the friendship of
this King of Babylon he should be the safer for the future from any further
Invasion of the Assyrians; and if this were so, it must needs argue that he was
not so confident in Gods protection, as the remembrance of Gods late miraculous
Deliverance of him from the Assyrians might well have made him. But for this
and that which follows, and showed the house of his precious things, See the
Note 2 King. 20.13.

Ver. 3. What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee, etc.] This
the Prophet demanded of the King, not because he knew not who they were, and
whence they came, but that by the Kings answer he might take occasion to
deliver the Message which God had given him in charge. As for his answer, They
are come from a far Country, etc. See the Note, 2 King. 20.14.

Ver. 4. Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? etc.] See the
foregoing Note; and Hezekiah answered, All that is in mine house, etc. Though
Hezekiah might well have thought, that Gods Prophet used not to come unto him,
but about very serious and weighty matters, and he enquired not of these merely
out of curiosity, that he might know what the business was he was come about;
yet by his plain and direct relating what he had done, it appears that he
apprehended not that he had sinned herein, but rather expected to be commended
for his wise and prudent managing of the whole business.

Ver. 6. Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which
thy Fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon,
etc.] As if he had said, All these things wherein thou have so prided thy self,
and whereof thou have so exceedingly gloried, shall be plundered and carried
away, even by the Babylonians, whom now by so great respects thou have sought
to engage to thee. A sad Message this was! But by making known, that this fact
of Hezekiahs should help forward that dreadful desolation which indeed was
chiefly brought upon the whole Land for the wickedness and obstinacy of the
people in general, 1. God discovered how hateful and detestable the sin of
Pride and Vain glory is in his sight: And 2ly. he brought Hezekiah and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem to humble themselves for what had been done; as it is
expressly said they did, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. But see also the Note, 2 King. 20.17.

Ver. 7. And of thy Sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shall beget,
shall they take away, etc.] To wit, mediately or immediately; his Posterity,
his Children or Childrens Children: and they shall be eunuchs in the Palace of
the King of Babylon, that is, Servants or Officers, See the Note, 2 King. 8.6.
And this was accomplished partly in the carrying away of Manasseh his Son
Captive into Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. but especially in the Captivity of
Jehoiachim, and others of the seed Royal, See 2 Chronicles. 36.10, 20. and Dan. 1.3.
And by foretelling this, Hezekiah was further informed how vainly he and his
Progenitors had chuckered themselves in the great treasures they had horded up
for their Posterity, seeing both their Treasures and Posterity too, were not
long after to be carried away into Babylon.

Ver. 8. Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which thou
have spoken, etc.] Thus the good King does quietly submit to the Sentence of
God, and to the denunciation of it by the Prophet; Good, says he, is the word
of the Lord; as if he should have said, It is most just that God should thus
punish both my sin, and the wickedness of this people; and I know that what he
does therein, he will do out of fatherly love to those that fear him: he said
moreover, for there shall be peace and truth in my days; which in 2 King.
20.19. is expressed thus, Is it not good, if peace and truth be in my days? for
which see the Note there. By peace and truth, is meant assured peace, or peace
with the faithful accomplishment of what God had promised; particularly it may
be, that of the lengthning out his days for fifteen years. So that that which
Hezekiah intended hereby, was, That he had cause to own it as an effect of Gods
Goodness and Favor to them, that this Judgment should be suspended and
deferred so long, that during his life, peace should be continued amongst them;
which also might hint some hope to them, that when the evil threatened was
brought upon the Land, God would remember mercy in the midst of Judgment.

CHAP. XL.
VERSE 1. COmfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God.] As if he should
have said, The Lord God, who does still own you for his Vovenant People, though
he has so severely chastised you for your sins, and will still approve himself
to be your God, upon the mention made in the foregoing Chapter of the
Babylonian Captivity, ver. 6, 7. (whereby we may see how fitly the Stories
there related were inserted in that place) the Prophet addresseth himself to
comfort the people of God with many promises of their return from Babylon, and
being settled again in their own Country; and under this also, of our Redemption
by Christ from that more dreadful Bondage under Sin and Satan, whereof that
deliverance of the Jews from the Babylonian Captivity, was a type, or shadow;
so that indeed most of the following Prophecies, if not all, even to the end of
the Book, are mainly concerning this subject, the return of the Jews out of
Babylon, and that great work of our Salvation by Christ. And it may well be
thought, that when the time of the Babylonian Captivity began to approach, the
Prophet wrote this Prophecy purposely that during that long and sad time of
their exile, they might have this as a Cordial amongst them for the chearing of
their hearts. In the beginning of this Prophecy, God by Isaiah enjoins his
Prophets, to wit, such as God should raise up in the time of the Babylonian
Captivity; as namely, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Haggai, Zachariah and others,
that they should comfort the sad hearts of his people with the tidings of their
approaching deliverance; and especially likewise those, that about the time of
Christ's coming in the flesh, were endued with a Spirit of Prophecy, and spoke
to the people concerning that great mystery, such as were Zachary, old Simeon,
and Anna, together with the Apostles and other Preachers of the Gospel, that
they should comfort poor dejected sinners with the glad tidings of our
Redemption and Salvation by Christ. And herein observable also it is, 1. That
to imply what plenty of these God would raise up after that long time of
silence, when they had not, in a manner, a Prophet amongst them (See the Note,
Psalm. 74.9.) this Command is expressed in the plural Number, Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people. And 2ly. that it is twice repeated, 1. To set forth Gods
pity and compassion toward his afflicted people. 2ly. To imply how faithfully
and strenuously God required this work should be done by his Messengers and
Ministers. And 3ly. to hint what full, abundant and continual ground of
Consolation was contained in the glad tidings they were to impart to Gods
people.

Ver. 2. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, etc.] That is, to the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem; Or, the people of God, and Church of Christ in general. It is in
the Hebrew, Speak to the heart of Jerusalem; whereby is meant, either that they
should speak that which might be as pleasing and delightful to them, as their
own hearts could desire; or rather, that they should speak those things that
might affect, comfort and revive their very hearts within them: and cry unto
her, that is, proclaim to her with much assurance and earnestness, that her
warfare, or, as it is in the Margin, her appointed time is accomplished, that
is, (as it respects the Jews in Babylon) That her Captivity there is at an end;
or that the set time appointed by God for her deliverance from thence is fully
accomplished: Or, (as it respects the coming of Christ to perform that great
work of man's Redemption) that his peoples servitude under the Law, Satan, Sin
and Death, was fully expired; and that the fullness of time appointed by God for
man's Redemption by Christ, was come; which is fully the same in effect with
that of our Savior, The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand,
Mark 1.15. that her iniquity is pardoned, that is, That God is now resolved to
receive her into his favor, and will proceed no further in a way of punishing
her, as he has done; Or, that God will now accept of satisfaction from Christ,
and so pardon the sins of his people: for she has received of the Lords hand
double for all her sins; that is, she has been abundantly punished for her
sins; for so this word double is frequently used in the Scripture, as
afterward in this Prophecy, Chap. 61.7. for your shame ye shall have double;
and again, Jer. 16.18. I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double:
and so likewise, Jer. 17.18. Zach. 9.12. and Rev. 18.6. see also the Note,
Prove. 31.21. The meaning is not, That the Justice of God was fully satisfied by
her sufferings; or that she had suffered more than her sins had deserved (for
quite contrary is that Confession of Ezra's, Chap. 9.13. Our God has punished
us less than our iniquities deserve) but that God would not lay any further or
greater Punishment upon her, though indeed her sins had deserved for more. God
seems to speak of his people, as pitying them for the great miseries they had
undergone. Alas! my people have endured enough and enough, and more than
enough! It is high time they should now be delivered.

Ver. 3. The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, etc.] See the Note,
Chap. 13.4. where we have a like Expression. It is, as if he had said, Let
there be, Or, there shall be the voice of one crying in the Wilderness. Or we
may conceive the Prophet speaking here, as in a prophetical rapture, Methinks I
hear the voice of him that cri^th in the Wilderness, etc. Because in the
foregoing verses, by way of foretelling how graciously God would shortly deal
with his people, he had enjoined his Messengers to make known the glad tidings
they had for them, to cry unto her, that her warfare was accomplished, etc.
Here now he shows how this should be done by the voice of one that should cry
in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, etc. Now as this is spoken
(in the type) of the Jews return out of Babylon to their own Country, the
meaning is, That God would order it so, that through the favor of Cyrus there
should be an easy and a clear way opened unto them for their return, which had
been hitherto blocked up against them with many difficulties not like to be
removed; and that they who had been carried away as captivated slaves, with so
much scorn and contempt, should now return back in an honorable and glorious
manner. The voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make straight in the desert a high way for our God; the words do
plainly imply, 1. That the Lord God would go before his people, and carry them
home into their own Country. And 2ly. that therefore as Kings, when they are to
pass from one place to another with their Train and Attendants, or to march
with their Armies into foreign parts, are wont to have their Harbingers or
Forerunners go before them, to set Pioneers and others on work to remove all
obstructions out of their way, and to provide that the way be direct, and fair,
and plain before them, as they pass along; so would the Lord provide, that all
hindrances should be removed that might obstruct their return; and that there
should be a clear, a fair way set open before them. The Prophets should bring
them to repentance, so that their sins should not hinder their return any
longer; and as for other difficulties that might discourage them, their
scattered, poor and desolate Wilderness-condition in Babylon, and those waste
desert Countries they were to pass through in their going homeward to Judea,
God would order it so, that they should have no stop nor disturbance, but all
should be carried on with as much facility and expedition, as if such a fair
Cawsey-way had been prepared for them, even as in former times their Fore
fathers were carried from Egypt through the Wilderness into Canaan; the
accomplishment whereof we may see, Ezra 1.3, 4, 5, 6. But then as this was
spoken with respect to the coming of Christ, the promised Messiah, as
principally it was, doubtless it is meant of John the Baptists preaching in the
Wilderness of Judea, as is evident in the Evangelists, who do expressly affirm,
that in him this Prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled; See Matthew. 3.3, 4. Mark 1.3.
Luke 3.3, 4, 5, 6. and John 1.23. And the meaning is, That the Baptist by his
preaching the Gospel in the Wilderness of Judea, should, as Christ's Herald or
Harbinger, prepare a way by faith and repentance in the hearts of those that
heard him, for the receiving of Christ that was coming after him, and the Grace
of Life and Salvation that in Christ, as their Messiah, should be tendered to
them. Though the hearts of men were naturally blocked up against the
entertainment of Christ, and more especially by the great corruption of those
times; yet by the power of the Baptists preaching, all hindrances should be
removed, and the hearts of multitudes should be subdued to the obedience of
Christ, and he should make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

Ver. 4. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be
made low, etc.] As this was spoken with respect to the Jews return out of
Babylon, the meaning is, that they should meet with no trouble or difficulty in
their way. But now as it respects the Baptists preaching, the words seem to
import, that there should be a strange reformation wrought thereby in the
hearts of his hearers, even as to those things that did most indispose men to
the ready receiving of Christ and the Grace of the Gospel. And so, 1. by the
exalting of valleys, may be meant, either that men of low and cowardly spirits,
should be advanced to great courage in embracing and professing the Gospel; or
that men of base worldly thoughts should become heavenly-minded; or rather,
that the sinking and despairing souls of poor sinners, dejected with sense of
their sins, and the terrors of Gods wrath, should be comforted and raised up
with hope of Reconciliation with God, and life eternal. 2ly. By laying Hills
and Mountains low, may be meant the humbling of proud spirits, presumptuous and
highly conceited of their own righteousness, with the terrors of the Law. 3ly.
By making the crooked straight, we may understand the reforming of the crooked
and false ways of ungodly men, and making them conformable to the straight Rule
of Gods Law. And 4ly. by making the rough places plain, may be meant, the
bringing of those that are of a rugged and stubborn temper, to become mild, and
gentle, and pliable to Gods will. And summarily, the meaning of all may be,
That all sorts of men should be prepared by the Baptists Ministry, to stoop to
the yoke of Christ.

Ver. 5. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, etc.] The meaning of this
also may be, That the glorious power, and mercy, and faithfulness of God to his
people, should be manifestly discovered in the Jews return out of Babylon into
their own Country. And accordingly we may understand the following clause, and
all flesh shall see it together, to wit, that this work of his peoples
deliverance should be so wonderful and glorious, that all Nations, all men
might see; yea, that a man should see plainly, that it was the glorious Majesty
of Heaven and Earth that had done it, and should stand amazed at it; so far
they should be (poor frail Creatures) from being able to hinder what God will
have done! But now if we understand it of the great work of our Redemption by
Christ (to which the Evangelist St. Luke applies it, rendering it according to
the Septuagint, Luke 3.6. And all flesh shall see the salvation of God) then
the meaning may be either, first, That Christ, the promised Messiah, who was
the only begotten Son of God the Father, and the brightness of his glory, Heb.
1.3. should after a long time of Expectation be at last manifested unto the
World in man's nature, according to that, Joh. 1.14. And the Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth. Or, 2ly. that by that
wonderful work of man's Redemption by Christ, that Mystery which had been hid
from Ages and from Generations, Col. 1.26. the transcendent Glory of all Gods
glorious Attributes, should be manifestly and abundantly discovered to men;
which is further set forth in the next words, and all flesh shall see it
together; that is, The Elect, say some, of all Nations and all sorts of people;
or multitudes of all sorts and Nations, not the Jews only, but the Gentiles
also, shall see this Glory of God in Christ, and in the great work of our
Salvation by Christ.

Ver. 6. The voice said, Cry.] This, as it is in our Translation, seems to have
relation to that charge given, ver. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people; as if
it had been expressed thus: I heard, or methought I heard the voice that gave
the former charge, saying, Cry. And therefore it must be understood either of
the voice of God commanding the Prophet Isaiah to cry; or as a prediction of a
voice from God, enjoining the Prophets a little before the deliverance of the
Jews out of Babylon; or a voice from Christ enjoining his Messengers and
Ministers after the coming of Christ in the flesh, to lift up their voice, and
to cry aloud, to wit, with all earnestness and endeavor to make men hear, as
it was fit they should do, both in regard of the importance of their message,
and the stupidity of those to whom they were to speak; or, as those that have
very glad tidings are wont to do.

And he said, etc.] That is, the Prophet Isaiah (for it is usual with the
Prophets to speak of themselves in the third person) or the party to whom this
charge from God or from Christ shall be given, What shall I cry? And this is
added to imply, partly the readiness of Gods Servants to undertake the service
imposed upon them; and partly their care to say nothing in the message they
were to deliver, but what they had received distinctly and expressly in charge
from God.

All flesh is grass, etc.] This is that which was to be proclaimed; All flesh
is grass, that is, All men in their natural Estate are poor transitory and
perishing things; and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field;
or, as the Apostle Peter cites it out of the Septuagint here, 1 Pet. 1.24. and
all the glory of man, as the flower of grass; that is, All that is of greatest
excellency, graceful and glorious in any man whatsoever, and for which men are
usually most admired and esteemed, as when men are endued with excellent
natural gifts, as Beauty, Strength, Wisdom, Learning, Courage; and when men are
outwardly above others in Riches and Honors; all are of no more continuance
than a fading flower. But, may some say, Why was this known truth concerning
the vanity and frailty of man, and all that is in man, enjoined here with so
much vehemence to be proclaimed? I answer, Many reasons are given for this by
Interpreters; but the most probable are these: first, some say, That lest the
people should question the promises they should hear from Gods Servants
concerning the Lords delivering them out of Babylon, because of the mighty
power of the Babylonians, by whom they were held in Captivity; therefore this
was enjoined to be proclaimed, to imply, that how dreadful and invincible
soever the Babylonians might seem to be, yet if God did set himself to destroy
them, they would soon be found to be no better than grass, and as a withering
flower. Again others hold, That the drift of this Cry was to hint unto the
people of Judah their approaching Captivity, that so afterward he might proceed
to assure them again of their deliverance from thence; All flesh is grass, and
all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field; as if (...) had said,
Though after the destruction of the Assyrian Army your State will seem to be in
a very flourishing Condition, yet alas! All the glory of man is a poor fading
thing; it will not be long ere all the glory of your State will be ruined, and
you your selves will be carried Captives into a far Country; only indeed after
this, the Comforts before promised you, shall surely be fulfilled in their
season. But then thirdly, others (owning man's Redemption by Christ, whereof the
deliverance out of Babylon was a type, to be the main comfortable tidings
intended, ver. 1.) do accordingly hold, That the Servants of Christ are here
enjoined, either to proclaim the baseness of man's natural Condition, that all
flesh was grass, etc. thereby to set forth the riches of Gods grace, in that he
would send his only begotten Son to take our Nature upon him; or, that Gods
redeeming man by such a wonderful way, could not be ascribed to any worth in
man, but only to Gods free grace; or else, rather to convince men of their
natural corruption, to wit, That of themselves (unless when they are quickened
and revived by the spirit of grace) they are poor, dying, perishing Creatures,
unable to do any thing toward their recovery out of this Condition, that so
they might be fit to go out of themselves, and embrace the Salvation tendered to
them in the Gospel through Jesus Christ. And indeed, till men be made sensible
of their own lost Estate, they are not capable of the Consolations which ver.
1. were appointed to be propounded to them.

Ver. 7. The grass withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord
blows upon it, etc.] As if he had said, As these things wither away, if a
little sharp breath of wind does but blow upon them (See the Note, Psalm.
103.16.) so when God is but pleased in his anger to blow upon men, they and all
their glory are soon brought to nothing; surely the people is grass, that is,
All the people in the World are no better than grass before God; whereby what
is intended, see in the foregoing Note. Yet it may be more peculiarly meant of
Gods own people; to wit, that even they also, however they might pride
themselves in their carnal privileges, had in their natural Estate no
advantage in this regard above others.

Ver. 8. The grass withers, the flower fades, but the word of our God shall
stand for ever.] The meaning of this may be in general, that however the Plots
and Resolutions of poor perishing men might come to nothing, yet the Decrees
and Promises of God should certainly stand firm for ever. But now as this is
spoken with particular respect to the Jews return out of Babylon, that which
was intended must needs be, either that how firm soever the Glory of the
Babylonian Monarchy might seem, yet that should wither and be ruined, but the
word of promise which God had spoken concerning their return out of Babylon,
and wherewith he had enjoined his Servants to comfort his people, should surely
be accomplished; or that though the glory of the State of Judah should be
brought to nothing in the Babylonian Captivity, yet that should not hinder what
God had spoken concerning their re-establishment again in their own land. And
as it has reference to the days of the Gospel, the meaning is, either that
Gods promise and Decree concerning the coming of Christ to redeem poor sinful
perishing man, should certainly be fulfilled; or else, that the word of Christ,
published by the Ministry of the Gospel, and received by a lively Faith into
the hearts of tr^^ Believers, should sanctify and regenerate those poor dying
Creatures, and so should, as an incorruptible ^eed, work in them an
incorruptible and immortal life, and so should bring them to be everlastingly
glorious in Heaven. And so indeed the Apostle applies this passage, 1 Pet.
1.23, 24, 25.

Ver. 9. O Zion, that bring good tidings, get thee up into the high
mountain, etc.] This may be read as it is in the Margin, O thou that tellest
good tidings to Zion, get thee up into the high mountain; and so likewise in
the following words; O thou that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem, lift up thy
voice, etc. and being thus read, it seems to be a repetition of the charge
before given, ver. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, to wit, That they
should proclaim to Gods people those glad tidings wherewith they were appointed
to comfort them; for which see the Note there. But now reading it as it is in
our Text, O Zion, that bring good tidings, get thee up into the high
mountain; it is rather Zion and Jerusalem it self, that is, the Church of the
Jews (belonging to Zion, the place of Gods public Worship, though now Captives
in Jerusalem) that are here enjoined to spread abroad as far as they could
(which is implied by willing them to get up into a high mountain) the glad
tidings they had received concerning the liberty granted them for their return
out of Babylon into their own Country. And to the ^ame purpose is that which
follows, O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up thy voice with
strength; that is, Cry aloud (as they use to do that have good tidings to
proclaim) that as many as may be, may hear thee; lift it up, be not afraid; to
wit, as any way questioning the certainty of your tidings; or as fearing any
that may be enraged against your return; say unto the Cities of Judah, that is,
Those that were once the inhabitants of the Cities of Judah, though now in
Captivity, and scattered abroad into several Countries, and are now to raise up
the several ruined Cities of Judah again: Behold, your God: that is, Lo, you
shall now see, or you have now seen your God, with whom your enemies have so
often twitted you, and of whose help you have been so often ready to despair,
appearing gloriously to destroy your enemies, and to deliver you. This I
conceive is the meaning of this whole verse, as it was spoken with respect to
the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon. But now as it respects the
accomplishment of the long expected promise concerning the Messiah, I conceive,
Gods Zion, the faithful that were first comforted with the tidings of the
coming of Christ, are here enjoined to get up into a high Mountain, and to lift
up their voice with strength; that is, cheerfully, openly, freely and
confidently to spread abroad the glad tidings of the Gospel, first to the
Cities of Judah, that is, the Jews, the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
Matthew. 10.6. but then afterward even to all Nations throughout the World,
without any fear of those that should oppose or persecute them for so doing.
And this is just that which Christ said to the Apostles, Matthew. 10.27, 28. What
ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the house tops. And fear not them which
kill the body, etc. And again, Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the World, and preach
the Gospel to every creature. And thus understanding it, by those words,
Behold, your God, may be meant, either the Son appearing visibly in man's
nature, as when the Baptist pointed him out to the people, Behold the Lamb of
God which takes away the sin of the World; or else merely his coming into the
World to accomplish that great work of man's Redemption, which they had so long
expected.

Ver. 10. Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, etc.] This may be
read as in the Margin, Behold, the Lord God will come against the strong, that
is, Against the mighty enemies of his people, the Babylonians; Or, taking it as
spoken of Christ against the Devil, who is called, Matthew. 12.29. the strong man
that was to be subdued by Christ, and cast out of his house. But indeed the
sense is the same, if we read it as it is in our Text, Behold, the Lord God
will come with strong hand; for if we refer it to the deliverance of the Jews
out of Babylon, the meaning is, That God would appear with his Almighty power
for the Destruction of the Babylonians, that so his people mighe have liberty
to return into their own Country. And to the same purpose is that which
follows, and his arm shall rule for him; that is, By his own all-sufficient
power he shall exercise that Dominion that belongs to him over all the
Creatures, by destroying his peoples enemies, and delivering them; behold, his
reward is with him, that is, He will immediately without delay reward the proud
Babylonians for all their wickedness; See the Notes, Chap. 34.8. and 35.4. and
make his people amends for their patient waiting upon him, during the time of
their Captivity; which is again repeated in the last clause, if we read it as
it is in the Margin, and the recompense for his work before him: but if we read
it as it is in our Text, and his work before him, the meaning is, That the work
which he intended to do, both in delivering his people and destroying their
enemies, lay plain and open before him, there being nothing that could lie as
an Obstacle in his way, that could hinder him. And this may also imply that
which some think is here chiefly intended, that they, to whom he intended a
recompense of evil and good, lay naked and open before him, and were exactly
known by him, so that he could fully proportion a reward according to the evil
or good that he found in them. Thus, I say, this verse is to be understood, as
it has respect to the Jews return out of Babylon. But now as it has respect
to that which was figured thereby, Christ coming into the World to redeem his
chosen people, I understand it thus, Behold, the Lord God will come with strong
hand, and his arm shall rule for him; that is, the Lord Christ will come with
infinite power to vanquish those spiritual enemies under whom his people were
held in bondage, and to redeem his people out of their power; 1 John 3.8. Joh.
12.31. Col. 2.15. and Heb. 2.14. of which even the Miracles that he wrought in
casting out Devils, and restoring the Dead to life, etc. were some discovery
beforehand, with respect whereto it is said, that he was mighty in word and
deed before God and all the people, Luke 24.19. his reward is with him, that
is, he will punish the Devil and his Servants with eternal Damnation; and those
that embrace him and serve him faithfully, he will abundantly reward, both here
and eternally in his heavenly Kingdom: and his work before him; that is, He
will be earnestly intent upon the work which his Father shall send him to do;
to wit, the work of man's Redemption; for so Christ used often to speak of it,
as John 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his
work. And 17.4. I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. Some, I
know, do otherwise understand the latter part of this verse; for some by his
reward, do understand the ransom paid by him for man's Redemption; and some
hold, that his redeemed ones are here said to be both his work and reward; See
Chap. 45.11. and 60.21. But the former Exposition I judge the best.

Ver. 11. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, etc.] That is, Having
gathered together his poor captived people, that were dispersed abroad into
several places and Countries, he will with all care and tenderness carry them
home to their own Country in one body, defending them, and providing for them
all the way they go thorough those waste places by which they must pass, and
likewise after they are gotten home; so that the weakest and the tenderest
amongst them, shall receive no prejudice by their Journey; which is more fully
expressed in the following words, he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and
carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young; that
is, He will cherish them with all tenderness, as a Shepherd deals with the
feeble in his flock, that when his Lambs are yeaned far off from the fold, or
are wandered abroad, or wearied with driving, is wont to take them into his arms
or lap and carry them home; and when the Ews are feeble and wearied, is very
careful not to over drive them, See Genesis 33.13. And so likewise under this is
set forth Christ's tender care over his Church and people, to defend them, and
to provide for them, and to guide and govern them; and particularly, the tender
respect he has to his little ones, his poor weak ones, and those that are
burdened with any heavy load of sin, affliction and sorrow.

Ver. 12. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? etc.] That
is, Who, but God? The Prophet does here largely undertake to set forth the
infinite and incomprehensible Power, and Wisdom, and Majesty of God, by that
great work of his creating the world; his Wisdom in that he made those vast
bodies of the Heaven, the Earth and Sea, in such due order and proportion, as
if he had made them all by weight and measure; his Power, in that when he made
these vast bodies, the Sea, the Heaven, the Earth, they were as nothing in his
hand; whence it is said that he measured the Sea in the hollow of his hand, and
meted out the Heaven with a span, and comprehended the dust of the earth (so he
calls the vast globe of the earth, to imply, that it was all but as a little
light dust before God) in a measure (a tierce it is in the Hebrew, which was,
it seems, some small measure with them) and weighed the Mountains and Hills in
the scales of a little balance. And this the Prophet does, thereby to show,
either 1. That there was no cause why the Jews should question the
accomplishment of what God had promised concerning the ruin of the
Babylonians, and their deliverance from their bondage under them, out of a
groundless fear of their seeming invincible power, or any thing which their
Idol-gods could do for them; for alas! What were these before that great God,
to whom the making of the whole World was a work of no difficulty at all? Or
2ly. That men had no reason to question the mysteries of the Gospel in the work
of man's Redemption, because they cannot comprehend the possibility of them; and
that because we may be sure the God that created the World can do whatever he
pleases. Some indeed think, that this large Description of the greatness of
God, is to set forth the wonder of Christ's Incarnation, to wit, that this great
God should vouchsafe to be made man. But the account that is before given of
the Prophets scope in this place, is far more generally approved by Expositors.

Ver. 13. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord? etc.] That is, Who, by any
Advice or Counsel given him, did direct God in the doing of any thing that he
did in the Worlds Creation? And this is added more fully yet, to set forth the
infinite and incomprehensible Wisdom of God; and thereby yet further to imply,
That it is a folly for men to question any thing which God says he will do,
because they cannot conceive how it should be done. By the Creation of the
World we may see, that God can do those things which are far above the reach of
our understanding. By the Septuagint this is translated, Who has known the
mind of the Lord? etc. And accordingly it is cited by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.16.
to prove the unsearchableness of the Gospel Mysteries by man's natural
understanding. And again, Romans 11.34. to prove the unsearchableness of his
Counsels.

Ver. 14. With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him and taught him in
the path of Judgment? etc.] That is, In the way how to frame or order the
Creatures which he made with such admirable Judgment, and Wisdom, and
Understanding, or to govern them when he had made them? The drift of this is
the same with that in the foregoing verse.

Ver. 15. Behold, the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the
small dust of the balance, etc*] That is, They are of no more worth, or power
before God, or in comparison of God. And what therefore cannot that God do, who
is so infinitely great? Or, how can any Nation hinder any thing that God will
have done? behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing; that is, He
can, if he pleases, take them up and throw them away; he can overturn and
destroy them, and that easily and in a moment. Because Islands are commonly
esteemed places of greatest strength; and the Inhabitants think themselves most
safe and secure therein, as being compassed with the Sea; therefore these are
particularly mentioned.

Ver. 16. And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof
sufficient for a burnt-offering.] To wit, if men would think to offer up to God
a burnt-offering, perfectly besitting his Majesty, and fully proportionable to
his greatness. And the drift of this is still to set forth the infinite and
incomprehensible greatness of God. Yet some think it may be added more
particularly to imply, how infinitely short man must needs come of finding out
any means to satisfy Gods Justice, which is the subject of the Gospel.

Ver. 17. All Nations before him are as nothing, etc.] That is, In his sight
and account, or in comparison of him; and they are counted to him less than
nothing, and vanity; See the Note, Psalm. 62.9. But the drift of this is the
same with that before, ver. 16.

Ver. 18. To whom then will ye liken God, etc.] This also tends to set forth
the incomprehensible Majesty of God; and that still thereby to imply how little
cause they had to distrust or doubt of the promises of this their God because
of the power of any Heathen people that had none but Idol-gods to rest upon.
God had, indeed, made use of these Nations to punish them for their sins; but
alas! when God had a purpose again to rescue his people out of their hands,
neither they nor their gods were any thing before him. This, I conceive, is the
main scope of this place. But yet it is clear, that together with this, the
Prophet intended hereby to secure his people, that did already, or should
hereafter live as Captives amongst those Idolatrous Nations, from being
corrupted with this brutish and abominable sin.

Ver. 19. The workman melts a graven Image, etc.] This is spoken by way of
deriding the brutish folly of those that can undertake to make themselves gods;
and the Goldsmith spreads it over with Gold, and casts Silver chains, to
wit, to be an Ornament to it; or else, to fasten it therewith somewhere aloft
that it may not fall or stir, but stand bolt-upright.

Ver. 20. He that is so impoverished that he has no oblation, etc.] That is,
That has no such rich oblation, as is before mentioned, to be consecrated
toward the making of a God for him, to wit, Gold, or Silver, or Brass; chooses
a tree that will not rot, (which is spoken by way of derision) he seeks unto
him a cunning workman, to prepare a graven image that it shall not be moved;
that is, That may stand a long time, there being no need to take it down,
because it is perished and decayed; Or, that may be so fastened by the Workman,
that it may not be in danger to totter or fall down.

Ver. 21. Have ye not known, etc.] To wit, That God the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, is the only true God, and of that infinite Majesty, that he cannot be
represented by any Image? As if he had said, Surely you cannot but know this:
have ye not heard? that is, Has no body ever told you thus much? Or, have not
ye, my people, been taught this out of my written word? has it not been told
you from the beginning? have ye not received this by tradition from your
Fathers successively in all Generations, even from the first Creation? Or, have
ye not been told this even from your Childhood? or from the beginning of Gods
revealing himself to your Nation, as his peculiar people? As if he had said,
This is no new Doctrine; even from the times of Moses and Abraham ye have been
taught this: have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth? that is,
say some, From the time when the Foundations of the earth were first laid? But
rather the drift of these words is to show, that this truth concerning the
infinite Majesty of the only true God, was sufficiently discovered to all men
by the Creation of the World, or particularly by the strange Foundations
whereon God has unmoveably settled the earth from the Creation unto this day.

Ver. 22. It is he that sits upon the circle of the earth, etc.] That is,
That has the Heaven for his Throne, and the earth for his footstool, Chap.
66.1. the most high God, that is infinitely above all, the Sovereign Lord,
Possessor and Governor of the whole earth and the fullness thereof. But now
this may be read as it is in the Margin, Him that sits upon the Circle of
the earth; and then it must be read, as joined to the foregoing verse, thus;
have ye not understood him that sits upon the circle of the earth, and the
Inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers? to wit, even as to men that stand aloft
on some high Mountain, things beneath seem very little (for to this there is an
Allusion in these words) that stretches out the heavens as a curtain; See the
Note, Psalm. 104.2. and spreads them out as a tent to dwell in; that is, say
most Expositors, for men to dwell in, who are under the Canopy of Heaven, as
the covering of a Tent; or rather, as a Pavilion, or palace for himself to
dwell in.

Ver. 23. That brings the Princes to nothing; he makes the Judges of the
earth as vanity.] That is, He makes the great Kings and Rulers of the earth to
appear to be as nothing, and mere vanity before him; or by destroying them, he
brings them to nothing, See the Note, Job 12.21.

Ver. 24. Yea, they shall not be planted, yea they shall not be sown, yea their
stock shall not take root in the earth, etc.] As if he had said, In what a
flourishing Condition soever these great ones seem to be, they shall be
destroyed, as easily and utterly, without any memorial of them left behind
them, as those things are overthrown or blasted, that never had any root in the
earth; as namely, a dry, dead stock of a tree put into the earth; or as grass,
that shooting up of it self in the superficies of the earth, and not having any
deep root, is soon withered. Some, I know, understand this of their being
overturned in the beginning of their Reign, before they are well settled in
their greatness, or before they have any Posterity to leave behind them. But
the former Exposition I judge the better, and most agreeable to that which
follows, and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, etc. that
is, The least breath of Gods displeasure shall soon bring them to nothing; See
the Note, Psalm. 103.16.

Ver. 25. To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? etc.] See the
Note above, ver. 18.

Ver. 26. Lift up your eyes on high, etc.] To wit, heavenward, as becomes men
whom God has created with erect bodies, and countenances fit to view the
Heavens; and not like the Beasts that have their faces always grovelling toward
the earth: and behold who has created these things, to wit, these heavenly
Orbs, and the glorious lights therein: Consider of what infinite Power, and
Wisdom, and Majesty that God must needs be, that has made all these things,
that brings out their host by number, he calls them all by names: See the
Note, Psalm. 147.4. by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in
power, not one fails; that is, By reason of his infinite power, when he
brings out this his heavenly Host, it is not with him as with other Generals,
that when they lead out their Companies into the Fields, do usually miss some
of their Soldiers; not one of his Host from the Creation unto this time, has
ever been wanting; but they have all been found in their places, ready pressed
to do whatever God shall enjoin them.

Ver. 27. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel? etc.] That is,
Considering the infinite Power and Wisdom of God before described, why should
you ever and anon break forth into such words of despair, that are Gods
Vovenant People, his Israel, the Posterity of Jacob; who because he relied upon
God, being in danger of an enemy too mighty for him, was therefore called
Israel? my way is hid from the Lord, that is, (say the most of Expositors) God
takes no notice of, or does not regard the Miseries we endure in Babylon; and
my judgment is passed over from my God, that is, He passes over my cause, and
minds it not, and so he does not execute Judgment upon those that wrong and
oppress me. Well, but now the words may be understood another way, and that
very probably, My way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over from
my God, that is, God himself cannot find out a way now to deliver us out of our
Captivity; the way of judging and avenging us upon our enemies, is so far past
all hope of being effected, that God himself cannot redress it; See the Note,
Job 3.23. And indeed this Exposition some do rather approve, because of that
which is added in the following verses.

Ver. 28. Have thou not known, have thou not heard, etc.] See the Note above,
ver. 21. that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the
earth, faints not? to wit, as men usually do, when their strength is worn out
with long toil and labor. Gods not fainting is alleged to imply covertly, that
he was able to do as great and wonderful things for his people, as he had ever
formerly done, as being never wearied with what he does: and with respect
hereto it is, that God is termed here the everlasting God; that is, That God,
who from Eternity to Eternity continues always the same unchangeably; and the
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, to imply, that being therefore
Omnipotent, and having the whole World, even to the utmost ends of the earth,
as being the work of his hands, under his power and command, to govern it as he
pleases, it must needs follow, that this immutable God, that ceased not to
govern the whole World, would much less cease to take care of his own Church
and people; and that he was able to deliver his people, even in Babylon, and
from the uttermost ends of the earth, as well as if they had been still in the
land of Judea: there is no searching of his understanding: as if he had said,
And how then can you think, that your way should be hid from such infinite
Knowledge? Or, why should you not think, when you do not understand how that
which God does, should tend to the good of his people, that this may be because
the Wisdom of his Proceedings may be far above your reach?

Ver. 29. He gives power to the faint, etc.] That is, to those that are ready
to faint and sink under great Afflictions and Temptations, as being no way able
to help themselves, as it was indeed with the Jews in the Babylonian Captivity.
Such as these, and that have humble thoughts of themselves, God does usually
strengthen them, and revive; and is it likely that he should faint himself,
that revives the fainting spirits of others?

Ver. 30. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall
utterly fall.] That is, The strongest that are, may, and do often, for want of
strength to hold out, fail of effecting what they undertake; which is the
rather said, because such, out of the high conceit they have of their own
strength, are many times emboldned to undertake things too high for them, and
so are ruined thereby.

Ver. 31. But they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, etc.]
The word in the Hebrew may be translated, shall change their strength; but the
meaning is, That they that trust in God, and wait patiently and quietly upon
him for the accomplishment of his promises, though they may sometimes be ready
to faint, yet being strengthened by grace, shall again encourage themselves, and
go on cheerfully, resting upon God for Deliverance: they shall mount up with
wings as Eagles; that is, By mounting up in their Meditations concerning their
God, and all his Glorious Attributes, and the Glory which in Heaven he has
prepared for his people; they shall with great courage and magnanimity of
Spirit, raise up themselves above all Difficulties, and Dangers, and Fears, and
with much confidence rest upon God, even against all opposition that may seem
to threaten them in their way. But see the Note also, Psalm. 103.5. They shall
run, and not be weary: and they shall walk, and not faint: that is, Though the
accomplishment of Gods Promises to them be never so long delayed, and though
they meet with never so much Discouragement; yet resting confidently upon God,
they shall hold out to the end, and courageously run the Race that is set
before them.

CHAP. XLI.
VERSE 1. KEep silence before me, O islands, etc.] So usually in the Scripture
all Transmarine Countries are called; See the Notes, Genesis 10.5. and Psalm. 97.1.
The scope of this Chapter is much the same with that in the foregoing Chapter,
to wit, to make known to the Jews with what confidence they might expect that
deliverance out of Babylon, which God had before promised them, and does here
again assure them of (and so likewise that Redemption by Christ, whereof that
deliverance was a type) and what little cause they had to fear that any power
of that Heathen people, or their Idol-gods, should be able to disappoint God of
doing that for his people which he had promised. And thus still also by the way
they are covertly forewarned to take heed, that whilst they continued in
Babylon, they were not drawn away to their Idolatry. Now accordingly here in
the beginning of this Chapter, God by the Prophet (as is evident, ver. 4.)
challenges all the Heathen Nations round about, to enter into a fair and equal
debate with him, that when he had pleaded his cause, and they had answered what
they had to say for themselves, it might be judged and determined, whether God
had not in all Ages done that for his people, as they had often found to their
cost, which none of their Idol-gods were ever able to do; and consequently
whether there was not very just ground why his people should quietly expect the
accomplishment of that which God had promised to do for them, without fearing
anything their Idol-gods could do to hinder him therein: Keep silence before
me, O Islands, to wit, that you may hear what I shall say; and let the people
renew their strength, that is, Let them take courage, and strengthen themselves
with all the Arguments they can; See the Note, Chap. 40.31. Let them come near,
then let them speak; that is, Let them except what they can against what I say,
and say what they can for themselves, and for their Idol-gods that cannot speak
for themselves; Let us come near together to Judgment, that is, Let us with
fair and equal terms on both sides debate the matter, that our Cause may be
judged and determined. And thus he gives the Jews to understand, that the very
Heathens might be convinced of the truth of that which he had now to say, if
they would seriously consider of it.

Ver. 2. Who raised up the righteous man from the east?] To wit, Abraham, whom
God called out of Ur in Chaldea, that lay Eastward of Judea, raising his heart
effectually to detest the Idolatry of the place where he lived, and readily to
obey Gods command for the leaving of his Country and Kindred, to go to the
Country whereto he would carry him; and who is called here the righteous man;
because being justified by faith, Genesis 15.6. he did afterward approve himself a
truly righteous man, by continuing constant in the Worship of the only true
God, and by the general Justice and Righteousness of his Conversation in all
other regards: called him to his foot, that is, To follow God whithersoever he
would lead him, not knowing at all whither it would be; even as servants being
bidden, follow their Master, though they know not whither he will carry them;
and being likewise afterward ready to go to and fro, as God was pleased to
appoint him, gave the Nations before him, and made him rule over Kings; to wit,
by vanquishing them; See the Note before, Chap. 40.10. he gave them as the dust
to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow; that is, He did as easily rout
and subdue them, as dust or stubble is driven away or scattered by the wind.
And all this is spoken, though more especially of Abraham, with reference to
that victory of his over the four Kings that had plundered Sodom, see Genesis
14.14. yet inclusively also of his Posterity, and of the many Kings whom they
conquered and subdued; and all this to show with what assured confidence the
Jews at present might rely upon their God, and how little cause they had to
fear the idolatrous Nations, or their Idol-gods, if they would consider what
God had done for their father Abraham, and so for his Posterity successively:
Who raised up the righteous man from the East? etc. as if he should have said,
who but the God of Abraham did this? Or, which of the Heathen gods ever did the
like? And therefore why should Abraham's Posterity question the deliverance
promised them? When he was in Chaldea, God carried him safely through many
dangers into the land of Canaan, and did afterward do great things for his
Posterity; and now you are in bondage in Chaldea, why may not God do the same
for you? I know well, that many learned Expositors do understand this of Cyrus,
who, say they, was raised out of the East, that is, Persia; that lay Eastward
of Babylon, and is styled the righteous man, etc. because he did justly and
faithfully what God would have done in executing vengeance upon the
Babylonians, and setting Gods people free, and sending them home into their own
Country. And again, others understand it of Christ; the holy one, and the just,
as he is called, Act. 3.14. and who by the Gospel has vanquished and subdued
many Nations. But the former Exposition concerning Abraham, I conceive is far
most probable; only Christ may be included in Abraham, of whose seed he came.

Ver. 3. He pursued them, and passed safely, etc.] That is, Abraham pursued the
Kings before mentioned with safety and success, and without any considerable
loss or damage to him or his followers, Genesis 14.15. even by the way that he had
not gone with his feet, that is, In remote Countries where he had never been,
and must needs therefore be unacquainted with their ways. But in this also,
that which he did in his Posterity, may also be included. See the foregoing
Note.

Ver. 4. Who has wrought and done it? etc.] To wit, all before mentioned
concerning Abraham, and his Children successively in all Generations; and with
respect thereto therefore it follows, calling the Generations from the
beginning; that is, Who, according to his eternal fore-knowledg and decree,
has from the beginning of the World, made and raised up the Nations of the
World in their several Generations (which the Apostle, Romans 4.17. expresses
thus, and calls those things which be not, as if they were) and has ordered
and disposed of them as he pleased; and so amongst others, the Posterity of
Abraham, making them a great and numerous people, and doing great and wonderful
things for them in their several Ages and Generations. It is as if he had said,
It was none of your Idol-gods that did this, or were able to do it, but I the
Lord Jehovah, whom alone he and his faithful Posterity have always worshipped.
I the Lord, the first, and with the last I am he; that is, I the eternal and
ever-living God, who having my being of my self, was before all things; and
that shall govern and dispose of all things to the last, and subsist after all
things have an end; the first cause and the last end of all things, Romans 11.36.
it is I that have done all these things.

Ver. 5. The Isles saw it, and feared, the ends of the earth were afraid, etc.]
Some apply this particularly to the astonishment of the Nations afar off, when
they heard of Abraham's Victory over the Kings that had invaded the plain of
Sodom, mentioned before, ver. 2, 3. But I see no likelihood how that victory
could be such a terror to Nations so remote, as seems here to be intended.
However, should that be included, certainly it must be principally meant of the
wonderful works which God wrought for the Israelites, the posterity of Abraham,
and their prevailing over the Kings that opposed them, when God delivered them
out of Egypt, and carried them into Canaan; to wit, that when the inhabitants
of remote Countries (see the Note above, ver. 1.) saw what God had done for
this his people, they were amazed and affrighted (see Exodus 15.15. and Josh.
5.1.) Or, that they saw that the God of Israel that had done these things, was
the true God, and that their Idols were nothing, and were startled at this. As
for the following words, that they drew near and came, they are added to show,
that though they were thus far convinced, yet they would not stoop and yield;
but that either they combined and gathered themselves together to fight against
the Israelites; or else, that they assembled together to encourage one another
in their Idolatry; which last agrees best with that which follows, ver. 7.
concerning their eagerness to make new Idols.

Ver. 6. They helped every one his neighbor, and every one said to his
Brother, Be of good courage.] That is, Notwithstanding their forementioned
Conviction and Astonishment, yet they continued obstinately in their Idolatry,
and encouraged one another to oppose and fight against the Israelites, for whom
they saw God had done such wonderful things; or to hold fast to their former
Religion, and to proceed on to the making of new Idols.

Ver. 7. So the Carpenter encouraged the Goldsmith, etc.] To wit, to make
ready, and bring the Gold or Silver plates wherewith the wooden Idol which he
had made, was to be overlaid; and he that smootheth with the hammer, him that
smote the anvil; that is, He that polisheth the plate, encouraged him that
wrought at the Forge; saying, It is ready for the sodering; that is, It is now
sufficiently beaten out at the Anvil; and now it is fit to join the pieces
together with soder, that they may be fairly polished; or this clause may be
read as it is in the Margin, saying of the soder, it is good; that is, Having
joined and sodered the pieces together, they were wonderfully well pleased, and
delighted with their work, saying, So, so, this is very handsome, the pieces are
neatly sodered together; and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be
moved; that is, The Workman fastened with nails, either the frame or plates
sodered together, to the wooden stock underneath it, that the pieces might hold
the firmer together; or the Idol it self, being thus finished, to some nail or
post, that it may stand fast; See the Notes, Chap. 40.19, 20. The scope of this
whole passage was to show, That the Nations being thus eargerly bent to go on
in their Idolatry, the Workmen, whose Trade it was to make Idols, were very
ready to take hold of this opportunity to be set on work for the forging of new
Gods for them.

Ver. 8. But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed
of Abraham my friend.] So Abraham is called, because of his frequent communion
and covenanting with God. Having hitherto showed, purposely thereby to comfort
the Jews, That the Heathens themselves could not say, that ever their Idol-gods
had done such great things for them, as he the Lord had done for Abraham and
his Posterity; hereupon now he addresseth his speech directly to them, and with
many affectionate Expressions of love, persuades them not to fear their
deliverance out of Babylon, which God had now promised them; and consequently
also that greater Deliverance by Christ, whereof the other was a type.

Ver. 9. Thou, whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, etc.] Some
understand this of Gods bringing up the Israelites out of Egypt; and
accordingly they also understand the following words, and called thee from the
chief men thereof, of the King and Nobles of Egypt, out of whose hands God
delivered the Israelites. But it is rather meant as with reference to what was
said before, ver. 2. of Gods bringing the Jews, to wit, in the loins of
Abraham, out of Chaldea; and of Gods choosing Abraham to be the Father of his
people, rather than of the great ones in the Country; and them, his Posterity,
to be his peculiar people, rather than any of the great and mighty Nations in
the World besides; and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; that is, I took
thee to be my Vovenant People, that thou should serve me according to the
Law I gave thee; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away; that is, I have
not rejected and passed by thee, as I did others; or rather, since I took thee
to be my people, I have never forsaken thee, or cast thee off, as many times
thou have given me just cause to do.

Ver. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God,
etc.] That is, Though thou come to be in never so sad and forlorn Condition,
yet be not dismayed; I will strengthen thee, yea I will help, yea I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness, that is, with my righteous right
hand, to wit, mine Almighty power, wherewith I will faithfully make good my
promises, delivering thee, and executing just Vengeance on all thine Enemies:
only we must remember that what is promised here to the Posterity of Abraham
and Israel, must all along also be extended to Believers under the Gospel, the
true seed of Israel.

Ver. 11. Behold, all they that were incensed against thee, shall be ashamed
and confounded, etc.] That is, Be they never so many, they shall be all
overthrown, even the mightiest of them; See the Note, Psalm. 40.14.

Ver. 12. Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them, etc.] That is, They
shall be utterly destroyed; so that there shall be no danger of their
recovering themselves to trouble thee again.

Ver. 13. For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, etc.] That is, I
will be, as it were, thy Confederate; See the Note, Prove. 11.21. Or rather, I
will be thine aid upon all Occasions; as when a man takes his Friend by the
hand, and undertakes to lead him on his way, to stand by him, to support,
defend, and help him; See the Note, Psalm. 73.23. Or, I will make thee
courageous and strong, saying unto thee, Fear not, etc. that is, chearing thee
up by my Word and Spirit.

Ver. 14. Fear not, thou worm Jacob, etc.] That is, Though thou art a poor
despicable people in thine own eye, and in the Judgment of others, cast down to
the very earth (see the Notes, Job 25.6. and Psalm. 22.6.) yet be not afraid.
And to the same purpose is that which follows, and ye men of Israel, that is,
Though ye be but poor mortal men, and but few in number, in comparison of your
enemies (for so some read it as it is in the Margin, ye few men of Israel) yet
fear them not.

Ver. 15. Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing Instrument, having
teeth, etc.] That is, As poor a worm as thou art, thou shall break thine
enemies in pieces, even as a new sharp threshing Instrument having teeth (of
which see the Notes before, Chap. 28.27, 28.) does break the straw and chaff in
threshing the Corn when being new; it is therefore the stronger and sharper,
the pegs or teeth not having been yet worn or blunted; thou shall thresh the
mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the hills as chaff; that is,
Thou shall subdue and destroy the greatest, the lo^tiest and mightiest of thine
enemies. But when, after this Prophecy of Isaiah's, did the Posterity of Jacob
do this? I answer, 1. Some say this was accomplished when the Babylonians were
destroyed; because though the Jews did not do it, yet God did it upon their
Prayers, and for their sakes. 2ly. Some understand it of those glorious
victories which God at some times gave the Jews over their enemies after their
return from the Babylonian Captivity in the days of the Maccabees. And 3ly.
others hold it is meant of the Victories of Christ and his people in the days
of the Gospel, both spiritual in the subduing of all nations, and bringing them
under the Dominion of Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, that sharp
threshing instrument, which pierces to the very soul, and breaks the hard
hearts of the most obstinate sinners; and external, when the Church has
wonderfully broken her Adversaries in pieces, even like the chaff of the summer
threshing-floors, Dan. 2.35. Yea, and some also take in the Saints judging the
wicked together with Christ at the last day, 1 Cor. 6.3. And indeed I conceive
these Victories of Christ and his people in Gospel Times, is chiefly here
intended; concerning which see also the Notes, Psalm. 149.6, 7, 8.

Ver. 16. Thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them, etc.] That is, Thou shall not only vanquish them
and break them in pieces, but also disperse and scatter them; and thou shall
rejoice in the Lord, etc. to wit, as acknowledging the Glory of all to belong
to him.

Ver. 17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their
tongue fails for thirst; I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will
not forsake them,] That is, Because I am their God, I will provide for them.
And this may be meant of Gods taking care of the poor afflicted Jews, either
whilst they were Captives in Babylon, where most of them were in a very poor
Condition, destitute of all things necessary, even as men ready to perish for
thirst, and no way able to supply themselves in their wants; or else in their
return homeward from Babylon, when indeed they went through many dry deserts;
to wit, That God would provide that they should not perish for want of a supply
of whatever should be necessary for them. But withal, I conceive it is
principally meant of Christ's refreshing poor souls troubled for sin, and
scorched with the fear of Gods fiery indignation; poor in Spirit, and thirsting
after Righteousness with the reviving Consolations of his Gospel and Spirit,
which indeed are no where else to be found.

Ver. 18. I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the
valleys, etc.] That is, In all places high and low, Hills and Valleys; yea, in
the most desert places, as it follows in the next words, I will make the
wilderness a pool of water, etc. But the meaning is, That rather than the Lord
would not supply his peoples wants (according to what is said in the foregoing
Note) yea, and that abundantly too; he would provide for them in a supernatural
and miraculous way; yea, and under this there is also a promise made of those
living waters wherewith in the days of the Gospel the souls of poor sinners all
the World over, yea even amongst the Gentiles, should obtain that refreshing
which was no where else to be had. But for this, see the Note, Chap. 35.6.

Ver. 19. I will plant in the wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah-tree, etc.] To
wit, a chief sort of Cedar, as it is commonly said of the wood whereof the
boards and the utensils of the Tabernacle were made; See the Note Exodus 25.5.
and the myrtle and the oyl-tree, etc. that is, the Olive Tree; or more
generally, as some will have it, any tree of the fruit whereof Oil is made. The
meaning is, That God by his Providence would so provide for his people, that
their passage homeward from Babylon to Judea, should be as commodious and
convenient, even when they traveled through the wildest deserts, as if the way
had been all along planted with store of pleasant shadowy trees under which
they might shelter themselves from the scorching of the Sun. But now as this is
to be referred to Gospel Times, it must needs signify the enlargement of the
Church, and the propagation of the Gospel, even amongst the Gentiles that were
before as a wild and barren Wilderness, amongst whom there should be many men
of eminent gifts and graces, trees of Righteousness, as they are called, Chap.
61.3. or there should be in the Church plenty of spiritual Ordinances, Gifts
and Graces, that should be a shelter to men against the scorching heat of
Temptations.

Ver. 20. That they may see, and know, and consider and understand together,
that the hand of the Lord has done this, etc.] As if he had said, The things
before mentioned I will do, that all men, not mine own people only, but the
Gentiles also, may upon due consideration be together full satisfied and
convinced, that I the Lord Jehovah, the God of Israel, have done these things
for my people, and so may be satisfied concerning mine Almighty power, in that
my works have been far above what any Idol-gods have been able to do, and
concerning my love to, and care over my peculiar people.

Ver. 21. Produce your cause, says the Lord, etc.] Here God by the Prophet
returns to his Plea with the Heathen idolatrous Nations, begun ver. 1. and
having hitherto pleaded his own cause against them, and shown what he had done
and would do for his people; here now he challenges the Idol-gods, say some,
that they should plead their cause, and prove themselves Gods; or the
Idolatrous Nations, that they should say what they could for their Idols:
Produce your cause, that is, Propound your cause, that it may be fairly tried;
bring forth your strong reasons; as if he should have said, You that are wont
to deride the simplicity of my people for their confidence in an invisible God,
let us now hear your strong unanswerable Arguments and Demonstrations (which is
spoken in a way of derision) to prove the Deity of your Idol-gods. All which is
still spoken, not only to forewarn Gods own people to beware of such Idolatry;
but also to show them, that they had no cause to fear that either the
Babylonians or their Idol-gods could hinder their promised return into their
own Country. And this he concludes with an express asserting that this was
spoken by the King of Israel: bring forth your strong reasons, says the King
of Jacob; partly for the greater comfort of his people, and partly by way of
deriding their Idol-gods, that could not as Kings defend the people that
worshipped them, as he the God of Israel did.

Ver. 22. Let them bring them forth, etc.] That is, Let the Nations bring forth
their Idol-gods, that we may hear what they can say for themselves; or rather,
let the Idol-gods bring forth their strong reasons, of which mention was made
in the foregoing verse, to prove themselves Gods. And accordingly in the next
words there is one particular way propounded, whereby they are required to
prove this, namely, by foretelling future things, as God had often done for the
good of his people: Let them bring forth, and show as what shall happen. As for
the next words, let them show the former things what they be, etc. There is
much difference amongst Expositors concerning the meaning and drift of them.
Some think that by former things, is meant (as the words plainly seem to
import) things past, and that the telling of this is required of their
Idol-gods; because, poor dead and dumb things, they were not able to do that.
The whole period seems to intend as much, as if it had been said, Let them, if
they will be gods, prove themselves Omniscient, as the true God is; such as
know all things, both things past and things to come: of the first, things
past, the words immediately following are meant, let them show the former
things; that is, Things that have formerly been done, that we may consider
them, and know the latter end of them; that is, That we may improve the
knowledge of these fore-past things by considering seriously of them, and of the
event that followed thereupon: and then he repeats that of foretelling future
things; or declare us things for to come, that being indeed incommunicably
proper to God. Again others hold, that by former things, are meant the things
which the Idol-gods had formerly foretold; let them show the former things what
they be, that is, Let them tell us what those things are, which they have
formerly foretold, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them;
that is, That we may duly weigh them, and that we may know whether they came
to pass exactly as they were foretold, and so may judge of the question in
hand, whether they be gods or no; or else let them at present tell us what
things are to come to pass hereafter. And lastly, others by the former things,
understand the first of future things, which I judge to be the true meaning of
the words; Let them bring them forth, and show us what shall happen: let them
show the former things what they be; that is, The former of future events;
those things that are immediately to come to pass, that we may consider them,
and know the latter end of them; that is, That considering seriously of them,
we may be able to judge what is like to be the end and event of such things in
after times, that so we may accordingly prepare to avoid the evil, or fit
ourselves for the good, which we judge those things are like to produce. It may
be taken to be all one in effect, as if it had been ironically said, Let the
Idol-gods foretell those things that are forthwith to come to pass, and we will
by discourse and reason judge hereby of what is like to follow afterward; or
else, let the Idol-gods foretell all things that are to be, the former and the
later, from the beginning to the end. But may some say, How can the foretelling
of future things be mentioned thus, as that whereby they were to prove
themselves gods, seeing it is evident, that the Idol-gods amongst the Heathens,
or rather the Devil by them, did often in their Oracles foretell future things?
I answer, It is undoubtedly God alone that can foretell all future things
infallibly of himself; and this the Idols nor the Devil in them never did, nor
could do. Their predictions were but either natural or politic Conjectures
(which by reason of their great Knowledge they were the better able to make)
and therefore their Oracles were usually so ambiguous, that whatever the event
was, they might seem to have foretold the truth: or else they foretold them by
some discovery they had made of those things from the Scriptures, or from some
command they had received from God concerning some thing they were to do. And
all this likewise God suffered to be done, that they might, in a way of
punishment for sin, be the more blinded and carried away by the delusions of
Satan.

Ver. 23. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye
are Gods, etc.] See the foregoing Note. This is again ironically spoken; yea,
do good, or do evil, that is, Reward them that faithfully serve you, and punish
your enemies, as before I have shown that I have done for my people, the
Posterity of Abraham; which is also propounded as the sole work of God, there
being none but he that can absolutely at his own pleasure both save and
destroy, James 4.12. that we may be dismayed, and behold it together, that is,
That we may be astonished at the great things you will do (a sharp taunt) and
may jointly observe and consider of it, and so be convinced that ye are Gods.

Ver. 24. Behold, etc.] Here God by the Prophet gives over reasoning with the
Idol-gods, and passes sentence against them; Behold, ye are of nothing, that
is, So far ye are from being able to foretell, or do any thing good or evil,
that indeed ye are nothing (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 8.4. We know that an
Idol is nothing in the World) that is, As to y^^r being that which men would
pretend you to be, gods; all your Deities depend merely upon the fancy and
imagination of those that worship you. And much to the same purpose is that
which follows, and your work of naught, that is, your Workmanship, the shape
or figure which men put upon you, is nothing worth, or has nothing divine in
it; or your work is of naught, that is, you can do nothing, neither good nor
evil. But now the whole verse may be read as it is in the Margin, Behold, ye
are worse than nothing, to wit, because so much wickedness was committed in
them; and your work worse than of a viper, that is, say some, as having your
original from the Devil; or you not only do no good, but indeed you do much
mischief to those that worship you.

Ver. 25. I have raised up one from the North, and he shall come, etc.] Having
in the foregoing verses derided the Vanity of the Heathens Idol-gods, by
challenging them to foretell future things, or to do good or evil (neither of
which it was sure they could do) here now by both those evidences God does
again assert himself to be the only true God, namely, because he had foretold,
and does here again foretell the great things he would do for his people in
future times: I have raised up one from the North, that is, I have determined
he shall be raised up, etc. and he shall come; from the rising of the Sun shall
he call upon my name: it is a very difficult place, and therefore Expositors
differ much in their Judgments concerning the person here intended. First, some
understand this one to be the Chaldean, or Nebuchadnezzar their King, who are
usually said in the Prophets to have come from the North (as we see, Jer. 1.13,
15. and so in many other places) and yet it might be withal said, that from the
rising of the Sun, that is, from the East, he should call upon Gods name,
because Chaldea, as some say, lay North-east from Judea; and because
Nebuchadnezzar did there acknowledge the God of Israel to be the most High God
that rules and governs the whole World, and spoke very honorably of him;
See Dan. 3.26, 28, 29. and 4.34, 37. and to his great Victories not only over
Judea, but likewise over many other Nations, that in the last words may well be
applied: and he shall come upon Princes, as upon mortar, etc. that is, He shall
subdue them and trample upon them as easily as Mortar is trodden under men's
feet. Secondly, others understand the first clause, I have raised up one from
the North, and he shall come (as is before said) of the Babylonians that from
the North were called against Judea; and the second clause, from the rising of
the Sun shall he call upon my name; of Cyrus, who was raised up of God against
Babylon, and whose people, say they, lay Eastward of Babylon. And thus they
conceive that two great changes are here foretold, which none at this time
could have imagined, to wit, 1. That God would raise up the Babylonians in the
North, that should become a mighty Empire, and should be a sore scourge to
Judea, and carry away Gods people Captives into a strange Country. And 2ly.
that the Medes and Persians should afterward from the East break in pieces the
Empire of Babylon, and dismiss the Jews from their Captivity. And indeed
against this Exposition there can be nothing well objected, but that in our
Translation both clauses seem apparently to speak of one and the same person: I
have raised up one from the North, and he shall come: from the rising of the
Sun shall he call upon my name. Thirdly, others therefore do rather understand
both clauses of Cyrus, who came against Babylon with an Army of Medes that lay
more northerly from Babylon; and Persians that lay more easterly to it, (and
therefore is here said to be raised up of God, from the North and from the
rising of the Sun) and trampled the Princes of that great Empire like mortar
under his feet; and may well be said to have called upon Gods name with
reference to that Proclamation of his, Ezra 1.2. when he gave liberty to the
Jews to return into their own Country, wherein he did plainly acknowledge the
Lord Jehovah, the God of Heaven, to be the Author of all his Victories. But
fourthly, others hold, and I think most probably, that God does here again
assert, as an evidence of that his Omniscience and Omnipotency, which could not
be found in the Idol-gods, that which he had said before, ver. 2. concerning
his calling of Abraham, and in him his Posterity, out of Chaldea (which lying
North-east of Palestina, it is therefore said, that God raised him from the
North, and from the rising of the Sun) and making them victorious over so many
Nations. And thus under this seed of Abraham, even Christ also may be
comprehended, who should subdue all his peoples spiritual enemies, Sin, Death,
and the Devil, the Prince of the World; and by the preaching of the Gospel
bring all Nations to the obedience of the Faith; or rather, the Church of
Christ, the true seed of Abraham, who should be gathered from all quarters of
the World (for though the North and East are only mentioned, as in like manner
the East and the West, Matthew. 8.11. under these all other parts are comprised,
as we find it more fully afterward expressed, Chap. 43.5, 6. I will bring thy
seed from the East, and gather thee from the West; I will say to the North,
Give up; and to the South, Keep not back) and should serve God and call upon
his name, and so by his aid and assistance should subdue all their enemies, and
tread them under their feet.

Ver. 26. Who has declared from the beginning, that we may know? etc.] That
is, Who of all your Idol-gods has from their first beginning, or long before
(as it is in the following branch) foretold things to come, as I have done in
those things that I have foretold concerning Abraham and his seed? (See the
foregoing Note) or particularly concerning their deliverance out of Babylon;
that we may know, to wit, which of them it is that has so done, or what the
things are which he did so foretell, and whether they came to pass accordingly;
and so whether he be indeed a God, as he is pretended to be? and before time,
that we may say, He is righteous? that is, who of your Idol-gods have before
time made known such future things, that we may acknowledge that he has rightly
foretold them, and that he is to be justified and allowed of in his claim to a
Godhead? And this indeed agrees with that expression of our Saviors, Wisdom
is justified of her Children, Mat. 11.14. yea there is none that shows, that
is, There is never an one of their Idols that ever did, or indeed can foretell
what shall be hereafter; yea, there is none that declares, that is, There is
neither Priest nor Prophet, that being inspired by these their Gods, either do,
or can declare from them what shall come to pass in future times; yea, there is
none that hears your words, as if he should have said, And indeed ye are all
dumb Gods; and therefore there is no hearing of any such thing from you, or
from any body to whom you have imparted it.

Ver. 27. The first shall say to Zion, etc.] God, as I conceive, does here
speak of himself in a third person. But it is all one in effect as if he had
said, I the Lord, who am absolutely the first, not having any dependence upon
any other, (See the Note above, ver. 4.) or that did first undertake to prove
my self the only true and living God, by foretelling things to come, and
afterward challenged the Heathens Idol-gods, if they could, to do the like
(See the Notes above, ver. 1, 2. and ver. 21, 22.) I the first, shall say to
Zion, Behold, behold them: that is, say some, I will beforehand make known to
my people, first the coming of the Babylonians upon them to punish them for
their sins, and after the coming of the Medes and Persians to destroy Babylon,
and to deliver them out of their Captivity; or, I will say to Zion, Behold my
Servants the Prophets, who shall foretell future things to you, or that shall
bring you tidings of the accomplishment of those things that I had foretold
you: or rather, I will say to Zion for her comfort, Behold, Behold them, that
is, Behold my people, whom you thought utterly lost, are now brought back from
their Captivity; and so poor Zion that lay desolate before like a very
wilderness, shall then see her Children come flocking in to her in great
abundance: and I will give to Jerusalem one that brings good tidings, that
is, Such as shall bring them good tidings, to wit, both concerning their return
from Babylon, and that likewise which was signified thereby, the glad tidings
of the Gospel; See the Note, Chap. 40.9. This is that which I conceive may most
probably be intended in this verse. But yet I know there are diverse learned
Expositors that do otherwise understand these words. As the first branch, the
first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: some understand of the first of
the Jews that should come home from Babylon, to wit, That they should with
great joy make known the approach of Gods people, Behold, here our Brethren
come in great multitudes. And again, some understand it of Christ, the chief
and head of the Church; yea, the only Prophet of his Church, from whom all the
Prophets that were at any time inspired, did receive their Prophecies; to wit,
That he should make known the accomplishment of those things that had been
foretold concerning the days of the Gospel. Yea, and some understand it
particularly of the Baptist, who was the first that proclaimed the coming of
the promised Messiah. And so for the last clause, and I will give to Jerusalem
one that brings good tidings, they understand it solely of those that should
be sent to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel.

Ver. 28. For I beheld, and there was no man, etc.] God having challenged the
Heathens Idol-gods to appear, as it were, in open Judgment, that upon a debate
betwixt him and them, it might be determined whether they were true Gods or no;
upon default of appearance, as I may say, he takes the Cause pro confesso, and
as a Judge, pronounces Sentence against them, that they were no gods, but mere
Counterfeits; For I beheld, and there was no man; that is, I looked about to
see whether any did appear, or whether any of these Idol-gods, or their
Worshippers, would undertake to prove them to be gods, and found there was
none; even amongst them, that is, amongst the Idolaters and their Idol-gods;
and there was no Counselor, that when I asked of them, could answer a word;
that is, There was none that would undertake to plead their Cause, and that
could answer me a word, when I had challenged them to say what they could; Or,
there was none that did so much as go about to consult together what answer
they should give; which indeed agrees with a like passage, Chap. 45.21. Tell
ye, and bring them near, yea, let them take counsel together.

Ver. 29. Behold, they are all vanity, etc.] To wit, all the Idol-gods, their
works are nothing, see the Note before, ver. 24. But now it may be also
extended to the Idolaters, to wit, that they are all vanity; that is, Vain and
foolish; and that their works are nothing, that is, The Idols they make, and
all the service they perform to them, are mere lost labor; which may be
thought the more probable, because of the following words, their molten Images
are wind and confusion, that is, There is no profit in them; yea rather, they
are hurtful.

CHAP. XLII.
VERSE 1. BEhold my servant, etc.] Some learned Expositors are of opinion, that
this Prophecy might be intended concerning Cyrus, as he was a type of Christ;
and that because there are several passages in this Chapter, that are the same
in effect with others in the 44, and 45. Chapters, where Cyrus is expressly
named; and whereas it may be objected, that some passages here cannot with any
probability be understood of Cyrus; to this they answer, That in other like
Prophecies, where both Christ, and likewise David and Solomon, as types of
Christ, are jointly intended, there are some passages that cannot properly be
applied to the types, but only to Christ, who was chiefly intended; See the
Notes, Psalm. 2.1. and 16.8. and 22.1. and 45.1. and 72.1. But though it may be
questioned whether it were meant of the Jews return out of Babylon, and so of
Cyrus, whom God made use of as his Servant in that great work; there can be no
question made, but that it was principally intended concerning Christ; because
St. Matthew tells us that what the Prophet says here in the first four verses,
was fulfilled in Christ, Matthew. 12.17, 18. etc. It is usual with the Prophets
when they foretell things hard to be believed, therewith to join some Prophecy
concerning Christ; the reason whereof see in the Note, Chap. 7.14. But here a
more particular reason may be given of that which is here prophesied of Christ.
God having in the foregoing Chapter proved himself to be the only true God, by
that whereby the Idol-gods, as he there tells them, could not prove their
Deities; namely, by foretelling future things, which he would do for the seed
of Abraham, and not only in their deliverance out of Babylon, but also in that
greater work of their Redemption by Christ, whereof that was a type; and how
Christ and those whom he should send forth, should bring them the glad tidings
of the accomplishment of the great mercies here foretold (See the Notes, Chap.
40.25, 27.) Here he proceeds on in these his Prophecies concernning Christ,
Behold my servant, to wit, Christ; who though he were the only begotten Son of
God, yet is here called Gods Servant, with respect to his humane nature,
wherein he took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7. and as man, was
bound to serve God in a thorough obedience to his Laws; but especially because
of that singular Office of the Mediator, which God had imposed upon him; whom I
uphold, to wit, That he may not sink under my wrath which he is to bear for
sinners; nor under any other difficulty or discouragement which he shall meet
with in the discharge of his Office, but may thoroughly fulfill it; mine elect,
that is, whom from eternity I elected to this service, and who is indeed, both
in regard of the transcendent dignity of his Office, and the dearness of his
person, and his exact discharge of his Office, my choice Servant, in whom my
soul delights; that is, whom I dearly love, and through whom, and for whose
sake only I am well pleased with others, Ephesians. 1.6. I have put my spirit upon
him, See the Note, Chap. 11.2. he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles,
that is, He shall cause his Gospel to be published, not to the Jews only, but
also to the Gentiles, and thereby set up his Kingdom amongst them, and rule and
govern them as his peculiar people; See the Notes, Chap. 2.3, 4.

Ver. 2. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
streets.] It is expressly noted of Christ, that sometimes in his preaching he
lifted up his voice and spoke very loud; as John 7.37. In the last day, that
great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let
him come unto me and drink. The meaning therefore of that which is here
prophesied concerning Christ, is rather, 1. That this great King of the Church
should make no great noise in the World, that he should come to his people in
an humble and low Condition, without any of that stir or noise that uses to be
where earthly Kings and Potentates come in Pomp and State to any place. Or 2ly.
That he should be most humble, and meek, and gentle, not seeking the applause
of men in a boasting way, not seeking to awe and keep under his people by loud
clamours and threatenings, as earthly Kings often use to do, nor endeavoring to
carry on his Cause in a passionate and clamorous way, as men are wont to do,
that not being able to convince men by strength of Argnment, do then assay to
overbear men by passionate and loud speaking; whence it is that the Apostle
joins wrath, and anger, and clamor, together, Ephesians. 4.31. And this Exposition
may seem indeed the more probable, because in Matthew. 12.19. this place is cited
thus, He shall not strive nor cry, etc. and it is purposely cited by the
Evangelist in that place, to show how fully that was accomplished in Christ,
which our Prophet had foretold concerning the Humility, Meekness, and Calmness
of Spirit that should be in the promised Messiah; for having related how the
Pharisees were enraged against him for a Miracle that he had wrought, and how
Christ thereupon did not so much as contend with them, but only withdrew
himself from thence to another place, that he might not, when they were in such
a rage, provoke them any further, ver. 14, 15. and charged the people not to
make known the Miracles that presently after he wrought in another place, ver.
16. he adds ver. 17, 18, 19. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
Esaias the Prophet, saying, Behold my Servant whom I have chosen, etc. He shall
not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.

Ver. 3. A bruised reed shall he not break, etc.] That is, Those that are as a
cracked and bruised Cane or Reed which men are wont to break in pieces and
throw away as good for nothing; and the smoking (or dimly burning) flax shall
he not quench; that is, Those that are as the wick of a Candle that burns
dimly, or as a snuff that has more smoke than light, and is even ready to go
out, which men are wont to cast away, or at least to put them quite out. They
that understand this of Cyrus as a type of Christ, do apply it thus, That he
did not despise and destroy the people of God, whom he found in Babylon in a
low Condition, under extreme Bondage and Slavery; but on the contrary was very
tender over them, and rescued them out of the hands of their Oppressors, and
sent them home with honor into their own Country. But it is questionless meant
of Christ. And though it may be extended to his patience, and gentleness, and
forbearance toward the worst, as appears by the Evangelists citing this place,
with respect to Christ's yielding-carrage toward the Pharisees (See the
foregoing Note) yet I conceive it is chiefly meant of Christ's Gentleness and
Clemency toward the weaker sort of Christians, and those that are sorely
troubled and wounded in Conscience for sin. 1. He will not drive those to
despair by dealing over-rigorously and roughly with them that are poor
brooken-hearted sinners, and that are through the Affrightments of Sin and
Satan, and the weakness of their Faith, ready to sink in despair, like a wick
of a Candle that is even ready to go out, but will rather cherish and encourage
them, and blow up that spark of Faith that is in them. And 2ly. he will not
cast off those that have but a weak measure of Grace, Piety and Goodness, that
are like smoking flax, in that the light of Grace is hardly discernable by
reason of those strong corruptions wherewith it is in a manner overwhelmed, but
will bear with them, and cherish them, till Grace grow stronger in them. As for
the last clause, he shall bring forth Judgment unto truth; it is much the same
with that, ver. 1. he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles; and the
meaning therefore seems to be, That by the preaching of the Gospel, he should
set up his Kingdom among his people faithfully, according to what he had
promised; or that he should judge and govern his people truly, according to the
rule of the Gospel. And thus this may be added by way of explaining the former
words, namely, by showing, that though Christ should deal very gently with the
weakest of true Believers and true Penitents, yet he would not cherish any in
their sins, nor show any favor to Hypocrites, and profane obstinate Despisers
of the grace that was tendered them.

Ver. 4. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, etc.] That is, He shall not
faint nor be disheartened from going on in his work by any hard labor or
grievous sufferings; yea, though all the World oppose him, he shall
courageously go on; till he have set Judgment in the earth, that is, Till by
the preaching of the Gospel he has settled a Church upon earth, and therein
has established his Kingdom, even that Government whereby he sets up his
Throne in the hearts of his people, and works a thorough Reformation in them,
bringing the whole man to the obedience of his will, and whereby he subdueth
all contrary powers which resist and oppose the exercise of his Kingly power,
for the good of his Church and people; and with respect unto this last I
conceive it is, that these words of the Prophet are rendered by the Evangelist,
till he send forth judgment unto victory, Matthew. 12.20. and the Isles shall
wait for his Law, that is, even the Gentiles in the remotest parts of the earth
shall with all greediness embrace his Gospel, the Law whereby he will judge and
govern his people. Now because they that do so, must needs trust in him for
life eternal, therefore is this clause expressed thus, Matthew. 12.21. and in his
name shall the Gentiles trust.

Ver. 5. Thus says God the Lord, he that created the Heavens, and stretched
them out, etc.] See the Note, Psalm. 104.2.

Ver. 6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, etc.] By God the Fathers
calling Christ (the like whereto is also said of Cyrus as a type of Christ,
Chap. 45.4. I have called thee by thy name) may be meant, either his
fore-appointing him to the Office of the Mediator (See the Note above, ver. 1.)
or his actual bringing him to the undertaking of this Office by his
Incarnation, and by his inauguration thereto whilst he was upon earth;
according to the like Expressions we find elsewhere of Gods calling for a
Famine, 2 King. 8.1. and of his calling the Generations from the beginning,
Chap. 41.4. And if we take it thus, we must know, that this is spoken of as
done already, I have called thee, only to imply the certainty of it. As for
those words (in righteousness) I have called thee in righteousness, the meaning
thereof is, either 1. That Christ was designed to this Office in a just and
righteous way, namely, by commission from God, whose will is the sure rule of
righteousness, as the Apostle says, Heb. 5.4, 5. that he took not this Honor
to himself; and that too not without his own free consent, See the Notes, Psalm.
40.7, 8. Or, 2ly. That God called him in faithfulness that he might perform the
Promises which he had made unto his people; and will hold thine hand, and will
keep thee, that is, I will direct, support and defend thee: See the Notes, ver.
1. and Chap. 41.13. Psalm. 16.8. and 73.23. and give thee for a Covenant of the
people, that is, to be the Mediator, the Messenger, Mal. 3.1. the Surety and
the Ratifier of that Covenant of Grace which God has made with his people;
i.e. with the people of Israel (who are primarily here intended, and therefore
distinguished here from the Gentiles) and then also with all Believers taken
into the same Church with them; for a light of the Gentiles, that is, to
enlighten their minds, and cheer up their hearts; See the Note, Chap. 9.2.

Ver. 7. To open the blind eyes, etc.] That is, To enlighten men's minds, that
were by nature spiritually blind; See the Note, Chap. 35.5. to bring out the
Prisoners from the prison; and them that sit in darkness, out of the
Prisonhouse; that is, To rescue poor sinners out of the Bondage of Satan, Sin
and Death; and so out of that blindness and woeful misery wherein they lay,
which may well be called the darkness of the Devils Dungeon; See the Note,
Chap. 9.2.

Ver. 8. I am the Lord, etc.] It is in the Hebrew, I am Jehovah, which imports
a God that has his being of himself, and from whom all things have their
being; that is my name, that is, that peculiar name whereby I have made my self
known to my people Israel, and whereby I will be distinguished from all Idols
and false gods that have their being from others; See the Notes, Exodus 3.14.
and 6.3. and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven
Images; that is, The Glory and Praise of being the only true God, or the Glory
of an exact accomplishing what I have foretold should be, which is that whereby
God had before undertaken to prove himself the only true God; See the Notes,
Chap. 41. 22, 23, 25, etc. It seems therefore that the Lord having finished the
foregoing Prophecy concerning Christ, does here again hereupon assert, That he,
the God of Israel, whose name was Jehovah, that had foretold these things, was
the only true God.

Ver. 9. Behold, the former things are come to pass, etc.] That is, The several
things which from time to time I have long beforehand foretold my people, have
been all accomplished in their several seasons; and new things do I declare, to
wit, concerning the destruction of Babylon, the return of Gods people into
their own land, and their greater deliverance by Christ; before they spring
forth, I tell you of them, that is, long before there is any appearance or any
probable sign of any such thing. It is as if he had said: As sure as the former
things have been accomplished, so surely shall these things also, which I now
foretell, come to pass. And thus the Lord does reassume his former Argument of
proving himself to be the only true God, by his foretelling future things: See
the Notes, Chap. 41.22, 27.

Ver. 10. Sing unto the Lord a new Song, etc.] That is, say some, an exquisite
song; or rather, a new Song, to set forth a new work of wonder which God would
work; for indeed this is said with reference to that, ver. 9. and new things do
I declare. But see the Note, Psalm. 33.3. and his praise from the end of the
earth; see the Note Chap. 24.16. ye that go down to the Sea, to wit, Mariners
and Merchants; see the Note Psalm. 107.23. and all that is therein, that is,
that dwell in the Islands that are in the Sea, as it is explained in the
following words, the Isles, and the Inhabitants thereof. The Prophet having
foretold the Destruction of Babylon, and the Deliverance of the Jews, and that
which is the chiefest of all, the great work of man's Redemption by Christ; he
now stirs up the Nations that should hear of these things, to sing forth Gods
praise; and that purposely to imply the certainty of these things, the better
to cheer up those whose deliverance was therein concerned. And indeed, as it
was spoken with respect to Christ, concerning whom the Prophet had immediately
before prophesied, it implies a clear prediction how all Nations should praise
God upon the preaching of the Gospel amongst the Gentiles.

Ver. 11. Let the wilderness and the Cities thereof lift up their voice, etc.]
See the Note, Chap. 35.1. And if by the Wilderness here, be meant that vast
desert that lay Eastward of Judea, as the Sea, mentioned in the foregoing
verse, lay on the West; then this is all one in effect, as if it had been said,
That from the rising unto the setting of the Sun, God should be praised: the
villages that Kedar does inhabit, See the Notes, Chap. 21.16. Psalm. 120.5. and
Cant. 1.5. let the Inhabitants of the rock sing, that is, The Inhabitants of
Arabia Petrea, or of Petra the chief City in those parts; See the Note, Chap.
16.1. or rather, those that inhabit mountainous Countries, as the following
words show, let them shout from the top of the mountains. However, as this is
spoken with respect to the days of the Gospel, it clearly implies, That the
most barbarous Nations should then praise God.

Ver. 13. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, etc.] That is, having long
withdrawn himself, as if he minded them not, he shall at last go forth in great
fury, to wit, against the Babylonians; See the Notes, Job 16.14. and Psalm.
78.65. He shall stir up jealousy like a man of war, that is, As men stir and
blow up a fire, so shall the Lord stir up the fire of his jealousy, to wit,
his fierce wrath and indignation against his idolatrous enemies, proceeding
from his ardent love to his people, and zeal for his own glory; he shall cry,
to wit, as soldiers are wont to shout when they assault their enemies; yea,
roar, to wit like a Lion. But now this may be spoken with reference to Christ,
that he should go forth as a mighty man (it is an Expression which our Savior
himself used, John 16.28. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world) namely, to vanquish all his peoples spiritual enemies, Satan, Sin, Death
and Hell, and to destroy all those that obstinately oppose him, and are the
implacable enemies of his Church and people.

Ver. 14. I have long time holden my peace, etc.] God himself is here brought
in complaining of his enemies abusing his long-suffering and patience, and
promising Deliverance to his people: I have long time holden my peace, I have
been still and refrained my self, to wit, (as the following similitude seems to
imply) as a traveling Woman bites in her pains, and forbears crying out as
long as ever she is able; and the meaning is, That he had long forborne taking
vengeance on his peoples enemies, and suffered his people to be still kept in
Bondage by them: now will I cry like a traveling Woman, that is, as such a
Woman, when she comes to the extremity of her pain, the Child being brought to
the very birth, is then forced to cry aloud, and many times breathes out her
cries the louder, because she had before suppressed them, and kept them in,
thereby striving to help forward her deliverance, till when she can expect no
ease nor rest; so will I with all earnestness hasten the Deliverance of my
people, as if I traveled and were in pain until they were delivered, and will
fall with the greater fury upon their enemies because of my former forbearance.
And indeed this similitude does notably set forth, 1. Gods tender affection to
his people, even like that of a Mother to the Child in her Womb. 2ly. His
earnest desire of their deliverance. And 3ly. that though the Lord had hitherto
only groaned in a more silent manner for their sad Condition, yet now the set
and appointed time being come, they should speedily be delivered, as the Child
is when the Mothers cries are loudest. As for those last words, I will destroy
and devour at once, either the meaning is, That the Lord would destroy their
Enemies Land, and devour the Inhabitants; or that he would speedily make an end
of them all together, as it is with hungry ravenous wild beasts, that as soon
as they have killed their prey, do immediately devour it.

Ver. 15. I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs,
etc.] That is, the herbage which the Mountains and all other parts of the Land
afforded both for man and beast; and I will make the rivers Islands, that is,
Dry them up so, that here and there the dry land shall appear like so many
Islands. The drift of the whole verse is to set forth the horrid Desolation
that God would make in the land of the Chaldeans when he undertook the
Deliverance of his people from thence. And to this end he speaks of his
Vengeance therein, as a devouring Fire that would burn up all before it; See
the Notes, Deuteronomy. 4.24. and 32.22. And the particular mention that is made of
laying waste their Mountains and Hills, is either because there usually they
had their idolatrous Temples and Altars; or rather, because there they had
their greatest Cities and places of strength. And the same may be said for the
mentioning of the drying up of their Rivers, which were the great safeguard of
their Country; all is to imply, that all the strength and Riches of their
Country should not hinder God from destroying them, and delivering his people
out of their hands: one particular whereof is noted by some Expositors to have
been accomplished when Cyrus made the great River Euphrates passable for his
Army when they took Babylon. And then as this Prophecy refers to Christ, the
same is meant that is said before, ver. 13. That he should destroy the Kingdom
of Satan, and all the great enemies of his people, and ruin all the Riches,
and Pomp, and State of those that should exalt themselves against him.

Ver. 16. And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not, etc.] As this
is meant of the Jews return out of Babylon, they are termed blind, because they
saw nothing of their approaching Deliverance; they saw no likelihood of
escaping out of that sad Condition wherein they lay, and so regarded not Gods
promises, but as men stupefied and hopeless, were in continual perplexity, not
knowing which way to turn themselves; and of their return into Judea, it might
well be said, That they were led by a way they knew not, and in paths they had
not known; because the generality of them were born in Babylon; and so had
never gone that way before. But as it is meant of Christ's redeemed ones,
whether Jews or Gentiles, it was accomplished in the enlightening of their blind
minds (See the Note, Chap. 35.5.) and bringing them into the way of Salvation,
whereof they knew nothing before. And the like may be said of the following
words; they may be meant of the Jews returning out of Babylon; I will make
darkness light before them, that is, I will bring them out of an afflicted and
sad Estate, into a joyful and prosperous Condition (See the Notes, Esth. 8.16.
and Psalm. 112.4.) or rather, I will make their way clear before them, wherein
otherwise they might have been often brought to a stand, not knowing which way
to turn themselves; and crooked things straight, that is, their way shall be
easy and plain, free from those troubles and difficulties which otherwise they
might have found in it. But under this type is surely also meant, That Christ
would enlighten and cheer up his Servants by his word and spirit, and turn them
from their crooked wicked ways into the straight ways of Holiness and
Righteousness. These things will I do, to wit, how impossible soever men may
deem them, and not forsake them; that is, though because of their long
Captivity in Babylon, I may seem to have quite cast them off, yet I will not
forsake them, nor leave them always in bondage; or having delivered them out of
Babylon, I will not then leave them till I have brought them safe home to their
own Country. And of Christ likewise this is most true, because he never
forsakes his, but whom he loves, he loves unto the end, John 13.1.

Ver. 17. They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed that trust
in graven Images, etc.] This is spoken of the idolatrous Babylonians, to wit,
that they should not be able to stand before Gods avenging hand, but should fly
with shame before their enemies; Or, that they should be turned back, as men
that are ashamed to show their faces, when they should see how they were
disappointed of their hopes, how unable their Idol-gods were to save them, or
to do that for them, which the God of Israel had done for his people. But see
the Notes, Chap. 1.29. Psalm. 35.4. and 40.14. and 97.7.

Ver. 18. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see.] Some few
Expositors would have it, that the Heathens are here willed to yield and be
convinced by the great things which they should see done by the Lord for his
poor people, of which mention was made in the foregoing verses. But by the
whole sequel of the Chapter it seems clear, that the Prophet does here address
himself to expostulate with the Jews; and either it is meant of the spiritual
Blindness and Stupidity of the Jews in that Age, that both then when the
Prophet now prophesied to them, and so afterward from time to time, were deaf
to all the Instructions and Warnings of Gods Prophets, and blind as to a
serious Consideration of all the great works that God had wrought amongst them,
and so ran on impenitently, till the Lord was forced to bring a barbarous
Nation upon them that should carry them Captives into Babylon: Or else it may
be meant principally of the Jews in the days of the Gospel, this being a matter
of greatest wonder, that when Christ the promised Messiah came into the World
(as was foretold in the beginning of this Chapter) the Gentiles should see and
embrace the Salvation tendered in him by the Ministry of the Gospel; and the
Jews, Gods peculiar people, to whom he had been so long promised, should
continue obstinately blind, and despise that great Salvation that was offered
to them.

Ver. 19. Who is blind, but my Servant? etc.] They that understand the
foregoing verse as spoken to the heathen Nations, do accordingly hold, that
this is added by way of Correction, as if it had been said, Why do I check the
Gentiles for their blindness? none are in truth blinder than mine own people*
But rather this is added to confirm what was said before concerning the Jews
blindness. Who is blind, but my servant? to wit, mine own people the Jews; or
deaf, as my messenger that I sent? that is, My Priests and Levites whom I have
set apart for the instructing of others; according to that of the Prophet, the
Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth:
for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. Who is blind as he that
is perfect? etc. that is, Those that ought to have been perfect in the Knowledge
of Gods will, or that think and boast themselves to be perfect above others.
And this may be meant of the Jews in general, who had indeed greater means of
Knowledge than other Nations, and gloried much therein, Romans 2.17, 20. Behold,
thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, and
know his will -- and art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the
blind, etc. or else of their Teachers, who indeed had means of being eminently
kowing men above others, and were herein highly conceited of themselves, as we
may see by the Pharisees taking so great offense at our Saviors charging them
with blindness, John 9.40. Are we (say they) blind also. The sum of that which
is here said, is this, That even these men were blinder and more stupid than
the very Heathens, because under so much light and means of Knowledge, they
became never a whit the wiser for their own good.

Ver. 20. Seeing many things, etc.] This is added, to show what blindness and
deafness it was, that in the foregoing Verses the Jews were charged with, to
wit, spiritual blindness and deafness, seeing many things, but thou observest
not; opening the ears, but he hears not: that is, They minded not the great
works that God wrought amongst them, nor what God spoke to them by his
Prophets, no more than if they had been indeed blind and deaf; See the Notes,
Chap. 6.9, 10.

Ver. 21. The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness sake, etc.] This is a
very hard passage, and therefore Expositors differ much concerning the meaning
of it. But because it is not otherwise expressed what it was that God was well
pleased with, I conceive it most probable, that this is spoken with reference
to the following clause, he will magnify the Law, and make it (or him)
honorable: as if it had been all jointly together expressed thus: That the
Lord for his righteousness sake, that is, purposely to approve himself
righteous in all his dealings with his people, was well pleased to magnify his
law amongst them, and make it honorable. But how was God well pleased for his
righteousness sake to magnify his Law, and make it honorable? I answer, 1.
Some understand it thus, That God was willing and well pleased to do his people
good, and to have upheld them in a prosperous and flourishing Condition, that
hereby he might manifnst his Righteousness in making good his promises, and
they might be brought highly to esteem and reverence his Law, finding how well
it fared with them because of their careful observance of it; and hence it is
that some read the last words thus, to magnify his Law; and make him, that is,
his people honorable. And thus, say they, the Prophet implies, That God being
so ready to do them good, if they came to be in any great misery, they must
ascribe it to their own obstinacy, and stupidity, and rebellion against God.
Again, 2ly. others understand it thus, that God was pleased to give them over
in his wrath to that Blindness, and Deafness, and Stupidity mentioned in the
foregoing Verses, that so he might manifest his Righteousness in bringing those
Judgments upon them, wherewith he had threatened them in his Law, and so might
bring them the more to reverence and magnify his Law for the time to come. And
this indeed seems to have the fairest dependence upon that which went before.
Nor do I see but that what is said in these two foregoing Expositions might be
jointly intended, namely, That God was well pleased for his Righteousness sake,
to magnify his Law, and make it honorable, both by making good the promises
thereof to his people, when they were carefully to obey it, and by punishing
them as he had threatened, when they did slight and disregard it.

Ver. 22. But this is a people robbed and spoiled, etc.] That is, This is a
people that will certainly be robbed and spoiled; for though some think that
this is spoken of the ten Tribes, that were already vanquished and carried into
Captivity by the Assyrians; yet it seems rather to be meant of the Jews, to
whom the Prophet now spoke, to wit, That they would be unquestionably delivered
up to be robbed and spoiled, namely, by the Babylonians first, and afterward by
the Romans. It is, as if he had said, God was willing to have done them good,
but they would not obey him, nor mind the warnings given them, and so did in a
manner choose rather to be robbed and spoiled; they are all of them snared in
holes, that is, either being taken by their enemies, they shall be clapped up
in caves and holes, till at more leisure they may otherwise dispose of them;
or, though they fly into Caves and Dens of the earth, hoping there to hide or
secure themselves, yet being there cooped up, they will be only the more easily
taken. This, indeed, may be read as it is in the Margin, insnaring all the
young men of them; the meaning whereof can be no other, but that this people by
their infidelity and obstinacy, brought their choice young men into Bondage and
Captivity. But the former Translation is more generally received; and they are
hid in prison-houses, they are for a prey, and none delivers; for a spoil,
and none says, Restore, that is, none shall undertake to defend or deliver
them; which though it was fulfilled in the Babylonians vanquishing of them,
when none appeared considerably for their defense (as it had been also before
with the ten Tribes, when they were captived by the Assyrians, and were never
brought back again; of which some understand this place) yet it was most fully
accomplished, when they were destroyed and dispersed by the Romans, under which
sad Condition they continue unto this day.

Ver. 23. Who among you will give ear to this? etc.] Thus the Prophet proves
those to be blind, and deaf, and stupid, whom before, ver. 19. he had called
Gods Servants, and Gods Messengers, namely, because they would not regard the
warning he had now given them, who will hearken and hear for the time to come?
of which the meaning is either, 1. That even in time to come, when the
Judgments now threatened should come upon them, they would not call to mind, or
lay to heart the warning now given them. Or, 2ly. That there was very few of
them that would so far regard what he had said, as by timely Repentance and
Reformation to prevent those Judgments which he had told them would otherwise
certainly in time to come be poured forth upon them.

Ver. 24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did not the
Lord, he against whom we have sinned? etc.] Some think that this is meant of
the Destruction which God had brought upon the ten Tribes, commonly called the
Kingdom of Israel, for their sins; and so Judah is here warned by their
Example. And others understand it of the spoil that had been formerly made in
the land of Judah at several times by several Nations. But rather I conceive
this is spoken to the Jews, the Posterity of Jacob, as supposed to be in
Captivity in Babylon: the aim of the Prophet being to convince them of this, as
one of the great truths which they would not see, to wit, that it was the Lord
their God that brought those barbarous enemies upon them, the Babylonians
first, and the Romans afterward, to punish them for their sins. And if that of
the Romans be intended, then their disobeying the Gospel may be included in
that reason which is given of their Destruction; for they would not walk in his
ways, neither were they obedient to his Law.

Ver. 25. Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle, etc.] Some think this is meant of Sennacheribs invading
Judea. But see the foregoing Note. Rather it is meant of the Babylonians
Invasion, or that grievous War which the Romans made against them in
aftertimes, which proved Destruction to the whole Nation: and it has set him
on fire round about, that is, It has brought utter Destruction upon him, out
of which there was no escaping; or their City and Country was on a light flame
round about: for to the burning of the City and Temple of Jerusalem, I conceive
these words have special respect; yet he knew it not, that is, He minded it
not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart; to wit, so as to repent
of his sins, and turn to the Lord.

CHAP. XLIII.
VERSE 1. BUt now, etc.] Having in the latter end of the foregoing Chapter
foretold a day of grievous misery that was coming upon the Jews, wherein the
generality of them should continue obstinate and impenitnent, notwithstanding
the wrath of God so terribly poured forth upon them; here the Lord by the
Prophet returns to his former Consolation, namely, That he would not utterly
cast off and destroy his people, but that there should be a remnant whom he
would preserve, and with whom he would deal graciously, as with his own
peculiar inheritance; But now thus says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob,
and he that formed thee, O Israel; that is, who as I gave thee thy first being,
together with the rest of mankind, so I also formed thee, and molded thee into
a National Church and State, and made thee a holy people for my self; for that
this is indeed chiefly intended, is evident by many places; See the Notes,
Chap. 29.23. Deuteronomy. 32.6. and Psalm. 95.6. fear not, See the Note, Chap. 41.10.
for I have redeemed thee; that is, I have many a time delivered thee when thou
were in a low and sad Condition, which may encourage thee to wait upon me for
future deliverances: Or, I have determnined to deliver thee, to wit, both from
the Babylonian Captivity, and from your spiritual Captivity; I have called thee
by thy name, that is, Thou art in my special favor, see the Notes, Exodus
33.17. or, I have chosen thee and taken thee to be my peculiar people, and by
that name have distinguished thee from all other people. And indeed, that this
is principally here intended, appears by the following words; thou art mine:
for which see the Notes, Chap. 41.8, 9.

Ver. 2. When thou passest thorough the waters, I will be with thee, etc.] To
wit, to preserve thee from drowning: when thou walk thorough the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, etc. It is an Expression much like that, Psalm. 66.12. Thou
have caused men to ride over our heads; we went thorough fire and thorough
water: and it may be it was used in allusion to the Israelites being carried
safely thorough the Red Sea, and thorough Jordan. But however the meaning is,
That God would deliver them out of their most desperate Dangers and Miseries,
which must be understood as all other temporal promises, conditionally, to wit,
unless God sees it better for them by their constant sufferings to confirm his
truth, and so to translate them to heavenly Glory.

Ver. 3. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.] Most
Expositors understand this thus; That when God raised up Tirhakah King of
Ethiopia (of which see Chap. 37.9. and 2 King. 19.9.) to go out with an Army
against Sennacherib (wherein it may be probably thought both the Egyptians and
Sabeans went along with him as his Confederates) at that time when Sennacherib
was going up against Jerusalem, not doubting speedily to surprise and sack that
City; and Sennacherib upon the Report of the approach of the Ethiopian Army,
was forced for the time to give over his design against Jerusalem, and to march
away against Tirhakah, whom with his whole Army he did at that time overrun
and utterly destroy (for which see the Notes, Chap. 18.1. and 20.1. -- 4.) it
might be well said upon this account, That God gave the Egyptians, Ethiopians
and Sabeans, as a ransom for the Jews; because God did hereby give up, as it
were, these Nations to be destroyed by the Assyrian, purposely that Jerusalem
might thereby be delivered from that ruin which at that time hung over their
heads. But many things asserted in this Exposition are very questionable. And
therefore I rather think, that the intention of these words was only to show,
That God had usually destroyed other Nations, that he might deliver them; and
that he instanceth in the Egyptians, with respect to that famous Destruction of
the Egyptians in the days of Moses, whereby the Israelites were delivered from
that hard bondage under which they had held them; and in the Ethiopians, with
respect to that mighty slaughter that was made amongst them (with whom also it
is likely the Sabeans were joined) when they invaded Judea in the days of Asa,
2 Chronicles. 14.9. etc. In both which that was accomplished, Prove. 11.8. The
Righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead. And
Chap. 21.18. The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous; for which see the
Notes in both places.

Ver. 4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, etc.] That is, Since I took thee
to be my peculiar people, thou have been honorable, to wit, as being advanced
to such an honorable Condition: Or, through my favor thou have become great,
and of great renown above other Nations: and I have loved thee; that is, I have
constantly continued to love thee, and to manifest it by many favors afforded
thee; therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life; that is, As
I have formerly done, so I will do still; rather than thou shall be destroyed,
I will destroy whole Nations to preserve thee; which was accomplished in the
Destruction of the Babylonians; See the foregoing Note.

Ver. 5. Fear not, for I am with thee, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 41.10, 14. I
will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from the West, etc. which is
meant, 1. of Gods bringing home the Jews from Babylon and other parts of the
World, whither they were scattered, to their own Country; See the Note, Chap.
11.12. for indeed there is no question to be made, but that upon the approach
of the Babylonians, many fled into Egypt, and into other Countries; and that of
those that were carried Captives into Babylon, many were sold to other Nations.
But, 2ly. under this type it is principally meant of Gods calling the Gentiles
from all parts of the World, according to that, Matthew. 8.11. Many shall come
from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
in the Kingdom of God.

Ver. 6. I will say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not back,
etc.] This is spoken with reference to that which was said before, Chap. 42.22.
they are for a prey, and none delivers: for a spoil, and none says, Restore:
as if he had said, Though none shall appear for their deliverance, yet at my
command they shall be delivered, even from the remotest parts of the World:
bring my Sons from far, etc.

Ver. 7. Even every one that is called by my name, etc.] That is, That profess
themselves my people (and so even the converted Gentiles may be comprehended
too) whom therefore I must not disregard, unless I will be regardless of mine
own name: for I have created him for my Glory, to wit, that they may live to my
Glory; Or, that I may be glorified in all my glorious Attributes by all the
great things that I do for them: I have formed him, yea I have made him, See
the Note above, ver. 1.

Ver. 8. Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have
ears.] Some understand this as a continuation of the foregoing promise; as if
it had been said, Then shall those poor souls be brought forth out of Bondage,
that were before spiritually blind, but then shall be enlightened to see what
they could not see before; and that were before deaf, but then shall hear;
which may be understood both of the Jews brought back out of Babylon, and
likewise of the converted Gentiles: See the Notes, Chap. 29.18. and 35.5. and
42.16, 19, 20. But others hold, that here the Lord begins again to repeat his
former Expostulation with all the idolatrous Nations, Chap. 42.1. challenging,
that they might be brought forth into Judgment; who, though they had eyes and
ears, yet were as blind and deaf as if they had none, to wit, that they might
prove their Idol-gods to be really Gods, as they professed them to be. And
this, indeed, is more agreeable to the context, and to the challenge we have in
the following verse.

Ver. 9. Let all the Nations be gathered together, and let the people be
assembled, etc.] In these words the Heathen Nations are summoned to make good
the Deity of their Idol-gods, as before, Chap. 41.1. for which see the Note
there: and that as there, ver. 21, 22. by foretelling future things: Who among
them can declare this? that is, Who among their Idol-gods, or who among these
idolatrous Nations, by revelation from their Idol-gods, can declare this which
I have foretold concerning the deliverance of my people out of Babylon, and the
great work of man's Redemption by Christ, or any such like? and therefore it
follows, and show us former things; for which see the Note, Chap. 41.22. let
them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified, to wit, those
that can witness that they have truly foretold things to come; see the Note,
Chap. 41.26. or let them hear and say, It is truth, that is, Let them hearken
to what I have said, and be convinced thereby, and yield that they are indeed
no gods; Or, let them hear what I say, or what my witness shall testify, and
so confess it to be true, that I am God alone.

Ver. 10. Ye are my witnesses, etc.] Having in the foregoing verse challenged
the Idolatrous Nations to produce their witnesses, that might testify what
those future things were which their Idol-gods had foretold, thereby to prove
that they were indeed Gods; here he undertakes on his own behalf to do the
like: ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, that is, ye my people that have
heard so many future things foretold by me, and have afterward seen them
accomplished. Indeed the following words, and my servant whom I have chosen,
are diversely understood by Expositors. For, 1. some joining it to the foregoing
words, take it thus; That the Jews were his Witnesses, and his Servant whom he
had chosen, See the Notes, Chap. 41.8. and 42.19. 2ly. Others understand it of
the Prophets in general, Gods peculiar Servant. 3ly. Others hold, that it is
Isaiah in particular, to whose Testimony God here speaks, because he had by
Revelation from God, foretold so many things that came exactly to pass. But
because it may seem probable that this is spoken with reference to that which
was said before, Chap. 42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in
whom my soul delights; therefore I rather think, that it is the same choice
Servant of whom he there spoke, that is here intended, to wit, either Cyrus (as
some there think) who indeed gave a glorious Testimony to God in this regard;
See the Note, Ezra 1.2. Or else rather Christ, in whom the chief things now
foretold by Isaiah was fulfilled, and who is often mentioned in the Scripture
as Gods peculiar choicest Witness; See Chap. 55.4. John 18.37. Revel. 1.4. that
ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: as if he had said, I
appeal to your seeing the things accomplished which I have foretold, that
hereby ye may be fully assured that I am the only true God; and I appeal to the
promised Messiah, because by him ye shall be further confirmed in the truth of
that which I now call you to attest: before me there was no God formed, neither
shall there be after me: that is There was never any of your Idol-gods before
me, gods of men's forming; nor shall there be any God after me, because I am the
only everlasting and eternal God.

Ver. 12. I have declared, and have saved, etc.] That is, I have foretold that
I would deliver you from your enemies, and accordingly did deliver you (and
this indeed was another evidence whereby the Idol-gods were challenged to prove
themselves true Gods; See the Note, Chap. 41.23.) and I have showed, that is, I
have by my Prophets made these things known to my people, when there was no
strange God among you, to wit, that could foretell those things at that time;
See the Note, Deuteronomy. 32.12.

Ver. 14. Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, etc.] See
the Note, Chap. 1.4. for your sake I have sent to Babylon, to wit, Cyrus, with
his Medes and Persians; and have brought down all their Nobles, to wit, from
that height of Glory wherein they formerly lived. It is in the Hebrew, All
their bars, and so some understand it of Cyrus his beating down Babylons strong
Walls and Fortifications, because these were as bars to keep out an Enemy from
breaking into their City; See the Note, Chap. 45.1. yet it may be as well meant
of their Nobles, or men of War, who are usually accounted the strength and
great defense of a City: and the Chaldeans whose cry is in the ships; to wit,
either, 1. because they used to make a great shouting in their ships by way of
glorying and vaunting herein, wherein they abounded by means of their two great
Rivers, Euphrates and Tygris: Or, 2ly. because of the confused and sad out cry
that was in their ships, when they fled thither to preserve themselves, the
City being taken; especially when they perceived they could not sail in their
ships, the waters of Euphrates being so far drained away by Cyrus: Or, when the
poor captive Chaldeans were shipped by the Conqueror to be sold for slaves in
other Countries. And all this we must know the Prophet speaks of, as of a thing
done already, the better to set forth the certainty of it. To which some add,
That the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, is mentioned as a pledge of
their greater Redemption by Christ, that had been now promised them.

Ver. 15. I am the Lord, your holy one, the Creator of Israel, your King.] See
the Note above, ver. 1.

Ver. 16. Thus says the Lord, which makes a way in the Sea, and a path in the
mighty waters.] This last clause some understand of the Lords dividing Jordan
before the Israelites, even at that time when there was a mighty inundation of
the waters thereof; see the Note, Josh. 3.15. But I rather think, that both
branches are meant of Gods carrying the Israelites dry-shod thorough the mighty
waters (as they are called, Exodus 15.10.) of the Red Sea; and that because in
the following verse he seems clearly to speak of the Egyptians being drowned
therein. And the reason why God puts them in mind of this, is hereby to let
them see, that they had no cause to question their promised deliverance out of
Babylon; what he had formerly done for their Fathers, he could do again for
them.

Ver. 17. Which brings forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power,
etc.] That is, Who at his pleasure does by his all-ruling providence bring
forth the great and mighty Armies of Princes, merely that he might destroy
them; even as by hardening the heart of Pharaoh, his Princes and People (for by
the dependence of this upon the foregoing verse it is clear, that hereto the
Prophet alludes) he brought them forth to pursue the Israelites into the
Wilderness, and afterward to follow them into the Red Sea: they shall lie down
together, they shall not rise; that is, They shall be irrecoverably destroyed,
to wit, as Pharaoh and his Army were. And because this was done by drowning
them in the Red Sea, therefore are the following words added, they are extinct,
they are quenched as tow, that is, They are as easily and suddenly destroyed as
the snuff of a Candle (See the Note, Chap. 42.3.) is extinguished when it is
thrown into the water; which does notably set forth the destroying of Pharaoh
and his Army in the Red Sea, when they came out with such burning rage against
the Israelites. And some think that this Comparison of quenching Tow or Flax,
is the rather used in allusion to Egypt, that did abound in those kind of
Commodities; see the Note, Chap. 19.9.

Ver. 18. Remember ye not the former things, etc.] It is as if he had said,
That the things he did now foretell, were so wonderful and strange, that they
would be sufficient of themselves so to convince men of Gods infinite power,
that there would be no need to call to mind Gods former deliverance of his
people out of Egypt; Or, as most Expositors understand it, That that former
deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, though very wonderful, was not
worthy to be thought of in comparison of that which he had now promised to do
for them. And hereby I conceive is jointly meant the deliverance of the Jews
out of Babylon; and likewise, yea principally, that spiritual deliverance of
Gods people by Christ, which was signified thereby; see the Note, Chap. 42.1.
For, first, their deliverance out of Babylon, though there were not so many
strange miracles wrought for the effecting of that, as were for the bringing of
the Israelites out of Egypt; yet in many regards that of bringing them back out
of Babylon into their own Country, might well be looked upon as the greater and
more wonderful mercy, as namely (besides other reasons that might be given) 1.
Because they were in a more glorious Estate when they were carried away
Captives into Babylon, than when they were brought into Bondage by the
Egyptians; and so as their misery was greater when they were made Bondslaves
in Babylon, so the mercy was greater when they were freed from this Bondage.
And, 2ly. Because it was in some respect a wonder above all the wonders wrought
in Egypt, and most unexpected and strange in the eyes of Gods people, that a
Heathen King should of his own accord take so much care to send back Gods poor
captive people into their own Country, and give them back all the rich Vessels
of the Temple, and take such strict order that they should be furnished with
all necessary Provisions, both for their Journey homeward, and for the
rebuilding of their City and Temple when they came thither. And therefore we
see that elsewhere the Deliverance out of Babylon is mentioned as a mercy to be
prized above the other, Jer. 16.14, 15. The days come, says the Lord, that it
shall no more be said, The Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt; But the Lord lives that brought up the Children of
Israel from the Land of the North, etc. But secondly, the Redemption of Gods
people was so far transcendently above the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt,
that it might well be said, that the deliverance out of Egypt was not worthy to
be minded in comparison of this. And this therefore is questionless chiefly
here intended. So that as by the former things, not to be comparatively
remembered, is meant their Deliverance out of Egypt, together with all that
followed, unto their being put into possession of the land of Canaan; so by the
greater deliverance that had been now promised, which should make the former
things to be in a manner forgotten, is meant their deliverance out of Babylon,
even unto that which was signified thereby, that great work of man's Redemption
by Christ.

Ver. 19. Behold, I will do a new thing, etc.] That is, a new and notable work,
far above what I have formerly done; whereby is jointly meant the deliverance
of the Jews out of Babylon, together with that great work, of our Redemption by
Christ, whereof that was a type; See the foregoing Note. And though neither of
these were done till very many years after, yet he speaks of them (as the
manner of the Prophets is, to imply the certainty of things) as of that which
should be done within a short time: now it shall spring forth; and that because
Gods Providence would be presently working toward the accomplishment of these
things, and especially because several ages are but as a moment with God; See
the Note Psalm. 90.4. shall ye not know it? that is, it shall be certainly done,
and that so that you shall take notice of it as an Accomplishment of what is
now promised: I will even make a way in the Wilderness, see the Notes, Chap.
40.3, 4. and rivers in the desert, see the Notes, Chap. 35.7, 8. and 41.18. It
is meant of the fair, and safe, and comfortable passage which God would give
them in their return through the deserts from Babylon to Judea; and likewise
spiritually of making a way in the Wilderness of the Gentiles, for bringing in
of people to Christ, and life eternal.

Ver. 20. The beasts of the field shall honor me, the Dragons and the Owls,
etc.] As this is spoken with respect to the Jews return out of Babylon, either
it may be an hyperbolical Expression to set forth the wonder of Gods providing
so carefully and bountifully for his people in their return through those dry
and barren deserts, through which they went; as if it had been said, That the
very bruit beasts should stand amazed at it, and adore the mighty power of God
therein, and his fatherly love to his people therein; or else the meaning may
be, either that the very unreasonable Creatures did honor God by forbearing to
do his people any hurt, that so their passages through those deserts might be
the freer and safer; or else, that they fared the better, because of the bounty
of God to his people, even as when God brought water out of the rock for the
Israelites, the wild beasts of the wilderness were refreshed thereby; for as
when such Creatures do languish for want of food, they may be said to cry unto
God for it, Psalm. 104.21. so when they delight themselves in the provision God
affords them, and are cheared therewith, they may be said in their kind to
praise God for it, Psalm. 148.7. And thus the Beasts that were refreshed with
Gods bounty to his people, are said to honor God for it; Because, says the
Lord, I give waters in the Wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink
to my people, my chosen. But now, if we take this as spoken with respect to
that greater work of our Redemption by Christ, then it must be understood of
the Gentiles, a brutish people, being called into the Church, and honoring
God for those waters of Life, wherewith God had refreshed their souls; See the
Notes, Chap. 11.6, 7.

Ver. 21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my
praise.] Some think this is spoken of the Gentiles, whose Conversion they
conceived is foretold in the foregoing verse; and that by way of opposing them
to, and preferring them before the Jews, of whose wickedness God complains in
the following verse. But rather it is spoken of Gods peculiar people in
general, both Jews and Gentiles; see the Note, Psalm. 102.18. And they imply a
reason why God would certainly deliver them, namely, because having formed them
for himself and for his own Glory, he was engaged to deliver them, even out of
respect to his own honor, that he might have a people to praise his Name.

Ver. 22. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, etc.] That is, say some,
You my people, the seed of Israel, have not called upon me in your troubles, as
having indeed no confidence in my protection and help. But rather by calling
upon God here, as usually elsewhere, the whole worship of God is meant; and
accordingly I take these words, But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, to
be all one in effect, as if he had said, You think that you have called upon
me, and so have yielded me that honor for which I made you my people (as it is
said in the foregoing verse) but it is not so; you have not called upon me, but
upon an Idol-god of your own feigning; a god which will be content merely with
external Worship, which I abhor, Chap. 29.13. nor do ever own those Prayers as
service done to me, which are not offered with the inward Devotion of a
believing, holy, and obedient heart; and so thou have not called upon me, but
thou have been weary of me, O Israel; that is, it has been a burden to thee to
serve me. And the drift of the Lords alleging this, is, say some, to show what
just cause he had to cast off them, and take in the Gentiles to be his people.
But rather it is to show, that their deliverance out of Babylon now promised
them, and likewise the great work of our deliverance by Christ, would be merely
of Gods free Grace, and not because they had desired any such favor from him.

Ver. 23. Thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt-offerings,
neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices, etc.] That is, say some,
Thou have not offered them to me, but to Idols. And so they understand also the
following clause, I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied
thee with incense; that is, I have not exacted such abundance of these kind of
oblations of thee, as therewith to over-burden thee, and to make thee weary of
my service: no, it is thine Idols for whom thou have been at so much cost, and
upon whom thou have tired out thy self with offering them such a multitude of
Sacrifices. But rather the meaning is, that because they did not offer them in
a right manner, God did not own them as sacrifices offered to him; See the
Notes, Chap. 1.11. etc. they were not the service which he had given them in
charge.

Ver. 24. Thou have bought me no sweet cane with money, etc.] To wit, for the
precious Ointment, Exodus 30.23. or for the Incense, Exodus 30.7. wherewith it is
therefore joined, Jer. 20.6. It is thought to be the same that is elsewhere
called Calamus, Ezekiel. 27.19. and it is spoken of as a costly thing, because it
grew not in their own land, but was brought from far Countries: neither have
thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices, that is, Thou have not satisfied
nor delighted me with thy sacrifices, I never regarded them; See the foregoing
Note: but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with
thine iniquities: as if he should have said, I have not caused thee to serve
with imposing upon thee too great a burden of sacrifices, but thou have caused
me to serve with thy wickedness; to wit, because thy sins have been as great a
grief, and trouble, and burden to me, as it is to men to serve under hard
Taskmasters; and I have been as much wearied with bearing with thee, as such a
man can be with enduring such a hard service.

Ver. 25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own
sake, etc.] And not in regard of any desert of yours; and see the Notes, Psalm.
51.1.

Ver. 26. Put me in remembrance, etc.] That is, If you have any thing to
allege or reply against this which I have charged you, let me know it; Or, if
there be any thing wherewith you have deserved your deliverance, and the
Remission of sins promised, put me in mind of it; for it may be I have
forgotten it, and therefore you shall do well to bring it into my remembrance;
which is spoken by way of a sharp ironical derision: let us plead together, to
wit, that the truth betwixt us may be known; See the Note, Chap. 1.18. declare
thou, that thou may be justified, that is, Say what you can for your selves,
allege what it is whereby you have deserved that I should work so great a
deliverance, and so great salvation for you, that hereby you may be justified.

Ver. 27. Thy first Father has sinned, etc.] Some understand this of Adam, the
first Father of all Mankind; and think that this is mentioned, because sin
being traduced from him to all his Posterity, they that were descended from
such a corrupt stock, must needs be sinners themselves. Again, because this
seems to be spoken with more special respect to the Jews, others understand it
of Abraham, and that with respect to his being an Idolater before his calling,
see the Notes, Josh. 24.2. And indeed Abraham is usually spoken of in the
Scripture as the first Father of that Nation, because he was first circumcised,
which was the sign whereby they were always afterward distinguished from other
Nations, as Chap. 51.2. Look unto Abraham your Father. And they used to glory
much in this, see Matthew. 3.9. and John 8.39. But indeed the most of our best
Expositors hold, That hereby is meant their Ancestors in general: Thy first
Father, which is all one as if he had said, Thy fore-father has sinned; and
the word Father being usually taken collectively (as it is, Ezekiel. 16.3. Thy
Father was an Amorite) it is all one as if it had been said, Thy forefathers
have sinned. And so for the following words, and thy teachers have transgressed
against me; thereby I conceive is plainly meant their Priests and Prophets; and
that this is added as an aggravation of the wickedness both of them and their
Fathers, that even they that taught others, and so should have been themselves
most exemplary for good, were even as bad as others. And so the drift of the
whole verse, I conceive, is to show, that seeing their forefathers had been
great Transgressors as well as themselves, they could not ascribe the great
deliverances which God had now promised, to any goodness that God had found
either in them, or in their Fathers. Indeed this people did use to glory much
in their Fathers; but God gives them to understand, that had there been nothing
else to move him to show them mercy, they had been destroyed long ago.

Ver. 28. Therefore I have profaned the Princes of the Sanctuary, etc.] Reading
this as it is in our Bibles, I conceive it is clearly meant of those, at least
the chief of those, that in the foregoing verse were called their Teachers, the
chief of their Priests and Levites, such as had the chief command in Gods
Sanctuary, and that are called, Jer. 20.1. chief Governors in the house of the
Lord; but as it is in the Margin, the holy Princes; their Kings and Princes may
be also intended, who are so called, because they ruled over Gods holy people.
And these may be said to have been profaned, when they were slain and sold for
slaves, and every way used as basely and contemptuously as any of the ordinary
sort of people; See the Notes, Chap. 24.2. and Psalm. 89.39. and have given
Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches; that is, I have given them up,
even those that were my peculiar people, to be destroyed as an accursed thing,
and to be exposed to all kind of Reproaches; they shall be looked upon amongst
the Nations as an execrable and accursed people. And this may be understood as
spoken, either with respect to that which God had already done to them in all
the Judgments and Destructions which at several times he had formerly brought
upon them, especially the Ruin and Desolation he had brought upon the ten
Tribes by the Assyrians; or rather with respect to what God had determined to
bring upon them by the Babylonians; for it is usual with the Prophets to
express the certainty of what 0 they foretell, by speaking of such things as if
they were done already.

CHAP. XLIV.
VERSE 1. YEt now hear, O Jacob, my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen.]
Having spoken of his severe dealing with his people in the close of the
foregoing Chapter, here now God addresseth himself again to speak comfortably
to them, just as a man would speak to his Children or Friends, when he sees
them weeping and mourning, and as before he had done; See the Notes, Chap.
43.1. and 41.8, 9.

Ver. 2. Thus says the Lord that made thee and formed thee, etc.] See the
Notes, Chap. 43.1, 21. from the womb, that is, say some, from your conception
or birth, before you could do any thing whereby you might deserve any favor at
my hands; and that by reason of the Covenant, wherein from the first, as by
right of inheritance, you shall have an Interest; Or, as others, from your
first beginning; which was, say some, from the first calling of Abraham, or
from (...) birth of Jacob, the stock, of whom they were called Israel (and some
(...) therefore, that this is spoken with reference to that presaging Sign
(...) was seen at his Birth concerning the excellency of his Posterity, for
(...) see the Note, Genesis 25.26. or rather, from the time when they first be^^
to be an entire people by themselves severed from other Nations. And some (...)
the Metaphor is taken not so much from the forming of the Body in the ^omb, as
from the Midwives care in forming and setting right every limb ^^ the Child
when she has taken it from the Womb; which will help thee* to wit, because
thou art his; fear not, O Jacob, my servant, see the Notes, Chap. 41.8, 10, 13,
14. and thou Jesu run whom I have chosen, see the Note, Deuteronomy. 32.15.

Ver. 3. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground, etc.] Some understand this of the many Prophets that God would
raise up amongst them in Babylon, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Haggai etc. and others, of
the abundant gifts of the Spirit which God would pour forth upon the Preachers
of the Gospel in the days of the Messiah; with respect whereto they conceive
the next clause is added by way of expounding this, I will pour my Spirit upon
thy seed, etc. But rather the meaning is, That the Church and people of God
that were as a dry, thirsty, and barren wilderness, where nothing almost grows
and thrives, but all things seem in a manner dead, shall by the blessing of God
become as a well-watered ground where all things thrive and flourish; that is,
They shall multiply and prosper exceedingly, which is more plainly expressed in
the following words; I will pour forth my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing
upon thine offspring; where what is meant by Gods Spirit, see in the Note,
Psalm. 104.30. And this I conceive is meant of the abundance of Mercy and Grace
which God afforded the Jews at their return out of Babylon; and afterward to
his Church both Jews and Gentiles in the days of the Gospel; See the Notes,
Chap. 35.1, 7. and 41.17, 18.

Ver. 4. And they shall spring up as among the grass, etc.] That is, They shall
multiply, grow up, and flourish abundantly, even as plants and trees do, that
grow in green and fruitful Medows.

Ver. 5. One shall say, I am the Lords: and another shall call himself by the
name of Jacob, etc.] That is, say some, My people shall with one consent after
their return out of Babylon, renounce all Idol-gods, and shall give up
themselves wholly and only to the worship of the true God. But rather this is
spoken of the increase of Gods people, as with reference to that which went
before, ver. 4. that though they should be but a few, to speak of, at their
return from Babylon, yet by degrees they should become very Numerous; which is
spoken principally with respect to the calling of the Gentiles: One shall say,
I am the Lords, etc. that is, Several persons of several sorts shall come in
from all Places and Nations, and give up their names to Christ, and yield up
themselves to be wholly at his command, and shall make open profession of
Christ and of his Gospel, and so shall join themselves to Gods Israel; See the
Note, Psalm. 87.4.

Ver. 6. Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of
^^sts, etc.] This may be referred to that which went before; yet rather it s^
^s to be spoken with reference to that which follows after. However, the ^ift
of it is to assure them of the truth of that which he had promised them,
^amely, because he that had promised was clearly the only true God: I am the
^^st, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God; See the Note, Chap.
41.4*

Ver. 7. A^^ who as I, etc.] Having in the close of the foregoing verse said,
That there was ^o God besides him; here he undertakes to prove it by the same
Argument ^^ had used formerly, taken from his foretelling his people in all
Ages the thing ^ that should afterward come to pass, Chap. 41.22, 26. and 43.9.
And who ^^ I shall call, that is, who among the Idol-gods of the Heathens can
command, decree and determine future things, which accordingly shall afterward
come to pass, as I have done? See the Note, Chap. 41.4. and shall declare it,
that is, Foretell such things before they come to pass, as I have done to my
people? See the Notes, Chap. 41.22, 26. and 43.9. and set in order for me; that
is, Bring to effect what is so foretold, that I may see it done, even every
thing orderly in its appointed time; or rather relate to me in order what from
time to time shall come to pass, as I have done to my Church; since I appointed
the ancient people, that is, Since I appointed such a Church to be; which was
from the beginning of the World, or from eternity; or rather, since of old I
appointed the Posterity of Abraham to be my peculiar people: and the things
that are coming, and shall come; that is, Which of your Idol-gods can foretell
future things, either those things that are come to pass immediately, or a long
time hereafter? let them show unto them, that is, Let their Idol-gods, if they
can, foretell such things as these to those that worship them as gods.

Ver. 8. Fear ye not, neither be afraid, etc.] That is, Fear not the
accomplishment of the promises I have made to you, though Idolatrous Nations
bring never so great Miseries upon you (as it may be they had already destroyed
the ten Tribes, which might be an occasion of great fear to them) yet be not
afraid of their Idol-gods, as if they could hinder me from making good my
promises; See also the Notes, Chap. 41.10, 14. have not I told thee from that
time, and have declared it? that is, From the time when I appointed thee to be
my peculiar people (for which see the foregoing Note) have I not ever since
that time successively in all Ages told thee what in future times should come
to pass? And thus by repeating the foregoing Argument, he proves himself to be
the only true God: ye are even my Witnesses, see the Note, Chap. 43.10. Is
there a god besides me? yea, there is no god: it is in the Hebrew no Rock, for
which see Deuteronomy. 32.4. I know not any, which I conceive, is ironically spoken;
as if he had said, And therefore sure there is none, unless you know more than
I know.

Ver. 9. They that make a graven image, are all of them vanity, etc.] See the
Note, Chap. 41.29. and their delectable things shall not profit, that is, Their
rich Idols curiously carved, and gorgeously attired and adorned with all the
pompous service which they yield them, wherewith they are so much delighted,
see the Note, Chap. 1.29. and they are their own witnesses, they see not, nor
know, that they may be ashamed; that is, their Idols are Witnesses against
themselves, or against those that worship them, to wit, because (as it follows
in the next words) they see not, nor know; that is, They have neither eyes, nor
understanding: Or, the Idolaters and Idol-makers are Witnesses against
themselves, to wit, that they see not, nor know, but are as blind and stupid as
their Idols; or they are Witnesses against themselves to their shame, that
their Idols cannot profit them, because they cannot but know, that they can
neither see nor understand any thing.

Ver. 10. Who has formed a god, or molten a graven Image that is profiable for
nothing?] That is, Who is so mad as to do this? to wit, to undertake to make a
god (or if you intend not that it should be a god) to make an Image, if no
profit be to be expected by it?

Ver. 11. Behold all his fellows shall be ashamed, etc.] That is, all the
Workmans Companions (of whom he had spoken in the foregoing verses) to wit,
those that had any hand in the making or worshipping of them, shall be all of
them ashamed; See the Note, Chap. 42.17. and the workmen they are of men, that
is, They are no better than men; whereby is implied both the gross absurdity of
the thing, that they that were but men made by God, should undertake by their
power to make a God; and likewise how unable they were to stand before God: let
them all be gathered together, let them stand up: to wit, to maintain and
defend their Idols; See the Notes, Chap. 41.1. and 43.9. yet they shall fear,
and shall be ashamed together: to wit, when their Consciences begin to be
awakened, or when God shall begin to contend with them.

Ver. 12. The Smith with the tongs both works in the coals, and fashioneth it
with hammers, etc.] Some understand this of the Smiths forging out Tools for
the Carpenter that was to make the Idol. But it is expressly said, that the
Heathens had Idol-gods of iron, Dan. 5.4. as well as of other metals; and of
these therefore I conceive the Prophet here speaks, or of the Iron work that
was used about their Idols: and works it with the strength of his arms: that
is, he puts forth all his might in the forging of it; which is spoken by way of
deriding their blind zeal, and so is likewise that which follows: yea, he is
hungry, and his strength fails; he drinks no water, and is faint: to wit,
as being so intent upon his holy work, that he cannot afford himself time to
eat or drink. Yet this mention of his hungring and thirsting may be also
covertly to imply, both what a poor Creature such a one is, to undertake to
make a God; and what vain things such Gods are that cannot keep their Servants
from fainting, when they take such pains for them, unless they feed on the meat
which the true God. has provided for men.

Ver. 13. The Carpenter stretches out his rule, etc.] To wit, to measure out
the length and breadth of the timber to be set apart for the making of his
Idol: he marketh it out with a line, to wit, to show how much of the timber on
every side must be cut away; he fitteth it with plains, and he marketh it out
with the compass, to wit, that he might draw out every member with its due
Proportion; and makes it after the figure of a man, that is, a Man or Woman;
according to the beauty of a man; that is, That noble and majestic shape which
God has given to man; that it may remain in the house; that is, in some
Temple, or in his own dwelling house, for his own private Devotions. However,
this covertly hints their folly; their Idols, after their pains and cost, not
being able to do any thing, and so serving only to stand idle, and fill up a
Room in their houses.

Ver. 14. He heweth him down Cedars, and takes the Cypress and the Oak, which
he strengthens for himself among the trees of the forest, etc.] That is, which
he has suffered to grow till they were come to their full growth or strength.
But many do rather like that Translation which we have in our Margin; and he
takes courage to himself among the trees of the forest, that is, he
encourages himself to take the fairest timber trees for this service, and to
put forth his utmost strength in hewing them down: he planteth an Ash, to wit,
that there may be Timber for their Idol-gods in future times (whereby also is
hinted their resolvedness for their holding on in this brutish sin) and the
rain does nourish it, which is also added by way of derision; for was it not
most absurd to rob the true God of his Glory, by that which from him received
both its being and growth?

Ver. 15. Then shall it be for a man to burn, etc.] That is, when it is thus
grown up, then it is hewn down to be fuel for the fire: for he will take
thereof, that is, of the trees so hewn down, or of the chips he cuts off from
the Timber: and warmeth himself; yea, he kindles it, and baketh bread; yea, he
makes a God and worshippeth it, etc. that is, Some part of it he uses for
Kitching-service, both in the Oven and Chimney, and of the other part of it he
makes a god.

Ver. 16. He burns part thereof in the fire: with part thereof he eats
flesh, etc.] That is, say some, With part thereof he makes Tables and
Trenchers whereon to eat his meat; or rather, with part thereof he dresseth his
meat; for all along he seems only to speak how it was used as fuel for the fire.

Ver. 17. And the residue thereof he makes a god, even his graven Image: he
falls down to it, and worshippeth it, etc.] That is, He does not only provide
this Idol for the use of others, but he himself also worships it; and prays
unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my God: which is so set forth to
imply, That men cannot worship and pray to an Idol, but they own it for their
God.

Ver. 18. They have not known nor understood, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 27.18.
and Psalm. 14.1. for he has shut their eyes that they cannot see, etc. that is,
God has justly for their sins punished them with judicial blindness.

Ver. 20. He feeds of ashes, etc.] That is, The Idolater does as miserably
deceive himself, as he should do that thinks to slake his hunger, and nourish
himself with eating ashes; for as ashes eaten would be so far from doing men
any good in these regards, that it would rather hurt them; so it is with the
Idolater: he sets his heart upon that, he delights himself and trusts in that,
and so feeds himself with hopes of Benefit and Comfort from that which will no
way profit him, but rather do him a great deal of Mischief, namely, his Idols,
pieces of wood that shall one day be turned into ashes, as well as the rest of
the trees of which they are made, and therefore no way likely to help them in
their straits, but rather to draw the wrath of God upon them. It is an
Expression much like to that, Hos. 12.1. Ephraim feeds on wind; implying,
That the Idolater feeds himself with the vain deceits of his own heart: a
deceived heart has turned him aside, to wit, out of the way of truth, that he
cannot deliver his soul, that is, He cannot wind himself out of this foolish
Error* and so save himself from that Vengeance and Damnation which this his
Idolatry and Superstition is like to bring upon him; nor say, Is there not a
lie in my right hand? that is, Is not this Idol which I am forming, or which I
hold in my right hand, an Error and Deceit, a mere Fiction, no such thing as I
have falsely conceited it to be? Do I not see and feel, and find it to be so?

Ver. 21. Remember these (O Jacob and Israel) for thou art my servant, etc.]
See the Note, Chap. 41.9. Remember these Idolaters of whom I have spoken, to
wit, their gross sottishness; or these things which I have now said against
them, and the Vanity of their Idolatry. And that which is intended is, That God
would have them think seriously of these things, that so when they came to
dwell long as Captives in Babylon, they might not be entangled with their
Idolatry; I have formed thee, thou art my servant; which is repeated again to
intimate, that Idolatry would be worse in them than in the Gentiles, because
they were his peculiar people, and had been trai^ed up in the Knowledge of his
written Law. But see also the Notes, Chap. 43.1, 21.

Ver. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a
cloud thy sins, etc.] That is, As a cloud that darkens and hides the Heavens
from us, and seems to threaten some great storm, is many times quite dispersed
by the Sun, or driven away by the Winds; so have I by a free and a full pardon
perfectly put away all your sins, that have separated beteewn you and your God,
and have hid his face from you, Chap. 59.2. and have thereby cleared (...) from
all those Terrors and Judgments which your sins might otherwise have brought
upon you. And doubtless this is mentioned as the foundation of that deliverance
which God does here promise his people; their sins, the cause of Gods
controversy with them, being pardoned, they might well hope deliverance would
come: return unto me, to wit, by Repentance; and then fear not, for I have
redeemed thee, and therefore have the best right to thee; See the Notes, Chap.
43.1, 3, 4. and Psalm. 31.5.

Ver. 23. Sing, O ye heavens, etc.] To set forth how wonderful the work should
be of this new Deliverance that is promised to Gods people, the Prophet does
here break forth into this Rhetorical invitation of all the Creatures in Heaven
and Earth to bless God for it; an Expression much like that, 1 Chronicles. 16.31.
for which see the Note there: Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord has done it; to
wit, that which he had promised, the great work of the Redemption of his
people, and which indeed none but the Lord could do; shout ye lower parts of
the earth; that is, say some, The Plains and Valleys; this being opposed, say
they, to that which follows, break forth into singing, ye Mountains, or rather
the earth which lies below (as opposed to the Heavens before mentioned) yea,
the whole Earth even to the very Center: for the Lord has redeemed Jacob,
which is meant not only of the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, but also
especially of the great work of our Redemption by Christ: and glorified himself
in Israel, to wit, by delivering them, and destroying their enemies.

Ver. 24. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, etc.] That is, that did formerly
deliver thee out of Egypt, and will now again deliver thee out of Babylon; and
he that formed thee from the womb, See the Note above, ver. 2. and 43.1. that
stretches forth the heavens alone; See the Note, Psalm. 104.2. that spreads
abroad the earth by my self: that is, without the help or advice of any.

Ver. 35. That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, etc.] That is, Magicians,
Astrologers and Soothsayers, to wit, by crossing them in their Predictions,
whereof they had said, That such and such things were sure Signs and Tokens.
But though this be expressed indefinitely, as a thing that God usually does,
yet here it is spoken as with reference to what God meant to do amongst the
Babylonians, whose Magicians were exceeding famous all the World over; and it
may well be with particular respect to some Predictions of theirs concerning
the perpetual continuance of their Empire; and perhaps, that when the Medes and
Persians threatened Babylon, they should not prevail against her; namely, That
all these predictions should be found to be lies. And hereby also might be
covertly hinted how short their Predictions came of the Predictions of Gods
Prophets, that were always so exactly accomplished; and makes diviners mad,
that is, That makes their Divinations no more to be regarded, than the ravings
of mad men; or rather, that makes them mad to see all fall out contrary to what
they foretold; that turns wise men backward, to wit, by crossing them in all
their Counsels and Courses, and bringing all their Plots and Endeavors to
nothing; or by confounding them, so that they are ashamed to show their faces;
and makes their Knowledge foolish, to wit, say some, By discovering the folly
of their Predictions. But see the Note, Job 12.17.

Ver. 26. That confirms the word of his servant, etc.] To wit, Isaiah; or his
Servants the Prophets in general: and so the next clause may be added, as by
way of explaining this: and performs the counsel of his messengers; that is,
The Predictions of his Prophets concerning those things which it was the Will
and counsel of God should be. And though this must be understood generally of
all their Prophecies, yet we may well think it was spoken with special relation
to that Prophecy, that Cyrus should subdue Babylon, and send home Gods people
into their own Country; and that which went still along therewith, as signified
thereby, their Prophecy concerning our Redemption by Christ. And this return of
the Jews is therefore particularly added in the next words, that says to
Jerusalem, Thou shall be inhabited; and to the Cities of Judah, Ye shall be
built; under which also may be intended the raising up of the Church of Christ,
when ever she is brought low by her enemies: and I will raise up, that is,
build again, or cause to flourish, the decayed places thereof, that is, all the
ruinous and desolate places in the Land.

Ver. 27. That says to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers.] That
is, That can remove any Obstructions that are like to hinder the return of my
people; so that though there should be a Sea lying in their way, even that can
I dry up, and all the streams thereof. And most probable it is, that God by
this way of expressing his Almighty Power, does allude to his drying up of the
Red Sea first, and the River Jordan afterward, before the Israelites, as
before, Chap. 43.16. of which see the Note there; and that he does likewise
covertly hint the manner how Cyrus should take Babylon, namely, by Cyrus his
drawing away the waters of Euphrates in several Channels he had dug for that
purpose, that so his Army might pass over, and storm and surprise the City.
This is, I conceive, the clea^ meaning of this place; for which see the Notes
also, Chap. 40.3, 4. But yet some Expositors take it to be a directly
figurative Prediction of the Destruction of Babylon. A deep, they say, she is
called, as before the desert of the Sea, Chap. 21.1. (for which see the Note
there) because she lay in a deep valley full of waters; and by drying up this
Sea and her Rivers, is meant, they say, the destroying and plundering this
great City, together with other Provinces, Cities and Towns belonging thereto.

Ver. 28. That says of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, etc.] So he is called,
because as a Shepherd he was to take care of the Jews, Gods precious flock, to
rescue them from the tyranny of the Babylonians, even as Sheep from the mouths
of ravening Wolves, to gather them together that were scattered abroad in
Babylon and other Countries, and to carry them out into the large and fresh
pastures of Judea, that had been shut up in Babylon as in a pinfold; and shall
perform all my pleasure; that is, All that God had decreed and willed should be
done, both concerning the ruin of Babylon, the return of his people, and their
re-edifying their City and Temple, as is expressed in the following words, even
saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built; and to the Temple, Thy foundation
shall be laid. And indeed, in Cyrus his time there was no more done, but only
the laying of the foundation. However, most observable it is, That to the end
the Jews might know it was God that had wrought that great deliverance for them
when they were set free out of Babylon, and so might also believe his other
Prophecies concerning Christ (of whose Redemption that deliverance was a Type)
God does here tell them the very Name of the Man by whom they should be
delivered, as he had formerly foretold the name of Josiah, 1 King. 13.2. And
this was about an hundred and seventy years at least, before it was
accomplished; for Manasseh reigned five and fifty years, 2 King. 21.1. Amon
two, ver. 19. Josiah one and thirty, 2 King. 22.1. Jehoiakim eleven, 2 King.
23.36. (at what time Nebuchadnezzar began to captivate the Jews) and then their
Captivity in Babylon lasted seventy years. So that doubtless, when the Jews
first heard of one Cyrus that was preparing to invade Babylon, the remembrance
of this Prophecy must needs make them with great joy to conclude, That their
Deliverance was then drawing nigh. But see the Note, Ezra 1.2.

CHAP. XLV.
VERSE 1. THus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, etc.] Though Cyrus was
a Heathen idolatrous King, yet the Lord calls him his Anointed: 1. Because he
was ordained and appointed of God to be King of Persia and Babylon, no less
than the Kings of Judah that were anointed with oil; See the Note, Ezra 1.2.
And 2ly. because he was as it were consecrated and strengthened of God to be a
Savior and Deliverer of his people, and was therein a type of Christ; whose
right hand I have holden, that is, whom I will guide and strengthen, carrying
him on succesful, and causing him to prosper in all his great undertakings; See
the Notes, Chap. 41.13. and 42.6. to subdue Nations before him, that is, the
Babylonians and many other Nations that were under the command of Babylon, or,
that opposed him in his way thither; and I will loose the loins of Kings, that
is, Disarm, degrade and weaken them; See the Notes, Chap. 11.5. and 23.10. and
Job 12.18. to open before him the two-leaved gates, and the gates shall not be
shut; that is, So that they shall presently open to him the Gates of their
Cities and strong holds, together with their Palaces and private Houses; they
shall not dare to shut a door against him, but upon the terror of his approach
all shall fly open before him.

Ver. 2. I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight, etc.]
That is, Thou shall overrun the Countries where thou come, as if there were
nothing in the way that might in the least hinder thee; See the Notes, Chap.
40.3, 4. I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars
of iron; that is, No strength shall be able to withstand thee.

Ver. 3. And I will give thee the treasures of Darkness, and hidden Riches of
secret places, etc.] That is, The Treasures of those Nations whom he should
overcome, which he should find locked up and hidden in secret places; as
amongst others the Treasures of Croesus, the King of the Lydians, subdued by
him, of whom Histories report that he was a King of mighty Wealth, far above
any of those times: that thou may know that I the Lord which call thee by
thy name, am the God of Israel; that is, That thou may know, that I that
have so long beforehand foretold what thou should do, even naming thee by
thy name, as it is above, ver. 1. and Chap. 44.28. am the only true God, and
that I own Israel to be my peculiar people; See the Note, Ezra 1.2.

Ver. 4. For Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect, etc.] That is,
Merely that thou might deliver them out of their Bondage in Babylon: I have
even called thee by thy Name, that is, say some, I have in a special manner
owned thee, and honored thee; See the Notes, Exodus 33.17. But rather it is
meant of his mentioning him by name, as is noted in the foregoing verse, long
before he was in the World: I have surnamed thee, to wit, by stiling thee my
shepherd, Chap. 44.28. and mine anointed, as above, ver. 1. though thou have
not known me, that is, say some, Savingly; or rather, though then thou could
have no knowledge of me, but were afterward by the great things I did for thee,
brought to that knowledge which thou had of me.

Ver. 5. I girded thee, etc.] That is, say some, I raised thee to thy regal
Dignity, See the Notes, Chap. 22.21. and Job 12.18. or rather, I gave thee
Power and Might to do the great things thou were to do; or, I raised thee up
and fitted thee to make War with the Babylonians and other Nations; though thou
have not known me, that is, Though at that time thou were altogether ignorant
of me (see the foregoing Note) Or, though thou little knew who it was that
strengthened and prospered thee, and what my Purpose and Counsel was in all that
thou did; See the Note, Chap. 10.7.

Ver. 6. That they may know from the rising of the Sun, and from the West, that
there is none besides me, etc.] That is, That from East to West, or all the
World over (for under East and West all other parts of the World may be
intended) all people may by this great work of my Deliverance of my people out
of Babylon by thee, be brought to know, that I am the only true God. This was
Gods end in this mighty work; and this was in a great measure effected, partly
by the spreading of the fame of this great work of God far and near in those
days; and partly by the knowledge which people should come to have of it in
future times from the Scripture where it should be recorded. But still we must
remember, that the greater work of man's Redemption by Christ, whereof the
Deliverance out of Babylon was a Type, is here also intended.

Ver. 7. I form the light, and create darkness, etc.] This is mentioned as
another thing whereof the Nations should be convinced by that great work of
Gods delivering the Jews out of Babylon, to wit, that as he alone did cause the
light of the day, and the darkness of the night, so he alone was the cause of
all the Prosperity and Adversity that befalls men; which are usually, indeed,
in the Scriptures, expressed by these terms of light and darkness; See the
Notes, Esth. 8.16. and Psalm. 112.4. And to explain this, are the following
words added, I make peace, and create evil; See the Note, Chap. 41.23.

Ver. 8. Drop down ye heavens from above, and let the skies pour down
righteousness, etc.] Under this command a promise is implied of Cyrus his
destroying the Babylonian Empire, and delivering Gods people from their Bondage
there, and sending them home again into their own Country; which is here called
Righteousness, because it was a work of great Righteousness in God thus to
punish the wicked Babylonians, and to deliver his poor oppressed people, and
because thereby he approved his Faithfulness and Justice in performing what he
had beforehand promised them. And to the same purpose is that which follows,
let the earth open, to wit, to receive the showrs from above, or to let forth
that which is to spring up, as it follows; and let them, to wit, the earth
watered by the Heavens, bring forth Salvation, and let Righteousness spring
forth together. As for this figurative Expression whereby this promise is
expressed, Drop down ye Heavens from above, and let the skies pour down
Righteousness; let the earth open, and let them bring forth Salvation; and let
righteousness spring forth together; that is used to imply, 1. By whose command
this should be done (and that to the end Gods people should not look upon this
deliverance promised as an impossible thing, in regard of the desperate
Condition wherein the Jews should be at that time) namely, That God from Heaven
would suddenly and miraculously cause it to be done. And, 2ly. how wonderfully
great this Deliverance should be, and what an abundant discovery there should
be made therein of the goodness, righteousness and faithfulness of God; for it
is all one in effect as if God had said, I the Lord, who do cause the Heavens
to water the Earth, and the Earth thereupon to yield all kind of Fruit
abundantly, will from Heaven afford you so great Salvation, and so abundantly
manifest my Righteousness therein, that it shall be with you, as if the Heavens
did rain whole showrs of it upon you; and as if a plentiful crop of it did
every where spring out of the earth: See the Note, chap. 44.3. And herein also
may be comprehended the raising up of Cyrus, as a branch of Righteousness
springing up (according to the like Expressions elsewhere, for which see the
Note, Chap. 4.2.) by whom this great Salvation should be wrought for them. But
however, under this promise of the Deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, that
greater Deliverance is also promised, whereof this was a type, namely, the
Redemption of Gods people from the Bondage of their natural Estate by the Lord
Christ; and that as the happy effect of that typical Deliverance: for, indeed,
had not the outward Polity of the Jews been preserved by their Deliverance out
of Babylon, Christ could not have sprung up out of the stock of David, to be a
Savior for his redeemed, as God had promised. I know this passage is expounded
by some in somewhat a different way. For, 1. some understand it thus, That
Heaven and Earth should concur to afford their help for the effecting of that
great Deliverance which God had now in hand. And, 2ly. others understand it
both of the abundant bliss, safety and righteous dealing, which Gods people
should enjoy by the favor of Cyrus to them; and likewise of that fullness of
all spiritual Blessings, which the Church should enjoy under the Kingdom of
Christ. But the Exposition formerly given, I conceive, is the best; yet see the
Notes, Psalm. 72.6, 7. and 85.11. As for the last clause, I the Lord have
created it, it seems added with reference to that which went before, ver. 7.
and that to assure them, that how impossible soever that might seem to be,
which he had promised, yet it should certainly come to pass; to which purpose
he speaks of it as done already, I the Lord have created it; as if he had said,
I the Lord, who do by mine Almighty power what I please, will effect this.

Ver. 10. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker, etc.] To wit, either by way
of opposing what God has determined to do; or by way of murmuring against any
Dispensation of his Providence. And this might be spoken as by way of declaring
in general the evil and danger of opposing or muttering against any Counsel or
Acting of Divine Providence, upon occasion of that which God had said before,
that all that was done in the World, was done by his all-ruling Providence,
ver. 7. I form the light, and create darkness, etc. yet it seems rather to have
been intended more particularly either against the Babylonians, to show that
nothing but misery and woe would be the Issue of their opposing what God
intended to do; or rather against the murmuring of the Jews in Babylon,
especially as to that which God had now promised to do for them* Because the
poor Captives in Babylon might think with themselves, Why should the Lord bring
us his peculiar people under the tyrannical Bondage of such a barbarous Nation,
if he meant afterward to destroy them, and to deliver us, and send us back into
our own Country? Or, why should he defer our Deliverance so long? Or, why
should he not raise up one of our own Nation to do it, as he has formerly done
(even this also some add) but bring a Prince from so remote a Country to set us
free? And so likewise for that which God had promised concerning that great
Deliverance by Christ, because men might argue within themselves, Why was
Christ sent no sooner? or why should the Jews be cast off, and the Gentiles
called into their room? Against these, and all such Arguings with God, this is
here opposed; Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker; and then he adds, let
the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth: shall the clay say to him
that fashioneth it, What make thou? that is, What intendest thou to make of
me? Or, why do thou undertake that which thou art not able to effect? or
rather, Why have thou made me thus? as the Apostle has expressed it, Romans
9.20. Or thy work, He has no hands; that is, He has no hands to do what he
has undertaken; or rather, He has no hands fit to undertake such a work; or
surely he that made me thus rudely and bunglingly, either had no hands, or made
no use of his hands. And the drift of this is to show, that if it would be an
unreasonable and monstrous thing to think, that the clay should quarrel with
the Potter about his Workmanship, or call him to an account concerning the work
he made of it; much more unreasonable would it be for man, whom God formed out
of the earth as the Potter does his Vessels of clay, to contend with his Maker
about any thing he does to him; and that the rather, because the clay was not
made by the Potter; whereas man had not only his form and shape, but his very
being from God; and therefore it must needs be free for the Creator to do
whatever he pleased with his Creatures. But see the Note also Chap. 29.16.

Ver. 10. Woe unto him that says unto his Father, What begettest thou? etc.]
That is, Why do thou beget me? To what end do thou do it? Or, why have thou
begotten me so weak, so sickly, so unhandsome, so deformed, or of so mean
inward parts as I am? Or, why have thou begotten me subject to the same
Miseries as other men are? The drift of the words is the same with that in the
foregoing verse, to wit, to imply, that it is as base a thing to call God to an
account for any thing he does, as it is for a Child to quarrel with his Parents
about their begetting him.

Ver. 11. Thus says the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his Maker, etc.] To
wit, as the Potter makes his Vessels of clay; for to that said before, ver. 9.
he alludes. But see the Notes, Chap. 1.4. and 43.1. As for that which follows,
Ask me of things to come, concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of my
hands, command ye me: it is differently understood by Expositors; for some
understand it, as spoken to the Idolatrous enemies of Gods people, and that
Ironically; as if he had said, If you would know what I mean to do with my
people, the work of my hands, or what the work is I mean to do for them, you
had best enquire of me by my Prophets (wherein also there may be again a covert
deriding of them, because their Idol-gods were not able to foretell future
things, as he the God of Israel was, as before, Chap. 41.22. etc. and in
several places afterward) and if you like not what you shall hear I mean to to
do, you had best command me to do otherwise, and so hinder me from doing what I
intended; or Ask of me, etc. that is, You had best call me to an account, and
lay your Command upon me, not to deliver my people by Cyrus, as I have said I
will do. But others again hold (which seems to me more probable) that this is
spoken to Gods people; and that either, 1. as seriously advising them what they
should do in their fears and low Condition, namely, That they should seek to
him their Father and Maker; and commit themselves to his care, and expect help
from him. Ask me of things to come, etc. as if he had said, Instead of seeking
to Soothsayers and Magicians, enquire of me; for which see also the Note, Chap.
8.19. Therefore you are overwhelmed with grief in your Miseries, because you
will not ask Counsel of me; whereas, if you would enquire of me, in this you
might, as it were, command me; so ready I would be to inform you; and so you
might hear what might comfort you, how careful I am for you, and what a good
issue I will give to your troubles. Or rather, instead of murmuring against me,
and striving with your Maker, ask what you will of me, and ye shall be as sure
of it, as if it were at your command: Or else, 2ly. by way of upbraiding them
for their murmuring at Gods delay of the promised deliverance, that striving
with their Maker, whereof he had spoken, ver. 9. Ask me of things to come,
concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of my hands, command ye me: as if
he had said, If the clay may not contend with the Potter, nor the Child with
his Parents, why do you then that which is no better than a quarrelling with me
about my ordering you that are my Children, and the work of my hands? you had
best call me to an account to know how I mean to order my people for the
future, and prescribe me what I should do, as if there were danger lest I
should disregard them.

Ver. 12. I have made the earth, and created man upon it; I, even my hands have
stretched out the Heavens, etc.] See the Note, Psalm. 104.2. and all their host
have I commanded; that is, I made them by my word and command, and by my
command they are continually ordered: And the drift of inserting this here, is
to show, That therefore he must needs be all-sufficient, both for the managing
and effecting of whatever he had undertaken to do; and that it was a high
degree of folly and boldness for them to question or mutter against any thing
done by him, as thinking that he that governed all things as the great Creator
of Heaven and Earth, would not in a special manner take care of his own
peculiar people, that were in a more special manner the work of his hands.

Ver. 13. I have raised him up in righteousness, etc.] To wit, Cyrus above
named, ver. 1. See the Notes, Chap. 41.2. and above, ver. 8. and I will direct
(or make straight) all his ways; that is, I will guide and prosper him, and
facilitate all his designs; to wit, in his expedition against Babylon: he shall
build my City, that is, he shall order it to be built, and give my people much
toward the building of it; he shall let go my Captives, not for price nor
reward, says the Lord of host; that is, He shall give liberty to my people
that are now Captives in Babylon by my disposing Will and Providence, and shall
send them home into their own Country freely, without any ransom or
consideration received for it. But now still we must remember, that under this
Type of the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon by Cyrus, that greater work
of our redemption by Christ from our spiritual Bondage, is principally here
intended; for he indeed was raised up of God in righteousness, (See the Note
Chap. 42.6.) for the effecting of this great work, and had all his ways made
straight before him, (See the Note Chap. 40.4.) And by him the spiritual
Jerusalem, the Church, the City of God, is built, Mat. 16.18. Upon this rock
will I build my Church; and of his redeemed ones it may well be said, that he
delivered them, not for price nor reward; because instead of receiving any
thing from them, he gave himself as a ransom for their redemption.

Ver. 14. Thus says the Lord, The labor of Egypt, and merchandise of
Ethiopia, etc.] That is, The wealth, which the Egyptians get by their labor,
and the Ethiopians by their Merchandise; and of the Sabeans, men of stature,
That is, of great stature, tall, big and goodly men, shall come over unto thee;
That is, shall be brought into thee; and thy shall be thine: That is, not only
the riches of the Nations before mentioned, but even the Nations themselves
shall be thine, they that were before thine enemies, shall become thy Servants.
Some, and that very probably, do understand this as spoken to Cyrus, of whom it
is clear that he spoke in the foregoing verse, to wit, that as a recompense of
the service he should do for God, in destroying the Babylonians, and setting
free his People, both these mighty Nations, and the wealth of their rich
Countries, should together with Babylon fall into his hands. But others again
take it to be spoken to Gods people, to wit, That these Nations should bring in
their wealth to them, and be serviceable to them: which they think was partly
fulfilled, when these Nations, at the commandment of Cyrus first, Ezra. 1.4.
and of Artaxerxes afterward, Ezra. 7.20. etc. did out of the tributes which
they were to pay to the Emperor of Persia, afford them all things requisite for
their return home into their own Country, and for the work they had to do, when
they came thither: But espcially in the days of the Gospel, when both these and
other Nations did join themselves to the Church, and employed their riches for
her advancement. See the Notes, Psalm. 45.12. and 68.31. and 72.9. etc. And
indeed they that understand this as spoken to Cyrus, do withal hold, that it is
principally meant of Christ, of whom Cyrus was a Type. Nor needs it seem
strange that the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon by Cyrus, and the
redemption of Gods People by Christ, should be thus still jointly intended
together, because the main end of God's delivering the Jews out of Babylon,
was, that Christ, the promised Messiah, might spring up of that Nation, and so
his Kingdom might be established in the World. And to the same purpose is that
which follows, and they shall come after thee, in chains shall they come
over, to wit, as captives are wont to follow the Conqueror in his triumphs; and
they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make Supplication unto thee, saying,
surely God is in thee, and there is none else, there is no God, to wit,
besides; for as this may be literally understood of the Nations crouching
before Cyrus, and acknowledging that God was apparently w^^h ^im, prospering
him in all his enterprises; so it may be mystically understood of the Gentiles
submitting to Christ, and to the Church in Christ, as acknowledging God
Hypostatically in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. and Col. 2.9. and both God and Christ,
with the Church, even the true God, besides whom there is no God.

Ver. 15. Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the
Savior.] Here the Prophet breaks forth into an admiration of the hidden depths
of Gods Dispensations; for therefore is God said to be a God that hides
himself; 1. Because of the secrecy and unsearchableness of his Councels in the
actings of his providence, (as in the raising up Cyrus against Babylon: God's
purpose for the deliverance of the Jews thereby would not have been thought of;
and when it was done, Gods hand in doing it, had not God revealed it, would not
have been seen.) And 2ly. Especially, because though God be the sure Savior of
Israel, his People, yet he often stands a-loof for a time, and appears not as a
Savior; because he prospers their enemies, and suffers his People to be
miserably oppressed by them, as if he regarded them not. And thus by this
clause the Prophet does covertly persuade the Jews, not to murmr against God,
according to what was said before, ver. 9, 10. But patiently to wait upon him
for Deliverance in their lowest condition.

Ver. 16. They shall be ashamed, etc.] Thus the Prophet applies that which was
spoken in the foregoing verse in general terms, to the particular condition of
Gods People, They shall be ashamed, and also confounded all of them: to wit,
the idolatrous Babylonians, as the following words explain it; they shall go to
confusion together that are makers of Idols; this shall be at last the end of
all their flourishing greatness. See the Note, Psalm. 42.17.

Ver. 17. But Israel shall be saved in the Lord, etc.] That is, by the Lord:
with an everlasting Salvation; That is, say some, in all ages: or so that they
shall never perish; they shall be saved unto eternity; which is alleged
therefore by Expositors as an evidence, that the eternal Salvation purchased by
Christ for his People, is here also comprehended, whereof the deliverance out
of Babylon was only a Type; ye shall not be ashamed, nor confounded World
without end. That is, ye shall not always find your selves disappointed of that
Salvation which ye expect from your God; as he had said in the foregoing verse
it should be with those that worshipped Idols.

Ver. 18. For thus says the Lord that created the Heavens, God himself that
formed the Earth, and made it, etc.] See the Note above, ver. 12. yet some
think, that Gods creating all things is here mentioned as an evidence that he
was the only true God, and that therefore they that worshipped him, should not
be confounded, as all idolaters should be; as was said in the foregoing verse:
he has established it, See the Note, Psalm. 93.1. He created it not in vain, he
formed it to be inhabited; to wit, by the Children of men. And the drift of
mentioning this, may seem to be hereby to imply, that if God has been thus
careful to provide an habitation for all mankind, much more will he be sure to
provide an habitation for his own peculiar People that must continue on the
Earth so long as the Earth shall stand. This, I conceive, is most probably the
drift of this place. Yet some, I know, do by the Earth here understand the land
of Canaan, which God had provided for the habitation of his people, the
Children of Israel.

Ver. 19. I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the Earth, etc.]
Because the Oracles of the Heathens were usually in dark caves and dens of the
Earth, places fit for deceit: See the Note, Chap. 8.19. And because, when
People resorted thither for satisfaction in any thing they desired to know, the
Devil was wont cunningly to return them answers, as dark as the Caves wherein
they were given, obscure and ambiguous, that might always be understood several
ways, that so, whatever the event was, it might be thought he had foretold the
truth; therefore in an allusion hereto, the Lord intending to profess to his
People, that he had not spoken to them after such a manner, does thus express
himself, I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the Earth; as if he
should have said, I have always from time to time made known my will to you
openly, plainly and perspicuously; and not as the idolatrous nations were
informed by their Oracles. And it may well be, which some have thought, that it
was with respect to this of the Prophet, that Christ spoke that of himself,
John 18.20. I spoke openly to the World: I ever taught in the synagogue, and in
the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said nothing.
However the drift of this passage seems probably to be, to make known to Gods
people, that though the Lord might seem to hide himself from them, as was said
before, ver. 15. by the strange dispensations of his providence toward them,
yet having so clearly and openly revealed his will to them, that if they served
him faithfully, and fled unto him in their streights and troubles, he would
certainly deliver them, on this they might with confidence rely, however things
went: and that because, as his promises were clear and plain, so they were sure
and faithful; which is intended in the following words, I said not unto the
seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain; I do not encourage my people to seek unto me
in vain, and to no purpose, by promising that which they shall not find in due
time exactly performed: I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that
are right. That is, I speak nothing but what is true and just, and what in the
event they shall find to be so.

Ver. 20. Assemble your selves, and come: draw near together, ye that are
escaped of the nations, etc.] That is, ye of the Heathens, both Babylonians and
other idolatrous nations, that have escaped the destruction that Cyrus had made
amongst you. And the reason why the Lord does thus summon these nations
together, that were spread abroad all the world over, is, that they might say
what they could in the defense of their Idol-gods, now when they had seen how
unable they were to defend Babylon against the wrath of the God of Israel. And
accordingly some conceive, that the following words, they have no knowledge,
that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot
save, are added by way of correction, as if he should have said, Why do I
summon these to say what they can? Alas, these that worship stocks and stones,
are very bruits, and have no knowledge. But rather this seems to be added, as a
declaration of that which the Heathen nations had experimentally seen by Gods
destroying Babylon, and delivering his people, namely, how sottishly ignorant
they were that served Idol-gods, that could not save them. Some indeed take the
first words, Assemble your selves, and come, draw near together, ye that are
escaped of the Nations, to be a prophecy of the conversion of the Gentiles by
the Ministry of the Gospel, and that these are appealed to, as those that were
able experimentally to speak in this case, having been won from the vanity of
serving Idols, to the Worship and Service of the true God. But the former
Exposition is clearly the best, as is very evident by the following Verse.

Ver. 21. Tell ye, etc.] Some conceive that the Heathen Nations are here
enjoined to declare to others, what they had learnt or found by experience
concerning the true God; and so to invite them to come in and join themselves
to his Church and People: But rather here the cause is shown why the Nations
were summoned in the foregoing Verse to assemble together; and accordingly I
conceive that in these first words, Tell ye; either the Nations are appointed
to tell one another of the Assembly intended or enjoined, as the following
words seem to import, Tell ye, and bring them near; or else that they are
challenged to tell and say what they could by way of defending their Idol-gods;
yea, after they had met and consulted together about it, which is certainly
intended in those words, bring them near, yea let them take Counsel together.
And then in the following words the particular is expressed, whereby they are
challenged to prove their Idol-gods to be true Gods; who has declared this
from ancient time? that is, Which of your Idol-gods have foretold things to
come, long before they came to pass, as I have foretold this concerning the
destruction of Babylon, and the deliverance of my people, and so other things
before mentioned, even from Abraham unto this time? Who has told it from that
time? that is, from ancient time, as was before said; but see also the Note,
Chap. 44.8. have not I the Lord? and there is no God else besides me, a just
God and a Savior; that is, a true God, a God indeed, able to save those that
seek to him. It is the very same Argument whereby often before it was proved
that Idol-gods were no true Gods, namely, because they could not foretell future
things, nor save those that served them, as the true-God did. See the Notes,
Chap. 41.22, 26. and 43.9, 12.

Ver. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, etc.] As if
he had said, Look not to your Idol-gods, that cannot save you; but look unto
me, that is, own me to be the only true God, worship me, and seek unto me, and
trust in me (see the Notes, Psalm. 123.1, 2.) and so ye shall be saved; to wit,
both temporally from your streights and dangers here in this World, and
Eternally hereafter; and doubtless this is spoken with reference to Gods
purpose of calling the Gentiles to be his people, as is clear by the following
verse.

Ver. 23. I have swore by my self, etc.] Upon occasion of the foregoing
invitation of all Nations to own the true God, to let them see that it would be
their wisest course so to do; here the Lord makes his Purpose and Decree
concerning his bringing in of all Nations to be his People; and because this
might seem strange and incredible, especially to the Jews that looked upon
themselves as chosen of God to be his peculiar people, therefore he confirms it
with an Oath, I have sworn by my self, having no greater to swear by, says the
Apostle, Heb. 6.13. the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, that is,
say some, upon good and righteous grounds; (it being unquestionably a most just
and righteous thing that all men should own and worship the true God) or
rather, in truth and faithfulness, as being fully resolved to do what I say;
and shall not return, that is, the word I have spoken is a Decree irrevocable,
I will never reverse it; or, it shall certainly be accomplished, it shall not
return without effect, as men often do that go out upon some enterprise, but
are not able to effect what they designed; that unto me every knee shall bow,
every tongue shall swear; that is, I will so manifest my self to be the only
true God, the multitudes of all Nations that have formerly worshipped
Idol-gods, and sworn by them, shall then know and worship me, and swear by my
Name, or swear Fealty and Allegiance to me, see the Note, Chap. 19.18. This is
undoubtedly the true meaning of this place: The Apostle indeed cites this place
as a proof that all mankind throughout the World shall at the day of Judgment
be brought into subjection under the power of God in Christ, and shall stand
crouching before him, as being forced to acknowledge him their Lord and Judge,
Romans 14.10, 11. We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; for it
is written, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God. But considering that the bowing of all Nations
before God in Christ at the last day by way of owning his Sovereignty and
Dominion over them, was a full accomplishment of that universal subjection of
all Nations to him, which was begun in the conversion of the Gentiles; What
wonder is it that this which is here foretold by the Prophet concerning the
calling of the Gentiles, and their owning of the Sovereignty of God in Christ,
should by the Apostle be applied to the whole Worlds acknowledging of it, and
being forced to submit to it, when he shall come to judge both quick and dead of
all Nations?

Ver. 24. Surely, shall one say, etc.] It is in the Margin, Surely he shall say
of me, In the Lord is all righteousness and strength; and according to this
Translation the meaning is, that the faithful among the Gentiles, even every
one of them, that shall turn unto God in Christ, and shall own and serve him,
shall upon all occasions be ready to acknowledge and profess with much
rejoicing, that in him is abundance of Righteousness; that is, Justice, Truth
and Faithfulness, and an All Sufficiency of Power to do for them whatever he
pleases; this they shall find experimentally, and so to their comfort shall
see how much better it is with them, than when they served Idol-gods; but now
if we read it as it is in our Translation, Surely shall one say, In the Lord
have I righteousness and strength; there the meaning seems to be, that those
Converts before spoken of, should be still ready to glory in this, that all
their righteousness, both imputed and inherent, and all the strength they had
to obey Gods Commandments, was wholly from the Lord; of themselves they had
nothing that was good in them, nor were able to do any thing that was good in
Gods sight: As for that which follows, even to him shall men come, and all that
are incensed against him shall be ashamed; some understand the first branch of
it, even to him shall men come, of the Converts before mentioned, to wit, that
they should come in, embracing the advice before given them, ver. 22. and join
themselves to God and his people, (see the Note Psalm. 65.4.) though before
Aliens and Heathens; and then the second Clause, and all that are incensed
against him, shall be ashamed, they understand of those wicked Wretches that
did obstinately despise God, and oppose him and his Truth, to wit, that they
should be destroyed, and thereby be brought to shame and confusion of face. But
then, others again understand both branches of these that will not stoop to
God, but stand out against him, and provoke him to Wrath, to wit, that they
should perforce come before Gods Tribunal, and there shall be put to
Everlasting Shame and Confusion.

Ver. 25. In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall
glory*] Some hold the genuine sense of this place to be, That the innocence of
the main body of the Jews, or of the faithful amongst them, should be justified
by the Lords Pleading their Cause against their Enemies, by rescuing them out
of the hands of their Oppressors, and taking vengeance on them that had so
sorely wronged and vexed them; and that they should glory and triumph in this,
according to that Jer. 51.10. The Lord has brought forth our righteousness;
come and let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God. And indeed the
word (justified) is sometimes so taken, as Chap. 50.8. He is near that
justifies me, says the Prophet, to wit, against the false aspersions of mine
Adversaries, Who will contend with me? But because there is in the foregoing
Verses, such a clear Prophecy of the Calling and Conversion of the Gentiles; I
rather do understand it with the general current of Expositors, of that
Justification whereby those that come to God in Christ are discharged from
their Sins, and owned as Just in his sight; and some conceive that this is
added by way of confirming that triumphing of the faithful, in the foregoing
verse, Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness; and affirming
that so it should indeed be; In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be
justified, and shall glory. See the Note Chap. 44.5. yea, and it may well be,
which some conceive, that by calling those Converts that should be justified
and glory in the Lord, the seed of Israel, the Prophet did purposely seek to
prevent the Jews any thought that he intended that God would cast off the Jews,
and take the Gentiles to be his people in their stead; No, God would own them
still as his firstborn People, and the Gentiles should be ingrafted into their
Stock, and made the Children of Abraham, the Seed of Israel, together with them.

CHAP. XLVI.
VERSE 1. BELL boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, etc.] These were the principal
Idol-gods of the Babylonians, those doubtless which they esteemed their great
Tutelary Gods; but under these all the rest of their forged Deities are
comprehended; for the drift of the Prophet here is to show, that God would
destroy, together with Babylon, even their Idol-gods too, in whom they trusted.
See the Note, Chap. 21.9. And this might be mentioned also as a figure of the
utter ruin of Idolatry throughout the World, by the Gospel of Christ; the
deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon being by all acknowledged to be a figure
of that great work of our Redemption by Christ* Of Bell we read, Jer. 50.2.
Babylon is taken, Bell is confounded, etc. and again 41.4. I will punish Bell in
Babylon; and in Pliny there is express mention of an Idol called Jupiter Belus;
yea, and probable it is, that with some respect to this Idol-god it was that
Daniel was called Belteshazzar, when he was brought a Captive into Babylon,
Dan. 1.7. because of that Nebuchadnezzar says of him, Dan. 4.8. But at the
last Daniel came in before me, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the
name of my God. Indeed of the other Idol Nebo, we find no mention elsewhere in
the Scripture; but we find a City so called from one of their Idol-gods. See
the Note, Numb. 32.38. And many of the Babylonian Princes and Nobles seem to
have had their Names from this Idol Nebo, as Nebuchadnezzar, Naburadan,
Nabopolassar, and others: The word Nebo according to the Hebrew, imports
Prophecy; and therefore it is generally thought that this Idol was an Oracle
amongst them, to whom they resorted for information concerning future things.
As for that which is said of these Idols, Bell boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, it is
clearly a Prophecy of the ruin and destruction of these Chaldean Idols, when
Babylon should be taken by Cyrus; some indeed would have these terms of bowing
down, and stooping, only to imply that these Idols that had been so magnified
and highly esteemed, should now decline and sink in their Credit; and others,
that they should stoop to the Yoke of Captivity; but the following words do
plainly show, that it is meant of the Persian Soldiers beating them down,
being made of Silver and Gold, that they might carry them away as a rich Booty.
Indeed considering that this was spoken when Babylon and her Idols were yet in
their height of Glory, it may well be, which some say, that these Expressions
are used to imply that their downfall drew nigh, Bell boweth down, Nebo stoopeth;
as if he had said, they are falling, they are falling, they begin to totter,
and will not stand long; however it is certainly spoken in a way of derision,
as importing that those lofty Idols before whom the Heads and Knees of the
proud Babylonians had so often bowed, should now bow and fall down themselves;
their Idols were upon the beasts and upon the cattle, that is, they were by the
Persians laid as so much luggage upon their beasts, or tumbled into Wagons,
that they might be carried as a rich prize into their own Country: your
carriages were heavy laden, they are a burden to the weary beast; This may be
taken, as spoken, either to the Persians, or to the Idols; as terming the
carriages wherein they were carried away, their carriages. However this is all
spoken by way of derision; as if it had been said; Surely these are weighty
gods, the poor weary beasts have much ado to carry them.

Ver. 2. They stoop, they bow down together, etc.] Some understand this of the
weary beast that carried the Babylonian Idols, to wit, that they fainted and
sunk under the weight of them; and so likewise the following words, they could
not deliver the burden, which they would have to be all one as if it had been
said, The poor beasts could not free themselves from their burden: Or, they
could not carry the Idols to the place where they were to deliver up that their
burden. But rather it is meant, either 1. of the Babylonians, that they stooped
and hung the head, they could not deliver the burden, that is, they could not
save their Idols from being carried away, when they saw the Persians lading
their beasts with them; Or rather, 2. Of the Idol-gods. For the first words,
They stoop, they bow down together, are in effect no more but a repetition of
what was said in the beginning of the foregoing verse, to wit, that both Bell
and Nebo, and all the rest of their Idols together with them, did stoop and bow
down, that is, were broken down by the Persians, and carried away upon their
beasts. And accordingly they understand that which follows, they could not
deliver the burden, that is, say some, they could not keep themselves from
being a burden to the weary beasts; Or rather, they could not deliver the
burden wherewith the beasts were laden, out of the hand of the enemy, that is,
they could not deliver themselves; but themselves are gone into captivity; That
is, even their Idol-gods; so far they were from delivering the People, that
they themselves, together with the People, were carried Captives. It is in the
Hebrew, their Souls are gone into captivity, which is an Hebraism, intending no
more than what is said in our Translation, themselves are gone into captivity,
as in Psalm. 105.18. where it is said of Joseph, his Soul went into Iron. But
yet others hold, that these Idols are termed the Babylonians Soul; because they
esteemed them as their own Souls, accounting that their well-being, yea their
very life depended upon them. And again others think, that this expression is
used ironically, by way of deriding these their dead gods, that had indeed
neither Soul nor Sense.

Ver. 3. Harken unto me, O house of Jacob and all the remnant of the house of
Israel, etc.] That is, all that were left of the People of Israel, after Ten of
the Tribes were carried away captives into Assyria, and after the great havoc
that should be made amongst the other two Tribes by the Babylonians. See the
Notes, Chap. 10.22. and 28.5. yet some by the remnant of the house of Israel,
understand those few of the Ten Tribes that had hitherto joined themselves to
the people of Judah. However that whereto he invites them to hearken, is that
which he meant to say concerning himself, and the vanity of all Idol-gods, that
so they might learn to trust in him, and to take heed of idolatry. As for that
which follows, which are born by me from the belly, which are carried from
the womb. That is, who from your very infancy, (See the Note Psalm. 22.11.) or
from the days of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, (the first Original of your being my
People) I have by my providence supported, and tenderly tended, fed and
preserved, even as a Mother that carries her Child up and down in her bosom,
and in her arms. See the Note, Deuteronomy. 1.31. This seems purposely added, the
better to set forth the difference that was betwixt him, the true God, and the
Idol-gods of the Heathens: They carried their gods upon beasts, and carts, and
wagons, whereas he on the other side did bear his People in his arms, as a
Mother does her young Infant.

Ver. 4. And even to your old age I am he, and even to h^ar hairs will I carry
you, etc.] As if he had said, And so I shall do more for you, than Mothers do
for their young babes; As soon as they are grown up a little, they are left to
go by themselves, and are carried no longer: But I will be the same to you,
even to your old age, that I have hitherto been. I have made, See the Note,
Chap. 43.1. (And herein there is another difference hinted, betwixt him, the
true God, that made his People, and the Idol-gods that were made by those that
worshipped them) and I will bear, even I will carry: See the foregoing Note,
and will deliver you; to wit, out of the Babylonian Captivity.

Ver. 5. To whom will ye liken me? etc.] See the Note, Chap. 40.18.

Ver. 6. They lavish Gold out of the bag, and weigh Silver in the balance,
etc.] To wit, to make sure, that there was as much Silver put into their Idol
as they allowed for it. Now all this is thus set forth, to show how unfit these
Idols were to be likened to the true and living God.

Ver. 7. They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, etc.] That is, Having
gotten him upon their shoulders, then they carry him.

Ver. 8. Remember this, etc.] This is spoken to the Jews, that were too much
addicted to idolatry, both in Babylon, and before they came thither: And see
the Note, Chap. 44.21. and show your selves men, that is, make use of your
^eason, and do not carry your selves in these things, as if you had no more
reason and understanding than the bruit beast has; Or, do not worship these
Idol-gods, out of a womanish fear of the Babylonians, or any other Idolaters;
bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors; that is, ye that have transgressed
the law, and the covenant of your God, call to mind again and again, and
meditate seriously of what I have said.

Ver. 9. Remember the former things of old, etc.] That is, All the glorious
Works of God from the Creation unto this time, his Predictions and Works, how
he has still done what he has foretold. And indeed, because he speaks here to
the Jews, it must be understood especially of all the great things he had done
for them in former Ages.

Ver. 10. Declaring the end from the beginning, etc.] That is, foretelling
things to come from the first to the last, and from ancient times the things
that are not yet done; which is an Argument often before used to prove, that
the God of Israel, who has done this, is the only true God: See the Notes,
Chap. 41.22. and Chap. 42.9. and 43.9. and 44.8. and 45.21. Saying, My counsel
shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure; and therefore what is not yet come
to pass* shall as certainly come to pass, as those things that have come to
pass already.

Ver. 11. Calling a ravenous bird from the east, etc.] To wit, Cyrus, that out
of Persia, (See the Note, Chap. 41.2.) should come swiftly upon Babylon,
overcoming all difficulties lying in his way, as if he flew over them, and
should tare their state and people in pieces, as such a bird does her prey: For
so it is expounded in the following words, the man that executes my counsel
from a far Country, See the Note, Chap. 44.28.

Ver. 12. Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted, etc.] Some think this is spoken to
the Babylonians, that out of the pride of their hearts, and stoutness of their
stomachs, thought to carry all as they pleased themselves, contrary to God's
promises and purposes. But by the general current of Expositors, it is taken as
spoken to the Jews, as was that before, ver. 8. and that they are called
stout-hearted, because they had carried themselves stoutly and stubbornly
against God, notwithstanding all the warnings he had given them by his Prophet,
and the heavy Judgment that lay upon them in their being Captives in Babylon;
and in the next words, far from righteousness, either because they were far
from the holiness and righteousness which God required in his people (and happily
with respect to their being much corrupted with the Religion and Manners of the
Babylonians, amongst whom they lived), and therefore were very unfit for the
deliverance they desired. Or else, as some think, because they looked upon
themselves as in a desperate condition, and far from seeing the righteousness
of God made good to them by the performance of his promise concerning their
deliverance.

Ver. 13. I bring near my righteousness: it shall not be far off, etc.] They
that understand the foregoing verse, as spoken to the Babylonians, do
accordingly understand these words thus; That though they had been far from
dealing righteously with his People, yet he would deal justly with them, in
bringing speedily that vengeance upon them, which by their cruel usage of his
people, they had justly deserved. But taking the foregoing verse, as spoken to
the Jews, (which by this, that is here added, seems far most probable) this is
all one in effect, as if the Lord had said to them, Though you by your
wickedness and infidelity do what you can to hinder me from doing it, yet I
will approve my self righteous by performing that which I have promised
concerning your deliverance by Cyrus, and that speedily, and without delay: See
the Note, Chap. 45.8. which fully agrees with that of the Apostle, What if some
did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? God
forbid, Romans 3.3, 4. And this does the rather appear to be the meaning of the
place, because of the following words, and my Salvation shall not tarry, to
wit, my delivering of my People out of their Captivity; and I will place
Salvation in Zion, that is, having rescued them out of Babylon, I will settle
them again in Zion, as in a place of safety, for Israel my glory, that is, by
whose deliverance I will be glorified. But still we must remember, that under
the Type of the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, that far greater
Redemption and Salvation by Christ is also comprehended wherein God was indeed
transcendently glorified: See the Note, Chap. 40.5.

CHAP. XLVII.
VERSE 1. COme down and sit in the dust, O Virgin Daughter of Babylon; sit on
the ground, etc. What is meant by the Virgin Daughter of Babylon, and why she
may be here so called, See the Notes, 2 Reg. 19.21. Psalm. 137.8. and Chap.
23.12. God by the Prophet does here speak to Babylon, as to some proud stately
young Queen gorgeously attired, and sitting upon her Throne, and bids her come
down and sit in the dust, and on the ground, to wit, as poor Slaves and
Captives used to do, and others in times of great and solemn mourning; See the
Note, Job 2.8. and that which was intended hereby is, that this glorious
Imperial City, that had ruled over so many Kingdoms and Nations, should be
forthwith brought down to the lowest pitch of baseness and misery. And indeed
Gods Command is enough to make such mighty changes in Kingdoms: there is no
Throne, O Daughter of the Caldeans: that is, thou shall never Lord it more over
other Nations, as thou have done; thy Monarchy shall now be translated to the
Presians; for thou shall no more be called tender end delicate, that is, thou
shall no more be applauded for thine excellent greatness. Or, thou shall no
longer live in such tenderness and delicacy, but shall be brought into a sad
and miserable condition.

Ver. 2. Take the Milstones and grind Meal, etc.] That is, prepare thy self for
the basest of all servile employments, such as was grinding at the Mill,
wherein they employed their Captives and poorest drudges. See the Notes, Exodus
11.5. and 12.29. Judge. 16.21. and Job 31.10. As for that which follows,
Uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers;
some understand the first words, uncover thy locks, of the custom of Women's
going in their Mourning, with their Hair hanging loose about them; and because
of that mention that is made in the last place of passing over, the River, that
which is said of uncovering their Legs and Thighs, they understand of taking up
of their clothes, when they were to wade through deep Waters: But I rather take
this whole passage to be a description of the sad plight wherein the Babylonian
Women should be, namely, that their stately Dames being stripped of their
bravery, should be carried away captives with their Hair hanging about their
Ears, having only such poor tattered Garments upon them as would neither cover
their Legs or Thighs: (See the Notes, Chap. 20.2, 4.) And so should be driven
away into Persia, wading through the Rivers as they went along.

Ver. 3. Thy nakedness shall be uncovered; yea, thy shame shall be seen, etc.)
To wit, the nakedness of their Privy parts, which Women out of modesty are
ashamed to have seen. I will take vengeance, as if he had said, it is not so
much Cyrus, that shall bring this misery upon thee, as I the Lord God of
Israel, who shall by this means take vengeance on thee for all the wickedness
thou have committed against me, and against my people. And I will not meet thee
as a man, that is, say some, I will fall upon thee without any pity or
compassion, which even barbarous enemies will sometimes show to the conquered,
especially to the weaker Sex; and therefore as a Lion, or some other ravening
Beast, rather than as a Man; or else, not with the wrath and power of Man,
which may be resisted and born, but with the unresistable and unsufferable
power of an Almighry God. It is as if he had said, whilst thou had to do with
men, thou were able to grapple with them, and usually to subdue them; but now
God will contend with thee, before whose indignation and revenging hand thou will never be able to stand. See the Notes, Chap. 17.6. and 2 Samuel 7.14.

Ver. 4. As for our Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, the Holy one of
Israel]. This is inserted by the Prophet in the Name of God's people, as taking
occasion from that which had been said concerning Babylon, to break forth into
this magnifying of God, by professing that it was their God, the great God of
Heaven and Earth that would do this, and that he would do it purposely for
their sakes, that they might be redeemed out of their Captivity.

Ver. 5. Sit thou silent, etc.] Here again God proceeds to set forth the misery
of the Babylonians in their Captivity. Sit thou silent, and get thee into
darkness, O daughter of the Caldeans; some think that by these words, get thee
into darkness, is intended, that they should be cast into dark Prisons; or that
after they were carried away Captives, they should abide in the darkness of
continual misery: But it is more probable, that all the expressions here used,
are to set forth how they should be overwhelmed with grief and shame; for men
in such a condition are wont to sit silent, (see the Note, Job 2.13.) and to
get into dark corners, as being ashamed to be seen. And it may well be, which
some think, that in that which is said of their sitting silent, there might be
some respect had to the great noise which that Empire had formerly made in the
world; as if he had said, Thou that had wont to thunder out thy commands and
threatenings through so many Kingdoms, shall now sit silent, as being ashamed of
the base condition whereinto thou art fallen, and not daring to mutter against
those that shall tyrannize over thee.

Ver. 6. I was wroth with my people, etc.] Here the cause is shown why Babylon
should be thus destroyed: I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine
inheritance, and given them into thine hand: That is, my people, whom I chose
to be my peculiar inheritance (see the Note, Chap. 19.15.) I have cast off, as
an unclean thing, as if they had been never separated from others to be a holy
people unto my self, and as a People that had by their wickedness made
themselves unfit indeed to be my people, and delivered them up into thine
hands, an unclean, uncircumcised people, that thou might carry them out of
my Land, whithersoever thou pleasedst; (See the Note, Chap. 43.28.) Thou did
show them no mercy: upon the ancient have thou very heavily laid thy yoke: The
accomplishment whereof, see Lam. 5.11, 12. The drift therefore of these words
is clear, namely, to show, that though he was willing that his people should
smart for their sins, yet he was highly offended with their cruel usage of
them: Yea, and this also is hinted, that if God spared not his own people when
they sinned against him, much less would he spare them.

Ver. 7. And thou said, I shall be a Lady for ever, etc.] This is added, as
another cause of Babylons destruction, to wit, her security and presumptuous
confidence concerning the perpetuity of her greatness, and which was indeed the
root of her pride and cruelty: So that thou did not lay these things to thy
heart; that is, say some, That Israel was my peculiar people; and that
therefore, though I made use of thee to correct them for their sins, yet there
was no likelihood that I would cast them off for ever, and consequently thou
did not lay to heart the cruelties thou did exercise toward them. But
rather, the things they did not lay to heart, were the things which were now
foretold them, those woeful miseries which their inhumane dealing with Gods
people would at last bring upon them; which is further confirmed from the last
clause, neither did remember the latter end of it, That is, what would at
length befall thee for thy cruelty to them: yet some understand this too, of the
end of Jerusalem or the people of God, namely, that they did not bethink
themselves that God would at last deliver his people.

Ver. 8. Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that
dwell carelessly, etc.] To wit, without fear of any change, see the Note,
Judge. 18.7. that say in thine heart, I am, to wit, the great Monarch and
Empress of the world, and none else besides me, that is, there is no Kingdom
like me, either for magnificence or sure stability; all other are not worth the
naming, and are as nothing in comparison of mine. An arrogant and blasphemous
expression, wherein she ascribes that to her self, which God often mentions as
his transcendent peculiar dignity. I shall not sit as a Widow, neither shall I
know the loss of Children; that is, I shall not sit desolate as a Widow, nor
want of the Royal issue to sit upon the Throne: Or, I shall never want a King
that shall be as a Husband to me, nor be deprived of that numerous people,
which, as my Children, live in subjection to me. See Rev. 18.7.

Ver. 9. But these two things shall come to thee in a moment, in one day, etc.]
To wit, in that day when Babylon was taken by Cyrus, which was done so suddenly
and unexpectedly, that there was no place for counsel or escape. The loss of
Children and Widowhood, that is, the destruction of thy people, and thy King
Belshazzar amongst the rest, See Dan. 5.30. See the feregoing Note, They shall
come upon thee in their perfection; that is, both the one and the other shall
be fully and to the utmost accomplished upon thee, even to the utter
destruction of thy Kingdom; for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the
great abundance of thine enchantments; that is, for all thy magical arts and
practices, wherein the Caldeans did abound: So that this is mentioned as
another cause of their destruction.

Ver. 10. For thou have trusted in thy wickedness, etc.] To wit, either their
wicked policies, their rapines and oppressions, and all other the wicked ways
whereby they had raised themselves to their present greatness, and whereby they
might still hope to secure themselves against all fears and dangers. Or 2ly,
the riches and power which they had gotten by such ways of wickedness. Or 3dly,
all their Magic Arts (mentioned in the close of the foregoing Verse, and much
afterward insisted on) whereon they relied much, because they thought their
Magicians able to foresee and foretell future things, and heard nothing but
assurance of good from them; and likewise able by their Sorceries and
Witchcrafts to help them, and prejudice their enemies. Thou have said, none
sees me; That is, thou have flattered thy self, as if neither God nor Man
could take notice of thy sinful ways and policies. See the Notes, Chap. 29.15.
and Psalm. 64.5. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge it has perverted thee; That is,
thy trusting to that which thou esteemest great wisdom and knowledge, thy carnal
policy, or thy great skill in Magic Arts, has deceived thee and mislead thee,
emboldening thee in thy hardness, and causing thee to chucker thy self with
groundless hopes; and thou have said in thine heart, I am, and none else
besides me; see the Note above, ver. 8. So that all things considered, the
drift of this Verse seems to be, to show what was the Root and Spring of that
pride and security in the Babylonians, mentioned before, Ver. 7. as the cause
why God would destroy them.

Ver. 11. Therefore shall evil come upon thee, thou shall not know from whence
it rises, etc.] It is in the Hebrew, Thou shall not know the morning thereof;
and therefore some take the meaning to be, either that they should not know
what day it should come; or that they should take no notice of the apparent
signs of their approaching destruction; though there should be many things that
should be as clear tokens of their approaching ruin, as the first dawning of
the morning is a token that the Sun is about to rise; yet they should never
observe them. And because the words may be rendered, Thou shall not know the
rising thereof, it may be the more probably thought, that there is a secret nip
here given to the practice of their Magicians and Astronomers, on whom they so
much relied, who in their Figure-casting, were wont studiously to observe the
rising and aspect of the Planets; as if it had been said, you that by the
rising of the Planets, pretend or foretell what all days will prove, whether
fatal or prosperous, shall not be able to foresee the rising or the morning of
the day of your own destruction. And again it may be spoken with reference to
the sudden surprisal of Babylon, that was taken before the Inhabitants began to
fear any danger, as all Histories reports. But because our Translators have
rendered the word, thou shall not know from whence it rises, it is clear that
they understand it of their not knowing from what Nation or Country their
destruction should come upon them, the Babylonians not dreaming at that time of
any quarrel or evil intention that Cyrus had against them: And mischief shall
fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to put it off; and desolation shall come
upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not know: That is, which thou shall not
foresee, and so it will be the more grievous to be born.

Ver. 12. Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy youth, etc.] That is, whereto
thou have been violently addicted, and which thou have followed with all
eagerness, even from the first raising of thy City and State. And indeed this
people were of Ancient time much given to these sinful practices; in so much,
that the professors of these Arts were among other Nations known and called by
the Name of Caldeans. Stand now with thine enchantments, etc. This is spoken by
way of derision, and by way of insulting over them for their vain confidence in
those things; as if it had been said, Call your Magicians together, and try
what good you can do with them; if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be
thou may prevail; That is, see whether this will any way advantage thee;
whether hereby thou can keep off the ruin that is coming upon thee; and then
you will soon find, that such things will do you no good in the World.

Ver. 13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy Counsels, etc.] As if he had
said, Thou do but tire thy self in vain, in seeking out many and many several
ways to save thy self: Or, having hitherto to no purpoose wearied thy self in
those manifold policies and ways, whereby thou have sought to secure thy self;
try now what thy cunning wise men, thy Wizzards can do; as it follows in the
next words, Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the Monthly
Prognosti^ators, that is, those that undertake to foretell what will come to
pass every Month, stand up, and save thee from those things that shall come
upon thee; that is, let them stand up like men, and make use of all their Art,
to see if they can foretell the miseries that are coming upon thee, and save
thee from them.

Ver. 14. Behold, they shall be as Stubble, etc.] See the Notes, Exodus 15.7.
The fire shall burn them, which is meant of the invasion of the Medes and
Persians; and it may be also spoken with relation to their burning of Babylon;
they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame, to wit, your
Astronomers and Star-gazers, etc. and how then shall they be able to deliver
you? So that indeed your trust in them, is as if by heaping Stubble about you,
you should hope to keep your selves from burning; There shall not be a coal to
warm at, nor fire to sit before it, That is, they shall be utterly destroyed
and consumed, as where Srubble is burnt, where there is not so much as a brand
or coal to be found, nothing at all but Ashes, good for nothing.

Ver. 15. Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou have labored, etc.] That
is, thus unable to help thee shall they all be, with whom thou have tired thy
self, in consulting with them concerning thine Estate. And commonly it is held,
that this is meant of their Magicians and Diviners, of whom he had been before
speaking: yea, of the same they hold the following words are spoken, even thy
Merchants from thy youth, etc. and that they are called Merchants, because (as
Merchants) they had many crafty ways to deceive those they traded with, and
made the people pay dearly for what they did for them. But yet others
understand the whole Verse, of the Merchants that from foreign parts traded in
Babylon in great multitudes, by reason of her convenient situation for Trade,
in regard of her many great Rivers that ran into the Persian Sea; as if it had
been expressed thus, As it shall be with thee in regard of thy Wizzards, so
also in regard of thy Merchants, with whom thou have traded from thy youth,
(See the Note above, Ver. 12. They shall wander every one to his quarter, That
is, they shall get away, fleeing every one to his own Country and home; or,
they shall flee some one way, and some another, wandering up and down, each one
in the way wherein he hopes to find a free passage; None shall save thee, to
wit, neither. Wizzards, nor Merchants.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Ver. 1. HEar ye this, etc.] Having in the foregoing Chapters foretold the
destruction of Babylon, and the deliverance of his people from thence; lest
this should make his people think highly of themselves, here the Prophet
addresseth his speech to them, convincing them of their gross hypocrisy and
wickedness, and that their deliverance would be merely of God's free grace,
Hear ye this, O House of Jacob, which art called by the Name of Israel, That
is, that are called Israelites, and glory much therein, though you be not so
indeed; and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, That is, that are the
offspring of Judah, and therefore called Jews, descending from his Stock, as
streams of water from their Spring; See the Notes, Numb. 24.7. Deuteronomy. 33.28. and
Psalm. 68. And this is mentioned as another thing wherein they gloried much,
because this was the royal Tribe, that had retained the worship of God with
them, when the other Tribes fell away to Idolatry: which swear by the name of
the Lord, to wit, as owning him to be the only true God, and make mention of
the God of Israel, to wit, in swearing by him; or more generally, in that they
talked much of God, and gloried in him as their God peculiarly, Psalm. 50.16.
But not in truth nor in righteousness, that is, not sincerely, but
hypocritically.

Ver. 2. For they call themselves of the holy City, etc.] That is, they boast
that they are Citizens of the Holy City Jerusalem, in regard of Gods dwelling
there amongst them, and their worshipping him there, and the confidence they
had, that upon this account God would certainly defend the City; and stay
themselves upon the God of Israel; that is, they profess much confidence in
God, and make a great show of relying upon him, though indeed there is no such
thing. The Lord of hosts is his name, which is added, not to imply that God,
Almighty Al-ruling power was the ground why they did with such confidence rely
upon him; but rather how able he was every moment to destroy them that did thus
grossly dissemble with him.

Ver. 3. I have declared the former things from the beginning, etc.] That is,
from the time when I first took you to be my people, I have successively in
former Ages foretold you future things: and they went out of my mouth, and I
showed them, That is, I determined on the things to be done, and then revealed
them by my Prophets to you. I did them suddenly, and they came to pass: That
is, when the time determined came, they were suddenly done: when they,
concerning whom they were foretold, did little think of any such thing. See the
Note, Chap. 42.9. All which is alleged, as often formerly (see the Note, Chap.
46.10.) to make it clear to them, that hereby he had sufficiently approved
himself to them to be the only true God. And what his aim was in asserting this
here; is set forth in the following Verses.

Ver. 4. Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew,
and thy brow brass) Here the reason is given, why he had, by foretelling things
before he did them, proved himself to be the only true God (as is said in the
foregoing Verse, and repeated again in that which follows) namely, because he
knew that they were a stubborn, stiff-necked, impudent people, that would
hardly be brought to believe his words by his Prophets, and very prone to rebel
against him; and so to prevent this (and that merely of his own free grace,
notwithstanding this their wickedness) he had thus clearly manifested himself
to them, even from their first being his people, unto that present time, when
he had foretold them their captivity in Babylon, the destruction of Babylon by
Cyrus, and their deliverance from thence.

Ver. 5. I have even from the beginning declared it to thee; before it came to
pass I showed it thee, etc.] See the two foregoing Notes, lest thou should
say, mine Idol has done them, etc. And this is mentioned as one of the main
effects of their stubborness, which God sought to prevent by foretelling
beforehand what he meant to do in future times, namely, their ascribing the
great things which he did to their Idol-gods.

Ver. 6. Thou have heard, see all this, etc.) That is, you have heard how in
all Ages I have foretold what should come to pass in future times, and how all
things have exactly come to pass as they were foretold; now mark and consider
all this, and lay it seriously to heart: And will not ye declare it? That is,
will ye not declare unto others this which you have heard concerning my
Predictions and the accomplishment of them, and so bear witness to the truth,
that it may be seen that I have omitted no necessary means of manifesting my
self to you? I have showed thee new things from this time, even hidden things,
and thou did not know them: As if he should have said, As formerly, so now
also I have foretold thee new things, which were wholly hidden, and which of
thy self thou could never have known, to wit, the destruction of Babylon,
and thy deliverance from thence.

Ver. 7. They are created now, and not from the beginning, etc.] That is, they
are now revealed and brought to light (as things are when created) and not in
former times, see the Notes, Ver. 3, 5. Even before the day when thou heardest
them not, That is, before the time when thou had heard any thing of them;
lest thou should say, behold, I knew them, that is, lest thou should say,
when they came to pass, I knew well enough that these things would be.

Ver. 8. Yea, thou heardest not, etc.] Some would have the meaning of this
whole Verse to be, that God had revealed these new things to them, of which
mention was made in the forgoing Verse, to wit, the destruction of Babylon, and
the deliverance of his people, when they heard not, etc. when they obstinately
stopped their ears, and would not hear what he said to them. But it is rather a
continuation of what he had said before; yea, thou heardest not, that is, the
things that I now reveal to thee, are things which thou had never heard
before from thy Star-gazers, or Soothsayers, or any body else; yea, thou
knew not, That is, thou knew them not any other way: Yea, from that time
that thine ear was not opened, That is, even when the least of this business
had never yet come to thine ear: for I knew that thou would deal very
treacherously. As if he should have said, Therefore do I repeat this, and press
this so often upon thee, that it is I that have foretold thee these future
things that shall befall thee, to make sure thou should know, that it was I
that caused thee to be carried away into Babylon, and that it was I that
delivered thee from thence; and that because I knew that thou would not own
mine hand in all that befell thee, but would treacherously ascribe it to
other things: And wast called a transgressor from the womb, That is, that have
been a transgressor from the womb, to wit, say some, from thy Nativity, or from
thy first coming out of Egypt, when God first took thee upon Mount Sinai to be
his vovenant people (but see also the Note, Chap. 46.3.) and therefore may
deservedly be so called, rather than as it is said, Ver. 1. they were commonly
called by the name of Israel.

Ver. 9. For my names sake will I defer mine anger, etc.) As if God said,
though thou art, and have always been so wicked, as is before said, yet will I
stay and suppress mine anger for my names sake, That is, say some, because thou
art called by my name, as being accounted my people: Or rather for mine own
sake, see the Note, Psalm. 25.11. That is, with respect to mine own glory. It
was not because you deserved not to be destroyed, but that men might not
question mine Almighty power and faithfulness toward my people; or say the
gods of the Gentiles were mightier than I. See the Note also, Deuteronomy. 32.20. And
for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off; That is, I will
for thy good withhold my self from destroying thee, that I may be praised for
my mercy and faithfulness to thee. All which is inserted for the comfort of the
faithful amongst Gods people; and that when they were delivered, they might
ascribe it wholly to Gods free Grace.

Ver. 10. Behold, I have refined thee, etc.] As if the Lord had said, Though
with respect to mine own Glory I would not utterly destroy thee (as was said in
the forgoing Verse) yet with respect to thy good, I have sought to purge away
thy Dross in the fire of Affliction. The greatest difficulty is in the
following words; which some read, as they are in the Margin, I have refined
thee, but not for silver, and so understand it, that it was not for any gain or
advantage that God got by it, that he cast them into the furnace of Babylon;
and indeed we have the like expressions, Chap. 45.13. and Psalm. 44.12. for
which see the Notes there. But by most interpreters the words are rendered, as
in our Translation, I have refined thee, but not with silver; which though some
understand of the succeslesness of Gods afflicting them, to wit, that though he
had sought to refine them in the furnace of affliction, yet it had not been
with them, as it is with Silver, which is purged from its dross in the Refiners
furnace; they being still as wicked as before; yet the most and best Expositors
understand it of the gentelness of Gods afflicting them, I have refined thee,
but not with silver; that is, not with so hot, and fierce, and vehement a Fire,
as the Refiners use in refining their Silver: I have afflicted thee but lightly
and moderately, having respect to thine infirmity, rather than to the greatness
of thy sin and stubbornness; I have not refined so accurately and exactly, as
Refiners do their Silver, who keep it in the Fire, till all the Dross be wasted
and purged out of it; for then they would have been quite consumed. I have
chosen thee in the furnace of affliction, That is, say some, I will make a
choice one of thee, by purging thee; or I have purged thee, like choice Silver,
in the Furnace of Babylon. But rather I conceive the meaning is, either that
God had chosen their captivity in Babylon to be as a Refining Furnace to them;
or else, that in this their affliction he had set his heart upon them, and had
chosen and called them out, as we do things we mean to preserve to be delivered.

Ver. 11. For mine own sake even for mine own sake, will I do it, etc.] see the
note before, Ver. 9. For how shall my Name be polluted? That is, otherwise how
exceedingly would my name be polluted? (which I can by no means suffer) to wit,
by the enemies blaspheming my name; and I will not give my glory unto another.
See the Note, Chap. 42.8.

Ver. 12. Hearken unto me, O Jacob, etc.] Here God addresseth himself again to
promise them deliverance out of Babylon, Hearken unto me, O Jacob, and Israel,
my called. That is, whom I have called to be my peculiar people, and whom I
cannot but own, in regard of the Covenant I have made with you, though you
indeed deserve not to be called by that name, I am he, to wit, that must
deliver thee; I am the First, I also am the last, See the Note, Chap. 4.14.

Ver. 13. Mine hand also has laid the foundation of the Earth, etc.] See the
Notes, Chap. 40.11, 12. and 45.12. and Psalm. 104.2. and my Right hand has
spanned the Heavens, which is spoken after the manner of Workmen, that were
wont sometimes to measure things by their span; when I call unto them, they
stand up together, to wit, as my Servants, ready to do whatever I command them,
See the Note, Chap 40.26. and this expression is the rather used in relation to
that which follows afterward Ver. 15. concerning Gods calling of Cyrus.

Ver. 14. All ye assembler your selves and hear, etc] That is, as it was
expressed before, Ver. 1 and 11. All ye my people Israel, considering I am so
great a God (as was said in the foregoing verse) hearken diligently to what I
say; some would have it that the Prophet speaks here in his own person, because
of those words in this verse, the Lord loved him. But nothing is more usual
than for God to speak of himself in the third person; It is therefore more
probable, that as before, and after, so here also, the Prophet speaks in the
name of God; which among them have declared these things? that is, which of the
Idol gods (see the Note before, Verse 5.) their Diviners or Astrologers, have
foretold these things that I have foretold? See the Notes Chap. 44.7. and
45.21. The Lord has loved him, that is, Cyrus, named before, Chap. 45.1. to
wit, in that he exalted him so highly, and made use of him in so great a
Service: He will do his pleasure on Babylon. See the Note, Chap 44.28. and his
arm shall be on the Caldeans, that is, he shall fall heavily on them, and
destroy them.

Ver. 15. I, even I, have spoken, etc.] That is, I, even I alone, who am a
faithful God, and sure to perform what I say: yea, I have called him, to wit
Cyrus, (as before, Ver. 14. to the doing of that great work, whereunto I have
appointed him; I have brought him, that is, I will bring him; and he shall make
his way prosperous, that is, he shall prosper in whatever he undertakes.

Ver. 16. Come ye near unto me, hear ye this, etc.] see the Note before, Ver.
14. I have not spoken in secret from the beginning, the meaning whereof must
needs be this (if we take them to be the words of the Prophet, as many do, and
as the last words in this Verse clearly are) that from the beginning of Gods
calling him to his Prophetical Office, he had publicly and plainly made known
to them what God had revealed to him; and accordingly the following words must
also be understood, from the time that it was, there am I; as if the Prophet
had said, from the time that any thing was revealed to me, there still am I (as
in my watchtower) faithfully and plainly declaring the whole will of God unto
his People. But this Exposition is somewhat hard; rather therefore it is God
that speaks here to his People, I have not spoken in secret from the beginning,
that is, from the first time that I took you to be my people, or from the time
that I first began to foretell you future things by my Prophets, I have always
made known such things to you clearly and in public: see the Note, Chap.
45.19. And then agreeably hereto, must the following words be understood, from
the time that it was, I am there; namely, either 1. that from the time that any
thing was foretold by his Prophets, he was there revealing to them, by his
spirit; the things which they did foretell; so that it was he indeed that spoke
by them. Or 2. That from the time that any thing came to pass which was
foretold, he was there accomplishing the things foretold, by his Almighty
power; as they were foretold, so they were also accomplished by him. And then
for the last clause there, as is said before, it is clear that the Prophet
speaks in his own person; and now the Lord God and his Spirit has sent me,
that is, as formerly in other things foretold by me and other the Prophets of
God; so now in this which I say concerning Babylon and Cyrus, I say nothing but
by commission from God, and by the inspiration of his Spirit.

Ver. 17. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, etc.] See
the Note, Chap. 1.4. I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit; that
is, who teaches thee by my Word and Spirit, those things which will be for thy
welfare; which leads thee by the way that thou should go; that is,
teaching and directing thee how to order thy conversation. And the aim of these
words, I conceive, is this; lest the Jews should say, If the Lord meant to
fetch us back out of Babylon, why did he bring us hither? Therefore the Lord
tells them here, that he had done enough to make them a Righteous people, which
had they improved for good, they might have been still in their own Land.

Ver. 18. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments, etc.] Implying, that
then they had been free from all those miseries, which by their disobeying Gods
commands they had brought upon themselves, and particularly in the Babylonian
captivity, see the foregoing Note: then had thy peace been as a river, that is,
then had thy peace or thy prosperity in every regard (See the Note, Psalm.
119.165.) been abundantly, and in a continued course, exceeding great,
over-bearing any thing that might in likelihood be any hinderance to it: And to
the same purpose is the following clause, and thy righteousness as the Waves of
the Sea; for by Righteousness here, is meant, either the reward of
Righteousness, namely, Peace and Prosperity, as before (as iniquity is
sometimes put for the reward of iniquity, Genesis 4.13.) See the Note, Chap.
32.17. Or more particularly, a State rightly and well ordered and established;
see the Note, Psalm. 72.3.

Ver. 19. Thy seed also had been as the Sand, and the Offspring of thy Bowels
like the Gravel thereof, etc.] As if he had said, Whereas your number has been
of late much diminished, by the breaking in pieces of ten of your Tribes, and
the carrying of them away into Captivity, and by the havoc also that your
enemies have made, even amongst you of Judah, had you been Obedient to my
Commandments, it would have been quite contrary with you; God would have
exceedingly multiplied you according to his promise of old, Genesis 22.17. His
Name should not have been cut off, nor destroyed from before me; that is, my
people Israel, their State and Commonwealth, and so their name and memory, and
the great renown which formerly they enjoyed, should not have been cut off from
the Land, where in the Temple I dwelt amongst them, as now it is like to be, to
wit, in the Babylonian Captivity.

Ver. 20. Go ye forth, etc.] Having in the foregoing verses told them, that
they by their sins had been the cause of the miseries that were come upon them,
here he adds, that yet notwithstanding, to wit, of his own free grace, and for
his own namesake, as he had said before, he would deliver them out of Babylon.
And this he speaks of, as if it were then a doing (though it were not to be
done till about a hundred years after) to make the tidings thereof the more
joyful to them, and the better to assure them of the certainty of it, Go ye
forth of Babylon; flee ye from the Caldeans, to wit, that ye may not be
destroyed with them. Some indeed conceive, that in these last words the Jews
are advised, upon the first report of the approach of Cyrus, to get them away
from amongst the Caldeans; but the following words do rather import a departure
with full and free Liberty upon the proclamation of Cyrus, than an escape by
flight; with a voice of singing declare ye; that is, with great joy declare
what God has done for you; and therefore it is repeated again and again, as a
matter of great joy, tell this, utter it even to the end of the Earth, etc.
that is, spread it abroad, so that the same may be carried to the ends of the
Earth.

Ver. 21. And they thirsted not when he led them through the Deserts, etc.] As
if he should have said, Though in this return of my People from Babylon to
their own Country, they went through many wild and dry deserts, yet they
wanted nothing that was necessary for them, I provided for them as I did for
their Ancestors, when I carried them out of Egypt through the Wilderness into
the Land of Canaan; He caused the waters to flow out of the Rock for them, etc.
that is, he did in a wonderful manner provide for them, as once for their
Ancestors in their passage to the Promised Land, see the notes, Chap. 41.18.
and 43.19. But yet, though this be thus expressed as done already, to imply the
certainty of it; yet; that I conceive which the Prophet intended, was, that
thus it should be when they were delivered out of Babylon.

Ver. 22. There is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked.] Having before
told them, Ver. 18. That if they would have obeyed Gods Commandments, their
peace should have been always abundantly great; here he assures them, that it
is never so with wicked men. But the drift of the Prophet in closing this
Prophecy with this general Proposition, may seem to be, to imply, either, 1.
that whilst God showed so much Mercy and Goodness to his people, yet it should
be quite otherwise with the wicked Babylonians, they should certainly be
destroyed; and therefore it would be wisdom in the Jews to haste out of
Babylon. Or 2ly. that though the Jews might have been in a most prosperous
estate, had they obeyed Gods Commandments (as was said before, Verse 18, 19.)
yet it was no wonder that it was so ill with them at present, because of their
great wickedness. Or 3dly. that in the foregoing promise, made to the Jews,
there was nothing of Peace spoken to the wicked amongst them, but only to the
godly; for though they might go out of Babylon together with others, yet this
would not be done for them, because God was reconciled to them, but still they
would lie under Gods wrath, because of their wickedness.

CHAP. XLIX.
Ver. 1. LIsten, O Isl^s unto me, etc.] see the Note, Chap. 41. I do not see
any inconvenience in that, which some learned Expositors hold; namely, that the
Prophet speaks here in his own person, and as before concerning the deliverance
of the Jews out of Babylon, yet as principally intending hereby to speak in the
name of Christ, of whom he was a Type, and to set forth the greater work of
Redemption which was shadowed forth in the deliverance of the Jews out of
Babylon, that was to be accomplished by Christ. But I confess, that the general
current of Expositors do understand this as spoken by Christ alone, without
respect to any other. Having (say they) hitherto spoken of Cyrus, and his
deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, here he speaks of Christ and of our
Redemption by him; and so on to the end of his Prophecy: whence also they say
it is, that whereas before the Jews only were spoken to, Hear ye this, O house
of Jacob, etc. here the Gentiles are called upon to hear, Listen, O Isles unto
me, and hearken ye people from far; because the Gospel of Christ was to be
preached to them, even to to the utmost of them, and because they would embrace
Christ, when the generality of the Jews should reject him, and so should be
taken in to be Gods People, instead of the Jews. However, it is clear that
Christ is here principally (if not solely) intended, because many passages in
this Chapter are in the New Testament expressly ascribed to Christ, as Verse 6,
8, and 10. And indeed, if we consider that the People of God would have no
well-grounded hope of that promised deliverance out of Babylon, but by their
reconciliation with God in and through the Mediation of Christ; it cannot seem
strange that from the prediction of the deliverance, he should now proceed to
this promise concerning Christ, The Lord has called me from the Womb, etc.]
That is, Even from the Womb he designed me to the Office of the Mediator; yet
the meaning is not, that God did not appoint him thereto, till he was conceived
or born (for he was by Gods decree chosen and separated to be the Messiah from
all Eternity) but that in his conception and birth, there was a tendency to the
accomplishment of this which God had decreed concerning him; to that end he was
born. Thus it was with Isaiah, in regard of his Prophetical Office (as it was
with Jeremy also, Jer. 1.5. and with St. Paul, Gal. 1.15.) and thus it was with
Christ; From the bowels of my Mother has he made mention of my Name; that is,
from my very birth, or before I was born, he assigned me my name, and did
thereby make known the Work and Office whereunto I was appointed; see Matt.
1.21. Luke 1.31. and 2.21.

Ver. 2. And he has made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his
hand has he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his Quiver has he hid
me.] For the understanding of this, we must know, first, that Christ's Word and
Preaching, (and Typically the Prophet Isaiahs too) is here compared to a sharp
sword, and to a Polished shaft, (which wounds, not only near at hand, but also
at a great distance, very far off) be cause it should be of such power and
efficacy, to wound and pierce the hearts of Men, both by working effectually
upon some for their conversion, and by convincing, vexing, and galling of
others, yea, even of the Gentiles, to the utmost parts of the World; the
accomplishment whereof we see in many things recorded in the Gospel concerning
Christ's preaching; as where it is said of Christ, that he was mighty in word,
Luke 24.19. and where his very enemies confessed, Never Man spoke like this
Man, Joh. 7.46. and in that which is said concerning the Doctrine of the
Gospel, Heb. 4.12. that it is quick and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged, sword, etc. see the Notes also Chap. 11.4. and Psalm. 45.6. And 2dly.
that by saying that God had hid him in the shadow of his hand, etc.] is meant,
that God would shelter him under the covert of his Almighty power, and protect
him from the rage of his enemies, until the time came, fore-appointed by God,
where he was to dye for the sins of his people; see the Notes, Chap. 18.1. and
42.1. And indeed, considering how sharply Isaiah dealt with the Jews, and that
for so long a time together, under so many several Kings (as when he called
them Princes of Sodom, and People of Gomorrah, Chap. 10. and so in many other
places) he might well say that God had hid him in the shadow of his hand, etc.
For otherwise how could he have been so long secured against their Rage and
Fury?

Ver. 3. And said unto me, Thou art my Servant, O Israel, etc.] In our great
Annotations, another Translation is approved as best, And he said, thou art my
Servant, It is Israel in whom I will be glorified. But this cannot be the
meaning of the words, according to our Translation; of those therefore that
adhere to our Translation, some hold that this is spoken of Isaiah, and that he
is called Israel, as owning him to be the only one, in a manner, amongst his
people, that in those times of general defection deserved to be called by that
name, an Israelite indeed, as Nathaniel is called, Joh. 1.47. but far most
generally it is understood of Christ, Thou art my Servant, O Israel; for
Servant, See Chap. 42.1. The greater question is, why Christ should be here
called Israel. Some say it is, because he was descended of the Stock of Israel,
which is not improbable, it being manifest, that elsewhere in like manner he is
called David, Hos. 3.5. Others, because he was the true Israel, who wrestled
with God to pacifiy his wrath against poor sinners, and prevailed, as Jacob
once wrestled with the Angel, and prevailed, and was thereupon called Israel,
Genesis 32.28. And others again, because he was the Seed, to wit of Abraham and
Israel, to whom the promise is made, Gal. 3.16. And so they hold, that both
Christ as the Head, and the faithful as his Members, are here jointly together
called Israel, as elsewhere Christ, together with the whole Church, is called
Christ, 2 Cor. 12.12. But this seems not so probable, because it is so clear in
the foregoing Verse, that one particular person is here spoken to. However the
ground of the following words, In whom I will be glorified, (as they have
respect to Christ) is clearly because, 1. by his making God known, and the
riches of his Grace toward poor sinners; and 2ly, by his accomplishing the
great work of their Redemption, and triumphing therein over Satan, Death, and
Hell: And 3dly. by his performing all that had been foretold by the Prophets,
God was exceedingly Glorified; whence was that of our Savior, Joh. 17.4. I
have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do.

Ver. 4. Then I said, etc.] To wit, Christ, (though indeed the following
complaint might well be Isaiahs also, as a type of Christ) I have labored in
vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain, to wit, in regard I
could prevail with so few of the Jews, to embrace the glad tidings of the
Gospel; see Joh. 3.32. Yet surely my Judgment is with the Lord, that is, he it
is that can and will judge my cause, and to him I willingly refer my self; and
my work with my God, that is, he knows the Commission I had from him, and how
faithfully I have discharged my trust; laboring therein, even to the spending
of my strength; and therefore I know that he will reward me, not according to
the success of my Labors, but according to my faithfulness in the discharge of
my duty.

Ver. 5. And now says the Lord, that formed me from the Womb, to be his
servant, etc.] That is, that appointed and fitted me from the Womb to be his
Servant, (and indeed then Christ took upon him the form of a servant) see the
Notes above, Verse 2, 3. to bring Jacob again to him, that is, to convert the
Jews, to bring them by Faith and Repentance to return to the Lord their God,
from whom they were strayed; Though Israel be not gathered, etc. Some read this
as it is in the Margin, that Israel may be gathered to him, and I may be
glorious, etc. and so make it a farther declaration of Gods end in sending
Christ, namely, the gathering of the Jews in to God. But reading the words as
they are in our Bibles, Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious
in the eyes of the Lord; the meaning is plain, as if he had said, it would have
been indeed a great glory to me, had I been the means of converting Israel,
according to that which the Apostle says of those that were converted by him,
1 These. 2.20. ye are our glory and joy; and when God seems to curse the labors
of his Servants, by making them ineffectual for the good of a People, it is
some kind of a dishonor to those his Servants; but yet though Israel be
obstinate, and will not be gathered in by me (according to that of our Savior,
Math. 23.37. How often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as a
hen gathers her Chickens, and ye would not?) yet will God highly esteem of
me, and of my labor in my Ministry; yea, and some think that under those
words, yet shall I be glorious, that glory may also be comprehended, where with
God honored him by his resurrection, and the glory that followed thereupon,
and by the bringing in of the Gentiles upon the preaching of the Gospel amongst
them; and my God shall be my strength, to wit, 1. to support and comfort me
against the ingratitude and incredulity of the people to whom I am sent. 2. To
defend me from the rage of mine enemies. And 3. to enable me for the whole work
that shall be imposed on me.

Ver. 6. And he said, etc.] That is, God said, as before, verse 5. It is a
light thing, that thou should be my Servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob;
that is, (say some, that understand it of the deliverance of the Jews out of
Babylon) to raise up the Commonwealth of Israel that is ruined and broken down,
and to set them up again in their former State, in their own Country: Or, (as
others say, that understand it of their spiritual conversion) to raise up the
Church of Israel, that by their apostatising from God, is in a manner broken to
pieces, and to make them again a holy people to the Lord their God: and to
restore the preserved (or the desolations) of Israel; that is, say some, to
restore that little remnant that is left in Babylon, whom God has hitherto
preserved in the midst of those great desolations that have been made amongst
them, and to bring them home again to their own Land. Or, as others, to bring
home to God, that little remnant of his elect, whom God had in all ages
preserved for himself with special care, even as the apple of his own eye. I
will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my
Salvation unto the end of the Earth; that is, (say they that understand the
foregoing words of the Prophets, foretelling the destruction of Babylon, and
deliverance of his People) this mercy of the deliverance of my people shall not
be the only effect of the ruin of Babylon, even to many of the remote nations
of the Gentiles shall it bring great joy, because even they shall thereby be
delivered from that fear and Bondage they had formerly been in. But this
exposition is nothing so clear, as that which most follow, concerning Christ's
enlightening the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Gospel to them, see the
Notes, Chap. 9.1, 2. and 4.26. for to this, Paul and Barnabas applied these
words, Act. 13.46, 47. where they told the Jews, that because of the rejecting
the Gospel, they would turn to the Gentiles, and gave this reason for it; For
so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a light of the
Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation unto the ends of the Earth. And
accordingly, I conceive, the words of the Prophet may be understood, as if he
had said, though it be a great matter that thou should convert the Jews, and
so raise up the tribes of Jacob, which implies that some even amongst them
should be converted by Christ; yet this is but a light and a small matter in
comparison of that which thou shall do, for by thee the Gentiles shall be
enlightened, and be brought in to be one Church together with the Jews, and
partake of the same common Salvation together with them.

Ver. 7. Thus says the Lord the redeemer of Israel, etc.] to wit, that has
often redeemed them out of many dangers and distresses; and his holy one; see
the Note, Chap. 1.4. to him whom man despises etc. or as it is in the Margin,
to him that is despised in Soul; that is, that is apprehensive in his own Soul,
how exceedingly he is scorned and despised, according to the complaint of the
Jews in Babylon, (of whom some understand this place) Psalm. 123.4. Our Soul is
exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at case, and with the
contempt of the proud. But the great question is, Of whom, and to whom this is
spoken. Some understand it of the Prophet Isaiah, to him whom man despises, to
him whom the nation abhors, a servant of Rulers; and that, say they, because
he was despised and abhorred by the generality of the Nation of the Jews, and
used like some poor contemptible Servant by their Princes and Rulers, and that
out of their rage against him for his bold and sharp reproving their sins. And
indeed, I see not why this might not be spoken with respect to him, as he was a
type of Christ; the greatest difficulty is in applying the following words to
him, Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship. But even that might
be spoken with respect to that reverent esteem they should have of him, and the
honor they should do him, when they should see many things come to pass
exactly as he had foretold them, as it was particularly in the case of
Sennacharib. Again, others understand it of the Jews in Babylon, whose
deliverance they say the Prophet here foretells, who were used there indeed as a
most despicable and abominable people, and were perfect slaves to their great
Lords, and accordingly they also understand the following words, Kings shall
see and arise, Princes also shall worship; to wit, that Kings should take
notice of the wonder of their deliverance, and upon the account thereof should
afford them much respect and honor (which they say was accomplished in the
great respect they had from Cyrus, Darius, and others, after their return out
of Babylon) because of the Lord that is faithful, and the holy one of Israel;
and he shall choose thee; because they should see the promises, that God had
made to them, faithfully performed; the Lord thereby owning them, and appearing
for them as his peculiar people. But questionless it is Christ that is here
principally intended, to him whom man despises, that is, whom every man in a
manner despises, as it is said afterward again of Christ, Chap. 53.3. He is
despised and rejected of men. See the Notes also Psalm. 22.6, 7. to him whom the
Nation abhors, to wit, the Nation of the Jews, as was most evident in their
bitter prosecuting of Christ at his death; to a Servant of rulers, that is,
Christ, whom the rulers used, as if he had been the basest of Servants or
Slaves; Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship, that is, even
the great Kings of the Earth shall at last own thee, that were so despised and
abhorred, to be the Lords anointed, and shall stoop to thy Scepter and
Soveragnty; because of the Lord that is faithful, and the holy one of Israel,
that is, the Lord of his faithfulness, bringing this about to make good his
promise made concerning thee; and these Princes being convinced hereof, upon
this very account, submitting themselves to thee; and he shall choose thee,
that is, I will choose thee, that have been despised of man, to rule over the
great Princes of the World. But the meaning is this, that God would make it
evidently appear that he had chosen him to be the Messiah. Thus, I say, these
words are certainly to be understood concerning Christ; yet withal, we must
know, that many learned Expositors do understand this of Christ and the
Primitive Church (the Body of Christ) jointly together. And indeed it may well
be said of the Church of Christ, that she was despised of Man, and abhorred of
Nations, and a Servant of Rulers, (or of the Jewish Nation particularly) so
that they looked upon them as the scum and the off-scowring of all things, and
made nothing of killing them; and yet withal, that afterward even their Kings
did honor her, and submit to her, and that upon the account of her Interest in
Christ in whom God has faithfully made good his promises to her.

Ver. 8. Thus says the Lord, etc.] The same having been expressed* twice
before, verse 5. and 7. we may well conceive* that it is with respect to the
greatness and the strangness of the Mysteries now delivered by the Prophet,
that this is the third time here repeated. And it is doubtless, God the Father
speaks here again to Christ, Thus says the Lord, in an acceptable time have I
heard thee, and in a day of Salvation have I helped thee; and that happily with
relation to that which David, had long before spoken of himself, as a type of
Christ, My prayer is unto thee, O Lord in an acceptable time, Psalm. 69.13. So
that the meaning is clearly this, that when the set time should come, which God
of his own free grace had appointed for the accomplishment of the work of man's
Redemption, by the death of Christ, he would then hear his Prayers and
Intercession for his people (for these words may well comprehend both his
Prayers upon Earth, such as that, John 17. and his intercession in Heaven) and
that in the execution of that, whereto God appointed him, he shall be sure of
support and assistance from him, see the Notes Chap. 42.1-6 and because by the
preaching of the Gospel, this great work of Man's redemption by Christ was made
known, and the doing of this, in the time determined by God of his free grace,
for the salvation of his Redeemed ones, and that even amongst the Gentiles, was
a part of the Office of Christ, as Mediator, even this acceptable time must
needs here be comprehended. And therefore we see the Apostle does expressly
apply this Prophecy thereto, 2 Cor. 6.2. For he says, I have heard thee in a
time accepted; and in the day of Salvation have I succored thee; behold now is
the accepted time, behold now is the day of Salvation. As for the following
words, they also must be accordingly understood; and give thee for a covenant
of the People, that is, to be the Mediator of the Covenant of grace betwixt God
and his People; (see the Note, Chap. 42.6.) and to make good by thee all the
deliverances which by covenants are to be wrought for my People, whether
Corporal, as the deliverance out of Babylon; or spiritual, from the Bondage of
Sin and Satan, whereof that other out of the Babylonian Bondage, was a shadow
and type: and so likewise the last clause of the verse, to establish (or raise
up) the earth, and to cause to inherit the desolate heritages: for as this is
spoken with relation to the type, the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon;
by the establishing or raising up the Earth, must needs be meant the settling of
the state of the Land of Judah again, or the restoring of it to its former
flourishing condition; and by causing to inherit the desolate heritages, is
surely meant the Peoples re-edifying, and then their re-posessing of their old
inheritances, which in the time of their captivity had lain waste and desolate.
But as it has respect to man's deliverance by Christ, that which is intended
thereby is, the restitution and establishing of the Church by him, which was
sunk very low in the Jewish Church, by bringing in the Gentiles to be added to
the Church, that God had given to Christ as his inheritance, by raising up and
restoring to life, earthly and dead men, according to the Prophecy of Simeons
concerning Christ, Luke 2.34. Behold, this Child is set for the fall and rising
again of many in Israel; by chearing poor sinners oppressed with the bondage
and burden of Sin, and by restoring them to their Heavenly inheritance which
they had forfeited and lost by their defection from God.

Ver. 9. That thou may say to the Prisoners, go forth; to them that are in
darkness, show your selves, etc.] that is, come forth into the light; this is
still spoken to Christ, and as in the type it is meant of the deliverance of
the captivtated Jews out of Babylon (see the Note Chap. 45.13.) so principally
in the antitype it is meant of Christ's setting free his redeemed ones by
preaching of the Gospel, the Gentiles especially, from that spiritual Bondage
and blindness under which they lay by nature; see the Note, Chap. 42.7. and so
likewise the following words, they shall feed in the ways, and their pastures
shall be in all high places; under the similitude of a flock of Sheep, for whom
the Shepherd is wont to provide good pastures, and that are wont, as they are
removed from one place to another, to graze on the Road-ways as they go. There
is a promise made, 1. concerning those that were to return out of Babylon, both
that they should be plentifully provided for by the ways they went, of all
things necessary; and likewise that their Country that had lain long untilled
and desolate, should every where be abundantly fruitful at their return, even
in those places that are usually barren. And 2. concerning Christ's redeemed
ones, that they should plentifully enjoy the means of Grace at all times, and
at all places: See the Notes, Chap. 41.17, 18.

Ver. 10. They shall not hunger, or thirst, etc.] Here the Promise in the last
clause of the foregoing Verse is further set forth; and that still under the
same Metaphor of a Shepherd's providing for his Flock, see the Notes Chap.
40.11. and 41.17, 18. and 48.21. And here again, as in the place last cited,
there is an allusion to the provision that God made for the Israelites in the
Wilderness, by showring down Manna from Heaven upon them, and fetching Water
for them out of the Rock. And so it is likewise in the following words, neither
shall the heat nor Sun smite them; for therein he alludes also to that Pillar
of the Cloud, that was to the Israelites by day a covering from the heat of the
Sun, see the Notes, Psalm. 121.5, 6. And in the last clause, for he that has
mercy on them, shall lead them, even by the Springs of water shall he guide
them; he alludes again to the streams of Water that were fetched out of the
Rock. And how this must be also spiritually understood of Christ's feeding his
Flock with the food of their Souls, and refreshing them with the Waters of
Life, and of Gods protecting them, so that the scorching heat, neither of
temptations, nor afflictions, shall ever be able to hurt them, we may easily
conceive, see the Notes, Chap. 41.17, 18. and Psalm. 23.1, 2. And because St.
John applies the first words to the State of the glorified Saints in Heaven,
Rev. 7.16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, etc. It may well
be, which some Expositors say, that under this promise of the good Christ would
do for his Church here in this Life, the perfecting thereof in Heavenly Glory
is also comprehended.

Ver. 11. And I will make all my Mountains away, and my Highways shall be
exalted.] For the meaning of this, see the Note upon two like passages, Chap.
40.3, 4. Yet as it respects Christ, some would have the meaning to be, that
those holy ways of Religion, which seemed hard and impossible to them, should
through Grace become easy to them.

Ver. 12. Behold, these shall come from far, etc.] First it is said in general,
that they should come from remote Countries, and then afterward some
particular quarters of the world are named, to imply they should come from all
parts of the world on every side; and lo, these from the north and the west,
etc. This I conceive is clearly the intent of these words, according to our
Translation. But now because most Expositors conceive that three quarters of
the world are mentioned in the following mords, lo, these from the north and
the west, and these from the land of Sinim, that is, say they, from the South
(holding that thus the South-quarter is set forth, either from the people that
dwelt upon the Wilderness of Sin or Sinai, Exodus 16.1. or from the Sinites,
reckoned amongst the posterity of Canaan, Genesis 10.17. or from a remote Country
in India, called Sina or China; or from the inhabitants of Sien or Sin, a chief
City in Egypt, Ezekiel. 30.15. all which they say lay South of Judea) therefore
they do generally understand the first branch of this Verse thus, Behold, these
shall come from far, that is, from the East; and say that the East-quarter is
thus set forth, because the Continent reached farthest that way from Judea, the
Sea being on the West, and the North and South not extending so far, by reason
of the inhabitable Poles. But however those, whose coming is here promised, are
certainly the same that were before intended in a place parallel to this, Chap.
43.5, 6, 7. For which see the Notes there.

Ver. 13. Sing, O Heavens, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 44.23. This expression of
exceeding joy implies the certainty of the Promise.

Ver. 14. But Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, etc.] To wit, the Church of
the Jews, by reason of their long continuance in the Babylonian captivity, and
the grievous miseries they endured there. And some add too, that they did thus
complain, because the coming of the promised Messiah was so long deferred.

Ver. 16. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, etc.] That is,
thou art always in mine eye, as if I had engraven thee upon the palms of both
mine hands; so that I am continually mindful of thee, and cannot indeed forget
thee, no more than I can forget my self. Some think there is in this expression
an allusion to the memorials which men are wont to hang upon their hands, or
upon their fingers, see the Note, Exodus 13.9. or to the Signets or Tablets,
whereon they had the names or pictures engraven of some persons whom they did
much affect, see the Note, Cant. 8.6. thy walls are continually before me, that
is, I continually see in what a sad condition thy Walls lie, and do think of
having them repaired again. And hereby also is meant, that God is continually
mindful of the preservation of his Chuch, her Polity and Government, and of the
raising her up again when she is in a low condition.

Ver. 17. Thy Children shall make have, etc.] That is, they shall with great
earnestness flock in speedily to thee; see the Note, Chap. 14.1. thy
destroyers, and they that made thee waste, shall go forth of thee; that is,
thine enemies that laid thy Land waste shall no more plead any title to it, but
give it up wholly to thee; or thine enemies, that sought thy ruin, shall let
thee alone and not trouble thee: Or it may be meant of Gods ridding them of
those wicked oppressors that were amongst them. As it respects the Church of
Christ, it may imply Gods freeing her from all that outwardly by force, or
within by false Doctrine or scandalous lives should be likely to hurt her.

Ver. 18. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold, all these gather
themselves together, and come to thee, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 14.1. As I
live, says the Lord, that is, as sure as I live, thou shall surely clothe thee
with them all, as with an ornament, to wit, because their multitude should be
an honor to Zion, especially considering they should not be a sordid Company,
such as are blots and blemishes to a State, but such as were eminent for their
endowments and graces, and therefore of high esteem both with God and man; and
bind them on thee as a bride does, that is, as a Bride puts on her Jewels and
other Ornaments; all which is chiefly meant of the honor, which the coming in
of the Gentiles should be to the Church of the Jews. And the similitude of a
Bride is the rather used, to imply, that the Lord having so long seemed to have
forsaken that Church, by his return then to her, she should seem to be as it
were anew Married to him.

Ver. 19. For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy
destruction, etc.] That is, thy destroyed Land, shall even now be too narrow by
reason of the inhabitants; as if he should have said, when thou shall again
possess thy Land, which now lies waste and desolate, it shall be so fully
inhabited, yea, even the most ruinous places of it, that there shall scarcely
by room for thy people to dwell one by another: But this is chiefly meant of
the mighty enlargement of the Church by the access of the Gentiles: And they
that swallowed thee up shall be far away; That is, as before, ver. 7. thou
shall no more be troubled with enemies, that shall seek to destroy thee. But
see the Note, Chap. 42.14.

Ver. 20. The Children which thou shall have, after thou have lost the other,
shall say again in thine ears, the place is too strait for me, etc.] That is,
there shall be such multitudes of them, that they shall complain that there is
not room enough for them. And this is meant of Zion, the Church of the Jews, 1.
in regard of the multitudes of them that returned from Babylon, and the great
increase of their posterity, as formerly in Egypt; whereas before she was left
as a childless woman, when the enemy had made such havoc amongst them, and
carried them away Captives: and 2. especially in regard of her great increase
by the coming in of the Gentiles in the days of the Gospel; whereas before she
was as a Childless Woman, there being so few amongst them, that were really
such as they profess themselves to be, Israelites indeed, upon the access of
the Gentiles she should be abundantly full of Children.

Ver. 21. Then shall thou say in thine heart, etc.] To wit, say some, as not
being able fully in words to express her joy and admiration; who has begotten
me these, seeing I have lost my Children, and am desolate, etc? That is, Zion
shall admire at her wonderful multitudes, because she had been not only
Childless (see the foregoing Note) but also desolate, without a Husband, the
Lord having seemed to cast her off. And indeed, the increase of the Jewish
Church, and particularly that by the Gentiles joining themselves to her, was
very strange and wonderful, considering that before the Gospel came to be
Preached, there was so little of the word of Life amongst them, the Seed of the
new birth; and that the Gentiles were so unlikely to leave their Idolatries,
and to embrace the Religion of Christ, and especially to join themselves to the
Church of the Jews that were such a despised people in those times.

Ver. 22. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the
Gentiles, etc.] To wit, As men are wont to do, when they call any that stand
some distance from them, to come to them; and set up my Standard to the people,
see the Notes, Chap. 11.10, 12. and 13.2. The meaning is, either that God would
call in the Nations, that is, by his Almighty Power cause them to come in, and
so accomplish what was promised in the foregoing Verses. It may be meant of
Gods gathering an Army, as Kings do, by setting up their Standard, that should
destroy Babylon, and set free his people; but especially it is meant of that
which was signified thereby, the conversion of the Gentiles by the lifting up
of that spiritual Standard, the Preaching of the Gospel, accompanied with the
effectual working of Gods Spirit; and they shall bring thy Sons in their arms,
and thy Daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders; which, as it has
respect to the Jews deliverance out of Babylon, implies that the Nations should
show them great love and respect, and afford them all possible help for their
return home into their own Country. But as it respects the conversion of the
Gentiles, it sets forth their ready tendering of their Sons and Daughters,
together with themselves, to be joined to the Church; even as it is now, when
Children are brought in Arms to the Assemblies of the Church to be Baptized.
Yet some would have it understood of the great respect, which even Pagans
should afford to Christians that lived amongst them, because of the eminent
holiness of their lives.

Ver. 23. And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing
Mothers, etc.] This was accomplished, say some, in the protection and support
which the Jews found, even during their Captivity, under the Babylonian Kings
and Queens, and which the Church should find under Heathen Princes. But rather
it is meant of the great and tender respect that should be shown to the Jews,
both in their return, and after their return, by Cyrus, Darius, Esther and
others; and of great Kings and Queens, that being converted to the Christian
Faith, should show great favor to the Church, and do great things for them,
such as were Constantine and many others. And so that which follows, they shall
bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, some understand of Nations
that should be subdued by Gods people; but rather it is meant of the great
honor and respect which those Princes should yield to the Jews; and especially
of the honor which those Christian Princes should yield to Christ (and for his
sake, to his Church and Servants) submitting to his Ministry, his Scepter and
Government; and lick up the dust of thy feet, for which see the Note, Psalm.
72.9. and thou shall know that I am the Lord, to wit, experimentally, by my
accomplishing of these things which I have promised; For they shall not be
ashamed that wait for me; as if he had said, Hereby men shall find this to be
true.

Ver. 24. Shall the prey be taken from the mighty? Or the lawful Captive
delivered?] This is generally taken as an objection of the Jews, in Babylon,
alleging this as a reason why they could not believethe promise of their being
delivered out of their Captivity. But more probably, as I conceive, it may be
taken as the proud boasting of the Babylonians, insisting upon two reasons, why
the Jews could have no just ground of hoping to be delivered, 1. their might,
which the poor Captives were not able to resist: and 2dly. their right, because
by law of arms and right of conquest, they were their lawful Captives; yea, and
under this Type there may be also implied, how unlikely it was in an eye of
reason, that Satan's bondslaves should ever be rescued out of his Power.

Ver. 25. But thus says the Lord, Even the prey of the mighty shall be taken
away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; etc.] That is, be your
enemies, never so mighty, and let them pretend what they will for their
detaining of you in Bondage, yet ye shall be delivered. And withal, observable
it is, that those whom they had called the lawful Captive, the Lord here terms
only the prey of the terrible. As for that which follows, for I will contend
with him that contendeth with thee, it may be understood of the Babylonians,
that God would set himself against them; and that to be sure would be
sufficient; and I will save thy Children; that is, deliver them out of their
Captivity: Or it may be taken as a more general promise, that after he had
rescued them out of their Captivity, he would still be an enemy to their
enemies, and defend their posterity against all that should seek to hurt them.
And how this may be applied to that which is said of Christ's vanquishing the
strong man armed, Luke 11.21, 22. we may easily conceive.

Ver. 26. And I will feed them that Oppresses thee, with their own Flesh, and
they shall be drunken with their own Blood as with Sweet Wine, etc.] Some would
have the meaning of these words to be only this, that by destroying Gods People
they should bring destruction upon themselves; or that as they had destroyed
Gods People, and thereby had, as it were, eat their-Flesh, and drunk their
Blood, so they also should be destroyed, and their cruelty should be in a
manner satisfied with their own Flesh and Blood, which some think might be the
more fitly said, because Cyrus brake in upon them, and destroyed them when they
were Feasting together, Dan. 5. But rather the meaning is, that they should
destroy and tear one another in pieces, as eagerly as if it were meat and
drink, yea sweet wine to them; and so the People of God should need to do
nothing themselves toward their deliverance: See the Note, Chap. 9.20. And
indeed thus it was at the Destruction of Babylon, those nations that had
formerly helped the Caldeans to destroy the Jews, did then join with Cyrus in
destroying the Caldeans; yea, as Histories report, the Caldeans here divided
among themselves, in so much that many of them fell off to Cyrus, and had a
principal stroke in the destruction of Babylon. And all Flesh shall know that I
the Lord am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob, and
therefore able to deliver you from all your mightiest Enemies.

CHAP. L.
Ver. 1. THus says the Lord, where is the Bill of your Mothers divorcement,
whom I have put away? etc.] Because the Jews in Babylon (and very many apply it
also to those that should live when the Romans had broken that Nation in
pieces, after their Crucifying of Christ) did complain of Gods casting them
off, who had formerly been as a Husband to them, never Charging it upon their
own Wickedness, whereby they had provoked him to such displeasure against them;
therefore, in allusion to that Law; Deuteronomy. 24.12. (for which see the Notes
there) whereby the Husband that put away his wife was enjoined to give her a
bill of divorce, and was disabled for ever taking her again; and by warrant or
pretense whereof the Jews did usually put away their wives upon very slight
occasions, even upon any dislike which they took against them; the Lord in a
way of derision does here challenge them to produce the bill of divorce whereby
he had divorced them; where, says he, is the Bill of your divorcement whom I
have put away? intending thereby, either that he had not cast them off, but
that they had treacherously left him; or that he had not cast off the Church of
the Jews in a way of divorce, at least not their whole Nation, nor for ever,
never to receive her for his wife again; or else (which seems most probable)
that he had not put them away without any just cause (as they used to put away
their wives) out of inconstancy or overmuch austerity, only because it was his
pleasure so to do; but upon very just grounds, for her base adulteries, and
breach of the Marriage-Covenant with him. And to the same purpose tend the
following words, or which of my Creditors is it to whom I have sold you? for
there likewise, in allusion to that law, Exodus 25.7. (for which see the Note
there) by warrant whereof many parents, to help themselves in their want, or
pay their debts, were wont to sell their Children, and their Creditors, when
they were no other way able to satisfy them, took their Children for their
debts, 2 Kings 4.1. The Lord requires them to name which of his Creditors it
was to whom he had sold them? implying that it was most absurd for them to
think of him, as of one that could be indebted to any man, or that should
through poverty be constrained to sell his Children. And this some understand
of selling their Children to those of another Nation; for when they sold them
to any of their Brethren, these were always to be set free at the year of
Jubilee. Behold, for your iniquities have you sold your selves, and for your
transgressions is your Mother put away; that is, you have sold your selves to
Satan, and Sin; see the note, 1 Kings 21.25. or rather by your wickedness you
have brought your selves into the state of Bondage you are in, and have
provoked God to cast you off.

Ver. 2. Wherefore when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none
to answer? etc.] This is spoken of the obstinacy of the Jews, in not receiving
God when he came to them by his prophets; and not minding him, nor harkening to
him, when by them he showed them how they might be delivered, and so did as it
were tender to rescue them out of their Bondage; and so likewise (as some
think) of their farther obstinacy in their slighting and disregarding God, when
by his own Son he came to them and taught them the way of Life and Salvation;
and there was none in a manner amongst them that regarded him; or his Doctrine,
or miracles; according to that, John 1.11. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not. Now accordingly though some think this is added to make good
the charge in the foregoing verse, that by their wickedness they had provoked
God to cast them off, and so had brought themselves into Bondage (if they would
have minded God, when he called upon them by his prophets, by the Lord Christ
and his Apostles, they had never come into such a sad condition) yet I rather
think, that this is added as a farther Charge, to wit, that as they had brought
themselves into Bondage, so they themselves also were the cause why they were
not delivered. God had by those he sent to them shown them the way how they
might be saved, but they would not hearken to him. For thereto tends that which
is added; Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power
to deliver? namely, to show, that they must needs yield that it was their
stubborness, in not harkening to his instructions and counsels, that was the
cause why they continued in their Bondage, and were not delivered, because
certainly they would not dare to say, that his hand was shortened, and could not
reach to the working of as great deliverances as he had formerly wrought for
his people; to which purpose it is that he mentoins those wonderful works of
his, in drying up the Red Sea, first, and Jordan afterward, before the
Israelites. For hereto the following words have clear reference, I dry up the
Sea; I make the Rivers a Wilderness, see the Note, Psalm. 106.9. Their Fish
stinketh because there is no water; and dies for thirst; and indeed we might
well think that this might well be so at those miraculous dryings up of the Sea
and Jordan, if we consider how long they lay dry, and how little a while Fish
can live out of the water, and great Fish out of great waters; yet some I
confess hold, that this last clause is meant of the miracles of turning the
rivers in Egypt into Blood, because in the relation of that, there is express
mention of the dying of the Fish, and the stinking of the Rivers thereby. See
Exodus 7.17, 18. and Psalm. 105.29.

Ver. 3. I clothe the Heavens with blackness, and I make Sackcloath their
covering] That is, I can, when I please, cover them with black Clouds, and so
clothe them in a mourning, habit, as they used to be clothed that in times of
solemn humiliation and mourning wore Sackcloath made of black goats hair. But
this is spoken also with respect to the plague of Darkness which God brought
upon Egypt, Exodus 10.21. and, as some think, to that miraculous darkness that
was at the passion of Christ.

Ver. 4. The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, etc.] Having
before proved that it was by their own wickedness that they continued in
Bondage, because the Lord was as able to deliver them, as ever he had formerly
been; so here now he farther proves it, because God was also willing to have
fitted them for deliverance, as appeared by his sending, as other his prophets,
so Isaiah particularly, fitted and furnished for this work. Yea, and under
these Christ is principally intended, of whom Isaiah was a Type, as is evident
in the following verses. And withal this might tend to the encouragement of the
better party amongst them, and for the strengthening of their Faith concerning
those promises wherewith he was sent to them, The Lord God has given me the
tongue of the learned, that is, the tongue of a learned and able teacher, one
that has been well taught and instructed, and that is fitted to move and
affect the Hearts of those to whom he speaks; which how it was most eminently
accomplished in Christ, see the Note, Psalm. 45.2. that I should know how to
speak a word in season to him that is weary, that is, seasonably to cheer up
those that were wearied with the miseries they endured, or overpressed with the
burden of their sins. And this indeed is that which Christ daily does by his
Spirit in the Ministry of the Gospel, according to that, Matt. 11.28. Come unto
me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. And to
the same purpose is that which follows, he wakeneth morning by morning, that
is, God does stir me up to receive instructions from him continually, day by
day, yea, early every day (for it may well be which some think, that the
morning is purposely mentioned, as the fittest time for learning) meaning, that
God did continually reveal his will to him, which he accordingly did reveal to
them, as our Savior said expressly of himself, Joh. 12.49. I have not spoken of
my self, but the father which sent me, be gave me a commandment what I should
say, and what I should speak: Yea, and there are that think, that as this
expression respects Christ, it implies, that he was constantly informed by Gods
Spirit, and not at times only, as the Prophets were: He makeneth mine ear to
hear as the learned, that is, say some, as Learned Teachers are wont to excite
their Disciples to learn; or as others, most diligently, as men are wont to
hear those that are eminently learned* or rather, as those that do not hear
idly and without any profit to themselves, but that become learned by their
Teaching; as those that are not only learners, but learned. Thus I conceive
these words must be understood of the Prophet, as the Type; but principally of
Christ, as the Antitype. I know indeed that many Expositors hold, that this
cannot be meant of Isaiah, but of Christ only, because we read not that Isaiah
ever endured that which follows, Ver. 6. I gave my back to the smiters, etc.
I hid not my face from shame and spitting. But this might be objected likewise
concerning many passages in the Psalms, where David clearly speaks of himself,
though as a Type of Christ; for which see the Notes, Psalm. 22.18. and 40.6, 7,
8. and 69.21.

Ver. 5. The Lord God has opened mine Ear, etc.] That is, he caused me to
hearken to him, to know his Will, and to obey him in all things he gave me in
charge, see the Notes, Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. and I was not rebellious, which might
covertly imply a reproof of the peoples rebellion; as if he had said, I was not
rebellious against the Word of God to me, as you have been against that which
from God I have spoken to you; neither turned away back, that is, I neither
refused to go, when God sent me; nor did I shrink or turn away from doing what
was given me in charge, notwithstanding all the hard usage I met with in the
doing of it.

Ver. 6. I gave my back to the smiters, etc.] That is, I did cheerfully and
willingly submit to be thus opprobriously used for the faithful discharge of my
Office. And indeed, considering that they used other the Prophets of God thus,
as Micaiah, 1 King. 22.24. and Jeremiah, Chap. 20.2. It is very probable that
Isaiah also was thus used; especially in the days of wicked Ahaz; and my cheeks
to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from shame and spitting.
However it is clear that all this was done unto Christ, Matt. 27.26, 30. Luke
22.63, 64. and 18.32. unless it be in that one particular of plucking off his
hair; which though it be not expressly mentioned by the Evangelists, yet their
mad rage and contemptuous usage of Christ in all other regards, joined with
this prediction of Isaiah, may well incline us to think, that even this amongst
other things they did to him. And if not so, we must then look upon that as a
proverbial expression, implying, that they used him with all possible scorn and
contempt.

Ver. 7. For the Lord God will help me, etc.] That is, he will assist me in the
discharge of mine Office, and uphold me against all that oppose me: And as this
is spoken with relation to Christ, it imports the carrying him through the work
of the Mediator, even to the raising of him out of the Grave, and so causing
him to triumph over Hell and Death; therefore shall I not be confounded: that
is, dismayed or discouraged; their shameful usage of me shall not make me
ashamed; therefore have I set my face like a flint, that is, I harden my self
against all the opposition and injuries I meet with, not to fear them, nor to
be troubled at them: For because these passions will be seen in the face,
therefore is this phrase used of setting his face like a flint, as likewise,
Ezekiel. 3.9. harder than flint have I made thy forehead, that is, so courageous
as not to be moved with all that wicked men can do to thee; and I know that I
shall not be ashamed, to wit, of my hope and patience, but that the issue will
be good.

Ver. 8. He is near that justifies me, etc.] That is, God will be still ready
to justify my cause, to wit, that I was truly sent by him, and have faithfully
discharged my Office; And as this respects the Prophet, the meaning may be that
God would justify him by bringing to pass all that he foretold, and by
defending him against his enemies. But as it respects Christ, it may be meant
of all that God did, tending to the clearing of his innocence, and the justice
of his cause, especially at his death, and afterward, as the testimony given
to Christ by Pilate and the Centurion, the rising of the dead out of their
Graves, etc. his triumphant Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, and the
conversion of such multitudes by the Preaching of the Gospel, and some of them
such as had been themselves active in the crucifying of him; Who will contend
with me? That is, who will argue or plead against me? Let us stand together,
etc. to wit, to argue the cause with those that oppose and persecute me, before
God the just Judge of all men. And to this place the Apostle seems to have
alluded, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It
is God that justifies. Who is be that condemns? etc. and that very fitly;
because from hence it may be clearly gathered, that it is in vain to condemn
those, whom God justifies.

Ver. 9. Behold, the Lord God will help me, etc.] See the Note above, verse. 7.
Who is he that shall condemn me? to wit, justly, as Christ said, Joh. 8.46*
Which of you convinces me of sin? See also Matt. 26.59. Lo, they all shall wax
old as a garment: That is, though mine enemies be never so splendid and
glorious, yet as a splendid Garment wears away, they shall be outworn and
perish. The Moth shall eat them up, That is, they shall by degrees be wasted
and consumed. And as it concerns those that contended with the Prophet, it may
seem to have respect to their being wasted in their long captivity in Babylon.

Ver. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his
Servant, etc.] Having in the last clause of the foregoing Verse denounced
judgment against the Prophets enemies (and so Christ's also, as the antitype)
this is here inserted for the comfort of the godly amongst them, those that did
obey the voice of Gods Servant, to wit, the Prophet, or Christ and his
Ministers, See the Note, Chap. 42.1. There were but a very few such amongst
them as this question imports, Who is among you that fears the Lord? etc.
(See the Notes, Psalm. 25.12.) But yet those that were such, the Prophet (on
Christ of whom he was a Type) does here by his example (of whose confidence in
God much is before spoken) exhort them to trust in God; And it is indeed a word
in season to him that is weary, for the speaking whereof, as it is said before,
Ver. 4. God had given him the tongue of the learned; Who is among you that
fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in
darkness, and has no light, that is, that is in great distress, misery and
sorrow, and void of all inward comfort, through the apprehension of their lying
under the Wrath of God. Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, that is, in God,
who has declared himself able to comfort and support them in their greatest
sufferings, and to deliver them out of their greatest troubles, and has withal
promised that he will do it; and stay upon his God, to wit, in regard of the
covenant which, through Christ, God has made with them.

Ver. 11. Behold, etc.] Having in the foregoing Verses encouraged the righteous
amongst the Jews against their long continued calamities, and stirred them up
to cast their care upon their God; here the Lord returns to denounce judgment
against the generality of the people, that slighted his Word, and despised his
Promises, Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about
with sparks, etc. And some understand this of their kindling the fire of Gods
wrath against them by their manifold wickedness, and their incensing him to
overwhelm them on every side with Judgments, which should utterly consume and
burn them up, See the Notes, Chap. 1.31. and Deuteronomy. 32.22. and accordingly we
must then understand the following words, Walk in the light of your fire, and
in the sparks that you have kindled, as spoken ironically, thus, Walk on
desperately in these your wicked ways, not fearing the fire which you have set
a flaming about you; and see what the issue of it will be. But rather it is
meant, as the most of Expositors take it, of all those vain things, wherein
that wicked people did flatter and chucker themselves. Behold, all ye that
kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks; as if he should have
said in a way of derision, you that do encourage and cheer up your selves, and
even compass your selves about with such variety of devices and carnal counsels
on every side, wherewith you hope to safeguard your selves, and seek to comfort
your selves against all the evils and judgments wherewith you are threatened,
rejecting the consolations of Gods Word, even as men should sit and warm and
refresh themselves at a great many fires they had kindled about them (and
hereby is meant, 1. the vain hopes of the Jews in the days of Isaiah in their
strength, and policy, and confederacy with other Nations, etc. which made them
slight the Promises that God made them by the Prophets; and secondly, their
confidence in their own natural righteousness, and in the false Doctrines and
Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees; which made them despise and disregard
Christ's Gospel Promises) Walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks
which ye have kindled, cheer up your selves as much as you can with these
brands and sparks of your own kindling, with these fleshly hopes and comforts,
all will be to no purpose; this shall ye have of mine hand, that is, by my just
judgment upon you, ye shall lie down in sorrow, that is, notwithstanding all
these vain self-deceits of yours, you shall be overwhelmed at last with
unremovable anguish and sorrow, out of which you shall never rise again: ye
shall dye in your sin, and so shall be laid in a bed of darkness and
insufferable sorrow and torments unto all eternity.

CHAP. LI.
VERSE 1. HEarken to me, etc.] The Lord having, ver. 10. of the foregoing Chap.
encouraged the faithful amongst the People to trust in God, though their
condition might seem never so hopeless; but then ver. 11. turning to the
generality of People, denounced Judgment against them; here he returns again to
comfort the godly party amongst them, Hearken to me, ye that follow after
Righteousness; see the Note, Prove. 21.21. It may be meant of hungring and
thirsting after the imputed Righteousness of Christ, but rather doubtless of
striving to do that which was just and right in Gods Eyes. Ye that seek the
Lord, that is, that seek to approve your selves to him, and to assure your
Interest in him, and that seek to him in all your streights. Now that which he
first assays here to comfort them in, is concerning the small number to which
they should be brought, before that deliverance and restitution of Zion should
be wrought, which by him God had promised them; and hereby may be meant, both
the fewness of that little Remnant that should come home out of Babylon, in
comparison of the numerousness of that Nation formerly: And likewise the
paucity of Believers that should be found in that Nation, when Christ the
promised Messiah should come to them with the glad tidings of Salvation. And
that which he says to encourage them herein, is, That he advises them to
remember how miraculously he had formerly multiplied their Nation: Look unto
the Rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the Pit whence ye are dug.
That is, as it is explained in the following Verse: Look to Abraham and Sarah,
out of whose Loins, you, the Children of Abraham, had your descent. And the
rather we may well think that Abraham is called the Rock, and Sarah the hole of
the Pit, that is, the Stone-querry out of which they were hewn and dug, with
respect to Abraham's dead Body, and the deadness of Sarahs Womb, Romans 4.19. They
being both in regard of Age like dry and hard Rocks, so that there seemed to be
no likely, yea, in a natural way, no possibility that they should have any
issue, until God was pleased miraculously to open Sarah's Womb. Now if God did
at first from such a dead Stock raise such a numerous Nation, as they had been;
why should they be discouraged at that very small Remnant to which their Church
should be brought?

Ver. 2. Look unto Abraham your Father, and unto Sarah that bare you, etc.]
This is added by way of explaining the former Words, for I called him alone;
that is, I brought him out of Chaldea, when he was a lone man, one Man, and
Childless too, yea without hope of having any Children by Sarah, being barren,
and at last, by reason of Age, past any hope of Childing: And blessed him, and
increased him; that is, as in many other regards I blessed him, so particularly
in the mighty increase of his Posterity, so that they became as the Stars in
the Heaven, or the Sand on the Seashore for multitude; and hereby is employed,
that the same God that did this, could likewise increase and multiply their
Church and People, though they were brought to never so poor a Remnant: See the
foregoing Note.

Ver. 3. For the Lord shall comfort Zion, etc.] To wit, with manifold
blessings, and particularly with an abundant increase, as he did Abraham. See
the foregoing Notes. And this may be meant both of the Jews returning out of
Babylon, (see the Notes, Chap. 12.1.) and of the Church in the days of the
Gospel: He will comfort all her waste places; that is, he will raise up her
City and State again, and those places that lay desolate shall be inhabited
again with multitudes of people: And he will make her Wilderness like Eden, and
her desert like the Garden of the Lord; see the Notes, Chap. 35.1, 2. But now
as this is meant of the Church in the days of the Gospel, it must needs intend
the holy change that should be wrought in Believers; and particularly the
mighty alteration that should be made in the Apostatised Church of the Jews by
the Conversion of a Remnant of them, and by the great access of the Gentiles:
Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, etc. see the Notes,
Chap. 35.10. and Psalm. 126.2. But as this has respect to the days of Christ,
it is chiefly meant of the great joy that should be wrought in afflicted
Consciences by the preaching of the Gospel.

Ver. 4. Hearken unto me, my People, and give ear unto me, O my Natition, etc.]
This is spoken still to the faithful amongst the Jews, Gods peculiar People;
see the Note above, ver. 1. for a Law shall proceed from me; that is, (say some
that would limit this to the Jews that were to come out of Babylon) as I will
bring home my People to their own Land; so I will govern them there as mine own
People. Do not think that Religion shall be lost amongst them by their long
Bondage; when I have brought them home they shall be governed by my Law, as
formerly. And accordingly they expound the following Clause: And I will make my
Judgment to rest for a light of the People; that is, I will make good my
Promises to my People in the sight, and to the convincing of all Nations. But
questionless it is that new Law of the Gospel, which God here says should
proceed from him for the governing of his Church; for which see the Notes,
Chap. 2.3, 4. And so one main drift of the Words seems to be, to show how the
Church of the Jews should be so exceedingly multiplied, as was before said,
namely, by the coming in of the Gentiles to them. And accordingly we must
understand the next Clause: And I will make my Judgment to rest for a light of
the People; that is, I will cause my Gospel to rest amongst the Gentiles, as a
light which the Enemies thereof shall never be able to blow out. For it is not
strange that the Gospel should be called Gods Judgment, because it is the Rule
which God has given us to judge of Good and Evil, and the Scepter whereby he
governs his Church; and Law, and Doctrine, and Judgment, etc. are Words
ordinarily used in the Scripture promiscuously one for another.

Ver. 5. My Righteousness is near, etc.] That is, The time is near at hand,
when I will approve my self Righteous and Faithful, by performing my promise of
saving you out of the hands of your Enemies; see the Note, Chap. 1.27. And this
may be meant both of that deliverance out of Babylon, and of our deliverance by
Christ from our Spiritual Bondage and Enemies; and the last, the rather,
because the expression here used, may also imply our being made Righteous by
Christ, and Christ's governing his Church as a Righteous King; see the Notes,
Chap. 40.10, 11. My Salvation is gone forth; see Chap. 43.19. The expression
here used may relate, either to the making known Gods Decree to the People by
his Prophets, or to the approaching and going forth of Cyrus his Decree
concerning the Jews deliverance. And mine Arms shall judge the People; that
is, by mine Almighty Power I will punish the Nations, the Babylonians and
others, that oppress my Church; or by mine own Power, accompanying the Ministry
of the Gospel, Romans 1.16. and confirmed by many miraculous Works; many Nations
shall be Converted, and shall submit themselves to my Government. And indeed
the stretching forth of his Arms seems to imply the enlarging of Gods Kingdom:
And hereto likewise agrees that which follows; the Isles shall wait upon me;
see the Notes, Chap. 41.1. and 42.4. It may imply the miserable condition of
the Gentiles, in regard whereof it might be said, that they waited for
Salvation by Christ, even as it is said of the bruit Creatures, Psalm. 104.27.
that they wait upon God for his giving them their Meat in due season: Or rather
the readiness of the Gentiles, after their Conversion, to obey all the commands
of Christ: And on mine Arm shall they trust; that is, they shall in all things
rely on my Power and Aid.

Ver. 6. Lift up your Eyes to the Heavens, and look upon the Earth beneath,
etc.] As if he should have said, consider how wonderfully the whole fabric of
the World is, by the mighty Power and provident Care of God over it, upheld and
preserved; For the Heavens shall vanish away like Smoke, and the Earth shall
wax old like a Garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner;
see the Notes, Chap. 34.4. and Psalm. 102.26. But my Salvation shall be for
ever, and my Righteousness shall not be abolished; of all which the meaning is,
either, 1. That though there should be never such horrid overturnings in the
World, God would not fail to make good his Promises in the Salvation of his
People; or, 2. That though the whole frame of the World should at last be
dissolved, yet the promised Salvation should not fail, but should continue for
ever; or, 3. (which most Expositors like the best) that the whole World should
rather be broken in pieces and come to nothing, than God would not make good
his Righteousness and Faithfulness, in working that Salvation for his People
which he had promised them; which is the same with that of our Savior, Luke
21.33. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not pass away.
Though Gods People may cheer up themselves by seeing how God preserves and
upholds the whole fabric of the World, yet in the unquestionable certainty of
his Promises there is a surer Foundation of Hope and Comfort for them.

Ver. 7. Hearken unto me, ye that know Righteousness, etc.] That is, That
approve and regard it, that live Righteously; the People in whose Heart is my
Law; see the Note, Psalm. 37.31. And this is the third time that they are here
called upon to hearken to what is said; because it is so hard a thing to cheer
up those that are in great misery and sorrow: Fear ye not the reproach of Men,
neither be ye afraid of their revilings; that is, when your Enemies shall
reproach you for your Piety and Confidence in God, fear them not, no, not the
greatest of them.

Ver. 8. For the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm shall eat
them like Wool, etc.] That is, like a Woollen Cloth, or Garment; see the Notes,
Chap. 50.9. and Psalm. 39.11. But my Righteousness shall be for ever, and my
Salvation from Generation to Generation; see the Note above, ver. 6. And as
this is meant of that great work of our Salvation by Christ, the word
Righteousness may have also respect to that everlasting Righteousness whereby
Gods People are justified and saved.

Ver. 9. Awake, awake, put on Strength, O Arm of the Lord, etc.] The Prophet,
and happily in the name of Gods People, does here pray, that God would exert the
power of his mighty Arm, which he had seemed of late to lay by, by destroying
his Peoples Enemies, as he had promised. And this may be meant both of the
Babylonians, and of the spiritual Enemies of Gods People vanquished by Christ,
who is therefore by some thought to be the Arm of the Lord here spoken of; and
seems purposely intended to cheer the Hearts of Gods People with the
remembrance of his Almighty power: Awake, as in the ancient days, in the
Generations of old; that is, as in times of old, when thou have often delivered
thy People, and destroyed their Enemies. Art not thou it that has cut Rahab?
see the Note, Psalm. 87.4. and wounded the Dragon? that is, destroyed Pharaoh;
see the Notes, Chap. 27.1. and Psalm. 74.13, 14. Now because the strength of
Gods Arm is unchangeable, and not subject to the least decay, therefore these
Instances are alleged, as a sure proof, that he could do the same still for
his People.

Ver. 11. Therefore, etc.] The Church and People of God do here cheer up
themselves, from the consideration of those great things mentioned in the
foregoing Verse, which God had done for his People: Therefore the redeemed of
the Lord shall return and come with Singing unto Zion, etc. see the Note, Chap.
35.10.

Ver. 12. I, even I am he that comfort you, etc.] Here the Prophet speaks
again to them in the name of God: Who art thou? that is, What a vain, foolish,
heartless Creature art thou? That thou should be afraid of a Man that shall
die, and of the Son of Man that shall be made as Grass? To wit, having the
Eternal and Almighty God to be your Protector and Savior: See the Note, Chap.
40.6.

Ver. 13. And forgettest the Lord thy Maker, etc.] See the Notes, Chap.
44.1.21. that has stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the
Earth? see the Note, Psalm. 104.2. and have feared continually every day,
because of the fury of the Oppressor, as if he were ready (or, had made himself
ready) to destroy? That is, as if the Enemy were sure to destroy, because he
was fully resolved, and had made ready to do it: Intimating, that it was their
great Sin to be so overwhelmed with fear in their greatest dangers, having the
promise of God for their deliverance; and where is the fury of the Oppressor?
That is, say some, what is become of the fury of those that formerly oppressed
my People? As namely, of the Egyptian, mentioned before, ver. 9, 10. or of
Sennacherib the Assyrian, of whom see what is said before, Chap. 16.4. Though
they were ready to destroy, did not their fury soon come to nothing? And if God
destroyed them, is not he able to do the like to the Babylonian too? But rather
it is spoken with respect to the Babylonian; and where is the fury of the
Oppressor? That is, as soon as I begin to contend with him, what will become of
his Fury? It will soon come to nothing: Or it may be taken more generally, that
when ever the Enemies of Gods People do oppress them, God can suddenly put an
end to their Fury; and that he will at last so perfectly deliver his People,
that they shall no more be in danger of being oppressed by them.

Ver. 14. The Captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, etc.] That is,
Gods poor People, that are now Captive in a strange Country, shall within a
short time be delivered; the time hasteneth when they shall be set at Liberty.
Now though there seems to be an allusion in the Words to the Israelites
deliverance out of Egypt, concerning whom it is said, Exodus 12.33. That the
Egyptians were urgent upon the People, that they might send them out of the
Land in haste; yet questionless it is meant (in the type) of the Captivated
Jews in Babylon, that the time of their deliverance was coming on apace; and in
the antitype of Christ's delivering his redeemed ones, that were in bondage to
Satan, bound with the Fetters of Sin and Death; who should with all readiness
embrace the Salvation tendered them in the Gospel. And accordingly we must
understand the following words, and that he should not die in the Pit; that is,
in that Pit of misery whereinto they were fallen; or in those Prison-houses
wherein they were kept in Babylon: Or (as it respects Christ's ransomed ones)
that they might not perish for ever in the bottomless Pit of Hell; nor that his
Bread should fail; that is, that the poor Captives in Babylon might not perish
there, for want of necessary provision in their long continued thraldom, or in
their return homeward, by reason of the desert places they were to go through:
Or (as it respects those that are redeemed by Christ) that they might be
instructed in the mysteries of the Gospel, and not want that Spiritual food of
their Souls. And in this too there may be an allusion to Gods care over the
Israelites, whom he delivered out of Egypt, that they should not want Bread to
eat, as they traveled through the Wilderness to the Land of Canaan; which
seems the more probable, because of that which follows in the next Verse.

Ver. 15. But I am the Lord thy God, that divided the Sea, etc.] To wit, The
red Sea, whose Waves roared, to wit, by reason of the violent blowing of the
East Wind, wherewith God divided the Waters of the Sea, that so the Israelites
might pass over on dry ground, Exodus 14.21.

Ver. 16. And I have put my words in thy Mouth, etc.] Expositors differ much in
their Judgments concerning the Person to whom this is spoken. That which seems
to me most probable, is, That it is spoken first to Isaiah, as the type; but
then, secondly, under him to Christ, and to all his Prophets, and faithful
Messengers and Ministers; or, as some say (which is all one in effect) to
Christ, and to his People, as the Body of Christ. However the drift of the
words is clear: Namely, That this is spoken to comfort his People, as before,
ver. 12. by assuring them, 1. That the Prophet spoke Gods Word to them, nothing
but what he had enjoined him, and in the very words and terms which he had
prompted to him; and that therefore they had no cause to question the promises
that he made them. And the like we must hold concerning Christ, who often
affirmed this, that he spoke nothing but what God had put into his Mouth; see
Joh. 3.34. and 8.26.28. And, 2dly, That God would secure him from all his
Enemies, and have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand; see the Note, Chap.
49.2. And then to show what should be the effect of this, the following words
are added, that I may plant the Heavens, and lay the Foundations of the Earth;
That is, That I may hereby create a new World, a new Heaven, and a new Earth.
Now we must know, that though this may be meant of the Jews deliverance out of
Babylon, because there was then such a change wrought amongst that People, as
if they had been brought into a new World; and because that is usually ascribed
to the Ministry of Gods Prophets, which they did only declare and foretell, as
in that Jer. 1.10. See I have this day set thee over the Nations, and over the
Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to
build and to plant: Yet certainly it is meant principally of that great change
and renovation, that God by Christ did actually and effectually work in the
World at his coming, by the Work of his Redemption, and the publishing thereof
by the preaching of the Gospel; by means whereof the curse was taken off from
the Creatures, which the Sin of Man had brought upon them, and all things that
were before, as it were, broken and ruined, were restored and settled in
Christ; and (which is chiefly intended) a holy Church is gathered and planted
throughout the World, who are reconciled to God and made new Creatures, a
People whose Conversation is in Heaven, and who are daily fitted for heavenly
Glory; and say unto Zion, Thou art my People; That is, That God might say, to
wit, by the Prophets, Apostles, and others, by whom it is published, and by
Christ, by whom it was both effected and published, ye that were not my People,
are now become my People.

Ver. 17. Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, etc.] Some think, that because
the Jews were at this time proud and secure, and fearless of any Evil that was
coming upon them, like a drunken Man fallen into a dead sleep, by reason of a
Spirit of drunkenness and slumber that God had poured forth upon them:
therefore God by the Prophet does here awaken them, and calls upon them to
arise and repent, and turn unto the Lord. And indeed expressions much like to
these are used by the Apostle in this sense, 1 Cor. 15.34. and Ephesians. 5.14. But
by the whole current of the Text it appears, that this is spoken by way of
comforting them. Because they might disregard the promise of deliverance which
God had made them, by reason of that extremity of misery and oppression under
which they lay; therefore there is hope here given them, that notwithstanding
that depth of Calamity, whereinto they were fallen; yet God would raise them
up. And accordingly comparing them to a People, that by drinking of the Cup of
Gods wrath, were fallen down and lay in a dead sleep; he calls upon them to
awaken and arise up: Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem; as if he had said,
There will be suddenly a happy change; and therefore lie no longer, O my
People, in so sad and disconsolate a condition, which have drunk at the hand of
the Lord the Cup of his Fury: That is, Whom God has in his just wrath punished
with great severity; thou have drunken the dregs of the Cup of trembling, and
wrung them out; that is, the whole Cup of Gods indignation, even to the very
bottom, dregs and all, (which in bitter potions use to be the bitterest) and
those pressed and squeezed, that nothing might be left. The meaning is, That
they had suffered the whole that God had measured out to be their portion; or,
so much that one would think their misery could not be well greater than it
was. And why this is called a Cup of trembling; see the Notes, Job 21.20. Psalm.
11.6. and 60.3. and 75.8. Now this may be conceived to be spoken: 1. With
respect to the Jews Captivity in Babylon, and their deliverance by Cyrus: And,
2dly. With respect to their greater destruction by the Romans; and that
following glorious condition, whereto that Church was raised by Christ, and
especially in the access of the Gentiles: yet it may be applied, as it is by
some Expositors, to the very sad condition, whereinto the Church of Christ may
be brought by her persecuting Enemies, and Gods appearing seasonably for their
deliverance.

Ver. 18. There is none to guide her among all the Sons whom she has brought
forth, etc.] That is, Amongst all that have been bred and brought up in her,
there were none, neither King, Prince, nor Prophet, that were able to lend her
a helping hand for her aid or deliverance; none that could counsel or comfort
her, uphold or direct her: For in those expressions, there is none to guide
her, and, neither is there any that takes her by the Hand; there is still an
allusion to the supporting and leading of one that is drunk; and of whom this
is meant, see in the foregoing Note.

Ver. 19. These two things are come unto thee, etc.] There is a like expression
before, Chap. 47.9. Who shall be sorry for thee? that is, there is none that
will lay thy miseries to Heart, or that will condole thy sad condition with
thee. And this indeed is a great addition to any Men's miseries, when no body
pities them, nor discovers the least fellow-feeling they have of their Griefs
and Sufferings: Whence is that, Psalm. 69.20. I looked for some to take pity,
and there was none. The great question is, which are the two things, the two
Evils before mentioned, that were come upon them; that is, that were to come
upon them. Some think that these are set forth in the following Words,
Desolation and Destruction, and the Famine and the Sword. For though four
things seem here to be mentioned; yet they are reducible to two Heads;
Desolation, to wit of the City and Land; and Destruction, to wit, of the
People, being mentioned as the two things before intended; and then the Famine
and the Sword are added, as the means whereby the City and Land were laid
desolate, and the Inhabitants destroyed. But I rather think that the two things
that are here said should come upon them, are, the Evil that should come upon
them by their Enemies from without, comprehended in those Words, Desolation and
Destruction, and the Famine and the Sword; the other from within, namely, that
they should have none amongst themselves that should be able to help, advise,
or comfort them; employed in those questions, who shall be sorry for thee? And
afterward in the close of the Verse, by whom shall I comfort thee? As if he had
said, alas! there is none to comfort thee; see the Note before ver. 18. And
this we find often mentioned in Jeremiah's Lamentations, as Chap. 1.2. Among
all her Lovers she has none to comfort her, and ver. 21. They have heard that
I Sigh, there is none to comfort me. Yet I know by some these last Words are
otherwise expounded, by whom shall I comfort thee? that is, by whose Example,
that has been in the like misery, should I assay to comfort thee? Which is all
one in effect, as if he had said, alas! thy miseries are matchless, and without
all president. And indeed we find a like expression used to set forth
Jerusalems Calamities, Lam. 2.13. What thing shall I take to Witness for thee?
What thing shall I liken to thee, O Daughter of Jerusalem! what shall I equal
to thee, that I may comfort thee?

Ver. 20. Thy Sons have fainted, etc.] To wit, Through extremity of grief, or,
as being in a manner starved; and so instead of being able to uphold and
comfort thee, they are ready to perish themselves; they lie at the head of all
the Streets; that is, all the City over they lie in the entrance of the
Streets, they lie languishing, as being houseless and harbourless, quite
famished in a manner; and so not able to stand or go. Some, I know, understand
this of the multitude of Carcases of men slain or famished, that lay scattered
about the Streets unburied. But that agrees not with the following similitude,
as a wild Bull in a Net, that is, fretting and afflicting themselves, but no
way able to help themselves, no, not those that have formerly been of greatest
Power and Strength; no more then a wild Bull can do, when he is once taken in
the Huntsmans Net, though he fume and toil himself with striving and tumbling
about never so much: they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy
God; that is, full of the Calamity and Misery, that vexation and anguish, which
God in his just wrath has brought upon them. But in this expression there is
an allusion also to that Cup of Fury mentioned before, ver. 17. whereof God had
caused them to drink.

Ver. 21. Therefore, etc.] Because thy misery is so great, and thou have
suffered what I allotted for thy portion; hear now thou afflicted and drunken,
but not with Wine; to wit, as formerly thou were wont to be, but with the Cup
of Gods Fury, ver. 17. And indeed these expressions of love and pity do clearly
show, that the drift of all that went before was the comforting of Gods People.

Ver. 22. Thus says thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God, that pleads the cause
of his People, etc.] See the Note, 1 Samuel 25.39. Behold, I have taken out of
thine Hand the Cup of trembling, even the Dregs of the Cup of my Fury; see the
Note above, ver. 17. thou shall no more drink it again; That is, Thou shall no
longer drink of that Cup; the Babylonians shall no longer keep thee in Bondage,
nor shall ever any more come to oppress thee. He does not say, That they should
never be brought into such a sad condition any more, (for after their return
from Babylon, they were often brought very low; and by the Romans they drank
deeper of the Cup of Gods Fury than ever; insomuch that unto this day they are
drinking the dregs of it) but that there should be an end of their Captivity in
Babylon. And indeed, if this promise be extended, as it is by some, to the
Church of the Jews, after their ruin by the Romans, it must be understood of
that Remnant of them that embraced the Christian Faith, (for the rest of them
were then cast off from being Gods Church) and of this Remnant this promise
shall for ever hold good, that they shall no more be destroyed and cast off
from being Gods People, as the Generality of the Jewish Church were.

Ver. 23. But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee, etc.] That
is, The Miseries, which they brought upon thee, others shall bring upon them;
which have said to thy Soul, that is, to thee; See the Note, Psalm. 3.2. bow
down that we may go over; See the Note, Psalm. 66.12. and thou have laid thy
body as the ground, and as the street to them that went over: The meaning is,
That in their Bondage in Babylon their great Lords should trample upon them
proudly and contemptuously, and without any Compassion, and use them just as
they pleased themselves, they not daring in the least to mutter against them.
And the like may be said too concerning their sad condition, when they were
vanquished by the Romans.

CHAP. LII.
VERSE 1. AWake, awake, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 51.17. This is still to cheer
up the Jewish Church with hope of deliverance from that poor and miserable
condition, whereinto they were to be brought; and it is thus often repeated,
partly, because of the delight the Prophet took in imparting these glad tidings
to the People; and partly because the People were so hardly wone to embrace the
promise, in regard that they looked upon their Estate as desperate, and past
all hope of recovery: Awake, awake, put on thy Strength, O Zion; that is, pluck
up a good courage, be courageous and strong in the confidence of Gods favor
and protection, which is indeed properly thy strength; put on thy beautiful
Garments, O Jerusalem, the holy City; as if he had said, Put off thy poor and
sad attire, wherewith thou were clad in thy low and captived Estate, when thou
were wont to embrace the Dunghill, and put on that brave attire again, which
thou were accustomed to wear on thy Festivals, and other times of Joy and
Gladness: As for the following words, wherein there is a reason given, why Gods
People are stirred up to be so courageous and joyful; for henceforth there
shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean; though some
understand it of the great Reformation that should be made amongst them, that
no wicked ones should harbor amongst them; or of the great holiness of the
Church in the days of the Gospel, which should be perfected in Heavenly Glory:
See the Note, Chap. 35.8. Yet certainly it is rather meant of their being freed
from the Cruelty and Tyranny of their Enemies. But how then was this promise
ever made good to the Church of the Jews; from henceforth there shall no more
come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean? I answer: As this was spoken
with respect to their deliverance out of Babylon; the meaning cannot be that
they should never more be invaded, vexed and oppressed by any of the
uncircumcised Heathens: For it is well known, that after that they were sorely
afflicted and oppressed by Antioches Epiphanes, and others; and that at last
the Romans did worse to them, than ever the Chaldeans had done. And therefore
if we take this as a promise made to the Jews, when they were delivered from
their Captivity in Babylon, it must be limited to the Babylonians; to wit, that
they should no more be invaded, as they had often formerly been, nor tyrannized
over by that Nation, that had then so long held them in Bondage; and he terms
them the uncircumcised and the unclean; because in their Bondage this did most
vex and afflict them, that they, Gods peculiar People, should be made drudges
to such a base, heathenish, uncircumcised People. But now, if we extend this to
the Church of the Jews, after they were ruined and destroyed by the Romans,
namely, those that were, together with the Gentiles, the Church of Christ's
redeemed ones; I see no other way, that it can be understood, but that their
wicked Enemies should never be able to ruin them, as the Jewish Church was by
the Romans. And this is that which Christ said, Matthew. 16.18. that his Church
should stand in the midst of all opposition, till she be taken up into Heaven,
where her Enemies shall trouble and afflict her no more.

Ver. 2. Shake thy self from the dust, etc.] This seems to be thus expressed,
with reference to that which had been said in the foregoing Chapter, ver. 23.
(See the Note there) of their lying on the ground, whilst their proud Lords
trampled upon them; arise and sit down, or, arise and sit up (as it is well
rendered in our great Annotations) Lie no longer on the ground, but sit in a
quiet and comfortable condition, as formerly. As Babylon was commanded to come
down and sit in the dust, Chap. 47.1. So Jerusalem is here called upon to arise
and sit up from the dust; loose thy self from the bands of thy neck, O captive
Daughter of Zion; That is, cast off thy Yoke. But still we must know, that the
intent of this is to show, that this should shortly be done; and that under
this type there is also a promise couched, of the Spiritual Redemption of the
Church of God by Christ: See the Note, Chap. 42.7.

Ver. 3. For thus says the Lord, ye have sold your selves for naught: and ye
shall be redeemed without Money.] See the Notes, Chap. 45.13. and 50.1. and
Psalm. 44.12. Because the Jews might think it impossible, that they should be
delivered from their Captivity in Babylon, where they had been kept in bondage
so long, under such a mighty People; therefore God tells them here, that though
they had sold themselves by their Sins; that is, though he had delivered them
up to the Babylonians by way of punishing them for their Sins; yet he, their
Lord and Sovereign, had never sold away his interest in them, by receiving any
price of the Babylonians for them; they did not so much as give him thanks for
them; and that therefore they could allege no just Title to them, but that it
was free for him, when he pleased, to challenge his own just interest in them,
and to recover them out of their hands again. By all which it appeared, that
there would be no difficulty in the work of their deliverance: If God would
challenge his just interest in them, and deliver them from those that did
unjustly keep them in bondage, who could hinder him? As they were sold for
naught, so they should be redeemed for naught: As they were subdued by the
Sword, so by the Sword they should be delivered out of their Power: And indeed
in this too some Expositors endeavor to show, how the deliverance out of
Babylon had some shadow in it of our Redemption by Christ.

Ver. 4. For thus says the Lord God, etc.] By former examples of the Lords
delivering his People from the oppression of their Enemies, he shows them
what good reason they had to believe and wait for that deliverance out of
Babylon, which he had now promised them; my People went down aforetime into
Egypt to sojourn there; as if he should have said, And ye know how the
Egyptians oppressed them there, and how he plagued the Egyptians for it, and
delivered his People out of that their bondage; and the Assyrian oppressed them
without cause; as if he had said, and so likewise Sennacherib the Assyrian (and
some would have all the rest of the Assyrian Kings included, that invaded Gods
People) did mightily afflict them, causelessly, when my People had no way
injured them; (for though Hezekiah had at first revolted from him, yet he
afterward submitted himself to him, and by mutual agreement made him
satisfaction) and ye know how God destroyed him and his mighty Army, and
delivered his People from their Rage and Fury. Thus I conceive, is the meaning
and drift of this Verse. There is a hint here given the Jews of two former
deliverances that God had wrought for his People; and then in the following
Verse he shows what might be inferred from hence concerning the sadder
condition of his People in Babylon. I know indeed that several Expositors do
judge otherwise concerning the second clause, and the Assyrian oppressed them
without cause: For some think, that by the Assyrian there, Pharaoh King of
Egypt is meant; and so they would have the meaning of the whole Verse to be
this, That the Israelites going down into Egypt only to sojourn there; the King
of that Country did without cause sorely oppress them. But this opinion is
built upon mere groundless and improbable conjectures; as namely, that that
Pharaoh that knew not Joseph, Exodus 1.8. was a Stranger, even an Assyrian; or
else, that all Tyrants were in those days, by a Proverbial way of speaking,
called Assurs. Others therefore say, that by the Assyrian the Babylonian is
meant, and that he is here called the Assyrian, because the Kingdom of Babylon
was always formerly a branch of the Assyrian Empire, and all Assyria was at
present under the Dominion of the King of Babylon; yea, the rather too, because
the Assyrians frequent invading Judea, in former times, did open a Door to that
absolute Conquest which the Babylonians did afterward make of that People, and
their carrying them away Captives into Babylon. And so accordingly they make
the Sense of the whole Verse to be this, That the Egyptians did of old
wrongfully oppress the Israelites, when they sojourned amongst them; and that
the Babylonians had now done the like. But the former Exposition is far the
clearest; to wit, that there are here two Instances given of Gods pleading the
Cause of his oppressed People formerly; and that God argues from hence by an
Argument taken from the greater to the less; that if God punished the Egyptians
for dealing so hardly and inhumanly with his People, that went down into that
Country voluntarily of their own accord, that they might sojourn there, though
the King of Egypt had some pretense for what he did, because they were in his
Dominions, and under his Jurisdiction. And so again, if God destroyed the
Assyrians, that only invaded and wasted the Land of Judea, and afflicted them
there in their own Country; much more will he punish the Babylonians, who
without cause invaded their Country, and carried them away Captives into a
strange Land.

Ver. 5. Now therefore, what have I here, says the Lord, that my People is
taken away for naught? etc.] The first words are very concise in the original;
and therefore may be understood several ways: As 1. With reference to that
which was said before, ver. 3. Now that my People has been forcibly carried
away into Babylon, without any price paid to me for them; what have I here?
that is, what gain and advantage do I get by their being here in bondage? As if
he should have said, Surely nothing at all; it was not a bargain of my making,
neither do I get any thing by it; and therefore why do I delay the rescuing of
my People from this their Captivity? Or, 2. With respect to the foregoing
Verse: Seeing I could not endure the Egyptians and Assyrians that oppressed my
People, but punished them, what have I here in Babylon, that should move me to
spare them that have carried them away Captive into a strange Country, which
the other did not? Or, what have I here to do, but to destroy Babylon, and to
hasten the deliverance of my People from their greater oppression here? Or, 3.
As bewaling the desolations of Judea; having no People left me here in Judea,
what do I here? Why do I not go away to Babylon, and fetch my People from
thence? Or, 4. With respect to their Bondage in Babylon; what have I here in
Babylon, that I should be as it were as a Captive here amongst my People, and
not carry them back again to my Temple at Jerusalem? And lastly, some take it
as spoken with respect to the state of the Jews, when Christ, their promised
Messiah, was sent unto them; why do I stay any longer amongst this People sold
over for naught, and not remove from them, and gather to my self another
People? Or, what do I speak of what my People suffer here in Babylon? seeing
they lie under a far greater oppression of their Spiritual Enemies? Why do I
not hasten to deliver them from that bondage? All these several ways these
first words are understood by Expositors, not without some ground of
probability. But the first, I conceive, does best suit with our Translation.
However according to what is said in this first branch of this Verse, we must
understand the following words; they that rule over them, make them to howl,
says the Lord; to wit, because of their cruel oppressing them, both outwardly
and in their Consciences also; and my name continually every day is blasphemed;
to wit, by the wicked Enemies of my People, who continually insult, as if I
were not able to deliver my People out of their hands. Indeed the Apostle
affirms, that this might be applied to the Enemies blaspheming Gods name,
because of the wickedness of those that profess themselves his People, Romans
2.24. But doubtless the Prophet intended here the Heathens blaspheming the God
of Israel, by their boasting that he was not able to protect or deliver his
People, according to what we find also in Ezekiel. 36.20. And when they entered
unto the Heathen whither they went, they profaned my holy name, when they said
to them, these are the People of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his Land.

Ver. 6. Therefore, etc.] That is, Because my People have been thus carried
away for naught, and have been thus cruelly oppressed, and especially because
their Enemies have thus blasphemed my Name, my People shall know my Name; that
is, they shall experimentally know that I am the Lord Jehovah, the only true
God, of Infinite Power, and faithful to make good all my promises; according to
that which follows; therefore they shall know in that day; to wit, when my
People shall be delivered out of Babylon, as I have promised, and when all
things shall be accomplished by Christ, that were foretold of him by the
Prophets; that I am he that does speak, behold it is I; that is that it is I
the Lord God that do now foretell these things by my Prophets, in that I will
exactly then accomplish what I now foretell.

Ver. 7. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that brings
good tidings, etc.] That is, How welcome, delightful, and acceptable shall the
coming be, and how highly esteemed shall the persons be, of every one of those
that shall bring to Zion, the Metropolis of Judea, situate in a Mountainous
Country, the glad tidings of the Destruction of Babylon, and the deliverance of
Gods People from their Captivity there; yet there may be, I confess, an
emphasis in these words; how beautiful are the feet, etc. as if it had been
said, The very feet of these Men, though dusty and dirty with travel, will be
beautiful and amiable in the Eyes of Gods People; See the Note, Chap. 40.9.
that publishes Peace; See the Note, Chap. 48.18. that brings good tidings of
good, that publishes Salvation, that says unto Zion, thy God reigns; that
is, he has now manifested his regal Power in governing the World, by
destroying his Enemies, and delivering his People, and has again taken them to
be under his Protection and Government, and to serve and worship him in his
Temple according to his Laws, as formerly. Now by these welcome Messengers are
meant, both the Prophets that foretold these things, and likewise those that
did first make known to the Jews the purpose of Cyrus to set them at Liberty,
and the Messengers that from Babylon were sent beforehand to acquaint those
that were left in Judea. But certainly this was chiefly accomplished in the
Apostles preaching the Gospel; as is evident by the Apostles applying this
place thereto, Romans 10.15. As it is written, how beautiful are the feet of them
that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things! And as
this is intended, the Phrase here used seems to have respect to the Apostles
traveling into many Countries, to preach the glad tidings of that Salvation
and Peace, which in Christ was tendered to them; See the Note, Chap. 9.6. And
that which is said, thy God reigns, is meant of the Kingdom of Christ,
according to that expression so frequently used by the Baptist and Christ:
Behold the Kingdom of God is at hand.

Ver. 8. Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice, etc.] By the watchmen here some
understand the same that in the foregoing Verse were mentioned, as the
Messengers that brought good tidings to Zion. And indeed, if by them we
understand the Prophets and Apostles, it is clear, that both these are termed
watchmen in the Scripture; See Ezekiel. 3.17. and Heb. 3.17. But it is very
probably by others said, that by their Watchmen here, are meant those Watchmen
that should stand in the Watchtower about Zion, who, when they should see the
People flocking home from Babylon, according to what the Messengers sent from
thence had told them, should lift up their voice; to wit, with great joy and
confidence, to proclaim unto the People those glad tidings; See the Notes,
Chap. 40.1, 9. And to imply that many of them should do this, (which was a
clear evidence of the certainty of it) therefore is that added, with the voice
together shall they sing; to wit, as being ravished with Joy to see Gods People
come back again; for they shall see Eye to Eye, when the Lord shall bring again
Zion; that is, they shall with their Eyes see the poor Captives come home into
their own Country: As the Prophet Ezekiel was appointed to say to Zedekiah,
Ezekiel. 34.3. Thine Eyes shall behold the Eyes of the King of Babylon, and he
shall speak with thee Mouth to Mouth. But now referring this to our Redemption
by Christ, the Watchmens lifting up their voice, must be understood of the
Apostles preaching the Gospel unanimously, with great joy and assurance of
Faith to all Nations, according to that of the Apostles, Romans 10.18. Their
sound went into all the Earth; and so likewise that which is said of their
seeing Eye to Eye, when the Lord should bring again Zion, must be understood of
their being Eye witnesses of Christ's performing the great work of our
Redemption; for which see Act. 4.20. and 1 John 1.1.

Ver. 9. Break forth into joy, etc.] These words may be taken, as the Words of
the Prophet, or the words of the Watchmen, mentioned in the foregoing Verse;
Break forth into joy, sing together ye waste places of Jerusalem; to wit,
because now, upon the return of Gods People, we shall be all built up again,
and abundantly replenished with Inhabitants; See the Notes, Chap. 49.19. and
51.3 And under this may be also comprehended, the building up of the Church
(especially by the access of Gentiles) which at the coming of Christ was
miserably wasted and weakened; See the Note, Chap. 35.1. for the Lord has
comforted his People; to wit, by their Redemption, and the blessed effects that
followed thereupon; See the Note, Chap. 51.3. for so it is expressed in the
following words, he has redeemed Jerusalem; See the Note, Chap. 44.23. But
withal observable it is, how this expression agrees with that Luke 2.25.
where it is said, that Simeon was a just and devout man, waiting for the
Consolation of Israel.

Ver. 10. The Lord has made bare his holy Arm in the Eyes of all the Nations,
etc.] By making bare, that is stretching forth, or stripping his Arm, is meant
the clear discovering and making visible his Almighty power to Men, by
delivering his People, and destroying their Enemies; so that all Nations, far
and near, should with admiration take notice of this wonderful work of God; and
he says his holy Arm, because it was Gods holiness that engaged him to do this
for those whom he had set apart to be a holy People unto himself. But see the
Notes, Psalm. 98.1, 2. and all the ends of the Earth shall see the Salvation of
our God; See the Note, Chap. 40.5.

Ver. 11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, etc.] To wit, out of
Babylon. See the Note, Chap. 48.20. It is thus often repeated, to imply the
care and speed that was required herein. And under this typical departure out
of Babylon, men are also called to come out of the World, namely, out of that
state of uncleanness and bondage, wherein the World lies, and from the
fellowship of the wicked of the World, by a true Conversion and Profession of
Christ, according to that of the Apostle: Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, 2 Cor.
6.17. as it follows here, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of
her; which as it enjoined a care to keep themselves clean, or to purify
themselves from all legal uncleanness; so likewise, especially that which was
signified thereby, that they should not suffer themselves to be polluted with
the Superstitions and other wickedness of the Babylonians, amongst whom they
lived; be ye clean, ye that bear the Vessels of the Lord; that is, ye that are
Priests, and Levites; for I conceive it is clear by that which is said, Ezra.
8.24. (See the Note there) that the carrying back of the holy Vessels and
Utensils of the Temple, which Nebuchadnezzar had carried away to Babylon, was
committed to the Levites, and that therefore they are here particularly and
principally charged to keep themselves unpolluted. And so under this type, all
Christians, that are an holy Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifice,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. (Ministers especially, that are
entrusted with dispensing Gods Ordinances) are pressed to be singularly pure
and holy.

Ver. 12. For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight, etc.] To wit,
as the Israelites posted away out of Egypt, the People pressing them to be gone
without any delay, and themselves happily suspecting lest Pharaoh should repent
of the leave he had given them, and again oppose their departing: See Exodus
12.33, 39. and 14.5. And some think that this is added to imply, that in this
regard there would not be so much danger of defiling themselves by the casual
touching of any unclean thing, (of which he had warned them in the foregoing
Verse) as if they had been to go away in any tumultuous haste. But sure the
main scope of these Words was to arm the People against any doubts that might
arise in their minds, concerning any difficulty they might meet with in their
getting away out of Babylon; for to prevent any such fears, he tells them, that
they should not make an escape out of Babylon, as those that steal away out of
a Country without the consent of their Prince, that make all the haste they can
for fear of being pursued and surprised; or, as the Israelites went out of
Egypt in such haste, that they had not time to leaven the Bread they were to
carry with them; but that they should go away openly, orderly, and freely,
without any fear of disturbance, as being set at liberty by Supreme Authority;
or just as a King should carry away his People, having vanquished their
Enemies, marching away triumphantly with Banners displayed. And then further,
to hearten them, he adds that which was chiefly considerable; to wit, That God,
whose will it was that they should be set at liberty, would go along with them,
and guide and safeguard them on every side, before and behind; for the Lord
will go before you and the God of Israel will be your rereward; wherein there
is an allusion to the Lords going along with the Israelites, in the Pillar of a
Cloud and Fire, which sometimes went in their Front, and sometimes in their
Rear, as when it stood between them and the Army of Egypt, Exodus 14.19, 20. And
in all this we may conceive a shadow and resemblance also of our Spiritual
deliverance by Christ; in that Christ's redeemed ones do come freely and
voluntarily, through Grace, out of their spiritual bondage, and are thenceforth
kept by the Power of God unto Salvation.

Ver. 13. Behold my Servant, etc.] Many learned Men begin the following Chapter
with these words. And indeed these three last Verses of this Chapter are
clearly of the same Subject with that, and do together contain an entire
Prophecy of the whole History of Christ. Having promised the Jews deliverance
out of Babylon, and that God would be with them to protect and bless them,
after they were delivered; here now he proceeds to Prophecy concerning Christ:
1. Because the main and chief end of that deliverance was, That he, the
promised Messiah, might spring from that Nation, who was to rear up the Throne
of David; and upon whom depended the making good of all Gods Promises: See the
Note, Chap. 7.14. 2. Because that deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, was a
type and shadow of that Spiritual deliverance of Gods People, which was to be
accomplished by Christ, and chiefly intended by the Spirit of God in all the
foregoing promises concerning the Jews deliverance out of Babylon. 3. Because
his aim here might be to comfort his people, by showing them, that it was no
wonder, though God brought them very low before he exalted them, seeing it
should be so also with their Lord and Head, the promised Messiah, Behold my
Servant; that is, Christ: See the Note, Chap. 42.1. shall deal prudently; to
wit, in his exact obeying the will of God, which is the highest point of
Wisdom, and in his wise managing all that belonged to the Office God had
imposed upon him; or, he shall prosper; to wit, in that he shall perfectly
finish the work, wherewith the Father shall entrust him, concerning Man's
Redemption. And indeed this Translation suits best with that which follows;
he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high; that is he shall be every
way exalted in his humane Nature transcendently above all the Creatures, both
in Heaven and Earth; to wit, in the uniting thereof in one Person with the only
begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.14. in the eminency and excellency of his gifts,
far above all other men, in the mighty effecting of the work of man's
Redemption, but especially in his Resurrection and Ascension, and sitting down
at the right hand of his Father; See the Note, Psalm. 110.1. The spreading of
his Name and Glory throughout the World, by the preaching of the Gospel, and
the high and honorable esteem, which Believers shall have of him.

Ver. 14. As many were astonished at thee, etc.] Some would have this understood
of Men's being astonished, in a way of admiration and reverence, at his Doctrine
and Miracles; as where it is said, Matthew. 7.28, 29. The People were astonished
at his Doctrine, and 8.27. But the Men marvelled, saying, what manner of man is
this, that even the Winds and the Sea obey him? And so they understand this
Verse, as if it had been expressed thus: As many shall adore and admire and
reverence him for his Word and Works, so others shall as much despise and abhor
him; which they think is intended in those following words; his visage was
marred more than any man's, etc. But it is clear, that our Translators
understood it not thus, because they make the reddition of the similitude to be
in the following Verse. And therefore according to our Translation it is
clearly meant of Men's being astonished at the contemptible and miserable
condition, wherein the Lord Christ should be in the World; having said in the
foregoing Verse, how he should prosper, and how highly he should be exalted; he
adds this concerning the low and sad condition wherein he should be for a time,
As many were astonished at thee, etc. As if he should have said, It is true, that
at first nothing of such a glorious condition, nothing of such exaltation shall
be seen in thee, my Servant; rather multitudes shall be astonished at thine
extreme low, and despicable, and miserable Estate, as not enduring to think
that the promised Messiah should be such a one as thou art. But yet, As many
were astonished at thee for this, so many shall as much afterward admire thy
Glory and Majesty, And this is in several terms expressed in the next Verse.
Only first in this Verse, to show what it was for which many should be
astonished, these words are added as in a Parenthesis; his visage was so marred
more than any man, and his form more than the Sons of Men; which must not be
understood of any deformity in his Countenance or Person, but of the
contemptibleness and misery of his outward condition above all men whatsoever,
no way suitable in the Eye of reason, for him that was indeed the Lord of
Glory; as namely, in that he was born of such mean Parentage, and lived in such
a poor and despicable condition, and was so scorned, and reviled, and abused,
and afflicted all his Life long, See Psalm. 22.6. but especially in regard of
his unparalleled sufferings at his Passion, both outwardly in his Body, and in
the anguish of his Spirit, when indeed his outward appearance was as of a man
ignominiously rejected both of God and his People; and he that was fairer than
the Children of Men, Psalm. 45.2. through the imputation of our Leprosy became
the most sad and loathsome spectacle that ever was seen amongst the Sons of Men.

Ver. 15. So shall he sprinkle, etc.] This is added with reference to the first
words of the foregoing Verse: As many were astonished at thee; so (says he)
shall he sprinkle many Nations, etc. Which is all one in effect, as if it had
been said: As many shall be astonished at his base and contemptible condition,
so shall many also, yea many Nations, be as much astonished at his Exaltation,
and the great works that shall be done by him; for this is intended by these
words; So shall he sprinkle many Nations, etc. for by sprinkling many Nations
is meant, either that he should distill down the showers of the Gospel, and
therewith shed forth the dew of his Spirit, Act. 2.33. among many Nations,
whereby they should be converted and brought to submit to his Scepter; wherein
there is an allusion to the watering of the Earth with Rain or Dew from Heaven;
See the Note, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Or else, that he should purge and cleanse them by
that his Spirit, accompanying the Ministry of the Gospel, and by his blood
through faith applied unto their Souls for their Justification and
Reconciliation with God, Heb. 10.22. which is therefore called the Blood of
sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Wherein there is an allusion to those sprinklings of
Men in the time of the Law with Water or Blood, or both meant together, which
were for the purifying of those that were legally unclean; or rather to that
Sacramental washing with Water, wherewith Christ appointed the spiritual
cleansing of Christians by his Blood and Spirit, to be sealed unto them in
Baptism. And so by those words, the Kings shall shut their Mouths at him; is
meant, That even the Kings of the Heathens should be silent before him; to wit,
either as not able to express the greatness of his Majesty and Glory, or by way
only of admiring his transcendent excellency and reverencing him for it, or by
way of admiring him for his Doctrine, and silent attending upon his Teaching;
See the Note, Job 29.9. not daring any way to gainsay or oppose him, but
renouncing their own wisdom and submitting themselves cheerfully to his Scepter
and Government. And thus though the Jews should reject him; yet the Gentiles
should embrace him; of which the reason is given in the following words, for
that which had not been told them shall they see, and that which they had not
heard shall they consider; that is, they shall see the accomplishment of those
things which the Prophets had foretold, whereof they had heard nothing, and
should hear and seriously meditate of those Gospel Mysteries, which in other
ages was not made known to the Sons of Men, Ephesians. 3.5. And hence it is that St.
Paul alleges this place to justify his Preaching the Gospel amongst the
Gentiles, Romans 15.21. But as it is written, to whom he was not spoken of, they
shall see; and they that have not heard, shall understand.

CHAP. LIII.
VERSE 1. WHO has believed our report, etc.] To wit, those good tidings,
mentioned before, Chap. 52.7. which we from God have reported to his People. In
the Septuagint the word Lord is inserted; and so accordingly we find it
rendered where this passage is cited in the New Testament, Lord, who has
believed our report? And accordingly we may well conceive it to be spoken by
the Prophet, in the name of all those who had published, or should publish
those glad tidings concerning Christ, whether the Prophets that had foretold
them, or Christ and his Apostles that should make known the accomplishment of
them, and that by way of bemoaning and bewailing to God the incredulity of
those to whom they were preached. It is indeed commonly held by Expositors,
that it is the incredulity of the Jews in particular, which the Prophet here
complains of. And it cannot be indeed denied, that they are here primarily
intended, both because this complaint seems to be opposed to that which the
Prophet had said, ver. 17. of the foregoing Chapter, concernning the spreading
of Christ's Kingdom amongst many Nations; as if he had said, Though the Gentiles
shall readily submit to him, yet how few of the Jews will be won to believe in
him? And likewise because the Evangelist says expressly, that this was
accomplished in the Jews, Joh. 12.37, 38. But though he had done so many
Miracles before them, yet they believed not in him: That the saying of Esaias
the Prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke; Lord, who has believed our
report? etc. But yet I see not why it might not be intended of the paucity of
those that should believe these glad tidings concerning Christ, both amongst
the Jews and Gentiles; for even amongst them there are but a very small Remnant
of those that truly believe, in comparison of those that believe not. And
therefore we see St. Paul, speaking of his preaching the Gospel to the
Gentiles, alleges this Prophecy, to show that it was no wonder, though but a
few of the Gentiles did embrace these glad tidings of Salvation, Romans 10.16.
But, says he, they have not all obeyed the Gospel: For Esaias says, Lord, who
has believed our report? I conceive therefore that this is spoken of the
incredulity of all, to whom the Gospel should be preached, though in the first
place, and principally of the Jews. The Prophet knowing, that what he had said,
and what he was further to say, concerning Christ, were Mysteries which Flesh
and Blood would not, nor could not believe, unless they were supernaturally
enlightened and persuaded thereto by the Almighty power of Gods Spirit, he
breaks forth into these words; who has believed our Report? and (which is the
same in effect,) to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? That is, to how few
shall these things be revealed by the mighty power of God, working by Christ,
and showing forth it self in Christ, and in the Ministry of the Gospel (which
is therefore called the power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1.16. without which
indeed no Man can believe? See the Notes, Chap. 51.9. and 52.10. The expression
here used, to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? seems to be taken from
Workmen, that are wont to strip up their Sleeves, and make bare their Arms,
when they set themselves to work.

Ver. 2. For he shall grow up, etc.] Here the reason is given why so few of the
Jewish Nation should believe the glad tidings of the Prophets and Apostles
concerning Christ, and accordingly, why so few should entertain him as the
promised Messiah, namely, because of the mean and contemptible condition, both
of his Person and Kingdom outwardly. They expected a Messiah, that should come
in Princely State, as some mighty Monarch, that should deliver them from their
bondage under the Roman Empire; and therefore seeing no such thing ^^ Christ,
but the quite contrary, he being so exceeding low and mean in the World, they
could not endure to think that he should be their promised Messiah. For he
shall grow up, to wit, Christ, in his humane Nature, of whom the Prophet had
spoken in the close of the foregoing Chapter, before him; that is, before God,
who had sent him into the World as his Servant, (and so it may be spoken as
with relation to that in the foregoing Chapter, ver. 13. Behold my Servant,
etc.] and under whose provident Eye and Protection, and Blessing he grew up:
Or, before him, that is, before the People of the Jews, that did so scorn and
despise him, as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry ground, a Succor
(as we usually call them, and so the Hebrew word here signifies) that springs
out of the root of a Tree, that grows in a dry, sandy, barren ground, a poor
slender Twig, in danger to be trodden down by every foot; See the Note, Chap,
11.1. The meaning is, That he should be amongst the great ones of his time, as
such a poor shrivelled Twig amongst many tall and stately Trees; he has no
form nor comeliness; that is, there was no splendour outwardly, either in his
personal state, or in his Kingdom; See the Note, Chap. 42.14. and when we shall
see him (this is spoken as in the person of the Jews, and as setting forth what
the Judgment of Flesh and Blood in all men would have been) there is no beauty
that we should desire him; that is, there was no sightliness, nothing that was
desirable in him, at least nothing that should induce Men to desire him as the
promised Messiah. He lived for thirty years together unknown, and in a poor and
mean condition, and his Church was at first poor and of no esteem, and because
of this, he that was the desire of all Nations, Hag. 2.7. was looked upon as
one that had nothing desirable in him.

Ver. 3. He is despised and rejected of men, etc.] Not only not desired, as was
said in the foregoing Verse, but also despised and rejected, as a vile,
abominable person, which was that St. Peter charged the Jews with, Act. 3.14.
But ye denied the holy one and the just, etc. A man of sorrows; that is, full
of all sorts of sorrows all his life long, but especially at his passion, so
that he might seem to be even made up of sorrows, and acquainted with grief;
that is, inured and accustomed to grief; all manner of griefs and sufferings
were familiar and ordinary with him: And we hid as it were our Faces from him;
which is again spoken of the generality of the Nation of the Jews. Some indeed
read this, as it is in the Margin; he hid as it were his face from us; and they
that render it so, understand it of Christ's hiding his Face, as it were, out of
shame, because of his sad and despicable condition; as the Lepers by the Law
were appointed to hide and cover their Faces, Lev. 13.45. But it is far better
rendered in our Translation; and we hid as it were our Faces from him; to wit,
by way of loathing him, as an abominable Person, whom they could not endure to
behold; or by way of hatred and detestation, as being ashamed to own him, or to
converse with him; or lastly, by way of disregard, or contempt, as not thinking
him worthy to be in the least minded or looked after. And that this last is
chiefly intended, the following words may incline us to think, which seem to be
added for the explaining of this; he was despised, and we esteemed him not;
whence it is that the Apostle says, Phil. 2.7. That he made himself of no
reputation, etc.

Ver. 4. Surely, etc.] Here the Prophet shows, why Christ was to live in such a
mean and contemptible Estate, and to suffer that abundance of grief and sorrow,
mentioned before, ver. 3. (hereby also to imply the folly of those that
stumbled at this) namely, because he was to take upon him the guilt of our
Sins, and the punishment which our sins had deserved; Surely he has born our
griefs, and carried our sorrows; that is, the guilt of our Sins, the diseases
of the Soul (as the word here used in the Original does properly signify) and
all those infirmities, griefs, sorrows, and pains, which man's Nature in general
is subject and liable to because of Sin (for those personal infirmities,
arising from the several constitutions and complexions of men, Christ did not
take upon him) for thus St. Peter expresses this, as is most probable in
allusion to this place, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our Sins in his own
body. The great question concerning this place is, how it is by St. Matthew
applied to the bodily Cures which Christ wrought, if it be to be understood as
is before related? Matthew. 8.16, 17. He cast out the Spirits with his word, and
healed all that were sick: That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
Esaias the Prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our
sicknesses. But to this two answers are given by Expositors: The first, which
most agree in, is, That the Evangelist says that this Prophecy was fulfilled
in these miraculous Cures of Christ, because they were a type and sign, that he
was come to cure them of, and deliver them from their Sins, the Spiritual
diseases of their Souls; by these miraculous cures he taught them as it were;
that he was come to satisfy the Justice of God, by bearing the punishment due
to their Sins, that so their Sins might be pardoned, and God being reconciled
to them, might show mercy in curing them of their bodily diseases. But then the
second answer is, (which seems to me far the clearest and plainest) that St.
Matthew says, That this Prophecy of Esaias was fullfilled, when Christ cured
such a multitude of sick and diseased Persons, because by his tender pity and
bowels of compassion toward those sad afflicted Creatures, he showed plainly,
that, together with our Nature, he had assumed the penal infirmities of our
Nature, and therefore had a sad fellow-feeling of the pains and griefs, which
those poor wretches did endure. But however that the Prophet did intend this
which he here says of Christ's bearing in his sufferings the punishment which
our sins had deserved, is evident by the following words, wherein he shows
how far otherwise the Jews would judge of his sufferings, yet we did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; that is, instead of esteeming him
according to the transcendent dignity of his person, we esteemed him to be one
whom God had justly plagued and punished for his notorious wickedness. And
hence it was that they mocked him for his hoping in God; See the Note, Psalm.
22.8.

Ver. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities, etc.] That is, He was grievously tormented, (so it is rendered in
the Margin) and cruelly afflicted, even to the taking away of his Life; not for
his own wickedness, (which the Jews vainly conceited, as was said in the
foregoing Verse) but to satisfy the Justice of God for our Sins; the
chastisement of our peace was upon him; that is, he was punished to procure our
peace, that reconciliation being by him wrought for us, we might be at peace
with God, and might enjoy peace in our Consciences; and some add too, that he
might recover for us all that bliss and prosperity, which we had lost by our
Sins, even the favor of God here, and Life Eternal hereafter: and with his
stripes we are healed: and from hence doubtless the Apostle took this
expression, 1 Pet. 2.24. by whose stripes ye were healed.

Ver. 6. All we like Sheep have gone astray, etc.] To wit, All Mankind, both
Jews and Gentiles, Romans 14.12. we have turned every one to his own way; that
is, we have all left the way of Life, and have wandered, some in one by way,
and some in another, and the Lord has laid on him, to wit, as our surety, the
iniquity of us all; that is, the guilt and punishment of all the Sins of us all.

Ver. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, etc.] That is, he was by the
violence of his Enemies sorely and unjustly afflicted; yet he opened not his
Mouth, which may be understood of that which is recorded by the Evangelists,
concerning his standing silent, when he was arraigned and accused before the
Judgment Seat, Mat. 26.62, 63. and Chap. 27.12, 13, 14. insomuch, as it is said
there, that the Governor marvelled greatly, perceiving, as it is likely, in
his countenance the signs of a meek and quiet and undisturbed mind; and that it
was not out of anger or stubbornness, that he answered not. But certainly that
which is intended here is, that he opened not his mouth in any way of
impatience, either against God, or against his Enemies. It is clear in the
Evangelists, that Christ spoke several times from the beginning to the end of
his passion, yea, and sometimes by way of clearing his innocence, and the
injustice of their dealing with him; as Mat. 26.55. Are ye come out against a
Thief with Swords and Staves for to take me? I sat daily with you, teaching in
the Temple, etc. And when he answered the Officer that smote him, Joh. 18.23.
If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou
me? and so in other places. But I say, here by not opening his Mouth is meant,
that he did not open his Mouth in any way of impatience or murmuring, or by way
of discovering any unwillingness to suffer, as the Apostle Peter expresses it,
1 Pet. 2.23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. For
indeed the very scope of this place is to show, that Christ suffered willingly,
and not merely by constraint, and did patiently submit to his Fathers
appointment herein; though his natural desires were against his sufferings,
Matthew. 26.39. O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; yet he
readily, and without any repining, submitted his will to the will of his
Father; (without which indeed his suffering could not have been satisfactory to
the justice of God) See the Notes, Psalm. 40.7, 8. knowing that he was to stand
in the stead of poor Sinners, and to suffer what their Sins had deserved, he
would not by any expression of discontent show any dislike of what he endured.
And to the same purpose is that which follows, for having said in the
foregoing Verse, All we like sheep have gone astray, as in allusion thereto, he
expresses here the patient submission of Christ to his sufferings under the
Similitude of a Lamb or Sheep; he is brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter; that
is, As a Lamb goes as quietly to the Slaughterhouse, as if it were going to
the Field or Fold; so did this Lamb of God, knowing that he was to be the
Priest, as well as the Sacrifice; so did he go patiently to lay down his Life
for Sinners, and as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb; that is, makes no
clamouring noise, as Swine and some other Creatures will do, when Men lay hold
on them, but is usually silent, though the Shearers do not only cut off her
Coat, but also many times clip her Skin; so opens he not his Mouth; to wit,
by way of silent and free submitting to all his sufferings, that we might with
open Mouth glory in his satisfaction. Observable it is, that this was the Text
which Philip opened to the Ethiopian Eunuch, at his Conversion, Act. 8.33. But
there it is rendered as it is in the Septuagint.

Ver. 8. He was taken away from Prison, etc.] The words here in the original
are very diversely interpreted, and so differently expounded. But I shall keep
to those Translations which we have in our Bibles. They may be rendered, as
they are in the Margin; He was taken away by distress and judgment, etc. which
plainly refers to his being taken away by death. And then by distress must
needs be meant, that either the unjust violence and oppression, wherewith his
Enemies proceeded against him without all Equity or Justice; or the restraint,
under which they held him until they came to execute Judgment upon him; or in
general, all the misery and anguish he endured in his sufferings, whether
Bodily or Spiritual. And so likewise by judgment is meant, either the
pronouncing of judgment against him, or the executing of it upon him, or all
those severe and cruel Courses, wherewith under a pretense of Judgment, they
proceeded to punish him, and at last to take away his Life. But now reading the
words as they are in our Translation: He was taken from Prison and from
Judgment; the most probable Expositions that are given of it may be reduced to
two Heads: For, 1. Some understand it of his being taken from his sufferings,
and Translated into Heavenly Glory. By Prison none understand a Prisonhouse;
for in the History of Christ's Passion it is clear, that he was never put into
any such Prison: but by the word which we Translate Prison, some understand the
restraint under which he was held after they had apprehended him, yea including
his imprisonment in the Grave, where his dead Body was sealed up and watched by
a guard of Soldiers: And some add too, those bonds of anguish and anxiety that
were upon the Soul of our Savior from the apprehension of Gods wrath, when in
his Agony he sweat drops of Blood, Luke 22.44. and when upon the Cross he cried
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. And then by
Judgment they understand (as is before said) the Judgment that was pronounced
against him, and executed upon him. And thus they make the meaning of this
first branch of the Verse to be this, That he was taken from all his
sufferings, rising again triumphantly out of the Grave, and then ascending up
into Heavenly Glory. But 2. Others understand it only of what he suffered from
his Enemies; namely, that the intent thereof is to show, either, that after
they had him under restraint, and had pronounced sentence of Judgment against
him, he was taken away by death: (and some think too, that in the expression
here used, there is relation to his being taken up to the Cross, according to a
like expression used elsewhere, Joh. 12.32.) or else the violence and
precipitancy of their proceedings against him; to wit, that after they had him
once under restraint, they presently carried him away to the Judgment Seat, and
when Pilate had pronounced Judgment against him, immediately, without any
delay, they hurried him away to Execution; so that, as it is clear in the
Evangelists, all was done in a violent hurry; they apprehended him but over
night, and he was condemned and executed the very next day. And indeed, because
the Prophet, both before and after these words speaks of his sufferings, this
last Exposition I judge the best. But then for the following words, and who
shall declare his generation? It is confessed that most of the ancient Writers
have understood it, either of the generation of Christ of God the Father from
all Eternity, as he was the only begotten Son of God; See the Notes, Psalm. 2.7.
and Prove. 8.24. or of his Conception and Birth as man, of the Virgin Mary,
without the knowledge of man. And indeed both these are wonderful Mysteries,
which no man is able to comprehend or express. But why in this place they
should be mentioned, it is hard to conceive. And therefore the most of our
later Expositors do understand it otherwise: and that three several ways. For,
1. Some by his generation do understand the duration, or continuance of his
Life and Kingdom. (as indeed the word is sometimes taken, Chap. 13.20.) Having
said in the foregoing words, say some, that he was from his sufferings taken up
into Heavenly Glory; he adds here, expressing it by way of admiration; that
after that, the continuance of his Age, his Life and Kingdom, would be
uncountable, even unto all Eternity; it should not be with him, as with them,
who being delivered from Death, do yet afterward dye again, because Christ
being raised from the dead, dies no more, Death has no more dominion over
him, Romans 6.9. Yea, and some extend this also to the Life everlasting, of his
Church and People; which indeed agrees well with that which follows, ver. 10.
He shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days. Or, say others, Having in the
foregoing words spoken of his being taken away by Death, here he adds as in
opposition thereto; but who shall declare his generation? as if he had said,
Though he lived so short a time, and was cut off in the flower of his age; yet
who can count his age, who shall live and reign even unto Eternity? 2. Others
by his generation understand the Men of that generation, wherein he lived, and
so make the meaning of the words to be this, who shall declare his generation?
that is, who is able to set forth the monstrous impiety and wickedness of that
generation of men, that could deal thus with the Lord of Glory that came to
save them? And, 3. Others by his generation understand his Spiritual Seed or
Issue; as the word is taken Psalm. 22.30. And this too is conceived to be added
as in opposition to the foregoing branch, thus: Though he shall be taken away
by Death; yet, oh! what an innumerable generation shall spring from him? In an
ordinary way, when a man is slain, there is an end put to the enlarging of his
Posterity; but it shall not be so with him; no man shall be able to count the
Spiritual generation that shall spring up to him after his Death; to wit, of
those that shall believe in him; which is that is said afterward, ver. 10. He
shall see his Seed, etc. And then for the last Clause; for he was cut off (it
is the very same word that is used concerning the death of the Messiah, Dan.
9.26.) from the Land of the Living; See the Note, Psalm. 27.13. for the
transgression of my People was he stricken; therein a reason is given, why he
should not be quite destroyed by Death, but should be taken up into Heavenly
glory, (for, as is said before, so some understand the first words of this
Verse) and should live and see his Seed, or Generation, unto Eternity; namely,
because he should not dye for any wickedness of his own, but in obedience to
his Father, and that to bear the punishment due to the Sins of Gods People;
that is, the Sins of Gods Elect People, say some; See 2 Timothy 2.10. Or, the
Jews, amongst others, that put him to death. And thus the Prophet might call
them his People: Though indeed, because of those words, for the transgression
of my People; many Expositors hold, that these last words are spoken in the
Person of God the Father.

Ver. 9. And he made his Grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his Death,
etc.] It is in the Hebrew, in his Deaths, because of his many grievous
sufferings, which were as so many Deaths to him; as the Apostle said of
himself, that he was in Deaths often, 2 Cor. 11.23. Not only because he was often
in danger of Death, but also, because his Afflictions and Sufferings were as
sore and bitter as Death it self. There are many Expositions given of these
words, which seem to me extremely forced; and some, which our Translation can
by no means admit. I will only mention those that may consist with our
Translation, and which have some appearance of probability in them. 1. Some
understand it of the just vengeance, which befell the Jews for their Crucifying
of Christ, when they were destroyed by the Romans; to wit, that God the Father
(or Christ) would bring that wicked People, even the greatest and richest of
them (who are particularly mentioned, because such being puffed up with their
greatness and riches, are usually most boldly wicked and oppressive of others)
to be as harshly and cruelly dealt with by others, as they had dealt with
Christ; that he would bring them to Death, and to the Grave, as they had
brought Christ. 2. Others understand it of the efficacy of Christ's Death and
Burial; namely, that thereby many wicked men; yea, many of the great and rich
ones amongst them, most unlikely to yield, should be crucified with him, and
buried with him, to wit; Spiritually; and so be made new Creatures, and be
brought to be obedient to the will of his Father; or (which is all one in
effect) that they should be brought to be with him, and own him, though
Crucified and Buried, as their Lord; and as his People, to submit to his
Scepter and Government. Again, 3. Some understand it only of his Sufferings,
but in a several way. For, 1. Some take it thus, That God the Father gave
Christ over into the hands of the wicked Jews and the Gentiles, even the great
ones of those times, such as were Caiaphas and Herod, and Pontius Pilate, that
so they might dispose of him how they pleased, both in regard of his Death and
Burial; which agrees with that of our Savior, Matthew. 26.45. Behold the Son of
Man is betrayed into the hands of Sinners; or, (for so some would have it) that
He, that is, the Jewish People, gave him up into the hands of the wicked
Gentiles, Pilate, and the Roman Soldiers, that they should Crucify and bury
him as they pleased. But, 2. Others understand it thus, that he should be cut
off by an untimely Death, as a wicked man, and accordingly should be Executed
amongst other Malefactors in Mount Calvary, the ordinary place where such kind
of Varlets used to be Executed and Buried, according to that which follows in
this Chapter, ver. 12. And he was numbered with the Transgressors: but yet
withal, the providence of God so disposing of it, he should be buried in the
Sepulcher of a rich man, as Joseph of Arimathea is expressly called, Matthew.
27.57. the Evangelist thereby pointing, as some think, to the accomplishment of
this Prophecy. And this last seems to me the most probable Exposition of this
place. As for that which follows, because he had done no violence, neither was
any deceit in his Mouth; or, as it is cited, 1 Pet. 2.22. neither was guile
found in his Mouth, which seems to have special respect to the unquestionable
truth of his Doctrine; it is given as a reason of that which went before; and
therefore must be understood according to the several Expositions of the
foregoing words; as either, 1. That God would bring destruction upon those that
crucified Christ, because they had dealt so cruelly with an innocent man, that
had never done any thing blameworthy, either in word or deed: Or, 2. That his
Death should be efficacious for the Conversion of wicked Men, yea, even the
greatest and richest of them, because he should not dye for any guilt that was
in him, but as a spotless Lamb, that suffered for the Salvation of others: Or,
3. That God would not suffer him to be buried amongst those notorious
Malefactors, in that common place appointed for their burial in or about Mount
Calvary, but provided that he should be honorably laid in a new Sepulcher,
which a rich and honorable person had provided for himself, because he was
such a new man indeed as the World had never seen, a man that had never sinned
neither in word nor deed.

Ver. 10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief,
etc.] That is, Though there was no fault in him, yet it was the will of God
that he should suffer sorely, to wit, because he was to suffer for poor
Sinners; See the Note before, ver. 5. when thou shall make his Soul an offering
for Sin; that is, when thou, O God, shall bring it to that, that his Soul, that
is, his Life, or himself, shall be offered up as a propitiatory Sacrifice for
sinful men; Or, (as it is in the Margin) when his Soul shall make an offering
for Sin; that is, when Christ shall willingly, even with all his Soul, offer up
himself, as a Sacrifice for his People, to wit, in his Death; See Gal. 3.13.
and 2 Cor. 5.21. he shall see his Seed, that is, his Spiritual Progeny; See the
Notes, Chap. 9.6. Multitudes of Believers, that shall be begotten again by his
Word and Spirit. It is as if he had said, that his Death should not hinder his
having a numerous Seed, because he should rise from the dead, and so should
live and see his Seed; yea, it should be so far from hindering it, that it
should be the cause of it, because reconciliation being made by his Death, he
shall thereby purchase them to himself; which our Savior intended in that,
Joh. 12.24. Except a Corn of Wheat fall into the ground, and dye, it abides
alone, but if it die, it brings forth much Fruit; and likewise because it was
not till after his Death and Ascension into Heaven, that his Spirit was to be
so abundantly poured forth, both upon those that were to preach the Gospel, and
upon those to whom it was Preached, Joh. 7.39. he shall prolong his days; See
the Note above, ver. 8. It is spoken with respect to his reigning long over his
Church upon Earth, till all his Enemies were subdued, and after that, together
with his Church Eternally in Heaven; and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his hand; that is, that which it was the Lords good will and pleasure should
be done by him, to wit, the Redemption and Salvation of Men, and that which
should make way thereto, the bringing in of Men to believe in Christ, by the
spreading of the Gospel through all Nations; See Joh. 4.34. and 6.39.

Ver. 11. He shall see of the travel of his Soul, etc.] That is, He shall for a
long time together, with much content and delight, see and enjoy (See the
Notes, Job 7.7. and Psalm. 34.12.) the effect and fruit of all the toilsome and
wearisome pains that he had taken, and pains and sorrows he had endured, and
that especially in his Soul, by reason of the pressures of Divine Wrath that
lay upon him, and put him into a bloody sweat. And by this fruit of the travel
of his Soul, is meant, that which in the foregoing Verse was called, the
prospering of the pleasure of the Lord in his hand; as namely, the gathering of
multitudes of Gods Elect People from amongst the Gentiles; together with that
transcendency of Glory, whereunto himself shall be exalted after his Sufferings
and Labors; (See Phil. 2.8, 9. and Luke 24.26.) and the Eternal Salvation of
all his redeemed ones; and shall be satisfied, to wit, with full content and
delight, as having obtained that which he earnestly thirsted after, and
accounting it an abundant recompense for all his Labors and Sufferings; even
as a Husbandman is satisfied, when after all his toil he comes to reap a
plenteous Harvest; and as a Woman is satisfied, when after all her pains in
travel, she sees the Child she has brought forth. And indeed this does notably
set forth the wonderful love of Christ to poor Sinners, in that he is satisfied
with their Salvation, as having therein obtained that only thing, which above
all things he earnestly desired; by his knowledge shall my righteous Servant
justify many, that is, by their knowing him, and believing on him, according
as the like expressions are used elsewhere, Joh. 17.3. and Phil. 3.8. for he
shall bear their iniquities, that is, the guilt and punishment of their
iniquities; See the Notes above, ver. 4.5.

Ver. 12. Therefore, etc.] That is, Seeing he has done me such faithful
Service, not sparing to lay down his own Life, that he might bear the
punishments due to poor Sinners, and satisfy my Justice on their behalf:
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
Spoil with the strong; where the same thing is intended in both expressions;
only in the first the Fathers donation of that which is here promised is set
forth, and in the second the Lord Christ's possession and enjoyment of that
which his Father had assigned to him. Some would have the intention of the
words to be the same, as if it had been expressed thus: I will divide him great
ones, or, I will divide great ones to him for a portion; and he shall divide
him a spoil amongst the strong, or he shall divide the strong for a spoil. And
accordingly they would have the meaning to be, either, 1. That Christ should
vanquish, and subdue, and spoil, all his great and strong Adversaries, Satan
and the World; as the Apostle expresses his triumphing over the Powers of
Darkness, at his Death, Col. 2.15. And having spoiled Principalities and
Powers, he made a show of them openly: Or, 2. That he should bring the Great
Princes and Potentates of the World, and the famous wise and learned men that
were amongst the Nations of the World, to stoop and submit to his Scepter: But,
according to our Translation, I conceive the meaning must needs be, That after
Christ's vanquishing his Enemies, he should divide the spoil, as other great and
mighty Conquerours are wont, when they have overcome their Enemies in Battle,
to divide the spoil amongst their followers. And if we so understand the words,
then by Christ's conquered Enemies must be meant Satan, Sin, Death, and Hell,
together with the wicked of the World, who were all overcome and vanquished by
the Death of Christ; and by the portion and spoil he should have, as the effect
and reward of his Conflict, and Victory, may be meant; 1. And principally, The
many Souls, all the World over, that should be rescued out of that Spiritual
bondage, under which they lay, and brought into subjection to Christ; See the
Notes, Psalm. 2.8. and 68.19. 2. The riches of the Kings and great ones, and the
learning and wisdom of the wise men of the World, who being Converted, should
dedicate all that they had to the service of Christ: And 3. That transcendent
Honor and Glory, whereto Christ should be exalted: All which he may be said to
divide, in regard his Church and People are made sharers with him in them all.
And indeed there are some Expositors, that by the great and the strong, with
whom Christ divided the spoil, do understand both the Apostles, and others that
should preach the Gospel, and likewise those violent ones, of whom our Savior
spoke, Matthew. 11.12. that took the Kingdom of Heaven by force. As for the
following words, therein the reason of this is further set forth; because he
has poured out his Soul unto Death; that is, he willingly, with all his Soul,
gave up himself to suffer Death for Man's Redemption, and he was numbered with
the Transgressors, to wit, in that they esteemed him such an one, and Accused
him, Prosecuted, Arraigned, and Condemned him as such an one; yea, the worst of
such, in that they chose rather to have Barabbas, a Thief and a Murderer, to be
let loose than him; and so likewise, in that he was put to the same Death that
Malefactors used to suffer, and in the same place, where such were ordinarily
wont to be Executed, and at the same time together with others; yea, in the
midst betwixt two Thieves, as the chief of Transgressors; so that the
Evangelist says expressly, that therein this Prophecy was fulfilled, Mark
15.27, 28. and he bare the Sin of many; See the Notes before, ver. 4.5, 6. and
made intercession for the Transgressors, to wit, even those wicked wretches, by
whom he suffered, in that Prayer of his upon the Cross; Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do, Luke. 23.34. But it may include also his work
of Mediation, as our Priest, and his Intercession for poor Sinners, that should
be brought to believe in him; both whilst he lived upon Earth, Joh. 17.20.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also, which shall believe on me
through their word; and now that he sits at the right hand of his Father, in
Heavenly Glory, Heb. 7.25.

CHAP. LIVE.
VERSE 1. SIng, O barren, etc.] Some conceive that this is spoken to the Church
of the Jews in Babylon. The Prophet, say they, foreseeing that the People of
the Jews, that seemed for the present to be in the Estate of a married Wife,
prosperous and comfortable, enjoying Gods presence in his Temple-worship, and
bringing forth daily a new Generation, whom God owned for his Children, should
e're long, when they were carried Captives into Babylon, be in the condition of
a barren Woman, cast off, as it were, by God, in a wasting and dying Estate,
and not likely to bring forth a Posterity, whom God would own for his Children;
he does here, for the comfort of the Faithful, give them a promise, that after
this she should bring forth a more numerous Issue to God, than ever she had
done: Yet though this, they say, began to be fulfilled at the return of the
Jews out of Babylon, it was not fully accomplished, till the days of the
Gospel. But because the Apostle, Gal. 4.26, 27. does plainly cite this
Prophecy, as accomplished in the days of the Gospel; Jerusalem, which is above,
is free, which is the Mother of us all; for it is written, (and we must know,
that the place is rendered, as it is in the Septuagint) Rejoice thou barren
that bear not, break forth and cry, thou that travellest not, for the
desolate has many mo Children, than she that has a Husband; therefore I think
that others do better hold, that by the barren here is meant, the Church of the
New Testament, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles; but primarily with respect
to the Jews, out of whom the First Fruits of the Church of the New Testament
were gathered, and into whose Body the Converted Gentiles were ingrafted, and
so became one Church of God, together with them; and accordingly, that in the
following words, (wherein the reason is given, why she is called upon to break
forth into so great joy) for more are the Children of the desolate, than the
children of the married Wife; by the married wife, mentioned in opposition to
her that was barren, and desolate, is meant the Church of the Jews under the
Old Testament, who was of old Gods Covenant People. Though therefore this may
be spoken with reference to the Jews returned o^t of their Captivity in
Babylon, as a type of the Church of the New Testament, set at liberty by Christ
from their spiritual bondage; yet questionless it is the Church of the New
Testament, to whom the Prophet here directs his Speech. Having in the foregoing
Chapter foretold the Sufferings and Death of Christ, and the numerous seed he
should have, notwithstanding he should be so cut off by Death, meaning thereby
the generation of believing Converts, that should join themselves to him, and
become his Church and People; See the Note, Chap. 53.10. hereupon, as in a
triumphant manner, he breaks forth here into a Congratulation of this Church
for her great enlargement and advancement; Sing, O barren, thou that did not
bear, break forth into singing, and cry aloud thou that did not travel with
Child; wherein, as she is compared to a barren woman, and one that had not
traveled with Child, that is, a woman that was not very fruitful in bringing
forth Children; either with respect to the Gentiles, who had been before
barren, and brought forth no Children unto God, having been hitherto without
God, and without Christ in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. or with respect to the
depraved condition of the Church of the Jews, at the time when Christ came
amongst them, when there was but a very few that were Israelites indeed, and
such as God owned for his Children, or else rather with respect to the small
number of those that did at first embrace the Faith of Christ, upon the
preaching of the Gospel to them, it being expressly noted, Act. 1.15. that
immediately after the Ascension of Christ, there were but a hundred and twenty
of the primitive Christian Church; so she is withal called upon to break forth
into singing, in regard of her future fruitfulness: (wherein some conceive
there is an allusion to those Songs of Praise, which were wont to be made by
barren women, when they began to be fruitful; such as was that of Hannah, 1 Samuel 2.1.) And this is set forth in the following words; for more are the
Children of the desolate, than of the married Wife, that is, the Church of the
New Testament shall be abundantly more numerous, by reason of the access of the
Gentiles, than ever was the Church of the Jews under the Old Testament, yea,
even whilst she continued faithful in Covenant with God.

Ver. 2. Enlarge the place of thy Tent, and let them stretch forth the Curtains
of thine Habitation, etc.] This is also to imply the mighty increase of the
Christian Church by the access of the Gentiles; but see the Notes, Chap. 49.19,
20. As for these expressions of enlarging their Tent, etc. that is spoken in
allusion to the ancient manner of Gods People dwelling in Tents; and the rather
happily to imply, that it is the state and condition of the Church and People of
God, to be Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth, Heb. 11.13. and to have here no
continuing City, Heb. 13.14. Spare not, lengthen thy Cords, as if he had said,
Spare not to lengthen thy Cords. It may imply, either that they should not
stick at, or scruple that to which he advised them, as questioning whether
there would be any need of enlarging their Tents, but do as he enjoined them to
do; or else, that they should spare no pains nor cost in the doing of it. As
for the last words, and strengthen thy stakes, whereby is meant, that they
should get such strong stakes, whereto to fasten the Cords of their Tent, and
drive them so fast into the ground, that they might be able to bear Curtains of
such length and breadth and weight, as theirs would be; this is to imply the
stedfastness and invincible stability of the Christian Church, for which see
the Note, Chap. 33.20.

Ver. 3. For thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on the left, etc.]
That is, Thou shall be spread abroad amongst all the Nations about thee on
every side. The expression here used of their breaking forth, is either taken
from the breaking forth of Children from the Womb, according to what was said
of Pharez, when he was born; How have thou broken forth? Genesis 28.29. or else
from the over-crowding of a Storehouse with any Commodity; so that it breaks
forth, and bears down the Walls before it; with respect whereto some think that
expression is used, Prove. 3.10. So shall thy Barnes be filled with plenty, and
thy Presses shall burst out with new Wine. And to the same purpose is that
which follows, and thy Seed shall inherit the Gentiles; that is, they shall, by
the Gospel that shall go forth out of Zion, bring the Gentiles in to be
ingrafted into them, and to be made one Church with them under Christ their
common Head, to whom they were promised for an inheritance; See the Note, Psalm.
2.8. and make the desolate Cities to be inhabited; that is, they shall
replenish their Cities with a new and sanctified people, whom God shall own as
his Children, and who shall continually worship and serve the Lord their God,
which lay as desolate before as a barren Wilderness, where there was nothing of
true Religion, nor of the knowledge of God to be found, none that owned God as
their Father: Yet, in the type, I confess, this may be meant also of the Jews
repossessing those Cities after they returned from their Captivity, which the
Babylonians had ruined and left waste and desolate.

Ver. 4. Fear not, etc.] Though in the beginning of this Chapter, ver. 1, 2, 3.
God by the Prophet speaks to the Jewish Church, with respect to what she should
be under the New Testament, when she should be (in those First Fruits of that
Church that should believe the Gospel) married unto Christ, and multiplied
exceedingly by the access of the Gentiles; yet here he speaks to them, as with
respect to their present condition, and to assure them of the undoubted
certainty of that which he had there foretold concerning their future Estate.
And therefore there is no cause why some Expositors should trouble themselves,
as they do, how that which is said here should be applied to the primitive
Church, especially with respect to the Gentiles. For certainly this is spoken
to those, to whom this promise was at present made, concerning their future
happiness, in the primitive days of the Gospel. Fear not; as if he should have
said, Doubt not the accomplishment of what I have promised, either because of
any sad and miserable condition whereinto your sins may hereafter bring you,
which may happily incline you to look upon your selves as utterly cast off by
God; See the Notes, Chap. 41.10, 14. and 44.8. for thou shall not be ashamed,
neither be thou confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame; that is, wait
for this which is promised, and thou shall never be ashamed of thy hope and
expectation herein, God will in time deliver, and restore, and multiply thee
exceedingly; or thou shall not for ever continue in such a reproachful
condition; though God may seem to cast thee off for a time, yet it shall not be
such a reproachful rejection; for thou shall forget the shame of thy Youth, and
shall not remember the reproach of thy Widowhood any more; that is, though thou
may be for a time in a sad desolate condition, like a young Woman, or a
Widow without a Husband, and without Children, because thy God shall seem to
have forsaken thee, and cast thee off for thy Sins; yet the Glory and Bliss of
thy future estate now promised thee, when thou shall rejoice in Christ thy
Husband, and in the multitude of thy Children, shall make thee forget all the
shame of thy former miseries. This, I say, is the whole intent of that which is
here said: Yet many Expositors do more particularly understand, by the shame of
her Youth, their bondage in Egypt, and by the reproach of her Widowhood, her
long Captivity in Babylon, when God seemed to have divorced her, and quite cast
her off; See the Note, Chap. 50.1. And indeed the Prophet Jeremy sets forth her
misery then under the same expression, Lamentations 1.1. How does the City sit
solitary, that was full of People? How is she become as a Widow?

Ver. 5. For thy Maker is thy Husband (the Lord of Hosts is his name) and thy
Redeemer, the Holy one of Israel, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 1.4. And so
likewise for those words, thy Maker; See the Notes, Chap. 43.1, 21. The intent
of that which is said here, is to assure the Church of the Jews, that God was
their Husband, and would again own her, and live with her, as her Husband, that
she might be fruitful in bringing forth Children to him; the God of the whole
Earth shall he be called; that is, he shall be, and shall be owned to be the
God, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, as the Apostle says
expressly, Romans 3.29.

Ver. 6. For the Lord has called thee, as a Woman forsaken and grieved in
Spirit, and a Wife of Youth, when thou wast refused etc.] That is, As a man
that has put away his Wife upon some displeasure, does in pity relent toward
her, when he sees how she is grieved, and in what a sad and disconsolate
condition she lives, and so takes her home to him again: So will the Lord in
tender compassion call thee back to him, when for a time he had cast thee off;
as for those words, as a Wife of Youth; some think they are added to imply the
cause, why she was so sorely afflicted in Spirit; namely, because she was in
the prime of her Youth, when her Husband had put her away. But I rather
conceive, that these words are added, either to imply some ground of the
inclinableness of the Husband to receive his forsaken Wife back again into
favor; namely, because a displeasure taken up against such an one, a Wife of
Youth, can hardly be perpetual and irreconcilable; or else to imply the
entireness and fervency of the Husbands love to his Wife, thus received again
into favor; to wit, that she should be most dear to him, as a Wife in her
Youth uses to be; or that she should be as dear to him as ever she had been
formerly in the flower of her Youth; See Prove. 5.18.

Ver. 7. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, etc.] As if he had said,
Should it be granted that I had forsaken thee, (which God never does to his
Church, though he may sometimes hide himself from them) yet it was but for a
small moment. And indeed, though their seventy years Captivity in Babylon was a
long time of misery, yet it was but a little while, both in Gods account, See
the Note, Psalm. 90.4. and likewise in regard of that Eternal happiness which
God has prepared for his People in Heaven. And indeed, observable it is, that
the same may be said of Man's Life, should it be wholly spent in misery; the
same period being set to the usual continuance of Man's Life, which was set to
the Babylonian Captivity; namely, threescore and ten years, Psalm. 9.10. but
with great mercies will I gather thee; that is, with mavelous Mercies, and
withal too of long continuance, (that so it may be opposed to what was said
before of his forsaking them for a small moment) even everlasting mercies, as
it is more fully expressed in the following Verse; In a little wrath I hid my
Face -- but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee. And thus also
God gives them to understand, that it should not be with him, as it is often
with men, that after reconciliation made, are colder in their affections than
formerly, in that his mercies should be greater and more firm and lasting, than
ever they had been. As for this expression, with great mercies will I gather
thee, as it seems to have respect to the dispersion of the Jews into several
Countries in their Captivity, from whence they were to be gathered together,
before they could be carried home into their own Country; so it also clearly
implies Gods free Grace in their reconciliation; namely, that they should not
return to him of themselves, but that God out of his pity to them should fetch
them home.

Ver. 9. For this is as the Waters of Noah unto me, etc.] That is, say some,
This deluge of misery, wherewith you will be in appearance overwhelmed and
utterly ruined in Babylon, shall be as Noah's Flood, to wit, such as I will
never more bring upon you: But I rather conceive that this is meant of the
Covenant of Grace, whereinto God had promised to receive his People, whom he
had seemed to have forsaken; namely, that this should be as the Waters of Noah
to him, that is, as the Covenant which God made with Noah concerning that
deluge; and that, not only in regard of the inviolable stability of that
Covenant, that the Covenant which he would make with them should be as firmly
and certainly accomplished in all succeeding Generations, as that had been and
should be to the end of the World; but also in regard of the substance of the
Covenant; because as I then engaged my self to Noah, that I would never drown
the whole World any more, so my Covenant now is, that I will never bring such a
deluge of misery and desolation upon my People, as that was in the Babylonian
Captivity; which is set forth in the following words, For as I have sworn that
the Waters of Noah should no more go over the Earth, (though we read not of any
Oath in express terms that God swear to Noah concerning this; yet because
solemn Covenants used to be confirmed by Oaths, and Gods Promises are as firm
as any Oath can be, therefore is this expression here used) so have I sworn
that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee, to wit, say some, in a
way of vengeance, to cast thee off, and utterly to destroy thee; (See the Note,
Psalm* 6.1.) for otherwise God is angry with, and does very sharply rebuke those
whom he loves most dearly; yea, and thus not to be angry, and not to chastise
men, is the greatest wrath; See Ezekiel. 16.42. Or rather, that I would not be
wroth with thee nor rebuke thee again, so as it was in the Babylonian
Captivity. This shall be to me as the Waters of Noah; I will never bring you
into such a condition any more. And indeed considering the desolate and lost
condition of the Church of the Jews in Babylon, when they were scattered and
mingled amongst the Nations, that they were no longer a People by themselves,
nor had any thing of the form or appearance of a Church amongst them, we may
well say, that though the People were many times, after their deliverance out
of Babylon, brought into a very low and miserable condition; yet it was never
so with them, as it was in Babylon, no not to the coming of Christ; and what
they have since endured is not to be mentioned; because since that the Israel
of God has been continued in the Christian Church, as the Jews have been cast
off. And indeed some understand this of the Covenant which God made with the
Church of the New Testament, that this should be to God, as the Waters of Noah,
namely, that he would never cast off them from being his People, as he did the
Nation of the Jews.

Ver. 10. For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, etc.] That is, The Mountains and Hills
shall be overturned and lost, rather than my kindness toward thee shall fail;
See the Note upon a like expression, Chap. 51.6. Neither shall the Covenant of
my Peace be removed, to wit, whereby I will engage my self to be at peace with
thee, and to bless and prosper thee; which seems also to be said in relation to
what had been before spoken of Gods Covenant with Noah; says the Lord, that
has mercy on thee, and therefore of his free mercy will do what he has
promised.

Ver. 11. Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, etc.] To wit, as a Ship
driven up and down with tempestuous Winds: (for it may well be that in these
words there is respect had to Noah's Ark, of whom mention was made before, ver.
9. and which was indeed a type of the Church, 1 Pet. 3.21.) or, as a poor
Cottage shaken with stormy Winds; for that may be intended, as in opposition to
that which is here promised, that this weather-beaten Cottage should be a most
glorious building; and not comforted; that is, having none to comfort thee. And
this may be meant principally of their Captivity in Babylon, whither they were
driven as with a tempest of Gods Indignation, and wherein they were scattered
abroad, and carried from one place to another; but withal of all the miseries
they endured afterward, unto the coming of Christ. As for the following words,
behold I will lay thy Stones with fair colors, and lay thy Foundations with
Saphires, etc. It contains a promise of Gods raising his Church, which should
lie for a time in such a poor and sad condition, to a state of most
transcendent, and almost incredible excellency and Glory; namely, That God
would build her up like some stately costly Palace, or City, made up wholly in
a manner of precious stones, under which Figurative description is doubtless
meant the spiritual excellency of the structure of the Church of Christ, begun
here on Earth, but perfected in Heaven; and accordingly by the Stones of this
building must needs be meant the faithful, who as living Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5.
are built upon Christ, the only foundation of the Church, 1 Cor. 3.11. Or
(which is all one in effect) upon the foundation of the Doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20. (whence it is that the twelve Apostles are
termed the twelve foundations of the Church, Rev. 21.14.) And they are
compared to several precious Stones, with respect to the manifold Gifts and
Graces of Gods Spirit, and the several degrees thereof, wherewith they should
be adorned here, and the unconceiveable Glory wherewith they shall be clothed
in Gods Heavenly Kingdom.

Ver. 12. And I will make thy Windows of Agates, etc.] Some by these Windows
would have the Preachers of the Gospel meant, by whose teaching Gods People are
enlightened; and so likewise in the following words, and thy Gates of
Carbuncles, and all thy Borders, that is, all thy Walls, wherewith thou art
bounded and shut in, of pleasant Stones, by her Gates and Walls they understand
Divine Protection. But that these things were particularly intended, it is hard
to say.

Ver. 13. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, etc.] That is, Not
only by the Preaching of the Gospel outwardly (which is clearly enough hinted,
in that they are called the Churches Children) but also by the Spirit of the
Lord inwardly: For to this purpose is this place alleged by our Savior, Joh.
6.45. where having said that none could come unto him, except they were drawn
unto him by God the Father, he adds, It is written in the Prophets, And they
shall be all taught of God. So that this is clearly a promise made to the
Church only concerning the Elect of God, whom God had appointed to be
Israelites indeed; and that too with respect to the time of the New Testament,
wherein God intended to bring in more to the Church, and to give them Knowledge
and Grace more abundantly than in former times, and great shall be the peace of
thy Children, that is, their prosperity and happiness in every regard; See the
Note, Chap. 48.18. or their inward Spiritual Peace, yea, in the midst of
afflictions.

Ver. 14. In righteousness shall thou be established, etc.] This may be
understood, 1. Of Gods Righteousness, or Faithfulness, to wit, that he as a
just and righteous God, would perform his promises to them, and so settle them
in a peaceable and happy condition; See the Note, Chap. 51.5. 2. Of the
stability of the righteousness of Gods Church and People, to wit, that it
should be permanent and stable, not fluid and vanishing; which may be meant
both of the imputed and inherent righteousness of Christians. Or, 3. Of the
Justice and Righteousness, that should be exercised and practiced amongst them,
(righteousness being here opposed to oppression) to wit, that they should have
just and righteous Governors to rule over them, such as were Zorababel,
Joshua, Ezra, and Nehemiah, and that the People should likewise be just and
righteous in their dealings, and that hereby they should be established, as
upon a sure foundation, in a good and happy condition: thou shall be far from
oppression, for thou shall not fear; and from terror; for it shall not come
near thee; that is, thou shall be so far from being oppressed, that there shall
be no cause why thou should fear it, to wit, either because thy Children
shall do all things righteously and shall not in the least wrong one another;
or because God will destroy those that seek to oppress thee, or will at least
protect you from their rage; See the Note, Chap. 32.17.

Ver. 15. Behold, etc.] God having in the foregoing Verse promised his Church a
peaceable and prosperous condition, that they might not from hence fancy, that
they should meet with no more trouble in the World, here he tells them, that
they should have many Enemies, that should be ever and anon conspiring and
bandying against them, only God would protect them: Behold, they shall surely
gather together, to wit, to do thee all the mischief they are able, but not by
me; that is, I shall not be with them to prosper them; and so whatsoever they
attempt shall be in vain and to no purpose; whosoever shall gather together
against thee, shall fall for thy sake; that is, they shall be destroyed, that
thou may be preserved.

Ver. 16. Behold, I have created the Smith that blows the Coals in the Fire,
and that brings forth an instrument for his work, etc.] To wit, His several
Tools wherewith he is to make those warlike Weapons, in the forging and working
whereof he is usually employed; and I have created the Waster to destroy, to
wit, those whom I intend to punish for their Sins. The drift of the whole Verse
is to show, that seeing the Smith that makes the Arms and Weapons of War, and
the Soldier, here called the Waster, that uses them, are both Gods Creatures,
they must needs be in his power, and ordered and disposed of according to his
will, and consequently that they can do nothing without his leave, or otherwise
than according to his appointment: so that neither can a Sword, or any other
Weapon of War be made, to be used against his People, if he be pleased to
hinder it: nor can any body make use of any Weapon against them without a
Commission from him; and therefore as long as his People were under his
protection, they need not fear any thing.

Ver. 17. No Weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper, etc.] To wit,
For the effecting of that which your Enemies intend, namely, the utter
destruction of you my Church and People; and every Tongue that shall rise
against thee in judgment; that is, every Person, that shall appear in a
judicial way against thee fasly to accuse thee, and to seek thy ruin; thou
shall condemn, that is, thou shall so clear thine innocence, and convince him
of his wickedness, in charging thee fasly, that he shall be ashamed and
confounded in himself, and withal sentenced and condemned in Judgment.

This is the heritage of the Servants of the Lord, etc.] That is, This is that
which God will allot to be the certain portion and reward of his righteous
Servants, and which shall as an heritage be assured to them in all succeeding
Generations. And this may be meant, either in general of all the good promised
to Gods Church and People, in the foregoing part of this Chapter: Or else more
particularly that which was mentioned in the words immediately foregoing,
namely, That God would protect them against all the open violence, and against
all the cunning false accusations of their Enemies; and their righteousness is
of me, says the Lord, where by righteousness may be meant, either, 1. The
blessings which should be by God conferred upon his People, which may be called
their righteousness, because they should, be bestowed as the reward of their
righteousness: Or else, 2. (as with respect to that foregoing promise, that
they should condemn every Tongue that should rise in judgment against them) it
may be meant of both the righteousness of their Persons and Lives, and the
clearing and vindicating of their righteousness from the false accusations of
their Enemies, to wit, that they both were from God.

CHAP. LV.
VERSE 1. HO every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, etc.] Having in
the foregoing Chapter foretold the exceeding great happiness of the Church of
Christ; here God, the Fountain of living Waters, Jer. 2.13. calls and
inviteth poor Sinners to come in and accept of those precious benefits, which
in Christ were there promised to his Church and People. And in the manner of
speech here used, there seems to be an allusion to the custom of crying in the
Streets of a City, the several provisions that are to be sold in such and such
places, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has
no money, etc. For the understanding whereof, we must know, 1. That by every
one that thirsts (under which hunger also is comprehended, as appears by the
following words, come ye, buy and eat, though thirst be only mentioned as the
most vehement and insufferable desire of the twain) is meant every one that
thirsts after true happiness; or more expressly, all those that being
convinced of their sinful and miserable condition by Nature, are extremely
afflicted therewith, and do thereupon vehemently desire reconciliation with
God, comfort and Life Eternal, and whatever may tend to the satisfying of these
wants and desires of their Souls. So that it is clear, that those that are
full, fully satisfied with their own righteousness, and desiring no other, or
fully glutted with earthly things, so as never to mind any thing better, cannot
be the Persons that are here invited; because such will never mind that
Spiritual refreshing that is here tendered, being like those that are so puffed
up with Wind, that though they want nourishment, yet they have no Stomach to
eat any thing: 2. That by the Waters, to which they are here invited, (and so
likewise the Wine and Milk and Bread afterward mentioned) is meant, that
superabundant Grace which is tendered to the Church, in the days of the New
Testament, above what they enjoyed formerly; namely, Christ held forth to Men
in the Ministry of the Gospel, as having accomplished the work of Man's
Redemption, together with all the gifts and precious benefits, which he has
purchased for poor Sinners, his merits and righteousness, the sanctifying
Graces of his Spirit, and in a word, all things tending to the Spiritual Life,
the comfort and satisfying of the desires of Men's Souls here, and to their
Eternal Life and Salvation hereafter. But see the Notes, Chap. 12.3. and 41.17,
18. See also Matthew. 5.6. and Joh. 7.37. 3. That by coming to these Waters is
meant, the poor Sinners accepting and embracing of Christ by a true and a
lively Faith, together with all the precious benefits, that are tendered in
Christ: For so is this explained by Christ, Joh. 6.35. He that comes to me
shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. 4. That by
these words, And he that has no Money; come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy
Wine and Milk without Money and without price, to wit, any thing given in
exchange for them, instead of Money; I say, hereby is not so much meant, as I
conceive, that the Poor are invited to come as well as the Rich; as that all
are invited to come freely, and to accept of that Mercy and Life that is
tendered in Christ, though they are nothing, though they have nothing, and can
do nothing toward the obtaining of this bliss and happiness, even those that
are most sensible of their Spiritual Poverty and Indigency in this regard. The
same that was before meant by coming to the Waters, is here again meant by
buying Wine and Milk, only it is expressed by these other kinds of Food, to
imply the sweet and comfortable refreshing that Men shall find in this
Spiritual Food; and that all good that Sinners can want or desire, is to be had
in Christ, and that there is provision for all sorts of People; Milk for
Children, and Wine for those that are of grown years; yea, and that they shall
have as sure an interest in what is tendered without Money and without Price,
as if they had bought it. And, 5. That by the frequent repeating and urging of
this Invitation is employed, both Men's backwardness in accepting the Grace here
tendered them, and Gods earnestness that they should be persuaded and won to
accept it.

Ver. 2. Wherefore do ye spend Money for that which is not Bread, etc.] That
is, That which is not true Food; See the Note, Chap. 3.1. and your labor, that
is, the Money you have gotten by your labor, for that which satisfies not,
that is, that which will neither assuage your hunger, nor nourish you, and
cause you to live. It is, as if he had said, Why do you so eagerly pursue,
sparing neither cost nor labor, that which will no way profit you? that is,
that which will afford no furtherance for the obtaining of that Soul-satisfying
bliss and happiness, which in Christ is tendered to you: And hereby is meant,
1. The greedy pursuit of the things of the World, which a Man is not sure to
obtain, and cannot long hope to enjoy, and which whilst he does enjoy them,
cannot satisfy the thirst and desires of his Soul, nor make him happy. 2. All
strictness and diligence in false superstitious Will-worships, which would
provoke God to displeasure instead of pleasing him, and were never like to
bring them to Life Eternal, Matthew. 15.9. And, 3. All false Doctrines,
concerning the way of attaining Gods favor here, and Eternal Life and
Happiness; such as that of the Scribes and Pharisees, of Men's being saved by
their own works and righteousness; See Tit. 3.5. Hearken diligently unto me, as
if he should have said, And by a constant observing the direction of my word,
you shall be sure to prevent all such mistakes, and eat you that which is good,
that is, that which is really good, that which is Bread indeed, that which will
indeed procure Gods Love and Favor, comfort you here and preserve you unto
Life Eternal, and let your Soul delight it self in fatness; that is, you shall
have abundance of the choicest and chiefest good, even that which will fully
delight and satisfy your So^ls; See the Note, Psalm. 36.8.

Ver. 3. Incline your Ear, and come unto me, etc.] See the Note above, ver. 1.
and Psalm. 45.10. hear, and your Souls shall live, See the Note, Psalm. 22.26.
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, wherein is employed. 1. A
renewing and confirming of that Covenant of Grace, which God had made with
their Fathers, in and through the Lord Christ; which was, for the substance of
it, an everlasting Covenant; as if he should have said, Though you have on your
part broken Covenant with me, and though in the Babylonian Captivity I may seem
to have cast you off, and the Kingdom settled upon David's Posterity, may seem to
be utterly ruined, yet fear not, I will renew and confirm that my Covenant with
you. And, 2. The making of a new Covenant with them, to wit, the Covenant of
the New Testament, confirmed with the blood of Christ, which though it were the
same in substance, with that which God made with his People under the Old
Testament, yet it was a new Covenant, in regard of the new manner of the
dispensation of it many ways, and may be here called an everlasting Covenant,
in opposition to that which was before, because it was to continue for ever,
and not to be abrogated, as that which God made with the Jews was. As for the
following words, even the sure Mercies of David; some, by David, here
understand Christ; as he is elsewhere called, Ezekiel. 34.25. and Hos. 3.5.
because he was that Messiah, whom God had promised of the seed of David; and
accordingly, by the sure Mercies of David, they understand those stable Mercies
which God had promised and covenanted, in and through the Lord Christ, the
Mediator of the Covenant (See the Note, Chap. 49.18.) to confer upon his
People. But again, others understand it of King David; and so by the sure
Mercies of David they understand, either Mercies that should as surely be
performed to his People, as those were for which he had engaged himself by
Covenant to David, or else, rather the very Mercies which he had promised to
David, and in and through him, as the Father and Type of Christ, unto his
Church and People; 2 Samuel 7. etc. and Psalm. 89.4, 35, etc. namely, that God
would give unto David a Son that should save his People, and that should reign
over them for ever. And hence it was that the Apostle Paul alleged this place
to prove the Resurrection of Christ, Act. 13.34. And as concerning that he
raised him up from the Dead, now no more to return to Corruption, he said on
this wise, I will give you the sure Mercies of David. For the Promise made to
Christ, or to David concerning Christ, the Eternity of his Kingdom, and the
Mercies he should procure for his People, could not have taken effect, if after
he was Crucified he had not been raised again from the dead.

Ver. 4. Behold, I have given him, etc.] To wit, Christ (See the Note, Chap.
9.6.] who in the foregoing Verse was called David, or at least intended as the
Son and Successor of David, the Mediator of the Covenant, the Mercies whereof
are there called the sure Mercies of David: I, says God the Father, have
ordained him for a witness to the People; that is, to make known, and testify
to the Gentiles the Counsel of God, concerning Man's Salvation, and by
accomplishing what God had foretold should be, to testify and make good the
Faithfulness of God: Whence was that of our Savior to Pilate? To this end was
I born, and for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear Witness
unto the Truth, Joh. 18.37. A leader and commander to the People; that is, one
that is to lead them in the way of Life, both by his Doctrine and Example, and
whose commands, upon pain of Eternal Damnation, all men are bound to obey,
Matthew. 28.20.

Ver. 5. Behold, thou shall call a Nation that thou know not, etc.] That is,
Thou, O Christ, (for he it is that was spoken of in the foregoing Verse) shall
effectually call in those Nations to believe in thee, whom formerly thou did
not own for thy People, nor did regard, or take any notice of, to wit, the
Gentiles. And indeed this is that which David did long before say of himself,
as he was a type of Christ, a People whom I have not known shall serve me,
Psalm. 18.43. and Nations that knew not thee, that is, that had never heard of
thee, and so had no knowledge of thee, but lived without God and without Christ
in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. shall run unto thee; See the Note, Chap. 2.2. because
of the Lord thy God, and for the holy one of Israel; that is, because the Lord
thy God (which is spoken of Christ, with respect to his humane Nature) shall
clearly manifest himself to be thy God, and thy Father, and shall make thy
Ministry effectual, by convincing the Nations, that thou art true and very God,
the Son of God sent to save Sinners; for he has glorified thee, to wit, by the
miraculous passages at his Birth and Baptism, by his transcendent holiness, and
the Miracles that were wrought by him and his, and especially after his Passion
by his Resurrection and Ascension, whereby the Nations were brought in to own
Christ to be the only begotten Son of God, and Savior of the World.

Ver. 6. Seek ye the Lord, etc.] The exhortation in the beginning of this
Chapter is here further pressed by the Prophet, namely, that Men should
diligently seek after that Grace and Reconciliation with God, which was
tendered to them in Jesus Christ: (Some would have it understood as spoken to
the Gentiles only, of whom the Prophet had spoken in the foregoing Verse;
others as spoken to the Jews, by way of pressing them to come in by the example
of the forwardness of the Gentiles before mentioned. But it is rather generally
spoken to all lost and miserable Sinners) Seek ye the Lord while he may be
found, that is, immediately and without delay, whilst yet Mercy and Pardon is
tendered to you in the means of Grace, and God does yet by his Spirit move you
to accept of it. And to the same purpose is that which follows, call ye upon
him while he is near; that is, whilst he is near in the means and offers of
Grace. But See the Notes also, Psalm. 32.6. and Prove. 1.28.

Ver. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, etc.] This is added to show, that
though Reconciliation be freely tendered in Christ to the worst of Sinners; yet
it is tendered upon condition of unfeigned Repentance, and that without that no
favor can be expected from God.

Ver. 8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, etc.] God having promised in
the close of the foregoing Verse, that he would have Mercy on true Penitents,
that would forsake their Sins and return to him, and that he would abundantly
pardon them; lest poor dejected Sinners should scruple this, as judging of God
according to what is usual amongst men, here he puts them in mind of the
infinite disproportion that is betwixt God and Man, for my thoughts are not
your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord; that is my
thoughts and ways of pardoning and showing mercy to Sinners, must not be
measured by the thoughts and ways of mercy that are in men, toward those that
have offended them. 1. Men are many times inexorable: And, 2. Especially in
injuries of a higher Nature; And, 3. At least they are hardly won to be
reconciled, and will often have some considerable compensation for the wrongs
done them. And, 4. Their Reconciliations are seldom sincere and perfect. And,
5. Though they be, yet through sickleness they are in danger to repent of their
Reconciliations, and to revive their old Quarrels. But now in all these it is
quite contrary with God; See Exodus 34.6, 7. Matthew. 12.21. I know some do
otherwise understand these words: For they conceive that therein there is a
reason given, why Sinners must abandon their former thoughts and ways, if they
desired that God should be at peace with them; namely, because their thoughts
and ways were not Gods thoughts and ways; that is, such as God had appointed
their ways and thoughts should be; or, because there was such a contrariety
betwixt Gods thoughts and ways, which were all infinitely holy and just, and
theirs that were so exceedingly sinful and wicked. But this Exposition cannot
consist with the following Verse, whereby it is clear, that the transcendency
of Gods Mercy above Man's is here intended.

Ver. 9. For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher,
etc.] That is, Incomprehensibly higher; See the Notes, Psalm. 103.11. The
distance betwixt Heaven and Earth does not fully parallel the distance that is
betwixt the Mercies of God and Man, because Gods Mercies are infinite; but this
expression serves to set forth, that Gods Mercies are wonderful, far above
Man's. One Man may exceed others in pity and tender compassion and readiness to
pardon Injuries, as far as the Mountains are above the Dales; but the highest
Heavens are not so far above the Center of the Earth, as Gods Mercies are above
all the Bowels of Mercy, that can be imaginably in the most merciful Men.

Ver. 10. For as the Rain, etc.] Here the Lord makes good what he had said
before concerning the greatness of his Mercy, by assuring them of the certainty
of what he had promised them: For as the Rain comes down, and the Snown from
Heaven, and returns not thither; to wit, without effecting that for which
they were sent by the God of Heaven; but waters the Earth, and makes it
bring forth and bud, that it may give Seed to the Sower and Bread to the Eater;
that is, that it may yield Men, not only plenty of Bread for food, but also
sufficient Seed for the following year. It is true that the Rain and Snow may
in some Sense be said to return again to the Heavens, in the Vapors which from
them are exhaled by the Sun, or blown up by the Winds, and so carried up into
the Clouds. But this expression here, of the Rain and the Snows, not returning
again, intends no more, but that they never fail of effecting that for which
pleased to shower them down upon the Earth.

Ver. 11. So shall my word be that goes forth out of my Mouth, etc.] That is,
Every word which my Prophets shall deliver truly from me. Yet I conceive this
is spoken here with particular respect to that promise which God had made them
concerning their deliverance out of Babylon, and their Redemption by Christ
signified thereby, and more especially, that above, Ver. 7. concerning his
pardoning penitent Sinners; it shall not return unto me void, etc. that is,
without effecting what I have said shall be.

Ver. 12. For ye shall go out with joy, etc.] This is mentioned as the word of
promise, of which he had said in the foregoing Verse, that it should not return
void, but should surely be accomplished; for which see the Notes, Chap. 52.11.
and ye shall be led forth with peace, that is, ye shall be led along from
Babylon to Judea peaceably and quietly; See the Notes, Chap. 52.11. under which
also may be intended mystically, that inward Peace which Christians should
enjoy in their passage to Heaven. And there seems also to be an allusion in the
words, to the leading of the Israelites by a Pillar of Cloud, as they went
through the Wilderness to Canaan: The Mountains and the Hills shall break forth
before you into singing, and all the Trees of the Fields shall clap their
Hands; that is, they shall rejoice at your joy and welfare; See the Notes,
Chap. 35.1. and 44.23. and 49. Yet there may be an Allusion also in the words
to the Mountains ringing with, and ecchoing back the joyful shouting and
singing of Gods People; and to the pleasant noise made in the Arms, the
Branches and Twigs of the Trees, by the sweet gales of Wind, which God should
send for the refreshing of his People as they went along.

Ver. 13. Instead of the Thorn shall come up the Firr-Tree, and instead of the
Briar shall come up the Myrtle-Tree, etc.] Some understand this of Gods making
the way of the Jews in their return homeward from Babylon convenient and
comfortable, and that they should meet with nothing that should be any an
annoyance or hindrance to them, even as they should go through those vast
barren Deserts that lay in their way. And so they make this parallel with that
Chap. 41.19. for which see the Note there. But then others again understand it,
and I think better, of the mighty change that should be in the Land of Judea,
at their return thither. Having, say they, assured the Jews, that their return
should be safe and peaceable and comfortable; here the Prophet adds, That
though their Land had so many years in their absence lain desolate, overgrown
with Briars and Thorns for want of People to till the Ground; yet at their
return home it should be exceeding fruitful, abounding with all useful and
pleasant Trees and Plants; and that the Face of their Country and State should
be every way changed for the better. But for this, and how it may be also
understood spiritually of the great change that should be wrought amongst
Christ's redeemed ones, in the days of the Gospel, whereof their return out of
Babylon was a type; See the Notes, Chap. 4.2. and 35.1, 2. and 49.11. and it
shall be to the Lord for a name; that is, this deliverance and restitution of
his Church and People, and this glorious change, that shall be wrought amongst
them, shall bring much Glory to God, for an everlasting Sign, that shall not be
cut off; that is, it shall be an Everlasting monument of his glorious Power and
Goodness to his People, by means whereof the Lord shall be for ever praised,
and his People shall be confirmed in their confidence that God will never
forsake them.

CHAP. LVI.
VERSE 1. THVS says the Lord, keep ye Judgment and do Justice, etc.] That is,
Do you all, Judges and others, that which is exactly just and right. The
exhortation to repentance, begun in the former Chapter, Ver. 6, 7. is farther
here pressed: For my Salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be
revealed; See the Notes, Chap. 46.13. and 51.51. It is the same in effect with
that which the Baptist Preached, Math. 3.2. and Christ also, Mark 1.15. The
Kingdom of God is at Hand; repent ye and believe the Gospel.

Ver. 2. Blessed is the Man that does this, etc.] That is, That keeps
Judgment and does Justice, as was said in the foregoing Verse; See the Note,
Psalm. 106.3. and the Son of Man that lays hold on it; that is, that does
zealously and constantly keep close to the doing of this; that keeps the
Sabbath from polluting it; that is, that is careful to worship God, as he has
appointed them: for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, is here put for the
exercising of all the Duties of Religion and Piety; and that happily the rather,
because this they might observe in their Captivity in Babylon, whereas many
other parts of Gods Worship were only to be performed in the Temple at
Jerusalem; and keeps his hand from doing any evil; to wit, to his Neighbor.

Ver. 3. Neither let the Son of the Stranger, that has joined himself to the
Lord, etc.] That is, Let not any Gentile, that by Faith in Christ has joined
himself to my Church and People; Speak, saying, The Lord has utterly separated
me from his People; to wit, because I am as an Alien and a Stranger, and not of
the Stock of the Jews; neither let the Eunuch say, Behold I am a dry Tree; that
is, like a dry Tree, barren and without possibility of Issue. Because by that
Law, Deuteronomy. 23.1. etc. (for which see the Notes there) an Eunuch, and Proselytes
that came in from other Nations, and joined themselves to the Church of the
Jews, were debarred from being admitted into full communion with the
Commonwealth and Church of Israel, left therefore the Eunuchs, or Heathens
should think, that surely they should not have any share in the Privileges
here promised, but only those that were born of Israel, and had not any such
Note of Infamy upon them; (and indeed we see how exceedingly even the believing
Jews stumbled at the taking in of the Gentiles into the Church of Christ, Act.
10.45. and 11.2, 3.) therefore the Lord does here assure them, that in the days
of the Gospel, of which he had spoken, there should be no such distinction
betwixt Jew and Gentile, betwixt Person and Person, but that those that seemed
most vile and contemptible if they came into Christ, should be admitted to the
same Privileges with the rest of his People.

Ver. 4. For thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, etc.]
See the Note above, ver 2. and choose the things that please me; that is, that
upon Judgment rightly informed do sincerely set themselves to do those things
that I have commanded them, (for both Will-worships, and Hypocrisy are hereby
excluded) and take hold of my Covenant; that is, that do embrace the mercy
tendered to them in my Covenant of Grace, and carefully observe to do those
things that by their Covenant with me they are bound to do, and so adorn their
profession of Christianity with a holy Conversation.

Ver. 5. Even unto them will I give in my House, and within my Walls, etc.] To
wit, within the Walls of my House, the Temple; or, within my Temple, and my
City Jerusalem. But however, both by the one and the other is meant the Church
of Christ, whereof both the Temple and Jerusalem were Types: For that which is
intended, is, that unto those Eunuchs, before mentioned, God would give in his
Church here, and afterward in Heaven, a place and a Name, better than of Sons
and Daughters; that is, of greater Honor and Dignity, than that which accrews
to them that have Sons and Daughters, which is accounted a great Honor and
Happiness to Men (See the Note, Prove. 17.6.) and in whom their Name is
continued when they are dead; namely, that of being Gods peculiar People, his
adopted Children, a Name more glorious and more durable, even that which shall
continue unto Eternity, as is expressed in the following Words, I will give
them an everlasting Name, that shall not be cut off; to wit, as the continuance
of Men's Names in their Posterity many times is.

Ver. 6. Also the Sons of the Stranger that join themselves to the Lord, etc.]
See the Note above, ver. 3. to serve him, and to love the Name of the Lord, to
be his Servants; to wit, as counting it an honor to serve him, because of the
great love they bare to him; every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting
it, and takes hold of my Covenant; See the Note above, ver. 4.

Ver. 7. Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, etc.] That is, I will
cause them to come in, and join themselves to my Church; See the Note, Chap.
2.2. and make them joyful in my house of Prayer; to wit, my Church, of which
the Temple was a Type. And the meaning is, that their Hearts should be joyed by
the consideration of their happiness in being admitted to be Gods People, and
to all the Glorious privileges, which thereby they should enjoy, by the
chearing of their troubled Consciences, with the glad tidings of the Gospel,
which should be there preached to them, and more particularly, by the sweet
refreshing comforts they should find in their Souls, both whilst they were
praying, and after they had prayed, and the gracious answers God should return
to their prayers; their burnt offerings and their Sacrifices shall be accepted
upon mine Altar; that is, their Spiritual and Evangelical Sacrifices ( Romans
12.1. and Heb. 13.15.) shall be acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5.
for mine House; that is, my Church, shall be called the House of Prayer, for
all People; to wit, Gentiles, as well as Jews; yet because the Church of Christ
is called Gods House in allusion to its Type, the Temple, therefore our Savior
cites this place, as spoken of the Temple, Mark. 11.17.

Ver. 8. The Lord God which gathers together the outcasts of Israel, says,
etc.] To wit, out of Babylon, and other Countries, where they were scattered;
See the Note Psalm. 147.2. yet will I gather others to him; that is, to Israel,
besides those that are gathered to him; that is, that are already gathered to
him out of Babylon. And it is meant of the Gentiles, whom after this would God
bring in, and make them one Church and People with Israel; see Joh. 11.51, 52.

Ver. 9. All ye Beasts of the Field, come to devour, etc.] Very many Learned
Expositors hold this to be the beginning of a new Prophecy: But if we take it
as a part of the foregoing Prophecy (as indeed, according to the division of
the Chapters in our Bibles, it seems to be joined with that) then we may
conceive the connection to be either, 1. That having cheared up the Godly with
many precious Promises in the foregoing part of the Prophecy, here he turns
himself to reprove the wicked party amongst them; and that the rather, that
hereby they might be put in mind, that the comfort of the foregoing promises
belonged not to them: Or, 2. That having made Gods People so many glorious
Promises, he now shows them, that before they should be fulfilled, very sad
havoc should be made in the Jewish State, by foreign Nations, that so the
Godly might not be stumbled, when they saw such sad things, so contrary to what
was now promised, to come upon them, but might only be stirred up by unfeigned
Repentance to approve themselves to God: And it may be also there might be an
intention to give some light to that which he had said of the outcasts of
Israel. As for the words themselves, All ye Beasts of the Field, come to
devour, yea, all the Beasts of the Forest; though they may be ununderstood
literally, as an invitation of all kinds of Beasts of Prey, to come and devour
the Carcases of Gods slaughtered People, intended to imply, that there should
be such multitudes of them slain by their Enemies, that there should be enough
to satisfy all the Beasts, both of Field and Forest, that would come in to
devour: Yet I rather think, that by these ravenous Beasts are figuratively
meant those barbarous cruel Nations, that should destroy and devour Gods
People; and that because in the following Verses, the blindness and neglect of
the Shepherds is alleged, as a motive to encourage them to come in and devour
Gods Flock. Many I know, and I think most probably, do understand this
particularly of the Chaldeans, and the many Nations that joined with them in
their invasion of Judea; but yet it may well be extended to all that were after
this called in at several times to devour the Jews, the Assyrians, Babylonians,
Grecians, Romans, etc.

Ver. 10. His watchmen are blind, etc.] That is, Isreal's Rulers, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical (the two Eyes of a Church or State) her Priests, and pretended
Prophets and Teachers especially, are blind Seers, such as could not foresee
approaching Evils and Judgments, that they might forewarn the People of them,
being ignorant and sottish, as the following words explain it; they are all
ignorant; that is, all of them, in a manner, are ignorant, as to the Law of God
and their own Duty; they know not how to teach and govern the People; such as
the Scribes and Pharisees were in our Saviors time; blind leaders of the
blind; they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark; to wit, by opposing the Evil
of the Times, reproving Evil doers, and forewarning them of the Judgments they
were like to bring upon themselves, and that because they were ignorant, given
to the Vices they should have reproved in others, nor willing by doing their
duty, to expose themselves to the displeasure of Men, especially the great ones
of the Times; in all which there is an allusian to House-Dogs, or Shepherds
Dogs, that are by barking to drive away Thieves and Wolves, and waken those
that should help to drive them away; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber;
that is, delighting in sloth and sluggishness, and giving up themselves
thereto. The word indeed which we Translate sleeping, is by some rendered, as
it is in the Margin, dreaming, or talking in their sleep, with reference, as I
conceive, to the vain things they vented, when they did at any time undertake
to teach the People, even their own Dreams, and not any thing which God had
given them in charge: However, upon these men we must know the blame is
particularly laid, not because the People were not also extremely wicked, but
because the neglect of their Duty was a main cause of the wickedness of the
People.

Ver. 11. Yea, they are greedy Dogs, which can never have enough, etc.] This
may be added as another of their Sins, to wit, their insatiable Covetousness;
or else as a reason of that which was said before of them; namely, That they
were blinded with Covetousness; and they are Shepherds that cannot understand;
that is, they know not how to order their Flocks aright; see the foregoing
Note, they all look to their own way; that is, say some, they all give up
themselves to do, every Man of them, what they list; or rather, they are all
for themselves, minding only their own affairs and profit, every one for his
gain from his Quarter; that is, every one from the place of his abode, even all
the City over, from one end to the other.

Ver. 12. Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves
with strong Drink, etc.] This is another Sin, wherewith their Watchmen before
mentioned are here charged; to wit, Their Rioting and Drunkenness. And they are
brought in here, enticing to, and encouraging one another in this Sin, and
perhaps the People: too, to imply their obstinacy and security herein; Come ye,
say they, I will fetch Wine, etc. as if they had said, Let Men say what they
will, and come what will of it, we will thus take our Pleasure: And so likewise
in the following words, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant; which do clearly hold forth a bold and desperate resolution of
running on in this their excess day after day; though they may also imply a
scornful contempt of the threatenings of Gods Prophets; as if they had said,
Come, let us drink stoutly, and fear nothing; if it be well with us to day, it
shall be as well with us to morrow, and, it may be, better.

CHAP. LVII.
VERSE 1. THE Righteous perishes, etc.] That is, They dye, (it is spoken
according to that which is outwardly seen in the Death of Men) and no Man
lays it to Heart; that is, no man minds it, or is troubled at it; though it
be an usual sign of some approaching Judgment, when those that are the Pillars
to support a Church are taken away; and merciful men (or Godly Men; for the
Word in the Original signifies both) are taken away; to wit, by a natural, or
a violent Death, (for some think it is spoken with respect to the Righteous
that were cut off by Manassah; see the Note 2 Kings 21.16.) none considering
that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come; to wit, as Husbandmen
make speed to House their Corn when they see storms coming. So it was with
Josiah, 2 Kings 22.20. This therefore is another wickedness, wherewith he
charge, not their Watchmen only, as before in the close of the foregoing
Chapter, but the whole People in general; namely, That whereas many, it seems,
of the Faithful Servants of God were at that time taken away, they regarded not
this warning which God gave them of those dreadful Judgments that were coming
apace upon them: But withal there is comfort hinted for the despised Righteous.

Ver. 2. He shall enter into Peace, etc.] That is, into the rest and peace of
Heavenly Glory, where they shall be with God, perfectly freed from all the
troubles of the World. It may indeed be read, as in the Margin, He shall go in
peace, and then the meaning may be, that they should go out of the World with
quiet and peaceable Consciences, and before those evil and troublesome times
came, of which he had spoken in the foregoing Verse; they shall rest in their
Beds; that is, in their Graves, (for as Death is called a sleep, so the Graves
are termed Beds, wherein dead men lie asleep until the general Resurrection,
when they shall all awake and rise again) their Souls being departed into
Heavenly rest, their Bodies shall rest quietly in their Graves; see the Note,
Job 3.13. each one walking in his own uprightness, or before him, as it is in
the Margin. The meaning is, that thus it shall be with every one that serves
God sincerely; see the Note, Genesis 17.1.

Ver. 3. But, etc.] Having, in the foregoing Verses, touched upon the happiness
of the Righteous, that were by Death taken away from approaching Judgments;
here he turns his Speech to the wicked Wretches of that Generation, that
rejoiced in their Death, rather than grieved for it; and triumphed in their
surviving of them, and condemns and threatens them. But draw near hither, ye
Sons of the Sorceress, the Seed of ye Adulterer, and of the Where; as if he
should have said, Thus shall it be with my Righteous Servants that are cut off
from amongst you; but as for you, the profane Crew that survive them, and
applaud your selves herein, draw near and hear your doom. And he calls them
Sons of the Sorceress, with respect to Jerusalem, their Mother, that was much
addicted to those wicked Arts; and the Seed of the Adulterer and the Whore,
because the Inhabitants of that City were also much given to those Sins of
uncleanness, but especially to that Sin of Idolatry, which is often in the
Scripture termed Spiritual Adultery and Fornication; see the Notes, Chap.
1.21. and 2 Kings 9.22. And thus these terms employed, that they were a Wicked
and Idolatrous Generation, descended from Wicked and Idolatrous Parents, both
by Fathers and Mothers side; and especially that they were no more in Truth the
Seed of Israel, or Children of God, than the Children which a Wife has by an
Adulterer are her Husbands Children.

Ver. 4. Against whom do ye sport your selves? etc.] As if he had said, When
you make your selves merry with flouting and jeering at the reproof and
threatenings of my Prophets, (consider well of it) it is not poor mortal Men
against whom you sport your selves, but the immortal and mighty God of Heaven
and Earth, whose Servants they are, and whose Word it is, which they Preach to
you; see 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Luke 10.16. 1 These. 4.8. for that this is here
intended, is evident by the following words; against whom make ye a wide Mouth?
to wit, in a way of derision; see the Notes; Job. 16.10. and Psalm. 22.7. and
draw out the Tongue? which was another gesture used of old by way of mocking,
as we see by that of Persius; Nec linguae, quartum sitiat canis Appela tantum;
Are ye not Children of Transgression? That is, say some, born of Wicked
Rebellious Parents, as was said before, Children of the Adulterer and the
Whore; or rather, Children that are transgressors, as Children of Iniquity,
Hos. 10.9. Children given to transgression and rebellion against God, brought
up in ways of disobedience, and so just such as your Parents, have been before
you, a seed of falsehood; that is, given to a false Religion; or rather, a
degenerate Seed; such as profess your selves to be the seed of Abraham, and the
Children of God, when ye are nothing so; Are ye not Children of transgression,
a seed of falsehood? as if he had said, you see it was not without cause that I
called you the seed of the Adulterer and the Whore; that which I have now said
proves it to be so; deny it if you can.

Ver. 5. Enflaming your selves with Idols, etc.] Some read this, as it is in
the Margin; Enflaming your selves among the Oaks, intending thereby the Groves,
wherein they sacrificed to their Idol Gods; for which see the Note, Chap. 1.29.
whereto indeed that suits well that follows, under every green Tree. But it is
better rendered, as it is in our Bibles; Enflaming your selves with Idols.
However it is meant certainly of that burning-hot and furious Lust, wherewith
they went a Whoring after their Idols; that is, the violence and mad rage,
wherewith they did pursue their idolatrous Worship; though many include also
the outward acts of uncleanness, which they committed at their Idolatrous
meetings (see Mumb. 25.1, 2.) and as some think, by way of honnouring their
Idol Gods; under every green Tree; to wit, in their Groves, or, it may be
indeed, under every great and shadowy Tree, which they judged a goodly choice
place for the rearing of their Altars; see 2 Kings 16.4. slaying the children;
that is, sacrificing their own Children to Baal, or Moloch; and that happily
under a foolish pretense of imitating Abraham's readiness to have sacrificed
Isaac; in the Valleys, to wit, in their Valleys in general, though especally in
the Valley of Topheth, or Hinnom; see the Notes, Levit. 18.21. and 2 Kings
16.3. under the clifts of the Rocks; that is, in Caves that are under craggy
Rocks; for there they had also their Altars, not only because they were
convenient to shelter them from Heat and Rain; but also because the dreary
darkness of those places tended to strike them with some kind of Religious awe.

Ver. 6. Among the smooth stones of the stream, etc.] Having before, speaking
to the Jews, termed their Mother Jerusalem, a Sorceress and a Whore; see ver.
3. here he turns his Speech to her, as to a common Strumpet: Among the smooth
stones of the stream is thy portion; for the understanding whereof, we must
know; 1. That by this expression is meant, either that they built their Altars,
or Temples for their Idol-Gods, of the Pebbles in the River, which were made
smooth by the continual washing and wearing of the Stream, or of Stones which
they had dug out of the clefts of the Rocks, by the River, that were
afterward curiously cut and polished, (which indeed if meant, was contrary to
an express command of God; see the Note, Exodus 20.25. Or rather that they built
them in the most pleasant places of their Land: Namely; close by the side of
the Rivers that ran through their most fruitful Valleys, where there lay
usually store of Stones scattered about. 2. That by saying her portion was in
these things, is meant, That she delighted in this Idol Service, that she
esteemed it her chief riches, bliss, and happiness, and trusted in it; and that
it was all in all to her: instead of esteeming the Lord her portion, as David
did, Psalm. 16.5. she accounted her Idols her portion. And, 3. That this is
spoken in a way of derision: These are the things which you have chosen for
your portion, a very goodly portion have you therein gotten for your selves;
they, they are thy lot; that is, as before, thy portion, or inheritance; even
to them have thou poured a Drink Offering, thou have offered a Meat Offering;
that is, to thine Idols there, as if they were Gods. And now, because they
thought indeed with these superstitious devices of theirs to serve and please
God; therefore is that added; Should I receive Comfort in these? That is, Can
ye be so stupid, as to think that these things would please or delight me? Or,
that I should not rather be highly provoked by them? Or, can I rid my self of
that trouble wherewith my soul is vexed by such practices as these? Or, can I
be at rest, or take comfort in any thing, till I have severely punished such
things as these? Yea, and again, some understand it of the persons that had
done these-things; should I receive comfort in these? That is, Can I take any
comfort in such people as these? But the first Exposition seems clearly the
best.

Ver. 7. Upon a lofty and high Mountain have thou set thy Bed, etc.] That is,
thy Temples, Chapels, and Altars, whereon thou did commit Whoredom with
thine Idol-Gods. The drift therefore of these words is to set forth the
impudency of Jerusalem, in her Spiritual Whoredoms, that like a brazenfaced
Harlot, that cares not how openly she plays the Strumpet; she committed this
uncleanness with her Idol-Gods, not in Caves only, and Valleys by the banks of
Rivers, but even upon the tops of Mountains and Hills, as Absalom lay with his
Fathers Concubines upon the House top, 2 Samuel 16.22. see the Note also, 2 Kings
23.12. Even thither wentest thou up to offer Sacrifice; to wit, to these high
places.

Ver. 8. Behind the doors also, and the posts have thou set up thy remembrance,
etc.] That is, say some, Their Household tutular Gods, which they had over and
above their public Idol-Gods; whose Images they had behind their doors and
posts of their Houses, as it were for the defense of their Families, and the
securing them in their going out and coming in. But rather it is meant of the
Images of their public Idol-Gods, or some memorial of them, which they set up
behind their doors and posts, that as they went out and came in, they might be
put in mind of them, and commend them and theirs to their protection. And in
this charge the Lord seems to hint to them, their great contempt of him, in
that in stead of setting up his Laws upon the doors and posts of their houses,
as he had commanded, Deuteronomy. 6.9. and 11.20. they had set up the memorials of
their Idols there; and how violently they were affected to their Idolatrous
practices, there being no place public nor private, that was not defiled
herewith, in regard whereof they were like Harlots, that were ready to play the
Whore in every corner: for thou have discovered thy self to another than me;
that is, forsaking me, thou have discovered thy nakedness, or prostituted thy
self to other Gods; and art gone up, to wit, to thine high places, as to thy
Bed, set up in open view; thou have enlarged thy Bed; that is, say some, thou
were not content to keep to me alone, but would needs worship other
Idol-Gods, together with me; yea, and that in my Temple, the place erected for
my peculiar Worship, 2 Kings 16.14, 15. and 21.4. But rather it is meant of
their increasing their Idolatry more and more, by multiplying Altars, and
places of Worship for their Idol-Gods; and made a Covenant with them; that is,
forsaking me, thou have joined thy self, as in a Marriage Covenant, with thine
Idol-Gods, undertaking that thou would always own them for thy Gods, and
never forsake them. Some indeed render this clause, as it is in the Margin;
thou have enlarged thy bed, and hewed it for thy self larger than theirs;
understanding it thus, that by hewing down Trees in their Groves, to make room
for their Altars and Temples, and otherways, they had sought to outstrip
others, that worshipped the same Idols. But the Translation in our Bibles is
the easiest and clearest; thou lovedst their bed where thou sa^^st it; that is,
wherever thou saw any Idol-God, or any new way of Idolatry, thou were
presently enamoured on it, and wentest a Whoring after it; of which we have a
notable instance, 2 Kings 16.10. etc. (which might be here particularly
intended) in that pattern of the Altar at Damascus, which Ahaz sent to Vriah
the High Priest, that he might make one of the same fashion, and set it up in
the Temple at Jerusalem. As for that Translation of these words, which we have
in the Margin, thou lovedst their bed, thou providest room; it must be
understood, as is before said of the Marginal Translation of the former Branch,
of their providing room for their new found Idols.

Ver. 9. And thou wentest to the King with ointment, and did increase thy
perfumes, etc.] Some conceive that the Lord does here still inveigh against the
Idolatry of his People, that Spiritual Adultery whereof he had hitherto spoken.
And accordingly they hold, that by the King here is meant, that great Idol
Moloch, because the word has the notion of a King in it, and so they make the
meaning of this passage to be this, that as Harlots are wont to paint, anoint,
and perfume themselves, that their Lovers may take the more delight in them; so
they went to this Idol with great and costly Offerings. And so likewise they
understand that which follows, of their sending Messengers far off; to wit, to
procure foreign Idols, and their debasing themselves, even unto Hell; to wit,
in that of a pure Virgin Jerusalem was become a Harlot, or by forsaking the
true God to worship such base Idols. But the most and best Expositors do indeed
hold, that here the Jews are charged with another Sin, which was also a kind of
Idolatry and Spiritual whoring, and the occasion also of increasing their
Idolatries: Namely; their seeking for aid to foreign Kings, when they were in
any danger. And thou wentest to the King with Ointment, etc. that is, say some,
to Tiglath-pileser, King of Assyria, to whom Ahaz sent for aid, 2 Kings 16.7.
who might be called the King in those days by way of Eminency. But it is rather
meant collectively of foreign Kings in general; to wit, that in their fears
they were still ready to fly to foreign Kings, the Assyrian, Egyptian, and
Babylonian, and that with great and rich Presents, Oil and Balsam, and all
sorts of Spices, that they might win them to make Leagues with them, and afford
them auxiliary Forces; and did send thy Messengers far off; that is, to very
remote Countries, and did debase thy self even to hell; that is, even as low
as possibly thou could; which may be meant, either of their base and servile
crouching before Heathenish Kings, prostrating themselves at their Feet, upon
the Ground, owning themselves unable to withstand their Enemies, and suing and
begging for their help; such as was that Language of Ahaz to the King of
Assyria, 2 Kings 16.7. I am thy Servant and thy Son; come up and save me, etc.
or else (which is much to the same effect) of the reproach and dishonor they
brought upon themselves, by this their base submission to Heathens, no way
suitable to the Majesty of Gods peculiar People, and by trusting more to their
Power and Friendship, than to the Favor and Almighty Power of their God, and
his provident care over them for their preservation.

Ver. 10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, etc.] Some understand
this also of their wearying themselves in their Spiritual Whoredoms, their
manifold Idolatrous courses; in seeking out, making, adorning, and worshipping
Idol-Gods; and accordingly also that which follows; yet said thou not, There
is no hope; that is, thou were not so wise as to see that all this would do
thee no good, thine Idols could not help thee; Thou have found the life of
thine hand; that is, thy Gods, which thou esteemest as thy life; (and it may be
they are called the life of their hand, in a way of derision, because they were
Gods which their own hands had made) Or, even in these Idolatrous courses thou
have gotten great wealth (called the Life of their hand, because they prized it
as their Life, and had gotten it with the labor of their hands) and so art
hardened against all instructions; therefore thou wast not grieved; that is, not
troubled, but went on chuckering thy self in thy wicked Idolatrous ways. But as
the former Verse, so this seems clearly to be meant, of their seeking to
foreign Princes for help against those that were like to invade them, Thou art
wearied in the greatness of thy way; that is, in thy long Journies into remote
Countries: But it seems to be spoken in a way of derision; as if he had said,
Thou have even tired thy self in vain and to no purpose: Yet said thou not,
there is no hope; that is, though it were so, yet would thou not be beaten
off from these vain courses, as concluding that there was no hope of getting
any good thereby: Thou have found the life of thine hand; that is, thou
imaginest, that by this going so far to seek for the aid of Heathenish Kings,
thou have attained, or art like to attain, that which thou soughtest after; to
wit, the upholding and safety of thy State, and the preservation of your lives,
when you thought all was before in danger to be destroyed, (for these fair
promises which they had gotten of friendship and help from Foreign Princes, is
called, The life of thy Hand; either, 1. Because it was obtained by their
labor and endeavors; or, 2. Because they thought those Foreign Kings would
be ready at Hand to help them; or, 3. Because thereby their Hands would be
strengthened against their Enemies:) therefore thou wast not grieved; that is,
thou were not troubled at thy tedious long Journies; thy pains seemed no pains
to thee. But now considering their seeking help from Foreign Nations proved
usually, at least in the conclusion, mischievous to them, all this seems to be
spoken ironically, and in away of derision; and it is all one in effect, as if
they had been told, that they had taken a great deal of pains to destroy
themselves.

Ver. 11. And of whom have thou been afraid or feared, etc.] the Original word
rendered afraid, imports a terrifying fear, and the latter rendered feared,
imports any lesser fear, and so it must be understood, as if it had been
expressed thus, Of whom had thou any dread or fear at all? Some hold that
Jerusalem is here charged with the impudency of a Harlot that is so bold in her
ways of uncleanness, that she fears neither God nor Man. Others think that the
drift of these words, is to charge her with her being void of all true fear of
God, as the ground of their secure and obstinate running on in their sinful
ways; notwithstanding the formal profession she made of Religion, yet the Lord
tells her, that she did not indeed fear him, because she was fallen away to a
false and Idolatrous Worship, which was not according to the Rule of his Word:
But rather the scope of these words, is to prevent an excuse she was like to
make for her seeking to Foreign Princes for aid, namely, that she did it when
she had just cause to fear, that she should have been overcome and ruined by
mighty Enemies, before whom by her own strength she should be never able to
stand; for, in answer to this, God here demands of her, what cause she had,
having him to depend upon for help, to fear any Enemies though never so potent,
so as to fall off from him, And of whom have thou been afraid or feared, that
thou have lied: That is, that thou have dealt disloyally and fasly with me,
breaking thy marriage Covenant with me, and have not remembered me; that is,
never minded me; neither thinking how able I was to secure thee from the rage
of thine Enemies, nor what experience thou had had hereof in former times,
nor how perilous the wrath of my Jealousy might be, if thou should not
carry thy self toward me according to thy duty, nor laid it to thy Heart; to
wit, as considering what the issue of these things might be: As for the
following clause, have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fear me
not? The aim of that is to show, that the true cause why they were so bold to
do those things, which were directly contrary to his commands, was because he
had been silent and born with them long, and this had so imboldned them, that
they stood in no awe of him, or of his word; instead of being bettered by his
long-suffering and patience, they were the worse for it, and feared him the
less; and, therefore it was high time to discover his displeasure against them.

Ver. 12. I will declare thy righteousness, etc.] As if he had said (with
reference to what was said in the close of the foregoing Verse) I will no
longer hold my peace, but by my Judgments executed upon thee, I will make known
what thou art, I will declare thy Righteousness; that is, thy horrid
wickedness, for it is Ironically spoken, and is much like that which God said
of Adam, Genesis 3.22. for which see the Note there. Yet it might be also spoken
in a way of deriding the high esteem which they had of themselves as righteous,
even in respect of their Idolatrous ways, for which God abhorred them; and thy
works; to wit, wherein thou gloriest so much; thy perfidiousness and Spiritual
Whoredoms, for they shall not profit thee, that is, whatever thou may think
of thy unwarrantable ways, they shall do thee no good, but rather shall prove
thy ruin at the last.

Ver. 13. When thou criest, etc.] To wit, to me, in those calamities that are
coming upon thee, let thy Companies deliver thee; as if he had said, That is
all the Answer thou shall have from me, I will turn thee off to the Companies
thou have relied upon for help. And by these Companies some understand the
multitude of Idol-Gods, which they had gathered from the Nations round about
them; and indeed we find God elsewhere thus turning off his People to them, in
a way of indignation and scorn, as Judge. 10.14. Go and cry unto the Gods which
ye have chosen, let them deliver you. And see also Jer. 2.28. But rather it is
meant of those auxiliary Forces which the Foreign Princes, to whom they had
sent, had promised to afford them; but the Wind shall carry them all away; that
is, thy hope in them shall deceive thee; when thou look for help from them,
they shall not be found, but shall be as Chaff which the Wind has carried
away, see the Note, Chap. 40.25. Vanity shall take them: that is, the least
thing that is, the least breath of Wind shall take them away: but he that
puts his trust in me, shall possess the Land, and shall inherit my Holy
Mountain; which is meant of those that should be brought back out of Babylon
into their own Country, and enjoy Gods Ordinances again in his Temple, as
appears by the following Verse.

Ver. 14. And shall say, etc.] To wit, Gods People returning out of Babylon, by
warrant of the Proclamation of Cyrus; they shall take order that all things
should be removed, that might hinder their return into Judea, Cast ye up, cast
ye up. See the Notes, Chap. 35.8. and 40.3, 4. etc.

Ver. 15 For thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eternity, etc.]
That is, who alone is truly Eternal, Who only has Immortality, as the Apostle
expresses it, 1 Timothy 6.16. And therefore also immutable and unchangeable,
whose Name is Holy, see the Note, 1 Samuel 2.2. I dwell in the High and Holy
place, that is, in Heaven; see the Note, Psalm. 115.3. with him also that is of
a contrite and humble Spirit, see the Note, Psalm. 34.18. to revive the Spirit
of the Humble, etc. that is to comfort them; only the word here used implies,
that none can do this, but he that can put life into dead men: But now the
drift of all this is, to comfort the poor Jews in their Captivity, that they
might not question the foregoing promise of deliverance, by putting them in
mind, that though their God was a God of Infinite and Incomprehensible Majesty
and Holiness, yet in the respect he had to the ordering of all things below, he
would be still graciously present with those that were humbled and afflicted
for their Sins, though they dare scarce look up to the most High God, yet the
most High God would come down to them and dwell in their hearts.

Ver. 16. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth,
etc.] To wit, with those that are of an humble and contrite Spirit, see the
foregoing Note, For the Spirit shall fail before me, and the Souls which I
have made; that is, if I should do so, the Spirits and Souls of my People would
faint away, or be overwhelmed with terror and despair; the meaning is, that
even with respect to Man's infirmity and weakness, whose life is but a blast,
God does many times put a stop to his proceeding in a rigorous manner against
men, (especially his brokenhearted People) and that too with some respect to
their Souls, being the work of his hands, but see also the Notes, Psalm. 78.39.
and 103.14.

Ver. 17. For the iniquity of his Covetousness was I wroth, etc.] That is, for
their base Covetousness, and all the Wickedness besides which their
Covetousness carried them into; for this sin, I conceive, is particularly
mentioned, not only because it was the Common sin of all sorts of People
amongst them, Jer. 6 13. From the least of them even to the greatest of them,
every one is given to covetousness; but also because it was amongst them, as
the Apostle says it is every where, 1 Timothy 6.10. The root of all evil; and
more especially the cause of all the oppressions and injurious dealings of
their Princes, Priests, and Judges, for which they were before called greedy
Dogs, Chap. 56.11. And smote him; to wit, with many several Judgments, before
they were delivered up to be carried captives into Babylon: I hid me and was
wroth; that is, in my wrath I hid my self from them, not appearing any way for
them in their favor or defense, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart, notwithstanding my displeasure manifested by the Judgments I brought
upon them.

Ver. 18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him, etc.] That is, I have seen
how he has repented, and reformed his sinful ways, and will deliver him from
the Judgments wherewith I had smitten and wounded him. But the words seem
clearly to have reference to that which was said in the close of the foregoing
Verse, And he went on frowardly in the way of his heart; and accordingly they
must be understood, either, as some do, of the effect of those their wicked
ways, to wit, that God saw into what Miseries and Calamities they had brought
themselves, and therefore out of his mere pity and compassion, did resolve to
heal them of this their sad condition, see the Notes, Chap. 19.22. and 30.26.
Or else rather of the wicked ways themselves wherein they walked; to wit, that
though God saw how vile their ways and courses were, and particularly their
obstinacy and incorrigibleness, even after God had contended with them by his
Judgments, and how in these ways they were running, on headlong upon their own
Eternal ruin; yet of his own free Grace, and for his own Names-sake, was
purposed to heal them: First, say some, of their sinful ways, and then
afterward of their sore miseries. I will lead him also; That is, I will conduct
them safely into their own Country, and restore Comfort unto him, and to his
Mourners; To wit, all the Comforts which they had formerly enjoyed in that
pleasant Land which God had given them, and were like again to enjoy, when God
should bring them back thither from Babylon, together with the Comfort, which
this evidence of Gods being reconciled to them should yield them; and this is
more especially promised to his Mourners; that is, those that had mourned for
the wickedness of Gods People, and the dreadful Judgments they had brought upon
them, as did Jeremy, Ezekiel, and Daniel, and others, though the residue of the
People should have a share therein by means of these; yet to these God did
especially intend them.

Ver. 19. I create the fruit of the Lips, etc.] That which God does effect in
an extraordinary way, when there was no likelihood of it, is frequently in the
Scripture called creating; see the Note, Chap. 4.5. Some carry on these words
to those which follow, and so make the peace there mentioned to be the fruit of
the Lips here intended, and that in several regards, as, 1. That God would make
all the talk of the People to be of Peace, whereas formerly their talk was
wholly for War, and the miseries thereof: Or, 2. That God would give them Peace
as the fruit of their Prayers: Or, 3. That God would by giving them Peace,
perform the promises which with his Lips, or the Lips of his Prophets, he had
made to them: Or, 4. That God would raise up Prophets, that from him should
bring them Tidings of Peace, and of their deliverance from the Babylonian
Captivity: Yea and, 5. Some extend it to Gods causing the glad Tidings of the
Gospel of Peace to be Preached unto them, thereby working in them much inward
Peace. But because our Translation, as does the Hebrew also, divides these
Words by a stop from the former: I Create the fruit of the Lips; therefore the
most of Expositors do by the fruit of the Lips understand the voice of Praise
and Thanksgivings, elsewhere called the calves of our Lips, Hos. 14.2. And
indeed the Apostle seems directly to intend the Expounding of this place of our
Prophet thus, where he says Heb 13.15. By him therefore let us offer the
Sacrifice of praise to God continually; that is, the fruit of our Lips, giving
thanks to his Name; only indeed the following Words are added to show how God
would create his praise, this fruit of the Lips; namely, by giving them
occasion of filling their Mouths with Gods praises, by the prosperous and happy
condition whereunto he would bring them, and wherein he would settle them:
Peace, Peace; that is, abundance of Peace, and long continued Peace there shall
be, to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord; that is,
as well to those that are carried away far off into Captivity, as to them that
shall be left in the Land of Judea: Or, as well to those that are far off in
Babylon, as to those that are in other strange Countries, but not so far from
Judea, as Babylon was. But now because the peace here promised to the Jews, did
typically fore-shadow the peace purchased by Christ, and published by the
Gospel, even this may be here included; and so by him that is far off, and him
that is nigh, must be meant, not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also. And
questionless in that which the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.17. Christ came and
preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them which were nigh, he does
at least allude clearly to this place. As for the last words, and I will hear
him; see the foregoing Note.

Ver. 20. But the wicked, etc.] Lest the Wicked amongst Gods People should
flatter themselves with hope of the Peace promised in the foregoing Verse, the
Prophet here adds, that there should be no peace for them; but the wicked are
like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt;
that is, as the Sea, being restless in it self, by reason of its continual
ebbing and flowing, is yet more restless, when it is tossed to and fro with
stormy Winds, and does continually cast up mud, and foam, and filth: so wicked
men, that never enjoy any inward Peace, partly by reason of the frequent hurry
of their inordinate Passions and Lusts, and partly by reason of the terrors of
their Consciences, are yet more restless, when God brings outward miseries and
troubles upon them; and so their Hearts, from whence nothing issues forth at
any time, but what is sinful and wicked, are then fullest of blasphemies, and
impatient swellings and murmurings against God. I know there are some that
understand this of the neighbor Nations, that did rage like the troubled Sea,
when they saw the Jews returned from Babylon, and endeavoring to rebuild their
City and Temple, striving by all possible means to hinder them, but did nothing
thereby, but only discover their own malice and wickedness: but the former
Exposition is the best.

Ver. 21. There is no Peace says my God to the wicked.] See the Note, Chap.
48.22.

CHAP. LVIII.
VERSE 1. CRY aloud, etc.] This the Prophet is enjoined to do, that he might
waken this sleepy, stupid, secure People, and make them know that they were of
those wicked ones, to whom in the close of the foregoing Chapter he had said,
there should be no peace. Cry aloud, which is in the Hebrew, Cry with the
Throa^ (as we use to say, Set up thy throat) that is, with all possible
vehemence, earnestness, and zeal, as having to do with a People wilfully deaf
and unwilling to hear; spare not; to wit, for fear of any Man's displeasure;
lift up thy voice like a Trumpet; to wit, as Gods Herald, sent to denounce War
against them; show my People their transgression, and the House of Jacob their
sins; that is, convince this stupid People of their sins, who do vainly Glory
in the profession of being my People, whereas indeed this is an aggravation of
their wickedness: I do indeed own them as my Vovenant People, and if they will
repent, I will esteem them as my People; but if they continue a wicked People,
I shall abhor them the more for calling themselves my People.

Ver. 2. Yet they seek me daily, etc.] Here the main cause is alleged, why the
Prophet was to cry aloud against the Jews: Namely, because they were an
Hypocritical People, and had high thoughts of their own Righteousness, and so
had need to be awakened, that they might be convinced of their wickedness. Yet
they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, etc. Some understand this of
their murmuring against Gods dealing with them; to wit, that they were still
desiring to know the reasons of Gods Counsels, and the Dispensations of his
Providence toward them, as conceiting themselves so Righteous, that God had no
cause so much as to frown upon them; they ask of me the Ordinances of justice;
that is, they desire that I would deal justly with them; they take delight in
approaching to God; to wit, that they may argue the matter, and contend with
him, about his dealing with them. But rather these words tend all to set forth
their Hypocrisy; to wit, that though they were so insufferably wicked, yet
they made a great show of Religion; yet they seek me daily; to wit, by
resorting to my Sanctuary, that they may seek my favor by their Prayers, and
Sacrifices, and Offerings; or by going to their Synagogues, and to my House,
the Temple, to hear my Word, and to inquire of my Priests and Prophets, what it
is that I required of them; and delight to know my ways; that is, they pretend
to do so, as a Nation that did Righteousness, etc. that is, as if they were
certainly resolved to do what God required, if they did but know what his will
were; they ask of me the Ordinances of justice; that is, they inquire of my
Servants what that Righteousness was, which by my Laws I required of them; they
take delight; that is, they seem to take delight, in approaching to God; that
is, in seeking to enjoy communion with me in mine Ordinances.

Ver. 3. Wherefore, etc.] This is added to show that their Hypocrisy was such,
that as wicked as they were, they were ready to quarrel with God, if he showed
any disregard of them; Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not?
Wherefore have we afflicted our Soul; that is, our selves, (see the Note, Psalm.
44.25.) to wit, by fasting; see the Note, Levit. 16.29. and thou take no
knowledge? that is, thou regardest it not: It is true, they boasted as much in
all their other outward acts of devotion, which they performed, enjoined them
by the Law; but this of their fasting is particularly instanced in, because
they placed so much confidence in this, when in their distresses they sought
unto God in this way, for his help and favor: And the ground of this their
expostulation may be, that notwithstanding their fasting and humbling
themselves before God, whether on the Fast in the seventh Month, expressly
enjoined by Gods Law, Levit. 23.27. (which may the rather seem particularly
intended, because at that time they were also enjoined to release their debts,
and set free their Servants; for the not doing whereof God does afterward here
reprove them) or upon any other voluntary and occasional Fasts, such as was
that of Esther, Esth. 4.16. Yet God by his Prophets did as bitterly cry against
them, as a wicked people, as if they had never done any such thing (and so this
might be spoken with respect to that charge of God to the Prophet, ver. 1.) Or,
yet God was regardless of them, when in their troubles and dangers they did in
this solemn manner, by fasting and prayer, seek for help and succor from him.

Behold, etc.] This is the answer which God returns to their expostulation:
Behold, in the day of your Fast (which seems to imply, that God did not own it
for a Fast) you find pleasure; that is, you satisfy your Lusts, by doing those
things, which may satisfy your sinful desires and delights: Or, you do what
you please your selves: Yea, and some would have it restrained to that
particular of their pleasing themselves in the exacting of their debts, of
which he speaks in the next words; and exact all your labors; that is, your
money which you had gotten by your labor (see the Notes, Chap. 55.2. and Prove.
5.10.) of those to whom you had lent it, even the poorest of them, not bating a
Farthing of that which they owe you. Indeed this is rendered by some, as it is
in the Margin, and exact all things, wherewith you grieve others; and then it
may be meant of the hard labor and service which they exacted of their
Servants, in extremity, above what God allowed them, or beyond the time they
were to serve them; or of the Rigor and Cruelty wherewith they exacted their
debts, which was very grievous to those from whom they were exacted.

Ver. 4. Behold, you fast for strife and debate, etc.] Some understand this, as
if the Prophet charged them either, 1. That strife and debate was that which
they propounded to themselves, as the end of their fasting: in that they
designed thereby to cover their Oppressions with a show of Piety, as it was in
Jezebel's Fast, when she had plotted the Death of Naboth, 1 King. 21.19. Or, 2.
That there was much strife and debate amongst them upon their solemn Fast-days.
For (say they) they used, when they met on those days, to be often quarrelling
and brawling one with another; at least they were wont to take advantage of the
Rest enjoined on those days, to look over their debt-Books and Bonds, and
Mortgages, and to prepare for, and promote what they could, the prosecuting of
their Lawsuits against their debtors. Yea, and there is a Learned Expositor
that holds, that it being their Custom on those days to sit in Judgment against
Offenders, that hereby God might be pacified toward them, the greatest matter
they usually there did, was to complain of their Debtors, and to procure some
Judiciary Sentence against them. And so for the following words; and to smite
with the Fist of wickedness; some conceive it is meant of their quarrelling and
fighting on those days; at least of Masters beating and abusing their Servants,
or of the imperious and contemptuous carriage of their great ones toward the
mean sort, in beating and striking them, or of Men's passionate falling upon
their Debtors, and laying violent hands upon them, as if they would force them
to pay that which they were not able to pay, according to that which is said in
the Parable of the Servant, whose Lord had forgiven him a great debt, and he
afterward meeting with one of his Fellow Servants, which ought him an hundred
pence; laid hands on him, and took him by the Throat, saying, Pay me that thou
owe, Matthew. 18.28. But to me it seems no way probable, that they either did
or are charged with doing these things on their fast-days. Questionless all
that is here intended, is, that even after their Fasting and Praying, they went
on in their ways of cruelty and unmercifulness to their poor Brethren; their
Fasts were followed with strife and debate, as if that had been the very end of
their fasting. And herein consists the absurdity of their dealing with God,
that whilst they sought in this manner to beg mercy of God, they should be at
the same time so cruel to their Brethren. Ye shall not fast as ye do this day,
to make your voice to be heard on high; that is, say some, ye are not to fast
as now adays ye do, with such brawling and loud outcries, as make the Air
aloft to ring of them, or as are like to mount up to Heaven, and draw down
vengeance upon you: Or, as others would have it, you must not fast, as now ye
do, weeping and howling aloud by way of ostentation, or as hoping that hereby
alone you keep a fast as God requires. But far more probably, I conceive,
others hold, that God does here inform them, that if they desired to have the
voice of their Prayers heard on high; that is, by God in Heaven, they must fast
in another manner than they did in those times. There must not be such strife
and debate, such contention and oppression amongst them as there was, if they
desired by their fastings to prevail with God.

Ver. 5. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? a day for a Man to afflict his
Soul, etc.] See the Note, Lev. 16.29. is it to bow down his head as a bullrush,
which being broken and bruised, will hang down with its own weight, and to
spread sackcloth and ashes under him; to wit, as they used to do in times of
solemn Humiliation and fasting; as it is said of Ahab, 1 King. 21.27. that he
fasted and lay in sackcloth; see also Esth. 4.3. and Job 2.8. The meaning is,
that the humbling of themselves thus out-wardly, if they did not withal repent
of and forsake their sins, was not the Fast which God enjoined, approved, and
delighted in; will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? As
if he had said, you cannot in reason think so, but rather that the Lord will
abhor it.

Ver. 6. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of
wickedness, etc.] By these bands of wickedness some understand the combination
of Judges, or others for the oppression of the poorer sort. But rather hereby
is meant, whatever it was wherewith the poor were straightened and pinched by the
rich, as their obligations and conveyances, either unjustly obtained, or
cruelly prosecuted, even against those that were notable to pay; yea, and the
bringing such into Bondage, or casting them into Prison, may be herein also
included; of all which God requires here, they should be released. And to the
same effect is the Rest here added; to undo the heavy burdens, to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke. For though in requiring that
the oppressed (or afflicted) should go free; he seems to have special respect
to the freeing of their debtors from restraint, either in Prison or elsewhere,
they not daring to stir abroad for fear of Arrests; and to the setting of their
Servants at liberty, at the times enjoined by Gods Law for their manumission;
yet it may be meant more generally of freeing them from all the vexations and
oppressions, under which they were crushed. And by the yoke may be meant all
the heavy pressures they groaned under. The meaning is, that they must leave
off their extortions and oppressions, and so likewise all other their sins, if
they would fast as God required they should do.

Ver. 7. Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, etc.] See the Notes,
Eccles. 11.1. and Prove. 22.9. and that thou bring the poor that are cast out,
(or afflicted) to thy house? to wit, voluntarily, even before it was desired of
thee; when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
thy self from thine own Flesh; that is, thy Brethren, of thine own Stock or
Nation; see the Note, Judge. 9.2. or, any that are Men as thou art; see the
Note, Neh. 5.5.

Ver. 8. Then shall thy light, etc.] As if he had said, do this, and you will
find, that there will be no cause for you to complain, as it is above, ver. 3.
w^refore have we fasted, and thou see not? etc. Then shall thy light break
forth as the morning; that is, thy sad and afflicted estate shall be certainly
and suddenly changed into a joyful and prosperous condition, even when there
seemed to be no likelihood of any such thing, which likewise shall grow
brighter and brighter, as the morning light does; see the Note Esth. 8.16. and
thine health shall spring forth speedily; that is, thou shall be presently
cured of thy miseries, and shall get new Vigor, as the Plants do when the
Spring is come; but see the Notes also, Chap. 6.10. and 57.18. and thy
Righteousness shall go before thee; that is, this thy just and merciful dealing
shall do that which thine Hypocritical fasting did not do, it shall declare
thee to be sincerely Righteous, and make thy Righteousness to appear
conspicuously before God and Man; Or, thy righteousness shall go before thee;
that is, thou shall plainly see the reward of thy Righteousness; thy
Righteousness shall direct and prosper thee in all thy ways; that is, it shall
procure for thee, that the Lord shall direct thee, and teach thee what to do,
and shall prosper and bless thee in all things whatsoever; he shall bring all
things into a just and righteous order; so that by all things that befall thee,
it shall appear that thou art a just and righteous Person; the Glory of the
Lord shall be thy rereward; that is, say some, after a Life spent Righteously
here, thou shall at last be brought to Heavenly Glory; but rather the meaning
is, either that the Glorious God, or the Glorious power and providence of God,
should gather them up, if they were scattered abroad, and protect them, as a
Shepherd does his Flock; or else, that by the constant Love and Favor of God
to them they would be Glorious and Renowned, whereas formerly, for the
Judgments of God upon them, they had been infamous.

Ver. 9. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer* thou shall cry, and
he shall say, Here I am: etc.] As if he had said, Then therefore thou shall no
more complain (as before, ver. 3) that I hear thee not when thou fastest and
prayest; if thou take from the midst of thee; to wit, that no such shall be
found amongst you; the y^ke; that is, every heavy pressure imposed upon your
Brethren, whether by fraud or violence; see the Note before, ver. 6. the
putting forth of the Finger; that is, either, 1. Pointing the Finger at Men,
whom they are at that time reviling and slandering; or by way of scorning and
deriding the Prophets and other the Holy Servants of God; or, 2. Laying their
Hands upon Men's Persons, by way of striking them ( the fist of wickedness,
before mentioned ver. 4.) or their Estates, by way of any unjust seizure; or,
3. Putting off and putting by, with a Finger stretched out and turned aside in
a way of denial, to those that sue to them for Mercy, forbearing them, or
mitigating any of their hard proceedings against them; or, 4. Which seems most
probable, the reaching forth the Hand, or lifting up the Finger by way of
Threatening Men; as if he had said, If you do forbear not only all acts of
Violence and threatening language, but all expressions and gestures tending
thereto; and speaking Vanity; that is, say some, lying, or flattering, or any
kind of wicked or vain speaking; or rather, considering the context in this
place, any thing that was like to be grievous and hurtful to their Brethren.

Ver. 10. And if thou draw out thy Soul to the Hungry, etc.] That is, if thou
do relieve them freely, willingly, and cheerfully, with much fervent
affection and tender Bowels of Compassion; and satisfy the afflicted Soul;
that is, if thou relieve the Poor Man, not sparingly, but bountifully, to the
full supply of his wants, and so that his Soul may be refreshed thereby; then
shall thy Light rise in Obscurity; see the Note above, ver. 8. and that also,
Psalm. 112.4. And thy Darkness shall be as Noonday; that is, and thine
afflicted estate shall be turned into very great prosperity; see the Notes,
Psalm. 37.6. and Job 11.17.

Ver. 11. And the Lord shall guide thee continually, etc.] That is, assist and
direct, and prosper thee in all thy ways, see the Note above, ver. 8. and
satisfy thy Soul in drought; see the Notes, Psalm. 103.5. Prove. 11.25. and
Psalm. 37.19. It is spoken here with reference to what was said in the foregoing
Verse, that if they would satisfy the afflicted, God would satisfy them; and
make fat thy Bones; that is he will make thee healthful and strong, the
expression here used has respect, either to the Bones being full of Marrow,
where persons are healthful. Job 21.24. Or to the store of Fat that will be
upon the Bones that are well Fatted. And thou shall be like a Watered Garden,
and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not; that is, like a Garden
watered with an ever-flowing Fountain, or like a Garden and an ever-flowing
Spring; and the meaning is, that God would abundantly bless them, that he would
bring them into, and continue them in a very plentiful and comfortable Estate,
so that they should be a delight and refreshing to many, see the Note, Numb.
24.6.

Ver. 12. And they that shall be of thee, etc.] As if he had said, even of thy
Posterity, how low soever you may be brought, there shall some arise, that
shall build the old waste places, that is, the Ruins of Jerusalem, and other
the Cities of Judea, that had lain long waste and desolate; Thou shall raise up
the Foundations of many Generations; that is, thou shall rear up those Cities,
where nothing was left but the very Foundations, that had lain waste and
desolate for many Generations; or thou shall raise up those Buildings that
shall last for many Generations; and thou shall be called the Repairer of the
Breach; to wit; the many Breaches in their Walls, see the Note, Chap. 48.8. the
restorer of Paths to dwell in; to wit, say some, in that they made those
ruins, which the Enemy had made by beating their Houses down to the very
Foundation, and over which they used to pass to and fro at their pleasure, to
be Places wherein they might again inhabit; or rather, in that by reedifying
their Cities, it came to pass that the paths to those Cities were frequented
again by Travelers, that had long lain overgrown and untrodden: But now many
there are, that would have all this understood mystically also, of the Building
of the Church of Christ by those that were first sent forth to Preach the
Gospel, all the World over, whereby the breach was made up betwixt the Jews and
Gentiles.

Ver. 13. If thou turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath, etc.] That is, if thou
avoid the doing of those things on the Sabbath day, wherewith the Sabbath must
needs be polluted; to wit, 1. The doing of those things, which though they
might lawfully be done on other days, yet were forbidden on that day, as
Traveling (which some think the Phrase here used of turning away the Foot does
especially intend) or doing any servile Work, and following any Worldly
employment. And, 2. All their sinful ways and courses. And indeed this last I
conceive is here principally intended; for as his aim before was to show them,
that their outward fasting was not enough, unless they did also Mourn for and
abandon their sinful courses, so here likewise it seems his drift is to show
them, that it was not enough for them to forbear their ordinary Worldly
Employments on the Sabbath day, if they did in the mean time profane them with
their wicked and sinful ways; if they should be never so strict, not to go a
Journey, nor dress Meat on the Sabbath day, and yet, at the same time oppress
the Poor, this the Lord would not esteem, to be a Sanctifying of the Sabbath
day. And to the same purpose is that which follows, If thou turn away thy
Foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; that is, that
which pleases thine own corrupt will; and call the Sabbath a delight; that is,
your great delight, as delighting in the Communion you then enjoy with God in
his Ordinances; the Holy of the Lord, and Honorable; to wit, as being
Consecrated wholly to the service of God; and shall honor him; to wit, by
denying to please themselves, that they might obey Gods Command, and enjoy
Communion with him; not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words; to wit, such as are pleasing to corrupt Nature.
But see the Note also, Chap. 56.2.

Ver. 14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, etc.] To wit, in his
love and favor, it is clearly spoken with reference to the foregoing Verse; as
if he had said, If thou delight in the Sanctifying Gods Sabbath, and to that
end do withold thy self from thy Carnal delights, thou shall have far
better delights than those, thou shall delight thy self in the Lord; see the
Notes, Job 22.26. and Psalm. 37.4. And I will cause thee to ride upon the High
places of the Earth; that is, say some, to dwell in places of security and
safety, see the Note, Chap 33.16. Or, the meaning may be only, that God would
bring them again into the Land of Judea, which was a Mountainous Country, far
higher than the Neighboring Countries were. But see the Note also, Deuteronomy.
32.13. And feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy Father; that is, with the
good things of the Land of Canaan, which God had promised to Jacob and his
Posterity.

CHAP. LIX.
VERSE 1. BEhold, etc.] This seems still to be in answer to that in the
foregoing Chap. ver. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not? etc.
Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened, that he cannot save; see the Note,
Chap. 50.2. neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear; that is, he is not
thick of hearing, through old Age, or otherwise: for this expression of heavy
ears; see the Note, Chap. 6.10.

Ver. 3. For your hands are defiled with Blood, and your fingers with Iniquity,
etc.] See the Note, Chap. 11.15. your lips have spoken lies, your tongue has
uttered perverseness; whereby may be meant whatever was spoken by them
wickedly, to the hurt of their Neighbors, as by slandering, cozening, false
accusing them, bearing false Witness, or swearing falsely against them, etc. It
is as if he had said, And what likelihood is there that the Holy God should
regard the stretching forth of such hands, or the words that are uttered by
such Lips.

Ver. 4. None calls for Justice, nor any pleads for Truth, etc.] See the
Note, Chap. 56.10. The meaning is, that there were scarce any Judges, or others
that would zealously and freely speak for the Truth, and for the just cause: As
namely, by reproving those that dealt unjustly, and advising them to deal more
justly, or by undertaking to plead for those that were injured, or oppressed;
all Men were willing to wink at the injuries and oppressions of their Brethren,
and never offered to do any thing for their defense and relief; they trust in
Vanity; that is, they trust in those things that can do them no good, but will
utterly deceive them; some understand it of their fraudulent dealing with their
Brethren, others of the vain hopes wherewith they encouraged themselves in
their wicked ways, and others otherwise; but see the Notes, Chap. 28.15. and
48.9. and Job 15.31. and speak lies; to wit, say some, in a way of boasting.
But by lies, the same is meant that was before called Vanity; they conceive
mischief, and bring forth Iniquity; see the Notes, Psalm. 7.14. and Job 15.35.

Ver. 5. They hatch Cockatrice (or Adders) Eggs, etc.] That is, say some, the
plots they contrive against others, prove many times mischievous to themselves.
But rather the meaning is, that those poisonous and pernicious plots, which
they have designed against others, are at last brought to effect. For still the
Prophet proceeds to set forth the horrid wickedness that was amongst them,
which had made a separation betwixt God and them: And so* for that which
follows; and weave the Spiders web; though some understand them either, 1. Of
the vanity of their Will-Worships, or Hypocritical Works, their Fasting and
Prayers, etc. that though they have a show of much Zeal and Holiness; yet they
shall not secure them from Gods Wrath, nor be any way any advantage to them.
Or, 2. Of the vanity of their mischievous plots against others, that whatever
great advantage they might promise to themselves by their Plots and Projects
for the oppression of others, yet they should prove ineffectual and unuseful in
this regard, like so many Cobwebs that are presently swept away; for which, see
the Note, Job 8.14. But rather this still tends to set forth their wickedness,
in that as the Spider is still making her Webs to catch and destroy the poor
Flies, so they were continually with much labor contriving with many
artificial plots for the intangling and ruining of others; he that eats of
their Eggs dies; that is, say some, he that joins with them in their wicked
Counsels and Designs, shall be destroyed thereby; or rather he that has any
commerce with them, his very life will be endangered thereby: As for the last
words, and that which is crushed breaks forth into a Viper; they may be read,
as in the Margin, that which is sprinkled, is as if there brake out a Viper;
and then it is as if he had said, that not only the eating of their Cockatrice
Eggs, but even a Man's being sprinkled with the bloody drops of their Eggs, when
they are broken, is likely to be mortal to him; but now reading it as it is in
our Bibles; and that which is crushed breaks forth into a Viper; the meaning
is, either that if a Man did but go about to search into their Plots, and
Counsels, or at least to discover them and crush them, they would be ready like
Vipers upon such a Man: Or rather, that if men were any way drawn in to have
any dealing with such Men, they would be their bane; as if a man should open a
Vipers Egg, thinking it to be the Egg of some Fowl that uses to be eaten, and
a Viper should fly in his Face; or as if a Man should casually tread upon such
an Egg, and the Serpent in it should fasten upon him. So that however the words
are translated, the meaning seems to be plainly this, That with such men there
is no safe dealing any way.

Ver. 6. Their Webs shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their works, etc.] How these words may be understood, according
to the Exposition which some give of the foregoing Verse; see in the Note
there. But doubtless the meaning is, that though their plots and practices were
hurtful to others; yet they should bring no profit to them; either they shall
no way advance themselves thereby in their outward condition; or, if they do
that, yet that shall stand them in no stead, as to the sheltering of them from
the wrath of God, and from the Evils that are coming upon them. And indeed to
show that no better could be justly expected from such wicked plots and
practices as theirs were, is that added which follows; their works are works of
Iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands; that is, they are
continually employed in works of oppression and violence, and other ways of
desperate wickedness.

Ver. 7. Their feet run to Evil, and they make haste to shed innocent Blood,
etc.] See the Note, Prove. 1.16. from whence this seems to have been taken. And
so likewise the Apostle cites these words, either from that place of Solomon,
or this of our Prophet, Romans 3.15, 16, 17. and that to prove that the Jews lay
under the same guilt with the Gentiles; their thoughts are thoughts of
iniquity; they not only do Evil, but they do it also advisedly and
deliberately: their minds being continually plotting and contriving mischief;
wasting and destruction are in their paths; that is, wherever they go they
waste and destroy; or all they do tends hereto.

Ver. 8. The way of peace they know not, etc.] That is, they are of such a
turbulent Spirit, and are so violently bent upon all injurious courses, that
they know not how to live peaceably with any body; they mind not peace, not
having the least inclination that way, but are mere strangers to it, utterly
unacquainted with any peaceable courses: and there is no judgment in their
goings; that is, they have no respect to Justice and Right in any thing they
do; see the Note, Chap. 56.1. they have made them crooked paths; that is, their
ways are not according to the straight rule of Gods Word; see the Note, Psalm.
125.5. whoever goes therein shall not know peace; that is, say some, whoever
converseth with them will be of the same unpeaceable disposition with them; or
rather, whoever imitateth them, and treads in these wicked and unpeaceable
paths of theirs, shall never prosper; they shall never know what Peace and
Prosperity means; see the Note, Chap. 48.22.

Ver. 9. Therefore, etc.] The Prophet having in the foregoing Verses shown the
People how extremely wicked they were, does here declare, that for this it was
that God had brought them into such a sad condition, and consequently that they
had no cause to murmur against God, as was before expressed, Chap. 58.3. And
because of that which follows; our transgressions are multiplied before thee,
etc. very many Expositors hold that the Prophet speaks this in the name of the
Captive Jews, acknowledging to God, that their wickedness was the cause why God
stood aloof from them, and did not come in to their help; Therefore is judgment
far from us, neither does justice overtake us; that is, it comes not near us.
Because of these our forementioned Sins, and particularly because we have not
minded Judgment and Justice in our dealings with others, therefore God hid
himself from them, and did not appear in a way of Justice for them, to protect
them, and to execute Judgment upon their Enemies; see the Note, Chap. 1.27.
we-wait for light, but behold obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in
darkness; that is, we were still hoping, especially when we had sought God by
fasting and Prayer, that he would have brought things into a more comfortable
condition, but, alas, our miseries continue still upon us; yea, even when
sometime there seemed to be some hope, and we began to promise our selves more
comfortable times; behold, even then so great was our disappointment, our
condition became rather worse and worse; see the Notes, Esth. 8.17. and Psalm.
112.4.

Ver. 10. We grope for the Wall like the Blind, and we grope as if we had no
Eyes, etc.] See the Note, Deuteronomy. 28.28. to which very place the Prophet seems to
have respect in these expressions; we stumble at noonday, as in the night;
that is, we are apt to miscarry and fall into mischiefs, where the danger might
have been easily foreseen and prevented. Both these expressions are added with
respect to that wherewith the foregoing Verse was closed, we walk in darkness.
But see the Notes also, Job 5.14. and 12.24. we are in desolate places, as dead
men; that is, we are in an exceeding sad and desolate condition, overwhelmed
with miseries, and hopeless of ever seeing better days, like Men that live in
desolate places, where there is nothing that can afford Men any comfort, or
rather, our condition is liker to that of dead Men in their Graves, then to
that of living Men.

Ver. 11. We roar all like Bears, and mourn sore like Doves, etc.] See the
Note, Chap. 38.14. These different Similitudes may seem to be used to imply;
the one, their loud outcries, like that of the roaring of Bears; the other,
their continual bemoaning themselves, like that of the mourning of Doves; or
else that they all lamented the Misery of their Condition; some with louder
outcries, others with more inward and private Mournings: We look for Judgment,
but there is none; for Salvation, but it is far off from us; see the Note
above, Ver. 9.

Ver. 12. For our Transgressions are multiplied before thee, etc.] As if he had
said, However we may flatter our selves, and endeavor to excuse and cover over
our Sins, yet thou know them all; and hereby thou have been provoked against
us, and this has been the cause why thou have stood aloof from helping us: And
our sins testify against us; see the Note, Chap. 3.9. For our Transgressions
are with us; that is, say some, they are evident in the Evils they have brought
upon us. But rather the meaning is, that their Sins were so manifest and
notoriously great, that they could not but be in their own Consciences fully
convinced of them. And to the same purpose is the following Clause; And as for
our Iniquities we know them; it being clearly either a confession of their
owning the Sins wherewith they had offended God; or an humble bewailing
themselves for them; See the Note, Psalm. 51.3. And now in all this the Prophet
joins himself with the rest of the People, not as guilty of the same Sins with
them, but as confessing and bewailing their Sins together with his own.

Ver. 13. In Transgressing, etc.] Having in the foregoing Verse acknowledged
the wickedness of the People in general, as the cause of all the Miseries that
were come upon them, here the Prophet proceeds to set them forth more
distinctly and particularly: And so having closed that Verse with those words,
And as for our Iniquities we know them; here he shows what those their great
Iniquities were, In Transgressing, and lying against the Lord, and departing
away from our God; and by all these several Terms is meant, their perfidious
Apostasy from God by their bold Transgressing of his Laws, without any regard
to their promises, and the Covenant they had made with God; See the Note, Chap.
1.4. And so by speaking oppression and revolt, is meant, that their talk for
the most part was of those things that tended to the Oppression of their
Brethren, and that did proclaim their revolt and Apostasy from God; and by
conceiving and uttering from the Heart words of falsehood; that is, they
contrive in their Hearts, and then afterward advisedly speak false and
deceitful words; See the Note above, Ver. 3.

Ver. 14. And Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands a far off,
etc.] Some understand this as those passages before, Ver. 9.11. But rather this
is a further Declaration of the Wickedness of the People; to wit, that all
Justice was vanished as it were from amongst them; neither in places of
Judicature, nor elsewhere, was there any regard of right or wrong; for Truth is
fallen in the Street; that is, being overborn by falsehood, or having no body
to support her, Truth falls to the ground in all places of Public concourse;
see the Notes, Job 29.7. and Ps. 55.11. and equity cannot enter; that is, it is
shut out by Violence and not suffered to be amongst us.

Ver. 15. Yea, Truth fails, etc.] That is, Neither in public nor private was
there any Truth to be found; see the foregoing Note. And he that departs from
Evil, makes himself a Prey; or as it is in the Margin, is accounted mad; that
is, a Man void of all Reason. And the Lord saw it, and it displeased him, that
there was no Judgment; that is, That there was no Justice to be found amongst
them: And thence it has been, that he has stood aloof from helping us in our
Miseries.

Ver. 16. And he saw that there was no Man, etc.] To wit, that would appear for
Right and Justice; see the Note above, Ver. 4. And wondered that there was no
Intercessor; that is, say some, none that would mediate with God, or Pray to
him for this Wicked People; or rather, none that would step in and interpose
himself to Plead for Justice, and defend the Oppressed; for so we find it
expressed afterward in a place very like to this, Chap. 63.5. And I looked and
there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold. As for
this expression of Gods wondering, it is used to imply both how strange and
wonderful it was, that Gods own peculiar People should be so grievously and
universally corrupted, that there should not be a Man found amongst them, that
should oppose the Injustice of those Times; and likewise what Riches of Grace
it discovered in God, that he should be so solicitously careful for the saving
of a People so desperately Wicked: Which is added in the following Words;
Therefore his Arm brought Salvation unto him, and his Righteousness it
sustained him; where the Hebrew word which we Translate unto him, may be an
Elegant redundancy, usual in that Language: Or, if that will not be admitted,
then it must be understood, either of Gods People, to wit, that when there was
no man that did appear for the saving of his People, or to defend them against
those that made a Prey of them, then of his own free Grace, God himself
undertook the Work, and by his Infinite Power, (his Almighty Arm, see the
Notes, Chap. 51.5. and 53.1.) without the assistance or mediation of any Man,
brought Salvation unto his People; and his Righteousness; that is, his Just and
Righteous judging betwixt his People and their unjust Oppressors; it sustained
him, that is, it upheld and preserved his People from being utterly ruined and
destroyed: Or else of God himself, as he is Interested in his People, and as it
was his work to save his wronged and oppressed People; to wit, That his Arm
brought Salvation unto him, and his Righteousness it sustained him; namely, In
that by his Almighty Power, and by his Righteous Judgments he had provided for
the preserving and upholding of his own Cause and People: And indeed this
agrees best with two other places, that seem parallel with this, that Chap.
63.5. And I looked and there was none to help -- therefore mine own Arm brought
Salvation unto me, and my Fury it upheld me; and that Psalm. 98.1. His Right
Hand and his Holy Arm has gotten him the Victory. I know that many Learned
Expositors do understand all this of that great work of Man's Redemption by
Christ; to wit, that God of his own free Grace, did by himself take care for
the saving of his chosen People, when no body else minded it: But rather it is
surely meant of Gods delivering his People the Jews from being destroyed;
though it may well be granted, that as often elsewhere, so here also, under the
deliverance of the Jews from the Babylonian Captivity, the Redemption of Gods
People by Christ, of which that was a Type, is comprehended.

Ver. 17. For he put on Righteousness as a Breast Plate, and an Helmet of
Salvation upon his Head, etc.] The meaning of this is, that God would interpose
himself as an Armed Man for the safe-guarding of his People, and for the
destruction of their Enemies; and that hereby there should be a clear discovery
of his Righteousness; that is, his Faithfulness in making good his promises to
his People, or rather his Justice in judging Righteously between them and their
Enemies, (see the foregoing Note,) and his tender care for the Salvation and
deliverance of his People; this being that which moved him so Gloriously to
appear for the deliverance of his People, and the ruin of their Enemies. And
to the same purpose is the next Clause, and he put on the Garments of Vengeance
for Clothing, and was clad with Zeal as a Cloak; namely, that his Zeal for his
own Glory, and his Indignation for the Oppression of his People should be
clearly seen in the Vengeance which upon this account he would Execute upon
their Enemies.

Ver. 18. According to their Deeds, accordingly he will repay, Fury to his
Adversaries, Recompense to his Enemies, etc.] It is in the Original, According
to Recompenses, etc. And so thereupon, some would have this to be the meaning
of the Words, that according to what God had often formerly done in
recompencing to the Enemies of his People, the Evil which they had done unto
his People, so he would now do again: But taking the Words as they are
Translated in our Bibles, the meaning is clear, that God would in great Fury
avenge himself upon his Peoples Enemies, according to what they had deserved,
or according to the Evil which they had done to his People. And now by these
Adversaries and Enemies may be meant all the Enemies of Gods People the Jews,
both Foreign, the Babylonians and others, and likewise Domestic, the Wicked
Princes, Judges, and others that oppressed their Brethren, especially the
Righteous amongst them; yea, by many Learned Expositors it is held, that
together with the Enemies of the Jews, here more especially intended, not only
all the Enemies of Gods Church in all Ages are comprehended; (which is the more
probable, because of the following Clause, to the Islands he will repay
recompense; that is, to the Enemies of his People in the remotest Parts, and
where they think themselves safest from all danger; See the Note, Chap. 41.1.)
but also their Spiritual Enemies, as with respect to Christ's Victory over them;
which Exposition indeed the following Verses seem much to favor.

Ver. 19. So shall they fear the Name of the Lord from the West, and his Glory
from the rising of the Sun, etc.] That is, By occasion of this Glorious Work of
God, mentioned in the foregoing Verse, in delivering his People, by executing
vengeance upon their Enemies; Men shall fear the Lord, and the Name and Glory
of God shall be renowned throughout the World; See the Note, Psalm. 113.3. And
indeed (as was hinted in the foregoing Note) though this may be meant primarily
of that terror wherewith all the Nations in the World in a manner should be
struck, upon the Destruction which God would bring on the Enemies of the Jews;
yet the words do so clearly seem to intend also that filial fear wherewith,
upon the conversion of the Gentiles, the Church of Christ throughout the whole
World should fear God; that whereas now God was despised by his own People, he
should then be honored by the Nations all the World over; (whence it is also
that in the following words there is a Promise added of Gods aiding them
against their Enemies) that this does much confirm that more general Exposition
given in the foregoing Note, of the revenge which God would bring upon the
Enemies of his People; When the Enemy shall come in like a Flood; that is,
whenever the Devil and his Instruments shall break in upon my Church like a
Flood, (see the Notes, Chap. 8.7, 8.) The Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a
Standard against him, or (as it is in the Margin) put him to flight; that is,
God by his Divine and Almighty Power shall take part with his People, and raise
up Forces against these their Enemies, wherewith he will oppose and vanquish
them: See the Notes, Chap. 5.26. and 11.12. and 49.22. Or, God with a blast of
his Breath only shall cause them to flee; yea, the meaning may be, if we
understand it of the Spiritual Enemies of Gods People, that he would by his
Holy Spirit so assist and strengthen his People, that they should be able to
withstand and overcome these their mighty Adversaries, Ephesians. 6.13.

Ver. 20. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, etc.] That is, God will send one
that shall redeem his People out of their Bondage and Misery: Now, as hereby
the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon was intended, Cyrus was questionless
this Redeemer: But, as this was also intended as a Promise of the Spiritual
Redemption, whereof the other was a Type, Christ was the Redeemer. And that
this was intended, is clear by the Apostles citing this place, (according to
the Translation of the Septuagint) to prove that certainly the Jews should at
last be converted, and made partakers of the Redemption that is by Christ; Romans
11.26, 27. And so (that is, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in,) all
Israel shall be saved; (that is, the generality of the Nation of the Jews) As
it is Written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob; For this is my Covenant unto them, etc. It is, as if
the Apostle had argued thus, The Prophet Isaiah foretold that Christ should
come as a Redeemer to the Church and Nation of the Jews, who as yet do despise
and reject him; and therefore certainly there shall a time come, when the
Nation of the Jews shall embrace Christ as their Redeemer: As for the following
Words, and unto them that turn from Transgression in Jacob, as they are spoken
with respect to the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, they imply both,
that that deliverance should be wrought chiefly for the sake of that little
Remnant amongst them that were reformed by their Captivity, and that it should
be to them only a real Mercy: But as they are spoken with respect to Man's
Redemption by Christ, they plainly show, that none can justly challenge any
Interest therein, but only those that forsakeing their Sins do turn unto the
Lord.

Ver. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, etc.] To
wit, with his People, whom the Redeemer mentioned in the foregoing Verse should
redeem. My Spirit that is upon thee, etc.] That is, say some, upon Christ the
Redeemer. And so they take it as a promise made by God the Father to Christ,
that his Word and Spirit should be for ever continued to his Seed, concerning
whom, See the Note, Chap. 53.10. But I rather conceive that this is spoken
either to the Prophet Isaiah; and then the meaning must be either; 1. That this
which God had now promised by him should be so accomplished, that the memory of
it should be continued unto all Posterity; Or, 2. That the Spirit which God had
put upon him, and that Gospel-promise which he had published, should be
continued to the Prophets and others that should succeed him in the Work of the
public Ministry, even to the end of the World: Or rather to the Church, the
Redeemed ones in his Zion, (to whom God here turns his Speech) My Spirit that
is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in thy Mouth shall not depart out
of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, etc. that is, My Word and
Spirit shall still be with thee, for thine instruction and direction unto the
Worlds end; there shall be always of my Messengers, Prophets, Apostles, and
other Ministers and Teachers, that shall successively Preach my Word faithfully
to you, and my Spirit shall go along with their Ministry to make it work
effectually upon you; so that there shall be still a profession of my Truth
among you. A clear proof, that though Councils may err, yet the true Catholic
Church shall never err.

CHAP. LX.
VERSE. 1. ARISE, etc.] This is spoken to Zion, to whom, Ver. 20. of the
foregoing Chapter, God had promised the Redeemer should come; and consequently,
according to what is there noted, in the Type it is spoken to the Jews in the
Babylonian Captivity; but in the Antitype to the Primitive Church of the Jews;
as is evident, because afterward, Ver. 3. it is said the Gentiles should join
themselves to her. Arise, to wit, (taking it as spoken to the Jews in Babylon)
out of the Dust, that low and sad condition, wherein thou have lain for a long
time; rouse up thy self, and enter into that happy change and advancement which
thy God will now bring thee into; see the Note, Chap. 51.17. Shine, be thou
now, or thou shall be now in a joyful, prosperous, and glorious condition: For
the Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; That is, the
Night of thine Adversity being at an end, the Day of thy Prosperity begins to
dawn, and the Lord is beginning to show forth his Glory, as the Sun does where
it rises, in delivering thee out of thy Captivity, to settle thee again in
thine own Land, or to make thee renowned and glorious. But indeed the
expression here used seems to allude to those Times, when the Glory of the Lord
used to appear upon the Tabernacle and in the Temple. But now under this Type,
the great bliss of the Primitive Church of Christ is here principally intended;
in regard whereof the Church of the Jews is here stirred up to arise and shine,
or, to be enlightened, as it is in the Margin; namely, with respect to that
Spiritual Happiness and Glory, whereto she should be raised from an estate of
Sin and Misery under the Messiah; which is set forth in the following words,
for the Light is come, or, as it is in the Margin, thy Light comes, and the
Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; that is, Christ, Joh. 8.12. long since
promised to them, and in whom they had in many respects a special Interest; Or,
the Gospel which was to succeed in the stead of the abrogated Law, called, the
light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ; 2 Cor. 4.4. Or, that blessed and joyful
estate whereto the Church of the Jews was then advanced.

Ver. 2. For behold the Darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross Darkness the
People, etc] To wit, you the whilst enjoying great and mavelous light, as it
follows in the next words: But the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his Glory
shall be seen upon thee: And this is added, the better to set forth the
greatness of their approaching happiness, that whilst other Nations should be
overwhelmed with thick darkness, as the Egyptians were in Egypt, they should be
as the Israelites that were in Goshen, that had Light in their Dwellings. Now
though this (in the Type) was accomplished, when the Jews were in a lightsome
comfortable condition at their deliverance out of Babylon, the Lord then
appearing graciously amongst them, and shining favorably upon them, and
causing his Glory to be clearly discovered upon them in that their wonderful
deliverance; whilst the Babylonians and other Neighbor Nations were under the
dismal darkness of sore tribulations, being subdued and wasted by Cyrus, who
set them free: Yet questioneless it is principally meant of the happiness of
the Church of the Jews, when Christ should come to them, above all the Nations
of the World besides, in that whilst this Sun of Righteousness; Mal. 4.2.
should arise and shine upon them, and dispel all the Darkness of their
blindness and misery, by the light of the Gospel, whilst all the World besides
should lie in darkness and the shadow of Death.

Ver. 3. And the Gentiles shall come to thy Light, etc.] In the Type this may
be meant of the great respect that should be shown to the Jews in their
wondrous and glorious return out of Babylon by Foreign Nations and Kings; See
the Notes, Chap. 49.6, 7. But with respect of the Antitype, it is principally
doubtless meant of the Conversion of the Gentiles, and their being enlightened
by the Gospel, first Preached amongst the Jews; see the Note, Chap. 2.3. Even
these Nations should be so far from being Enemies to the Jews, as formerly they
had been, that they should join themselves to them, and profess the same Faith,
and be one People with them; and Kings to the brightness of thy rising; that
is, Heathen Kings shall come in to thee, because of the brightness that shall
rise upon thee; or because of thy brightness when thou shall arise in great
Glory from a low condition; see the Note, Chap. 49.23.

Ver. 4. Lift up thine Eyes round about, and see, all they gather themselves
together, they come to thee, etc.] This is spoken to set forth, as by way of
admiration, the Multitude of the Gentiles, mentioned in the foregoing Verse,
that should from all Countries round about come flocking in, and join
themselves to the Primitive Church of the Jews; see the Notes, Chap. 2.3. and
14.1. and 43.5. but especially Chap. 49.22. though they were of several
Nations, and formerly at great enmity amongst themselves, yet should come in
willingly together, and join themselves to be one Church with the Christian
Jews. Some I know understand this of the Jews flocking home from all Countries,
whither they had fled, or were carried Captives. But if this should be intended
in the Type, yet certainly it is chiefly meant of the Conversion of the
Gentiles, as the relation the words have to the foregoing Verse does clearly
show. And so I understand also the following words; Thy Sons shall come from
far, and thy Daughters shall be nursed at thy side; that is, carried in thine
Arms and Bosom; namely, that the Children of the Gentiles should be brought
into the Church of Christ, as their Mother.

Ver. 5. Then thou shall see, etc.] That is, thou shall feed thine Eyes with
this pleasing sight of the Multitude of the Gentiles that shall come in to
thee, (it is spoken with reference to that in the foregoing Verse, Lift up
thine Eyes round about, and see) and flow together, that is, flock together to
behold such a joyful sight; and thine Heart shall fear; to wit, with
admiration, at the unexpectedness of the thing done, and the consideration of
the High and Glorious Estate, whereto God had suddenly raised them, especially
by the access of the Gentiles. And indeed wonderful and unexpected joys do
usually work a kind of fear and trembling of Heart in Men; see Genesis 45.26, 27.
Whence is that they shall fear and tremble for all the Goodness, and for all
the Prosperity, that I procure unto it. Jer. 33.9. And therefore are these here
joined together, and thine Heart shall fear and be enlarged; to wit, with joy;
See the Note, Psalm. 119.32. And indeed though the believing Jews did at first
grudge at the admitting of the Gentiles into the Church, before they understood
the will of God herein, yet afterward they did greatly rejoice in it; see Acts
10.45. and 11.18. Because the abundance of the Sea, etc. It is in the Margin,
because the noise of the Sea shall be turned toward thee; that is, a Multitude
of People shall come in like a Sea upon thee. But reading it, as it is in our
Bibles: Because the abundance of the Sea shall be Converted unto thee; the
meaning is, that the Church of the Christian Jews should be affected, as is
before said, because such Multitudes of Foreign Nations should embrace their
Religion, and be kindly affected to them, whom they hated before, bountifully
imparting of their Riches for the service of Christ, and his Church and People:
The Forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee; that is, whole Armies or
Troops of them shall come in to thee: This also (in the Type) many understand
of the forwardness of the Nations to help the Jews at their return out of
Babylon; and some would have the meaning to be, that Judea should become a
great Mart for Merchants by Sea: But the foregoing Exposition does most clearly
suit with the whole current of this Prophecy.

Ver. 6. The multitude of Camels shall cover thee, etc.] That is, thy Land; the
Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; that is, the Midianites (for Ephah was also of
the Posterity of Midian, Genesis 25.4.) who inhabited Arabia; see the Note, Genesis
37.28. The meaning is, that the Converted Gentiles should honor the Lord with
their Substance, and Consecrate themselves, and all that they had, to the
Service of Christ and his Church. And accordingly the several Nations are here
said to bring in those things, that were the choicest Commodities of their
several Countries. The meaning here cannot be, that these Midianites, Embracing
the Faith of Christ, should ride to Jerusalem upon Camels and Dromedaries, but
because in those Eastern Countries, they used to ride and to carry great
Burdens of Wares upon this kind of Cattle, and because in those days Men used
not to come empty handed to the House of God, therefore the Coming in of the
Gentiles, their submitting themselves, and all they had to the Lords disposing,
and their contributing of their Wealth in abundance, to the Church of Christ,
is thus figuratively expressed, that the Land of Gods People should be covered
with their Camels and Dromedaries. And to the same purpose is that which
follows, all they from Sheba shall come; see the Note, Psalm. 72.10. They shall
bring Gold and Incense; that is, they shall also Consecrate their Wealth to the
Lord; yea, and some would have it, that under these, Figuratively, the
dedicating of their Learning, and Eloquence, their Arts and Sciences to the
service of Christ and his Church, is also comprehended; and they shall show
forth the praises of the Lord; that is, they shall worship God. And indeed,
this last clause shows plainly, that the mention made in the foregoing Words
of their bringing Gold and Incense with them, was not with respect to Trading,
as some have thought, but with respect to the worship and service of God.

Ver. 7. All the Flocks of Kedar, shall be gathered together unto thee: The
Rams of Nebaioth shall Minister unto thee, etc.] Because the Kedarens and
Nabathaeans, Ishmaelites of the Posterity of Kedar and Nebaioth, dwelling in
Arabia, abounded in Flocks of Sheep, therefore it is said, that from them
multitudes of these shall be brought in to Gods People. And though (in the
Type) this again may be meant of these Nations, supplying the Jews that were
come out of Babylon, abundantly with Cattle for Sacrifices: But certainly it is
principally meant of the Converted Gentiles; and accordingly we must understand
it, either that they should zealously promote the Church of Christ, and the
worship of God therein, by contributing abundantly of their Substance thereto,
or that they should offer up Spiritual Sacrifices unto God: for it is usual
with the Prophets in speaking to the Jews, to set forth the Worship of the
Gospel under Figurative terms taken from their Legal Service; they shall come
up with acceptance upon mine Altar; that is, their Services shall be as
Sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ; and I will glorify the house
of my Glory; that is, in the Type, his glorious House, the Temple built for his
Glory, and wherein he had appeared often with great Glory, now trodden down by
the Gentiles, but to be raised up again gloriously at the Jews return from
Babylon: or rather, the Church of Christ; the House of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. which
God did many ways Glorify; but the access of the Gentiles is principally here
intended; see the Note, ver. 9.

Ver. 8. Who are these, etc.] The Prophet (some think, in the name of the
Church, who above, ver. 4. in this regard, was called upon to lift up her Eyes,
and look about) breaks forth here into an admiration at the multitudes of those
that should come flocking into Zion. And though some understand it of the Jews
returning to their own Country, at their deliverance out of Babylon, as they do
a like expression, Chap. 49.21. (of which see the Note there) yet indeed the
very words seem to hint, that he speaks of the Gentiles coming in to the
Christian Church of the Jews, because he speaks of them, as a People unknown,
such as were Aliens and Strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel: Who are
these that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their Windows? that is, the
Lockers, where they make their several Nests, and breed their Young ones; or
rather the loover-holes in the Turrets or tops of the Dove-house, whereby they
fly into it. Now the coming in of the Gentiles to the Church may be compared to
the flying of a Cloud, to imply their coming in from remote Countries, because
Clouds do many times arise in the farthest parts of the Sky; and to the flying
in of Doves to their windows, because as Doves do usually fly home, when they
see a storm coming, or are in danger of some Bird of prey, so it should be the
fear of wrath to come, that should bring in the Gentiles to the Church, as to a
place of refuge and safety. But questionless, the main intent of both
Similitudes, is to set forth with what eagerness, cheerfulness, and speed, (see
the Note, Chap. 19.1.) and likewise, in what multitudes they should come in,
like a huge flight of Doves, that cover the Air like a Cloud, or like a Cloud
that sometimes will spread and cover the whole face of the Heavens.

Ver. 9. Surely the Isles, etc.] That is, such as dwell in remote Islands, or
elsewhere on the Seacoast; see the Note, Chap. 41.1. This seems to be spoken
in the Person of God, or Christ, in answer to the wonder of the Prophet, or
Church, in the foregoing Verse; Surely the Isles wait for me; that is, being
convinced of the danger of their natural condition, by the Preaching of the
Gospel, they shall earnestly long to be brought home, and reconciled with me;
and therefore it is no wonder, though they come in flocking to me. But see the
Notes also, Chap. 42.4. and 51.5. and the Ships of Tarshish (see the Notes, 1
Kings 10.22. and Psalm. 48.7.) first; that is, the Men of Tarshish, famous above
others for Shipping and Navigation, shall be of the first and forwardest, that
shall be ready to come in to me, and serve me; to bring thy Sons from far; that
is, thy Children, O my Church; see the Notes above, ver. 4. and Chap. 49.22.
their Silver and their Gold with them; see the Note above, ver. 6. unto the
name of the Lord thy God; that is, to be consecrated to God, or for the Service
of his Church, or Temple; see the Note, Deuteronomy. 12.4. and to the Holy one of
Israel; see the Note, Chap. 12.6. because he has glorified thee; to wit, by
the great things he has done for thee, and particularly by enlarging thy
Church by the access of the Gentiles; But see the Notes before, ver. 5, 6, 7.

Ver. 10. And the Sons of Strangers shall build up thy Walls, etc.] This in the
type was accomplished, when at the Jews return from Babylon, the foreign
Nations did afford them Free-will-offerings toward the building of their City
Jerusalem and the Temple, being encouraged thereunto, by the Proclamation of
Cyrus* see the Note, Ezra 1.4. (notwithstanding the opposition that was made
against them herein, by the Samaritans at their return home; yet thus far by
the help afforded them by strangers this Prophecy was fulfilled) and likewise
when the Proselytes of other Nations returning with them, did join with them in
repairing both their City and Temple; and the like may be said of the following
words, and their Kings shall minister unto thee; that was accomplished in the
favor afforded the Jews by Cyrus, and some of his Successors. But now in the
Antitype this was clearly fulfilled, when God raised up, even amongst the
Gentiles, Learned Men, that by their preaching and writing, and Princes that by
their bounty and favor, should much promote the Edification of the Church, and
advance her strength and glory; see the Note, Chap. 49.23. for in my wroth I
smote thee, but in my favor have I had mercy on thee. This was spoken of the
Jewish Church, whom for their sins God did often sorely afflict for a time, but
afterward of his Free Grace showed favor to them, both in their deliverance
out of Babylon, and in that greater Mercy of their Redemption by Christ.

Ver. 11. Therefore thy Gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut
day nor night, etc.] To wit, that the Gentiles may from every side come in and
join themselves in one Church with thee; (none being excluded that shall in a
right manner tender themselves) and that they may, by night as well as by day,
bring in their Wealth to thee. And indeed that this is intended, appears by the
following words, which are added to explain that which went before; that men
may bring unto thee the forces (or wealth) of the Gentiles; see the Note above,
ver. 5. and that their Kings may be brought; that is, that not only the common
sort of People, but even their Kings also, who are usually fierce, and not
easily won this way; or that, to do any thing contrary to their own Wills, may
be brought in to thee, to stoop to the Gospel and Scepter of Christ: And indeed
the word here used in the Original may be understood, either of their being
brought in to the Church in the State, and with the attendance of Kings; or of
their being brought in as Captives, subdued by the Preaching of the Gospel, to
stoop to the yoke of Christ; see the Note, Psalm. 149.8. Even this also indeed
some understand of the Type: As namely, that it is said that the Gates of
Jerusalem should stand open continually, etc. to imply the great confluence of
the Nations round about thither, upon the Jews return thither from Babylon, and
of the readiness both of the People and their Kings, to contribute liberally to
their help. But we may easily see how much more clearly this suits with the
coming in of the Gentiles, upon the Preaching of the Gospel. And as for the
Evangelist St. John's citing this place, Rev. 21.25. to set forth the peace of
the Church triumphant in Heaven, the ground of that is only, because the
Apostle knew that the Prophet speaks here of that Glory of the Church of
Christ, which shall be perfected in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ver. 12. For the Nation, etc.] As if he had said, nor shall these thy open
Gates endanger thee, by letting in thine Enemies upon thee; for the Nation and
Kingdom, that will not serve thee; that is, all People that will not submit to
the Gospel and Scepter of Christ, erected in thee; shall perish, etc. that is,
shall everlastingly perish. Nor can this indeed be any way well understood of
the Church of the Jews returning out of Babylon, but with respect to what she
should come afterward to be in the days of the Gospel.

Ver. 13. The Glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, etc.] That is, that all
Cedars, and other goodly Trees, which make Lebanon look so Gloriously, shall be
brought in to thee; the Firre-tree, and the Pine Tree, and the Box together;
see Chap. 41.19. to beautify the place of my Sanctuary; to wit, the Temple at
Jerusalem; see Ezra. 7.27. and I will make the place of my Feet glorious; that
is, my Footstool, my Temple, as is before said; for though the Ark is in some
places more especially called Gods Footstool; for which see the Notes, 1 Chronicles. 28.2. and Psalm. 99.5. yet the Temple is elsewhere also called Gods
Footstool, as in Lam. 2.1. where the destruction of the Temple is thus set
forth; That the Lord remembered not his Footstool in the day of his anger; and
so likewise, Ezekiel. 43.7. So that in the Type, the rebuilding and beautifying of
the Temple, after their return from Babylon, is clearly here meant; see Ezra
3.7. But in the Antitype, it is certainly meant of the edifying of the Church
of Christ, his Spiritual Temple and Footstool, his settled dewlling place; and
God here promises a continual supply of whatever might tend to the
strengthening and adorning of it.

Ver. 14. The Sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto
thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of
thy Feet, etc.] Though there was some dark shadow of the accomplishment of this
in the great respect and honor, which was yielded to the Jews after their
return from Babylon, by many Nations with their Kings, that had formerly been
their bitter Enemies; yet the full and clear accomplishment of it was in the
great honor which the Gentiles and their Kings should yield to Christ and his
Church; see the Note, Chap. 49.23. and they shall call thee the City of the
Lord, etc. that is, they shall own the special interest which thou have in God,
being convinced by his appearing so wonderfully for thee.

Ver. 15. Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so that no man went
through thee, etc.] That is, disregarded and in a desolate condtion; see the
Notes, Chap. 3.26. and 3.11, 12. I will make thee an eternal excellency; or, a
lasting excellency; that is, I will bring thee into a most excellent and
glorious estate; and this, I conceive, must be understood of the Jewish Church,
from the time of her deliverance out of Babylon, till she came to be made
glorious by becoming the Spouse of Christ, and so on forward unto the end of
Christ's Kingdom. It is meant of the Spiritual excellency of the Church here,
and of her incomprehensible Glory in Heaven hereafter. And are to the same
purpose, the following Words, a joy of many Generations; namely, that the
exceeding happiness of the Church, should be the joy of Gods People, from
generation to generation.

Ver. 16. Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the
Breast of Kings, etc.] That is, the Heathens, with their Kings, that before
sought to devour thee, shall then with much tender love, nourish and support
and defend thee; see the the Note, Chap 49.23. As likewise for the following
Clause, And thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior and thy Redeemer,
the mighty one of Jacob. And see also the Note, Psalm. 132.2.

Ver. 17. For Brass I will bring Gold, and for Iron I will bring Silver, and
for Wood Brass, and for Stones Iron, etc.] That is, thou shall be brought into
a far more happy excellent and glorious condition, than ever thou enjoyedst
formerly; we cannot say that this was so with the Church of the Jews that
returned out of Babylon; and therefore it must be extended to this Church, when
she became Christian; when her condition was indeed transcendently bettered,
because then instead of Carnal Ceremonies, they had more Noble Spiritual
Ordinances, whereby Remission of Sins, Adoption, Sanctification and Life
Eternal, were tendered and conveyed to them, and because these the gifts of the
Holy Ghost should be more abundantly than ever, and in a more glorious manner
poured forth upon them; I will make thy Officers Peace, and thine Exacters
Righteousness; That is, whereas in former days thou were disturbed and
oppressed by thy Governors and their Officers; or, whereas in Babylon thou
were miserably crushed by cruel Taskmasters, then thou shall have such
Righteous Rulers and Officers, that thou shall live Peaceably and Comfortably
under them. And this was partyl accomplished in those just and peaceable
Governors, that God set over them after their return out of Babylon, Ezra,
Nehemiah, and others, that did indeed solely study and seek the Prosperity and
Welfare of the Nation. But especially I conceive it is meant of those Church
Officers and Rulers in the days of the Gospel, that should pacify the
Consciences of Men, by Preaching Peace and Righteousness to them through Jesus
Christ, and of those Christian-Magistrates, that should Govern the Church with
great Justice and Peace; see the Note, Chap. ^.26.

Ver. 18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting nor destruction
within thy Borders:] Having foretold in the foregoing Verse, how justly and
peaceably their Governors should Rule over them, this is added as the effect
hereof; to wit, that there should not any more be heard in their Land the
Outcries and Complaints of the poor People, either because of the Violence and
Oppression of their Rulers, or because of the wasting of their Land, by
Foreign Enemies breaking in upon them. But now if this be understood of the
Land of Judea after their return out of Babylon, it must be taken as spoken
Comparatively, that there should be no more such complaint of their
oppressions, as was at present amongst them, or as was when Jerusalem was
besieged and destroyed, or as when they were Captives in Babylon: Yea if we
understand it (as I conceive it is principally intended) of the Church of
Christ, either it must be understood of such a violence and destruction,
whereby the Church should be utterly Ruined and Destroyed; which all the powers
of Hell shall never be able to effect: Or else it must be extended to the
perfect Peace and Safety of the Church Triumphant in Heaven; (which seems the
more probable, because of that which is added in the following Verses) for
indeed, though the Gospel teaches Christians Peace and Righteousness, yet it
cannot be denied, but that there is too much Violence and Oppression amongst
them. And besides it is evident, that Enemies do often break in upon them,
waste and destroy them.

But thou shall call thy Walls Salvation, and thy Gates Praise.] The meaning
is, that the Walls and Gates of Jerusalem, should through the Blessing of God,
be a means of sure preservation to them, and give them occasion of frequent
blessing God in their Gates; see the Note, Psalm. 4.14. though some would have
it, that Praise is promised in their Gates, to imply, that the Justice
administered in their Gates, should be the great cause of their praising God.
And the Words may also be understood, as if they had been expressed thus, that
Gods Salvation should be instead of Walls and Gates to them, and should yield
them continual occasion of praising God. But for this see the Notes, Chap. 26.1.

Ver. 19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness
shall the Moon give Light unto thee, etc.] It cannot be thought that the People
of God should ever here in this World live without the Light of the Sun and
Moon; but the meaning is, that they should have a Light so transcendently
greater and more lightsom than those, that Comparatively they should not mind,
nor esteem them; namely, the Light of Gods gracious favor shining into their
hearts in and through the Lord Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, who should
enlighten their Minds with the knowledge of his Grace, by his Word and Spirit,
and thereby fill their heart with exceeding great Joy. And so we find this
explained in the following Words; but the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting Light; where also in those Words, an everlasting Light; that
transcendent excellency of this Light is hinted (which is more fully set forth
in the following Verse) to wit, that this Light should constantly and
continually shine upon them, without any variation or change, until they were
brought at last to the Eternal enjoyment of his Presence in Heavenly Glory. And
indeed many there are that hold, that of this last, the Glorious and Beatifical
presence of God which the Saints shall enjoy in the Life that it to come, this
place is principally, if not solely, to be understood; when they shall need no
outward ordinary means for their Joy and Bliss, but God shall be all in all to
them. But see the Notes also, Chap. 24.23. And thy God thy Glory; that is,
thine Interest in this great and glorious God through Jesus Christ, and the
great things he shall do for thee, shall be a great honor to thee.

Ver. 20. Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it
self, etc.] As if he had said, whereas men do not always constantly enjoy the
light of the Sun and Moon, because when they have shined their appointed time,
they Set again, and are hidden under the Earth; thy Sun and thy Moon, the Light
promised in the foregoing Verse, transcendently surpassing the Light of the Sun
and Moon, shall shine upon thee perpetually without any vicissitude and
interruption, it shall never be withdrawn, but shall be thy Light, by Night as
well as by Day, in the darkness of Adversity, as well as in Prosperity; yea in
Heaven unto all Eternity.

Ver. 21. Thy People also shall be all righteous, etc.] That is, those that are
truly such, true Members of the Church, even all of them, whether Jews or
Gentiles, shall be righteous; to wit, perfectly, by the imputed righteousness
of Christ; and really also, by inherent righteousness wrought in them, which
shall be perfected in Heaven. But see the Notes also, Chap. 4.3. and 59.20.
they shall inherit the Land for ever; that is, as it has respect to the Jews
returning from Babylon, they shall possess the Land of Canaan again for many
Generations; see the Note, Psalm. 37.18. Lest that poor Remnant that were
brought back from thence should fear, that they should presently be driven out
again, therefore is this promise added. But now as this is spoken with respect
to the Church of Christ, the meaning of this Inheriting the Land for ever must
needs be, that they should for ever continue in the World, as Gods peculiar
Church and People, the new World (say our Divines in their large Annotations)
by Christ renewed and restored in a special manner here, in full perfection
hereafter; whereof Gods giving Canaan to the Israelites for their peculiar
Inheritance, that they might therein abide by themselves, separated from all
the World, was a notable Type. As for the following Words, the Branch of my
planting, the Work of mine hands, that I may be glorified; they are added, as a
reason why those things must needs be so which he had here foretold concerning
Gods People, namely, because a Graft planted by the great God must needs thrive
and prosper; the rather, because of the great delight he must needs take in
them, even as Men are wont highly to esteem those Trees that are of their own
planting, and especially because his aim in planting them was, that they might
be to his glory. But see the Note, Chap. 29.23.

Ver. 22. A little One shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
Nation, etc.] This is a prediction of the miraculous multiplication of Gods
People; to wit, that it should be such, that one Man that had but a little
small Family should have such a numerous Posterity, that his Family should in a
short time become like a great Nation. And this may be understood as spoken, in
the Type, of the Jews that should return from Babylon, that though they were
but a small Remnant to speak of, yet they should soon become again a very
numerous People; yet I conceive it is principally meant, in the Antitype of the
Church of Christ, that though that was very little at first, yet it should
suddenly increase, even to admiration. And so indeed it was; see the Note,
Psalm. 110.3. The Apostles were but a few: Yet how soon had they spread the
Gospel to the utmost parts of the Earth? One Peter, by one Sermon, won three
thousand to the Christian Faith, Acts 2.41. And the Apostle Paul, that terms
himself, the least of the Apostles, how many Churches were planted by him
alone, even in remote Countries. Some would have the first branch understood of
a few growing to great multitudes; A little one shall become a thousand; and
then the second branch; and a small one a strong nation, of Men of mean
condition growing up to be potent and mighty Men. But I rather think, that in
both branches the same thing is intended; for the word rendered strong, is
sometimes used for numerous; see the Note, Chap. 16.14. Again, some would have
the Spiritual sense of these expressions to be, that Men even of mean parts,
and small gifts of grace, should bring in multitudes to believe in Christ. But
the first Exposition seems to me the clearest; I the Lord will hasten it in his
time; that is, however impossible this may seem to be, yet when the time comes,
that is appointed for the doing of it; I the Lord, who have all things under my
command, will not defer it, but speedily dispatch it.

CHAP. LXI.
VERSE 1. THE Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, etc. It is clear that the
Prophet Isaiah does in express terms speak this of himself. That the People
might with the more confidence believe what he had said to them, he assures
them, that God had endued him with the Spirit of Prophecy, and had sent him to
foretell their deliverance out of Babylon, for the comfort of his poor People,
when they should be there in great affliction and misery. The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me; that is, he has poured forth the Spirit of Prophecy upon
me, by the enabling whereof I speak; because the Lord has anointed me; that
is, consecrated and set me apart to be his Prophet, and accordingly fitted me
with gifts suitable thereto, whereof the anointing of Kings, Priests, and
Prophets of old was a sign; see the Notes, 1 Kings 19.15. to preach good
tidings unto the meek; that is, the tidings of their deliverance out of
Babylon; he has sent me to bind up (that is, to heal; see the Note, Psalm.
147.3.) the brokenhearted; that is, the poor brokenhearted Captives in
Babylon. And so we must likewise understand all that follows, to proclaim
liberty to the Captives, etc. Well, but now as clear it is also, that the
Prophet speaks this likewise as in the Person of Christ, of whom he was a Type;
and that because in the first Sermon our Savior preached at Nazareth, having
read this Text out of Isaiah, he told his Hearers, that the Prophet spoke those
words of him, Luke 4.21. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. And
of him therefore principally this place must be understood. The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me; for which see the Note, Chap. 11.2. because the Lord has
anointed me; that is, set me apart to the office of the Mediator, and
abundantly fitted me for it, by the pouring forth of the gifts of his Spirit
upon me, whereof the anointing of Kings, Priests, and Prophets was an outward
sign. But for this see the Note also, Psalm. 45.7. to Preach good tidings unto
the Meek; or, as it is cited, Luke 4.18. out of the Septuagint (and they or
both one and the same in effect) to Preach the Gospel to the Poor; that is, to
Men poor in Spirit, meekned and humbled with the sight and sense of their Sins,
and the Miseries they were obnoxious to by reason of their Sins; he has sent
me to bind up the broken hearted; that is, to heal them, as it is expressed,
Luke 4.18. To wit, by comforting them with the glad tidings of the Gospel, to
proclaim liberty to the Captives; See the Note, Chap. 42.7. And the opening of
the Prison to them that are bound; which last Clause seems to be rendered in
Luke 4.18. and recovering of sight to the Blind; the reason whereof Expositors
usually say, is, because Men set free out of dark Prisons have as it were their
Eyes opened thereby. But see the Notes, Chap. 42.7. and 49.9. Yea there is one
Clause more in that place of Luke, where our Savior is said to have read this
Text out of Isaiah, which is not here; to set at liberty them that are bruised;
of which therefore some say, that it had been added in the Margin of the
Septuagint, by way of explaining the foregoing words, and so was read also by
our Savior.

Ver. 2. To proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord, etc.] That is, the set
time, when God would accept of his People into his favor again, which though
it might be intended of the time appointed for the deliverance of his People
out of Babylon; yet questionless it is principally meant of that set time,
appointed by God (the Apostle calls it the fullness of time; Gal. 4 4.) Wherein
God was pleased of his own free Grace, upon satisfaction made by Christ, to
tender unto poor Sinners forgiveness of Sins and full Reconciliation with
himself, by the Preaching of the Gospel, which is indeed a time welcome and
acceptable unto those poor Souls, that lay groaning under a heavy burden of
Sin; 1 Timothy 1.15. and Romans 10.15. See the Note, Chap. 49.8. It is probable that
in the words there is an allusion to the year of Jubilee, which was a Type of
the Days of the Gospel; for which see the Notes, Lev. 25.10. etc. And the day
of Vengeance of our God; that is, the time when our God will take vengeance on
the Babylonians, the Enemies of his people; or Mystically when Christ will
destroy the Spiritual Enemies of his People, Satan, Sin, and Death, and so
rescue his PeoPle out of their Bondage; See the Notes, Chap. 59.17, 18. Yet
some understand it of the day of Judgment, when God will cast all the Enemies
of his Church, together with Satan, into Eternal Damnation: To comfort all that
Mourn; to wit, with the glad tidings formerly mentioned: And to the same
purpose are all the several Expressions added in the following Verse.

Ver. 3. To appoint unto them that Mourn in Zion, to give unto them Beauty for
Ashes etc.] That is, goodly and beautiful Garments instead of Ashes, wherein
they sat, and wherewith they sprinkled themselves in Times of Sorrow; See the
Note, Chap. 58.5. The Oil of Joy for Mourning; See the Note, Psalm. 45.7. and
104.15. The Garment of Praise for the Spirit of heaviness; that is, such
Garments as Men are wont to praise for their Beauty and Bravery, or such
Garments as Men are wont to wear on Festivals and times of Triumph, when thy
meet together to praise God for some great Mercies; that they might be called
Trees of Righteousness; that is, that those that were as Trees cut down to the
ground or spiritually dead, might sprout up again and flourish, and both be,
and be esteemed a Righteous People; The planting of the Lord, that he might be
Glorified; See the Note, Chap. 60.21.

Ver. 4. And they shall Build the old wastes, etc.] See the Notes, Chap. 58.12.
and 60 10.

Ver. 5. And Strangers shall stand and feed your Flocks, etc.] that is, you
shall be in such a prosperous condition, that the Heathens, whether taken in
War, or bought, or hired by you, shall cheerfully and readily serve you even in
the meanest and most servile Employments; and see also the Notes, Chap. 14.1,
2. But now as this is spoken with respect to the Days of the Gospel; many
Learned Expositors understand it thus, that even from amongst the Gentiles many
should be raised up that should be Teachers in the Church of Christ.

Ver. 6. But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, Men shall call you the
Ministers of our God, etc.] Some (I conceive without any just ground) would
have this understood particularly of the Priests and Levites, thus, that they
should be no more despised and abused, as they had been in Babylon (it is like,
above the other Captives) but that they should be highly esteemed amongst the
People, as the Priests of the Lord, and the Ministers and Servants of God; for
questionless the Prophet speaks here, as before to the whole people of the
Jews, and accordingly the intent of the words is to show them, that however
basely they had been used and esteemed in Babylon; yet, 1. When God delivered
them from thence, they should be honored abroad, and in as great repute, as if
they had been all Priests, a Holy People consecrated to Gods Service, and in
special favor with God; See the Notes, Exodus 19.6. And, 2. When they came to
Embrace Christ in the Days of the Gospel, they should be advanced to be Priests
unto God in a more peculiar and Spiritual manner, as it is said, Revel. 1.6.
That Christ has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, even to
offer up Spiritual Sacrifices to him; see Romans 12.1. and 15.16. Heb. 13.15. and
1 Pet. 2.5. Ye shall eat the Riches of the Gentiles; See the Notes, Chap. 60.5,
6, 7.1.16. and 45.15. And in their Glory shall ye boast your selves; that is,
in their Riches, and all that shall be Glorious amongst them, their Learning,
Eloquence, Gifts, and Graces; and in a word, in all the Glory which from them
shall redound to you: But see also the Notes, Chap. 49.18. and 60.9.

Ver. 7. For your shame you shall have double, etc.] That is, (as it is spoken
to the Jews, with respect to their Captivity in Babylon) for the shame you
underwent in the Land of your Captivity, ye shall have double Glory; that is,
abundant Glory; see the Note, Chap. 40.2. (For this seems to be added with
reference to the last Clause of the foregoing Verse; And in their glory shall
ye boast your selves) or a double portion for the Damages and Losses ye had
formerly sustained. And thus some conceive that the following words are added
by way of explaining these; and for confusion they; that is the Jews (the
person is changed as often, elsewhere in this Prophet) for the reproach they
underwent, shall rejoice in their Portion; that is, in their returning to, and
possessing again that Land, which God had of old given them for their Portion
and Inheritance; therefore in their Land they shall possess the double; that
is, double Glory, as is before said, or a double Portion in the Land; to wit,
in regard of the extraordinary Blessing of God upon that which they enjoyed; or
in regard of the large extent of each ones Portion, in comparison of what they
formerly held; because there was but only a small Remnant of them that
returned, a Tenth of them only, Chap. 6.13. the greatest part of them being
wasted and destroyed, partly by the Sword and Famine in their own Land, before
they were carried away Captives, and partly in their Captivity; by reason
whereof they that returned had the First-borns Portion, a double Portion;
Everlasting joy shall be unto them; See the Note, Chap. 35.10. Well, but now
there was but only a beginning of the performance of this promise in the
deliverance of Gods People out of Babylon, and their return home into their own
Country; the perfect accomplishment of it was under Christ in the Days of the
Gospel, partly in this World, but chiefly in Heaven: Referring it therefore to
the Jews when they became the Church of Christ, we must thus understand this
place; For your shame ye shall have double; that is, for the shame you have
undergone amongst your Enemies (whether the Babylonians, or those that shall
hate and despise you, both of the Jews and Gentiles, for your profession of
Christianity and Preaching of the Gospel; 1. Cor. 1.2, 3) You shall be
abundantly recompensed, your Honor and Bliss shall be double to what your
Shame and Misery was, and that particularly by the access of the Gentiles, and
the great Riches and Glory which they shall bring in to you, of which the
Prophet had before spoken: And for confusion they; that is, my People; shall
rejoice in their Portion; that is, in God, say some, who is the Portion of his
people; or in the bringing in of the Gentiles to be one Church and People with
them, say others; but I conceive it is generally meant of that abundant double
Honor and Bliss, which they should enjoy instead of their former Shame and
Misery, in and through the Lord Christ, partly in this World, and especially in
Heaven; for under this the foregoing particulars, and any other that can be
added, may be comprehended: Therefore in their Land, that is, in the Land of
Israel, where the glad Tidings of Christ should be Preached first amongst them,
and embraced by them; or, in the Land of the Gentiles, that did formerly
reproach and despise them, the several Countries where the Gentiles shall
embrace the Faith, and join themselves to the Church of Christ; or in the
Earth, which is indeed only the Inheritance of Believers; see the Notes, Psalm.
37.9.29. Or, in Heaven, say some, they shall possess the double; that is, the
double Portion before promised them; Everlasting joy shall be unto them; that
is, not momentary Joy, as is the Joy of the wicked, but a lasting Joy, begun
here in the joy of their Salvation and Eternal in Heaven.

Ver. 8. For I the Lord love Judgment, etc.] All the difficulty in this Verse
is to find out how it comes in, here in this place: Some take the words to be
added, as a reason of the foregoing Promises made to his People, thus, For I
the Lord love judgment, I hate Robbery for Burnt-Offering; that is, I so love
equal, just, and upright dealing, that though Men should being that which they
have gotten by Robbery and Oppression, and tender it to me in Sacrifices and
Offerings, I should loath and abhor them; and I will direct their work in
truth; that is, and therefore I will faithfully and constantly reward my
People, (for the word here rendered Work is often used for a Recompense, or
Reward; See Chap, 40.10. Or, I will order all their Affairs so that they shall
go on in a prosperous and successful way. The drift of the words, they say, is
this; that seeing he loved just, and hated all unjust dealing, he could not
with Equity do otherwise but reward and prosper his faithful People; to wit, 1.
Those of the Jews in Babylon, that had under so long and grievous Sufferings
continued faithful to him, and upright in his Service; Or, 2. Those of the
Gentiles, that should so willingly offer themselves, and all that they had to
his Service. But then again others (I think most probably) hold that there is
in these words a promise of a further Mercy, that God would confer upon his
People; namely, that God would make them upright and sincere in his Service:
The ground of this promise is laid down in the first words; For I the Lord love
Judgment, I hate Robbery for Burnt-Offering; that is, I love that which is just
and right, and consequently I hate all Hypocrisy and false dealing in my
Worship and Service, such as is now too usual amongst my People, that make
nothing of Rapine and Robbery, so that they can cover it over with a show of
Devotion in my Service, and bring of that which they have thus wickedly gotten,
and offer it in Sacrifice upon mine Altar: And then they say, the promise
follows, made to his Redeemed People, of whom he had hitherto spoken; And I
will direct their work in Truth; that is, I will make them upright and sincere
in my Worship, and in their whole Conversation; they shall not be as it is now,
a wicked People, and then think to cloak that, with making a show of Piety in
bringing Offerings to mine Altar: And indeed observable it is, that under this
promise there may be a hint given to Gods People, how they ought to be
qualified, to make them capable of the Mercies here promised them: And I will
make an Everlasting Covenant with them; see the Note, Chap. 55.3.

Ver. 9. And their Seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their Offspring
among the People, etc.] That is, The Posterity of my Church and People shall be
known, and be renowned and conspicuous among the several Nations of the
Gentiles. The drift therefore of these words is to show, that though in the
Babylonian Captivity, the Church and People should be brought to a very low
Ebb, yet they should be multiplied, and be renowned all the World over; to wit,
when the Gentiles should be won to join themselves to the Church of Christ, for
though this promise concerning their being, known among the Gentiles, etc.
began to be accomplished at the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon; see the
Note, Psalm. 126.2. yet its full accomplishment was at the Calling of the
Gentiles; when indeed those that professed the Faith of Christ, were, partly
for their Holy and Righteous Conversation, and partly for the great things that
God did for them, highly esteemed and owned to be Gods peculiar People; all
that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the Seed which the Lord has
blessed; see the Note, Chap. 44.3.

Ver. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall be joyful in my
God, etc.] The Church is here brought in triumphing and rejoicing in the
Goodness of God to them, upon the Accomplishment of those great Mercies
promised in the foregoing Verses; to wit, their deliverance out of Babylon, and
their Redemption by Christ; see the Note, Psalm. 34.2. For he has Clothed me
with the Garments of Salvation; That is, with Salvation, as with a Garment; by
the great Redemption and Salvation he has wrought for me, he has made me as
Glorious in the Eyes of those that behold me, as if I were Clothed with the
most Gorgeous and Glorious Apparel; and to the same purpose are the following
words; He has covered me with the Robe of Righteousness; for by Righteousness
here nothing else is meant, but the discovery of Gods Goodness and Faithfulness
in the Work of their Salvation; which indeed tended much to their Glory; see
the Note, Chap. 51.6. Only now, as we intend it to that great work of our
Salvation by Christ, begun here, but perfected in Heaven, it may be
particularly applied to that Evangelical Righteousness wherewith Christians may
be truly said to be Clothed; for which see the Note, Chap. 60.21. This I
conceive is the true meaning of this place; yet I know there are some that
would have nothing else intended thereby, but only this, that God had changed
their Captive Garments into the joyful Attire of those that are delivered out
of Captivity.

Ver. 11. For as the Earth brings forth her Bud, and as the Garden causes
the things that are sown in it to Spring forth, etc.] To wit, when the Winter
is gone and the Spring is come; So the Lord God will cause Righteousness and
Praise to Spring forth before all the Nations; that is, so, though God may hide
himself from his People for a time, yet when he begins to let the light of his
Countenance shine forth favorably upon them again, he will cause your Land in
the sight of all Nations to abound with Righteousness and Praise; that is, with
the discovery of his Goodness and Faithfulness to you, and the Praise that
shall thereupon be given to him; as if these things did grow and spring up
every where out of the Earth; see the like expression; Psalm. 72.3. and 85.11.
The Land shall be covered with Righteousness and Praise, as the Earth is with
the Fruits that grow up in the Spring time. But see also the foregoing Note.
The drift doubtless of these Expressions is to show, that how impossible and
incredible soever these things might seem, which the Prophet had promised, ^
yet that Almighty God that caused the Earth yearly to yield her Fruit, would
likewise effect this great Change of which he had spoken.

CHAP. LXII.
VERSE. 1. FOR Zions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I
will not rest, etc.] The Prophet here professes, that out of love and tender
respect to Zion, and Gods Church and People, and out of zeal for their good,
their comfort and encouragement, he would not give over publishing those glad
tidings, which he had already declared to them; to wit, concerning their
deliverance out of Babylon, and their Redemption by Christ, and praying to God
for the accomplishment of them; though he had long time done this, yet he would
still incessantly go on to do it, yea though he should be never so much
discouraged by the incredulity, hatred, and injurious dealing of the people, to
whom he imparted these glad Tidings, or by seeing the Ruin that should come
upon them for a time, yet ^e would not cease incessantly to proclaim these
things, that hereby he might raise up their Hearts constantly to wait for this
promised deliverance and Salvation, though it might be long er'e it came, Until
the Righteousness thereof goes forth as brightness, and the Salvation thereof
as a Lamp that burns; that is, (as it respects the Jews in Babylon) until by
Gods destroying the Babylonians, and his Peoples Deliverance, the Righteousness
of his Peoples Cause, which lay hid during their Captivity, shall appear so
clearly and gloriously, that all the Nations about them shall see and
acknowledge it. Or, (as it respects the Church of Christ) until Christ come,
who is the Righteousness and Savior of his People, until the great Work of the
Righteousness and Salvation of the Church be fully accomplished, and do shine
forth gloriously in the Ministry of the Gospel, to the drawing of all Men's Eyes
to it, even amongst Gentiles that before sat in gross darkness. Some think that
this is spoken by the Prophet in the Person of God; For Zions sake I will not
hold my peace, etc. To wit, that God would not rest, till he had pleaded the
Righteous Cause of his People and saved them from their Enemies; (for when he
does forbear to do this, he is in the Scripture* Phrase said to hold his peace;
See the Note, Chap. 42.14.) Yea, they say, that it cannot be spoken by the
Prophet in his own Person, because he dyed long before the return of the Jews
out of Babylon, and much more before the full accomplishment of these things by
Jesus Christ. But this is not a sufficient reason to disprove what is most
generally held by Expositors; to wit, that the Prophet speaks here in his own
Person; since his meaning here may be only this, that should he live till these
things, which God had promised his People, should come to pass, he would never
cease to Preach these glad tidings, nor to Pray for the speedy performance of
them. It is not unlike that Speech of the Apostles; 1 These. 4.17. We, which are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds; that is,
should any of us at that day be found living upon Earth, it would be so with us.

Ver. 2. And the Gentiles shall see thy Righteousness, etc.] To wit, that
before mentioned, which should go forth as brightness; for which see the
foregoing Note; and all Kings thy Glory; that is, all the great Kings of the
Gentiles, to whom the knowledge of it shall come, shall take notice of the
exceeding Glory whereto God has advanced thee; See the Note, Psalm. 138.4. And
thou shall be called by a new Name, which the Mouth of the Lord shall Name;
that is, God will give thee a new Name; to wit, that expressed afterward, ver.
4. Thou shall be called Hephzi-bah. But the meaning is, either that Gods Church
and People should, through his favor to them, become exceeding Famous and
Renowned, far more than ever formerly; Or, that God would bring them into a new
Estate and Condition, far more glorious than ever formerly heard of; which was
most fully accomplished, when they became the Church of Christ.

Ver. 3. Thou shall also be a Crown of Glory in the Hand of the Lord, and a
Royal Diadem in the Hand of thy God.) The meaning is, either, 1. That the Lord
by his Hand upon them in their Deliverance, and in the great things he would do
for them, as his peculiar People, would advance them to great Glory, so that
they should be eminently conspicuous and renowned even as a Glorious Crown or
Royal Diadem in the Eyes of those that behold it; or rather, 2. That God would
own his People to be an Honor and Glory to him, even as a Crown or Diadem,
which a King takes in his Hand and puts upon his Head, as being the people over
whom he Reigned as their King and Sovereign; and consequently that he would
make as precious account of them, as a King does of his Crown, and as carefully
preserve them.

Ver. 4. Thou shall no more be termed, forsaken, etc.] See the Notes, Chap.
49.14 and 54.6, 7. Neither shall thy Land any more be termed desolate; See the
Note, Chap. 1.7. and 54.3. But thou shall be called, that is, thou shall be,
and shall be owned to be (as we see in the like Expression used concerning
Christ; See the Note, Chap. 7.14.) Hephzi-bah; that is, my Delight is in her:
It was the very Name of Hezekiahs Wife, the Mother of Manassah, 2 Kings 21.1.
But here the intent of it is, that God of his own free grace should greatly
delight in his Church and People; and thy Land Beulah; that is, Married; for
the Lord Delights in thee; and thy Land shall be Married; that is, Whereas
thy Land has been bereaved of her People, and so has sat for many years as a
lone Woman without Children, thou shall now be in the state of a Married Wife
that has a House full of Children; because being received into Favor and
Communion with God, her Husband, her Land should be abundantly filled with
Inhabitants; yea and this may be extended also to the great enlargement of the
Church under Christ in the Days of the Gospel.

Ver. 5. For as a young Man Marries a Virgin, etc.] These are named, because
the love of such is usually most sincere and fervent, and they usually live
together with greatest content, delight and comfort; So shall thy Son Marry
thee; as if he had said, O, Zion, O my Church and People, thy Sons shall
possess and enjoy thee, as if they were joined in Marriage with thee, and they
shall live and dwell with thee as contentedly and comfortably as a young Man is
wont to live with some Beautiful Virgin, whom he has taken to be his Wife. The
intent of the words is to show, that Strangers should not possess Zion any
more, but that she should be Inhabited constantly by their own Natives, who
should rejoice and delight in her, according to the joy that is betwixt Husband
and Wife. This passage indeed seems to have some difficulty in it, that the
Sons of Zion should be said to Marry their Mother: And therefore some, by her
Sons here, would have her Governors and Magistrates to be meant, who are as a
Husband to the State and People. But the Exposition before given, is, I
conceive, clearly that which is here intended.

Ver. 6. I have set Watchmen upon thy Walls, O Jerusalem, etc.] Here the Lord
is brought in speaking to his Church, and telling them, that for their better
safeguard he had set Watchmen upon their Walls; that is, Prophets, Pastors, and
Teachers; See the notes, Chap. 21.11. and 52.8. Which shall never hold their
peace Day nor Night; that is, that shall be constant in their Duty, both in
Teaching the People, warning them of their danger and duty, and praying to God
on their behalf. And then again in the following words the Prophet again
speaks; ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence; that is, ye amongst
Gods people that are wont to speak of God, and to pray to God, cease not to
solicit him to be favorable to his poor people; Or rather, O ye, the
Watchmen of Jerusalem; that make mention of the Lord; that put Gods people in
mind of God, his grace and goodness and promises to them, and of their Duty and
Obedience; Or, as it is in the Margin of our Bibles; Ye that are the Lords
remembrancers; that is, ye whose Office it is to put God in mind of the
concernments of his People, Oh fail not constantly to do your Duty herein.

Ver. 7. And give him no rest, till he establish, etc.] That is, till he settle
his Church in a comfortable and lasting Foundation; and till he make Jerusalem
a praise in the Earth; that is, till by his wonderful deliverance of his
Church, and the glorious condition whereunto he shall exalt her, she shall be
praised, extolled, and magnified all the world over; Or, till the Nations do
for this praise the Lord; See the Note, Psalm. 76.3. And though this was in part
fulfilled, when Gods people were delivered out of Babylon, yet it was chiefly
accomplished in the spiritual Splendour of the Church of Christ, when that was
spread by the Preaching of the Gospel throughout the World.

Ver. 8. The Lord has sworn by his Right Hand, etc.] That is, say some, by his
Faithfulness, a token whereof among men is usually the giving one the Right
Hand. But rather by his Right Hand, and by the Arm of his Strength, is meant
his Almighty power; for in regard of the difficulty and seeming impossibility
of the things promised, God ingageth his Almighty power for the accomplishment
of them; surely I will no more give thy Corn to be Meat for thine Enemies, and
the Sons of the Stranger shall not drink thy Wine, for the which thou have
labored; that is, thy Provisions shall not any more be a prey to thine
Enemies. It is in the Hebrew, If I give any more thy Corn, etc. for which Form
of an Oath; see the Note, Chap. 5.9. It is all one as if God had said, let me
not be esteemed as an Almighty God, if this be so any more. Because even after
the Jews return from Babylon, Enemies did many times spoil the Jews of their
outward provisions, therefore several Expositors understand this spiritually;
to wit, that the Devil and his Instruments shall never bereave the Church of
those Provisions whereby their Souls are to be nourished unto Life Eternal. But
there is no necessity of flying to this Exposition. It is certainly a promise
made to Gods People, for their defense, and their peaceable enjoying their
Estates, contrary to that Curse, Deuteronomy. 28.33. Which as it was partly fulfilled
when the Jews returned out of Babylon, so especially under the Kingdom of
Christ; the Church never was, nor ever shall be deprived of necessary outward
Provisions, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise
of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. And besides, when
Chistians are bereaved of their outward Estates, the Curse of that threatening,
Deuteronomy. 28. is taken away.

Ver. 9. But they that have gathered it, shall eat it, and praise the Lord,
etc.] That is, thy People together with the Harvest men employed by them in
gathering in their Corn, shall eat it, blessing God for it; and they that have
brought it together; that is, the Wine before mentioned, ver. 8. shall drink it
in the Courts of my Holiness; that is, my Sanctuary, or in my Holy Courts, in
my Temple; the meaning is, that Gods People should in his Church peaceably
enjoy the outward blessings God afforded them, praising God for them even in
their public Assemblies; only in the expressions here used, there is an
allusion to the Holy Feasts which the Jews kept in the Courts of the Temple;
for which see the Note, Deuteronomy. 12.7. How this also is understood by some of the
Soul provisions of the Church; see in the foregoing Note.

Ver. 10. Go through, go through the Gates, etc.] The doubling of this charge
imports the doing of what is here enjoined with all speed and diligence. But
the great Question is, to whom, and concerning what Gates this is spoken. Some
conceive that the Inhabitants of Zion, the believing Jews; (or, Zions Watchmen
before mentioned, ver. 6. the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel) are here
called upon to go out of her Gates to make way for the Gentiles to come into
the Church. Again, others understand it of the Jews, encouraged hereby to press
and throng in through the Gates of Jerusalem, which though formerly broken down
or burnt, should at their return ftom Babylon stand open before them, ready to
receive them. And under this Type they conceive, that the flocking in of the
Gentiles on all sides to the Church is comprehended; see the Notes, Chap. 26.2.
and 60.11. But because in the following Words, there is mention made of
preparing the way for the Jews return out of Babylon, it is not so probable
that their pressing into the Gates of Jerusalem should be here set before that;
it may be rather thought, that the Jews are here pressed to hasten speedily,
and to go through the Gates of the several Cities where they were in Captivity,
and to get away to their own Country; which indeed agreeeth well with that
which is said elsewhere; see the Notes, Chap. 48.20. and 52.11. Yea, and some
too think, that it may be spoken to those, to whom the following Words are
directed, prepare you the way of the People, cast up, cast up the highway,
gather out the Stones; for which see the Note, Chap. 40.3. lift up a standard
for the People; see the Note Cap. 49.22.

Ver. 11. Behold the Lord has proclaimed unto the end of the World, etc.] To
wit, that which follows, say ye to the Daughter of Zion; see the Note, 2 Kings
19.21. Behold thy Salvation comes; that is, thy Redemption and Deliverance;
or, thy Savior that shall deliver thee; for that this last is at least
implied, is evident by the following Words; behold, his reward is with him,
etc. Now as this is spoken with respect to the deliverance of the Jews out of
Babylon; the meaning is, either, that the Lord had by the Proclamation of Cyrus
enjoined all Nations should give liberty to his People, to return home to their
own Land (which agrees well with that expression of Cyrus in his Proclamation,
Ezra 1.2, Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, the Lord God of Heaven has given me
all the Kingdoms of the Earth, etc.) or else, that the Lord by the wonderful
manner of that deliverance of the Jews, would cause all Nations even to the end
of the World, to understand that it was done by his Will and Command. But now
as it is spoken with respect to that great Work of Man's Redemption by Christ
(whereof the other was a Type) the meaning is, that the Lord had by the
preaching of the Gospel Proclaimed unto all Nations the coming of the promised
Messiah, that so they might come in and join themselves to his Church; and
indeed that passage, say ye to the Daughter of Zion, behold, thy Salvation
comes; is expressly applied to Christ by the Evangelists, Math. 21.5. behold
his Reward is with him, and his Work before him; see the Note, Chap. 40.10.

Ver. 12. And they shall call them, the Holy People, the Redeemed of the Lord,
etc.] That is, upon their miraculous deliverance men shall own them to be the
People whom God had Sanctified and set a part to himself, to be his own
peculiar People; see the Note, Exodus 19.6. and whom he had made a Holy People,
and redeemed out of the power of their Enemies; see the Notes, Chap. 4.3. and
60.21. and thou shall be called; to wit, thou O Zion, sought out; that is, of
her Husband that had cast her off; see the Notes, Chap. 34.6, 7. Or one, over
whom God took special care to look after her, and recover her when she was
lost. Or, the meaning may be, that she should be sought after, as one that was
in high esteem; to wit, by the Gentiles that should seek to join themselves in
one Church with her; and so it should be no more said of her, as formerly it
was; this is Zion, whom no Man seeks after, Jer. 30.17. A City not forsaken;
that is neither cast off by God, nor left desolate without People, as formerly
she seemed to be; see the Note above, ver. 4.

CHAP. LXIII.
VERSE 1. WHO is this that comes from Edom, etc.] Having in the foregoing
Chapter, Ver. 11. spoken of the Lords coming to save his People, as of a thing
ready to be done immediately; say ye to the Daughter of Zion, Behold, thy
Salvation comes; behold his reward is with him, etc. Here the Church, say
some, or the Prophet rather (as if he had seen in a Vision this great Savior
of his People, the Lord God, like some great Prince, coming from the Slaughter
of his Enemies, whom he had vanquished in Fight, with his Garments all stained
with their Blood, breaks forth into this expression of admiration, who is this
that comes from Edom, with Died Garments from Bozrah? and that still to assure
Gods People, that it would not be long ere he would come and deliver them, by
destroying their Enemies. It is questioned by Expositors, why it is said, that
he came from Edom, and from Bozrah, which was the chief City of Edom. That
which was commonly said by the Ancients, that the Prophet speaks this of Christ
ascending triumphantly into Heaven after his Bloody passion, cannot certainly
be here intended, because it is expressly said afterward, ver. 3. that his
Garments were Red, not with his own Blood, but with the Blood of his Enemies.
Nor is there much probability in that which is said by others, that because
Edom signifies Red, and Bozrah signifies a Vintage, nothing else is intended
by saying that he came from Edom and Bozrah; but that his Garments were
Blood-red, like one that having trod a Winepress, has his Garments all over
besprinkled with the Blood of the Grapes; it is therefore far more probable,
which some others say, that it is to be understood Literally, concerning the
destruction of the Edomites, that were always bitter Enemies to the Jews, Psalm.
137.7. Or, rather that the Edomites are put for the Enemies of Gods People in
General, especially the Babylonians; and that because the Edomites had been
successively in all Ages professed deadly Enemies to the Jews, and so had
manifested themselves to be when Jerusalem was destroyed by the Babylonians,
and by reason of their near Neighborhood were best known to them; see the
Notes, Chapter 34.5, 6. This I conceive is the genuine meaning of the place, that
this is spoken of God, coming like some Victorious Prince, from the destruction
of the Babylonians and other his Peoples Enemies, having his Garments
besprinkled with their Blood; yet I question not, but that under these
Victories of God over the Babylonians and other Enemies of his People, Christ's
Victories over their Spiritual Enemies, were also Typified. As for the
following Words, they contain a farther Description of this great Savior of
his People, this that is glorious in his Apparel; that is, Clothed with
gorgeous Attire, suitable to the dignity of his person, and that never a whit
the less glorious, because stained with Blood, this being a sign of the
glorious Victory he had obtained over his Peoples Enemies; Traveling in the
greatness of his strength; whereby is signified, either that he was passing
along the several Countries of his Peoples Enemies, that he might subdue and
destroy them, and that by no other but his own Almighty power; or, that he was
going along triumphantly with his People, carrying them away from the several
Countries where they were Captives; or else, that he Marched with a stately
gate, not as one that fled or retired before an Enemy, but as one that had made
a perfect dispatch of his Foes, and was marching away fearlessly in his full
strength. And then in the next Words, we have Gods Answer to the Prophets
Question, I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save; that is, it is I that
never promise any thing, but what I am sure to perform, as being Almighty to
save my People.

Ver. 2. Wherefore art thou Red in thine Apparel? and thy Garments like him
that treads in the Wine Fat?] And so has his Garments made Red with the
Blood of the Grapes, as their Juice is called, Genesis 49.11. This is the Second
Question, which the Church, or the Prophet rather, propounds to God, that great
Savior whom he had seen in a Vision, and of whom he had spoken in the
foregoing verse.

Ver. 3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the People there was none
with me, etc.] This is the Lords Answer to the Churches or Prophets foregoing
Question; wherein he shows, that it was no wonder, though his Garments were
Red, like one that had been treading in a Wine-fat, and that because he had
been treading down and destroying the Enemies of his People, in the Wine Press
of his wrath and vengeance, and therefore his Garments might well be besmeared
with Blood. And this he is said to have done alone, etc. And because, though he
made use of Men in the doing of it; yet, 1. it was done in such a manner, that
all Men might see there was a special hand of God in the doing of it. 2. Men
contributed no help to God for the effecting of it. And 3. Men at least minded
not at all the doing of it in a way of Revenge upon them for the mischief which
they had done to Gods People. But indeed in the great Work of Man's Redemption,
where Christ subdued our Spiritual Enemies, and rescued his People from their
Bondage (which was Typified in the deliverance of his People out of Bondage)
this was most clearly accomplished; to wit, that none helped him in that great
Work, for I will tread them in mine anger, etc. That is, I will with great
Indignation utterly destroy them, and that as a Man in a Wine-Fat treads the
Grapes in pieces under his Feet. And this is expressed as I conceive, in the
Future Tense, as a reason of that Answer which God had given to the Prophet, to
show why he appeared in such stian'd Apparel, I have trodden the Wine Press,
etc. Namely, because this in time he would certainly do.

Ver. 4. For the day of veng^nce is in mine Heart, etc.] That is, 1. That day
fore appointed for taking vengeance is in my Mind, and that it is now come;
and, 2. I am heartily desirous to have it Executed upon them; see the Note,
Chap. 34.8. And the year of my Redeemed is come; see the Note, Chap. 61.2.

Ver. 5. And I locked, and there was none to help, etc.] To wit, neither of his
own Poeple, nor others; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore
mine own Arm brought Salvation unto me, etc. But for all this, see the Note,
Chap. 69.16.

Ver. 6. And I will tread down, etc.] To wit, as Grapes are trodden in the
Wine-Fat, the People in mine Anger; that is, the Babylonians, and all other my
Churches Enemies, and make them drunk in my fury; that is, infatuate them, so
that they shall be like Men stupid or mad, no way able to resist me, nor to
know which way to turn themselves. Or the meaning may be, that God would punish
them with greatest severity, and out of the Cup of his fury give them their
Bellies full of misery; or, that he would fill them with their own Blood, as
with new Wine. But however the expression of making them Drunk, seems to be
here used with respect to that which he had said before of treading out Wine;
see also the Notes, Chap. 29.9. and 51.17, 20, 21. And I will bring down their
Strength to the Earth; that is, and thus those strong and mighty Nations shall
like so many drunken Men fall to the Ground.

Ver. 7. I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, etc.] Here begins a
Prayer of the Prophets, either in his own Name, or rather in the Name of Gods
Church, which is continued unto the end of the following Chapter. And herein,
in the first place he begins with a large and thankful acknowledgement of Gods
wonderful goodness to his People Israel in forrmer times, I will mention the
loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord; (which last is
added, because the very mention of the great things that God has done for his
People tends much to his praise) according to all that the Lord has bestowed
on us, etc. where the loving kindness of God to them is set forth in many
Words, not only thereby the more to aggravate their Rebellions against God, (of
which he speaks afterward) but also by way of pleading with God, that since he
had been so gracious to his People formerly, he would be so still; and withal
to strengthen their faith concerning the deliverance he had now promised them.

Ver. 8. For he said, etc.] That is, God; to wit, when he first entered into a
covenant of Grace with Israel, and took them to be his peculiar People, and
Children, he thought and said within himself then, as follows, surely they
are my People, Children that will not lie; that is, that will not be other than
what they profess themselves to be, that will not deal fasly and disloyally
with me, but will be sincerely what they have promised and covenanted to be;
see the Note, Chap. 59.13. Indeed it proved otherwise: God complained of them,
Deuteronomy. 32.20. that they were Children in whom was no faith; and our Prophet,
Chap. 30.9. that they were lying Children; for which see the Notes there. But
God speaks here (after the manner of Men) as a Father should speak of a Son, to
whom he had shown great respect, and upon whom he had bestowed great cost, and
of whom therefore he was willing to hope well; much as the Lord spoke in the
parable of the Vineyard, let out to Husbandmen: Surely they will reverence my
Son, Math, 21.37. So he was their Savior; that is, upon these conditions,
grounds, and hopes, he undertook the safeguarding and preservation of them. And
all this sets forth the great goodness of God to his Israel.

Ver. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them, etc.] Some understand this of some created Angel, employed
by God to save and deliver his People Israel, when they were in any danger, and
that he is called the Angel of his presence; because the Angels do indeed stand
continually in Gods presence, and behold his Face, as Christ said, Mat. 18.10.
and being sent from God, he was in Gods stead amongst them. But I rather think
it is meant of Christ, the Angel of whom God spoke to Moses, Exodus 23.20, 21.
(for which see the Notes there) who was always in the bosom of his Father, Joh.
11.18. and is now always before God, interceding for us; in his love and in his
pity he redeemed them; to wit, out of their bondage in Egypt; and he bare them
and carried them all the days of old; see the Notes, Chap. 40.11. and 46.3, 4.
and Deuteronomy. 32.11.

Ver. 10. But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit, etc.] See Ephesians. 4.30.
therefore he was turned to be their enemy; see the Notes, Job 13.24.19.11. and
he fought against them; to wit, by many adversaries which he had stirred
against them, in the days of their Judges and Kings. But this is alleged,
still to make way for the farther setting forth of Gods goodness to his People,
notwithstanding these provocations, and thereby to encourage them still to hope
in so gracious a God.

Ver. 11. Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his People, etc.] Some
of our best Expositors understand this as spoken of the People of God;
collectively taken, and therefore they say it is expressed in the singular
number. Then he remembered, etc. And then again of these, some understand it of
the Israelites in former times, that when God fought against them, as it is
said in the foregoing Verse, then Israel called to mind what God had done for
their Fathers, Moses and the People in his days, which is much the same with
that which is said of them, Psalm. 78.34, 35. But then others understand it of
the Church of the Jews in Babylon; to wit, that they remembered the great things
that God had done for their Ancestors, when Moses carried them out of Egypt to
Canaan. And accordingly both the one and the other do understand the following
Words, where is he that brought them up out of the Sea; etc? As the Words of
the People uttered by way of complaining and bemoaning themselves, that God did
not at present do for them, as he had done for their Fathers, and as it were
sighing after the like deliverance. But methinks it sounds very harsh to say,
that having spoken in the foregoing Verse of the People in the Plural Number,
But they Rebelled -- therefore he was turned to be their Enemy, and he fought
against them; immediately in the next Words, the Prophet should go on, and
speak of them in the Singular Number, Then he remembered the days of old, etc.
And therefore I rather judge, with others, that this is spoken of God himself
(and so indeed it has a clear connection with the last Words of the foregoing
Verse, therefore he was turned to be their Enemy, and he fought against them.
Then he remembered the days of old;) to wit, that when God smote the Israelites
in former times, yet calling to mind what he had formerly done for his People,
notwithstanding the frequent and great provocations, wherewith they had
provoked him, he thereby induced himself to work new deliverances for them.
Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his People; where Moses is
mentioned, either, as some, to imply Gods remembering the Covenant he had made
with the Israelites by the Mediation of Moses; or, as others, the frequent and
vehement Intercession of Moses on their behalf; or else rather only to imply
his remembering of his People in the days of Moses, and what he did for them
then by Moses his Minstry. And accordingly I conceive the following Words are
also to be taken as the Words of God, speaking of himseif in the third person,
and that as by way of arguing with himself, that seeing he had in the days of
Moses done so much for his People, whom he then took to be his peculiar People,
why he should then be found wanting to them, and not afford them the like
deliverance again? And indeed by our Translators inserting the word (saying) it
is evident that they understood it thus, Then he remembered the days of old,
Moses and his People, saying, where is he that brought them up out of the Sea,
with the Shepherd of his Flock? to wit, Moses the Shepherd of Gods Flock; or,
Moses and Aaron, if you read it, as it is in the Margin, with the Shepherds of
his Flock; see the Note, Psalm. 77.20. where is he that put his holy Spirit
within him? that is, say some, the Spirit of Prophecy; or rather those manifest
gifts of Gods Spirit, whereby Moses was enabled to teach and govern the People.

Ver. 12. That led them by the right hand of Moses, with his glorious arm,
etc.] That is, Gods Almighty power enabling Moses to do what he did. It was not
Moses, nor the rod of Moses (which some think is employed by naming his right
hand) but God that did it; dividing the Water before them; to wit, the Waters,
both of the Red Sea and Jordan; to make himself an everlasting name; to wit, by
the discovery, both of his Almighty Power in a work of such wonder, and of his
tender care over his People. Some think the Prophet adds this, by way of
farther enlarging that which God had said in the foregoing Verse; where is he
that brought them up out of the Sea? etc. But I see not why they may not be a
continuance of Gods words.

Ver. 13. That led them through the deep, as an Horse in the Wilderness, that
they should not stumble? That is, softly and gently, as when a Horse is led
with a Bridle; they did not flee through, as men frighted with fear, but
marched over soberly and leasurely; or easily, and safely, without any danger
or trouble; as a Horse may be led in a Wilderness, where the ground is dry, and
there is nothing to hinder, or trouble him in his way; see the Note, Psalm.
106.9.

Ver. 14. As a Beast goes down into the Valley, the Spirit of the Lord, etc.]
Some Expositors hold, that here (which is more probable than that which is
noted before to be the opinion of others, concerning ver. 12.) the Prophet does
here speak again, owning, and farther setting forth what God had said in the
foregoing Verse, concerning his leading the Israelites through the red Sea, as
a Horse in the Wilderness (And indeed the last words of this Verse, So did
thou lead thy People, etc. are clearly the words of the Prophet, or Church to
God) As a Beast goes down into the Valley; to wit, gently and softly, when it
is led down a steep Hill; the Spirit of the Lord; that is, God by his Almighty
Power, or by his Holy Spirit, caused him; that is, Moses, say some, the Leader
of his People, or rather, thy People Israel, to rest; to wit, in that the Lord,
after he had carried his Israel through the Red Sea, did lead him along quietly
through the Wilderness, providing for him resting places by the way (as it is
expressly said, Numb. 10.33.) until he had brought them to Canaan, the land of
their rest; see the Notes, Psalm. 95.11. and Jer. 31.2. And then in the next
words, the Prophet turns his speech to God; so did thou lead thy People to
make thy self a glorious name; see the Note above, ver. 12.

Ver. 15. Look down from Heaven, etc.] Here the People of God in Babylon, or
the Prophet in their name, having from ver. 7. set forth what great mercy God
had shown to their Fathers, and what great deliverance he had wrought for them
in former times, do now pray, that God would do the like for them; that though
he had of late for a time hidden himself from them, yet now he would again
appear for them; see the Note, Psalm. 80.14. and behold from the habitation of
thy Holiness, and of thy Glory; to wit, the extreme misery we are in; implying,
that if God would but take notice of their misery, they hoped he could not but
pity and help them; where is thy zeal; that is, thy vehement love to thy
People, not enduring to see them wronged by their Enemies; see 2 Kings 19.31.
thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me? (It is
an expression taken from those rumblings in the Bowels, which strong passions
of this nature, do usually work in Men; see the Note, Chap. 16.11.) see the
Notes, Psalm, 77.7, and 89.49. are they restrained? that is, do thou, or can
thou, against thy natural inclination, restrain those yearnings of thy Bowels,
which are wont so freely to flow out toward thy People at other times?

Ver. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, etc.] As if he had said, And therefore
surly thou will pity us thy Children; though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledge us not; to wit, as being long since departed out of this
world: They indeed were our Fathers, but they are now strangers to the things
that are done here below, and know nothing of our condition. Some there are
indeed, that would have the words understood in another sense: As, 1. Though
Abraham be ignorant of us, etc. that is, though Abraham and Israel would not
own us, as their Children; yet we are sure thou, O God, art our Father: Or, 2.
Though we should suppose that they are ignorant of our condition, let that be
granted; yet certainly God is our Father: Or, 3. Though they were not
comparatively to be owned as their Fathers; yet to be sure God was their
Father. But all this needs not; there is no cause why we should stumble at that
sense which the words do clearly and plainly hold forth; thou, O Lord, art our
Father, our Redeemer; to wit; therefore their Father, because he was their
Redeemer; thy name is from everlasting; that is, thy fame for thy great works
has been from everlasting; or this thy name of being the Redeemer of thy
People has been from everlasting. And indeed, thus some read the last words
jointly together, as it is in the Margin; our Redeemer from everlasting is thy
name: It may be happily questioned by some, why, in the beginning of this Verse,
Isaac is not reckoned amongst their Fathers, as Abraham and Israel. But to
this, the common answer that is given is, that Abraham and Israel are
mentioned, because God did oftenest and most solemnly appear to them, and
confirmed his Covenant with them; and because the Covenant was first made with
Abraham, and all Jacobs Children were taken into Covenant. And besides it is
said, that Abraham and Israel being named, Isaac, that was between them, is
included.

Ver. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? etc.] This is
spoken with reference to that before: But they rebelled and vexed his Holy
Spirit, ver. 10. Why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our
Heart from thy fear? That is, Why have thou, by way of punishing us for our
sins, withdrawn thy Spirit from us, and delivered us up to a Spirit of error
and obstinacy, and so left us to run after our own Hearts into so many erroeous
and wicked ways? see the Notes, Chap. 6.9, 10. and 29.10. Exodus 7.13. and Job
12.16. Some indeed understand this a little otherwise: Namely, that this is
spoken of Gods being the occasion of their turning away from Gods ways, and
their obstinacy therein, by continuing them so long under the oppression of
their cruel Enemies; which is indeed a sore temptation; for which see the Note,
Psalm. 125.3. But I conceive the first Exposition is the best, and accordingly
that it is spoken by way of bewailing, that their Heavenly Father should in
such wrath withdraw himself from them, and so leave them under such a dreadful
Judgment, and by way of entreating that it might be otherwise with them; as if
they had said, Why do thou not soften our Hearts, and reform what is amiss in
us? Return for thy Servants sake, the tribes of thine inheritance; that is, be
reconciled again to thy People, and show thy self again favorable to them,
because they are thy Servants, and thine Inheritance; and it might seem
dishonorable to God, to cast off his Servants, or to disregard his own
Inheritance. Yet some understand it otherwise; Return for thy Servants sake,
etc.] that is, with respect to thy Servants, our Progenitors, and with respect
to the Covenant which thou made with them; see Note, Psalm. 132.1. But the
former Exposition is far the clearer.

Ver. 18. The People of thine Holiness, etc.] That is, thy holy People; see the
Note, Exodus 19.6. have possessed it but a little while; and this they say,
though they had possessed it many hundred years, because Men are prone to think
it but a little time when they have enjoyed a thing long, if they earnestly
desire to enjoy it longer; or rather because those many hundred years were
indeed but a little while, in comparison of what God had promised the
Patriarchs: Namely, that they should possess it for ever, Genesis 17.8. Our
Enemies have trodden down thy Sanctuary; that is, thy Temple, or the Land of
Canaan; for that is sometimes also called Gods Sanctury; see the Note, Psalm.
78.54. However this implies, that the wrong to himself might well engage the
Lord to appear against their Enemies.

CHAP. LXIV.
VERSE 1. OH that thou would rent the Heavens, etc.] The People of God, as
being much troubled at that whereof they had complained in the latter end of
the foregoing Chapter, that the Heathens had possessed themselves of the Land,
which God had given them, and had profaned and trodden down Gods Sanctuary, do
here beg of God (going on in the Prayer begun ver. 7. of that Chapter) that
breaking through all impediments, he would suddenly, and in great fury and
indignation, come down and destroy the Enemies of his People, and deliver his
People out of their hands: Oh that thou would rent the Heavens, that thou
would come down; that is, that thou would come down, rending the Heavens
all asunder before thee; that the Mountains might flow down at thy presence;
that is, might be melted, and so flow away like Water, or melted Wax; where by
melting the Mountains may be figuratively meant the destroying and overturning
the Babylonians, and other the proud and lofty Enemies of his People* and the
removing of all impediments out of the way of their return home to their own
Country; see the Note, Psalm. 97.5. Or else it may be spoken by way of allusion
to that which was done, at the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, where all
being on a light flame, in that terrible tempest of Thunder and Lightning, the
Mountains seemed to tremble and melt away; see the Note, Judge. 5.4. and so the
desire of Gods People here may be, that in delivering them now he would show
forth some such sign of his Glorious Majesty and Power, as he did at the giving
of the Law. Some, I know, do understand this concerning Gods rending the
Heavens and coming down, of the Incarnation of the Son of God; and accordingly
by the flowing down of the Mountains, they understand either the humbling of
the Hearts of proud Sinners by the preaching of the Gospel, or else the
destroying of all the Enemies of his People. But if the first coming of Christ
be here intended, it is but only as his Redemption was typified by the
deliverance of Gods People out of Babylon.

Ver. 2. As when the melting Fire burns, etc.] This has reference to the
last words of the foregoing Verse, where Gods People desired, that at Gods
appearing for them; the Mountains might flow down (and there may be still an
allusion to Gods causing the Mountains of Sinai to melt away, as is noted
before) namely, that this might be done; As when a melting Fire, which uses to
be most vehement, burns; to wit, the Wood and Coals which are the Fuel of it,
or burns or melts Metals by the heat of it, and as when the Fire causes
the Waters hanged over it to boil; to make thy Name known to thine
Adversaries; See the Note, Chap. 63.12.) That the Nations may tremble at thy
Presence; to wit, the Babylonians and other Enemies. And hereby now is shown
what was meant in the foregoing Verse by the flowing down of the Mountains at
Gods Presence.

Ver. 3. When thou did terrible things which we looked not for, etc.] That
is, which our forefathers did never expect thou would have done for them, as
being things that seemed, when done, above all credit and belief, and such as
humane reason could not comprehend, thou came down, the Mountain flowed down
at thy Presence; as if they had said, Thou did then for them that which we at
present desire of thee. And now by these terrible things done formerly for
their Progenitors are doubtless meant all those stupendous miraculous Works,
which God wrought for the Israelites, from the time that Moses was sent to
fetch them out of Egypt, until they were possessed of the Land of Canaan, and
amongst the rest more especially those things which were done at Mount Sinai;
for which see the Note before; ver. 1. And the drift of this is to imply, that
since God had done such great things for them formerly, they might hope that he
would now do the like again for them, when they begged it of him.

Ver. 4. For since the beginning of the World Men have not heard, nor perceived
by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has
prepared for him that waits for him.) That is, None, besides thee, O God, who
did intend and determine beforehand to do them, did ever hear or see, or was
able to reach or comprehend those wonderful things, which thou have prepared
for them that trusting in thee, do patiently depend and wait upon thee; Or
else (according to the Translation, that is in the Margin of our Bibles) there
was never humane Ear or Eye, that ever did hear or see any God besides thee,
the God of Israel, that has done or prepared to do such things, as thou have
prepared for thy People. And this is also added to show, that they might well
be encouraged to beg that which they had desired, of a God that had formerly
done such unheard of, such unseen and wonderful things for his People. Now by
these wonderful things which from the beginning of the World Men had never
heard nor seen, are meant, I conceive, those terrible things which they looked
not for, mentioned in the foregoing Verse, which God had done for the
Israelites in his carrying them out of Egypt into Canaan, for which see the
Note there; and this may seem the more probable, because that which the Prophet
says here does so fully agree with that which Moses had long since said
concerning those wonderful works which God did then for the Israelites; Deuteronomy.
4.32, 33, 34. For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee,
since the day that God created Man upon the Earth; and ask from the one side of
Heaven unto the other, whether there has been any such thing, as this great
thing is, or has been heard like it, etc.] The Apostle indeed makes use of
these words of the Prophet, 1. Cor. 2.9. Where speaking of the wisdom revealed
in the Gospel, he affirms it to be above the reach of Man's understanding: Which
none, says he, of the Princes of this world knew -- But as it is written, Eye
has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man.
(Which Clause is added by the Apostle, the better to explain the words of the
Prophet) the things which God has prepared for them that love him; And by
these things some understand the incomprehensible happiness, which God has
prepared in Heaven for his Poople; but most, of the Mysteries revealed in the
Gospel, which had been formerly hidden even from Gods own People. But it is
usual with the Penmen of the New Testament to allege passages out of the Old,
only by way of allusion; See the like noted, Psalm. 19.4. And besides the words
here are so general, that they may well comprehend all the incomprehensible
Works of God for his People, though they might be more particularly intended,
as is before said, of the Wonders formerly wrought in the Deliverance of the
Israelites.

Ver. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and works righteousness, etc.] That
is, Those that trusting in thee do rejoice in thee, and do their Duty; Or,
those that do joyfully and cheerfully obey thee, and delight to do that which
is right in thine Eyes: And by meeting them, I conceive is meant meeting them
in a way of Love, Mercy, and Reconciliation; as the Prodigals Father went out
to meet him, whilst he was yet afar off; Luke 15.30. and as in our ordinary
Speech we are wont to say of those, to whom we are willing to be reconciled;
that we will at any time meet them half way: Those that remember thee in thy
ways; that is, that remember thee in thy several ways, or dispensations of thy
Providence, whether of Mercy or Judgment, do accordingly praise thee, or pray
unto thee; Or rather, those that being mindful of thee, and so of their Duty to
thee are careful to walk in the ways thou have enjoined them. But now the
question will be of whom this is spoken. Some think it is meant of Gods dealing
in former times with their forefathers; Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and
works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways; that is, thou
did meet, or were wont to meet them in great loving kindness and Mercy, thou
did show them great favor many and many times: as if they had said, Thus it
was with our forefathers; but it is far otherwise now with us. But according to
our Translation, I conceive it is spoken indefinitely, as of that which God
does at all times; and so it may imply both, that God had done so with his
righteous Servants in former Ages, and that he would have done the like also
for them, if they had trodden in the steps of their holy Progenitors; behold,
thou art wroth, for we have sinned; as if they had said, because we have
sinned, thou have in thy wrath brought great Miseries upon us, and so it was
with us, as it was with our Fathers; in those is continuance, and we shall be
saved; that is, in those thy ways of Goodness and Mercy to thy People there is
continuance, they are stable and perpetual: And therefore we hope that we shall
be saved.

Ver. 6. But we are all as an unclean thing, etc.] That is, as any Person, or
Thing, Naturally, or Legally unclean: As namely, Lepers, and such as had
touched any dead body, etc. There were doubtless some holy Persons amongst
them, even when they were in Babylon. But they speak here of the body of the
People in general, that were wicked and profane, and cast out of the Holy
Land, and excluded from all Communion with God in his Sanctuary; even as those
that were legally unclean, were shut up for a time from conversing with their
Brethren, and from going into the Temple. And this is likewise added, as in
opposition to that which was said in the foregoing Verse; either thus, Thou
were very gracious to our Forefathers, that rejoiced and wrought
Righteousness, etc. but now they are all gone, and we are all as an unclean
thing, etc. Or thus, Thou art constantly gracious to those that work
Righteousness, and remember thee in thy ways; yea, and when thou art wroth with
them, because they have sinned against thee, upon their returning to thee,
thou, out of thy unchangeable goodness and mercy, art ready to show them Mercy,
and to save them; but alas, it is not thus with us; We are all as an unclean
thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags; and for this last
branch, there is much difference amongst Expositors concerning this word
Righteousness. 1. Some think the abstract is here put for the concrete, as if
they had said, Our most Righteous men are as filthy Rags. 2. Others understand
it as spoken Ironically of those horrid Enormities, wherewith they had provoked
God to cast them out of the Land; and for this see the Note, Chap. 57.12. 3.
Others hold, that thereby is meant all their Legal Rights and Services, which
being performed Hypocritically, and by men profane and wicked, were abominable
in Gods sight, how Righteous soever they judged themselves in that regard. And,
4. Many conceive that hereby is meant, that the best actions of the best of
them, when best performed, had so much defilement of Corruption and Sin
cleaving to them, as might render them, if God should examine them rigorously
by the rule of his Law, hateful unto him. And indeed either of these four
Expositions do fairly suit with the drift of this place. And then for the
following words, they contain an acknowledgment of the misery, whereinto their
Sins had brought them; and we all do fade away as a leaf; that is, the Beauty
and Glory of our former estate is withered and gone; see the Notes, Chap. 40.6,
7. and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away; that is, as the Wind
drives faded leaves from off the Tree, or blows them about, when they are
fallen from the Tree, so have our Sins driven us away into the Land of our
Captivity.

Ver. 7. And there is none that calls on thy name, etc.] That is, though we
are in so sad a condition, yet there are very few, none in a manner, that for
the appeasing of thy wrath, and the removal of these Judgments, does in a right
manner, seriously, and from their Hearts cry unto thee; (see the Note, Chap.
43.22.) for that this is meant by calling on Gods Name, is evident by the
following words; that stirs up himself to take hold on thee; that is, that
do endeavor to rouse up themselves, that they may with all possible fervency
and importunity pray unto thee, that so thereby they may keep thee from
departing away from them, or win thee to return again in mercy to them, or stay
thy hand from smiting them any farther; as Moses did, as it were, hold the hand
of God from destroying the Israelites, when he said unto Moses; Let me alone
that I may destroy them, etc. Deuteronomy. 9.14. Or, that they might cleave close to
God, as their God and Father, resting upon his Grace and faithfulness, though
in his anger he seemed resolved to cast them off. The sum of what they here
confess against themselves is, That there was scarce any amongst them, that
took care to step in and intercede for the People, as Moses, Samuel, and others
in former Ages had done; As for the last clause; for thou have hid thy face
from us (see the Notes, Chap 8.17. and 57.17.) that may be added as a reason,
not only of the miseries that were come upon them, but also of their stupidity,
in that they called not upon God, when they were in such misery. It was because
for their wickedness God had hid his face from them, and left them to
themselves.

Ver. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father: we are the Clay, and thou our
Potter, and we all are the work of thine hand.] To wit, not only as we are thy
Creatures, but also as we are thy People; see the Notes, Chap. 19.25. and 43.1,
21. and Job 10.8, 9. In the words the People of God seem to plead with him,
that though he might at his pleasure break them in pieces, as the Potter may
his Pots, yet that he would rather spare them and deal favorably with them,
both out of respect to the frailty of their condition; see the Note, Psalm.
143.10. and especially, because of the interest he had in them, as being his
Children and the work of his hands; see the Note, Psalm. 119.73.

Ver. 9. Be not wrath very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever,
etc.] As if they had said, Though this we have deserved, yet deal more
favorably with us; see the Note, Psalm. 6.1. behold, see we beseech thee; see
the Note, Chap. 63.15. we are all thy People; that is, thou have taken us to be
thy Covenant People; and therefore spare us.

Ver. 10. Thy holy Cities are a wilderness, etc.] That is, the Cities of Judea,
which are called holy Cities, as the whole Country is called the holy Land,
Zach. 2.12. because of the special interest which God had in them, as having
given them for an habitation to his holy People Israel, wherein they were to
serve and Worship God, as they did constantly in their Synagogues every
Sabbath, both in Prayer, and hearing the word Preached, Act. 15.21. Some indeed
hold, that the following words, Zion is a Wilderness, Jerusalem a Desolation,
are added to show what were the holy Cities they intended; to wit, Zion and
Jerusalem, where the Temple was, wherein God was especially served; and which
were sometimes spoken of, as two distinct Cities, Zion being more peculiarly
called the City of David. However by mentioning the desolation of these Cities,
they seek to move God to pity them, and to destroy their Enemies; though not
for their sakes, that had deserved so ill at his hands, yet with respect to his
own Glory, and to his own Concernments.

Ver. 11. Our holy and our beautiful house, where our Fathers praised thee, is
burnt with Fire, etc.] This is added as a farther aggravation of their misery,
that not only their Cities, even Zion and Jerusalem amongst the rest, but even
the Temple also was burnt with Fire, that goodly house which God had given them
to be the peculiar place for his Worship and Service, and which was far dearer
to them than their own private Houses. But now withal there are two things
hinted, very observable, in that Clause; where our Fathers praised thee: as
namely, 1. That being as it were ashamed to allege their own serving of God
there, because they had been so regardless of their duty therein, and had done
what they did in such a manner, as might well render it loathsome to God; yet
they put him in mind how formerly in better times their Forefathers had duly
served him there: And, 2. How sad a thing it was, that they should now weep and
lament over the ruins of that House, wherein their Ancestors with such
triumphant joy used to praise God for his goodness to them; and all our
pleasant things are laid waste; that is, say some, all the choice things,
wherein we took pleasure, are spoiled and carried away. But the word, laid
waste, does rather import, that they speak hear of their goodly Palaces and
great Houses, public and private, which were likewise by the Enemy burnt down
and destroyed.

Ver. 12. Will thou refrain thy self for these things, O Lord? etc.] That is,
Can thou contain thy self from coming in to our help, and from avenging thy
self upon our Enemies, when thou see us, thy People, in such a miserable
condition, and our Enemies offering so much wrong to thy self, and thy
Concernments? Though we have deserved to be punished severely; yet will thou
not vindicate thine own glory?

CHAP. LXV.
VERSE 1. I Am sought of them that asked not for me, etc.] Many Expositors take
this to be Gods Answer to the Prayer of his People in the foregoing Chapter,
wherein by his seeking out those that minded not him, he assures them, that he
would have been ready enough to have hearkened to the Prayers of his People,
had they called upon him in a right manner, and had they not by their obstinate
wickedness caused him to disregard their Prayers. But now others, not
improbably, say, that the main scope of this place, is to foretell the
rejection of the Jews, and the just cause God had so to deal with them. Only
lest they should hence infer the making void of the Covenant which God had made
with their Fathers, he first promises this concerning the calling of the
Gentiles, in whom the Covenant should be made good, they being by Faith
ingratifted into the Stock of Israel; I am sought of them that asked not for
me, I am found of them that sought me not; that is, the Gentiles, that in
former times did neither know me, nor inquire nor seek after me, do now upon
the Preaching of the Gospel to them (won thereto by my preventing Grace) both
seek after me, and find me, and worship me; for that it is the calling of the
Gentiles, that is here intended, is evident, because it is by the Apostle Paul
expressly applied thereto, Romans 10.20. But Esaias is very bold (to wit, in that
he durst tell the Jews of that which was so hateful to them, the taking in the
Gentiles in their stead to be the People of God) and says, I was found of them
that sought me not, I was made manifest unto them, that asked not after me.
They are the very same words in effect with those of the Prophet here, only the
two branches are transposed. As for the following Words here added by the
Prophet, they are to the same purpose with that which went before; I said,
behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my Name; that is, I
was willing to manifest my self to them, and to receive and own them as my
People, which before they were not; or, as some, lo, here I am, ready still to
hear you, and to satisfy your desires, when you call upon me. But see the Note
also, Deuteronomy. 32.21. The Ingemination, behold me, behold me, is to imply, either
Gods great forwardness to hear and help them, when they should seek to him: or
the wonder of Gods grace herein, and how incredible it would seem to the Jews.

Ver. 2. I have spread out my hands, etc.] See the Note, Prove. 1.24. all the
day; that is, for a long time together, constantly and continually, even in a
long Succession of Ages, first by my Prophets, and afterward by my Son, unto a
Rebellious People; to wit, the Jews; for so the Apostle expounds it, Romans
10.21. But to Israel he says, all day long I have stretched forth my hands
unto a disobedient and gainsaying People, which is here in the Prophet, which
walks in a way that was not good; that is, in ways very bad, wicked ways;
see 1 Samuel 2.24. and Psalm. 36.4. after their own thoughts; that is, as seems
good in their own Eyes, according to the inclination and desires of their own
naughty Hearts: And herein it is like their following their own devices in
their manifold Will-worships, may be principally intended, because of that
which follows.

Ver. 3. A People that provokes me to anger continually to my Face, etc.] To
wit, by their Superstitions and Idolatries, say some, which they had brought
into the very Temple, the place of Gods special presence: Or, 2. by doing
boldly and impudently that which was contrary to what God in his Word had
expressly enjoined them; or, 3. by sinning openly and confidently, not in the
least fearing Gods allseeing Eye; that Sacrifices in Gardens; see the Note,
Chap. 1.29. and burns Incense upon Bricks, (so it is in the Hebrew) that is,
upon Altars of Bricks, as the Word is rendered in our Translation, of which
happily they chose to build their Altars, that they might be the more curiously
Hewed and Carved. But yet, as in a way of contempt (with respect to their
leaving his Golden Altar, to burn incense upon them) God calls them barely
Bricks. I know there are some that do otherwise understand this last clause;
namely, that it is meant of the Bricks or Tiles wherewith their flat-roofed
Houses were covered, where indeed these Idolaters used to burn Incense to their
Idols; or at least of the Altars of Brick, which for that purpose they were
wont to build there; see the Note, 2 Kings 23.12.

Ver. 4. Which remain among the Graves, and lodge in the Monuments, etc.] That
is, That haunted places where the dead had been buried, and sometimes continued
there a long while together, even lodging there by Night, perhaps for the
greater secrecy; to wit, that they might raise up their Ghosts, and consult
with them, or receive Answers from them in their sleep, by Revelations and
Divinatory Dreams: Or, that they might Consult with evil Spirits, that usually
delight to appear to Men in such doleful solitary places; see the Notes, Chap.
8.19. and Deuteronomy. 18.11. Which eat Swines flesh, expressly against the Law of God,
Lev. 7.11. and Broth (or pieces) of abominable things are in their Vessels;
that is, of things unclean by the Law of God, which they kept, either to eat,
or else, as some think, to pour it as a Drink Offering upon their Idolatrous
Sacrifices.

Ver. 5. Which say, etc.] To wit, to the Prophets or others, that undertook to
reprove them for the sins before mentioned, or that any way sought to reclaim
them; or generally to all that were not of their way, though the choicest of
Gods Servants, Stand by thy self; that is, Take care of thy self, meddle not
with me; or keep apart by thy self, touch not me; which they speak out of a
proud conceit of their own holiness, and contempt of others, as appears by the
following words; come not near to me, for I am holier than (...). And this
above all God abhored in them. These, says he, are a Smoke in my Nose; that
is, they provoke me to anger, or make my anger smoke against them (there seems
to be an allusion in the Phrase, to the Breath that will from the Nose puff
forth like smoke in those that are angry). Or rather, these are a vexation, a
trouble, and offense to me, as smoke uses to be to Men's Eyes and Noses; a Fire
that burns all the day; that is, they cause mine anger to burn like Fire
against them continually, or even unto Eternity, and to burn them like so much
combustible matter, with a Fire, say some, that shall never be quenched. See
the Note^ Deuteronomy. 32.22. Some understand the first Clause of Gods dispelling them
in his anger like Smoke: But the former Expositions are the best.

Ver. 6. Behold, it is written before me, etc.] Some refer this to that which
follows, concerning Gods punishing them, and so would have the meaning to be,
that God had determined and decreed, that he would be avenged on them for their
wickedness; See the Note, Jer. 13.26. But it is rather meant of their Evil ways
before mentioned; to wit, that they were kept upon Record before God, and were
ever in his Eye: I will not keep silence; that is, I will forbear them no
longer; see the Note, Chap. 42.14. but will recompense, even recompense into
their Bosom; that is, say some, by striking them with such terrors of
Conscience, that they shall feel what it is to sin against me: Or rather, it is
meant of punishing them abundantly; the Expression being taken from those that
when they would give of any thing plentifully to others, are wont to pour it
into their Laps, not standing to court or measure what they give; See the Note,
Psalm. 79.12.

Ver. 7 Your Iniquities, etc.] This depends upon the foregoing Verse: What
would he recompense into their Bosoms? Why, your Iniquities, and the
Iniquities of your Fathers together (says the Lord God) to wit, by punishing
you both for the one and the other. But how can it stand with the Justice of
God, to punish Children for the Sins of their Parents? I answer, 1. That God
never punishes any particular Persons for the sins of their Parents, unless
they run on in ways of wickedness, as their Parents did before them. 2. That he
never brings any evil upon any wicked persons, but what their own Sins have
abundantly deserved. 3. That yet it is no impeachment to the Justice of God, to
punish wicked Men the more severely and remarkably, even with respect to the
wickedness of their Parents, that happily escaped in their time, that so it may
be observed, that vengeance, though delayed for a time, does usually at length
fall upon the Race of the Wicked. And 4. that in cutting off a Nation, when
they have filled up the measure of their Iniquities, Genesis 15.16. it is no
injustice in God, thereby to punish the sins both of that present Age, and of
former Generations; which, that is, which Fathers of yours, have burnt Incense
upon the Mountains, and Blasphemed me upon the Hills; to wit, by these their
Idolatrous Courses, whereby the Lord was indeed really Blasphemed, 1. By that
base contempt which they cast upon him, in that they slighted him, and his Law,
and minded not what was there enjoined them. 2. In that they gave away the
Glory due to him, to such base Idols. And 3. By forsaking him, to follow the
Idol Gods of the Heathens: Therefore will I measure their former work into
their Bosom; that is, I will punish them for their sins long since committed,
yea even by their Fathers.

Ver. 8. Thus says the Lord, etc.] Here a Promise of mercy is added,
concerning the saving of a Remnant in that common Destruction that was coming
upon the Jews: As the new Wine is found in the Cluster, and one says, Destroy
it not; that is, As when a Man is going about to cut down a blasted or barren
Vine, and one espying some one good Cluster of Grapes on some Bough of it, does
call upon him to spare it; Destroy it not, for a Blessing is in it; that is,
Destroy not this Bunch, for there is some good Wine, some juice and liquor in
it, through the Blessing of God upon it; or, destroy not this Vine, for by this
Cluster it appears, that there is still a Blessing, life and sap in it, and
there may be hope therefore, that by good Husbandry and Pruning away the dead
Branches, it may recover and bear good Fruit again; and thereupon he forbears
to cut down the Vine: so will I do for my Servants sakes, that I may not
destroy them all; so will I do with my People, for the sake of those righteous
sincere Servants of mine that are amongst them, I will not destroy the whole
Nation, but reserve a Remnant to be a stock for aftertimes.

Ver. 9. And I will bring forth a Seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an
Inheritor of my Mountains, etc.] As if he had said, Not only shall this Remnant
of my people Israel be preserved, and brought out of Babylon; but from them
also shall spring a numerous Posterity, that shall fully replenish not only
Jerusalem (which may be more particularly here intended by Gods Mountains, as
being compased about with Mountains, Psalm. 125.2. but also the whole Land of
Judea, that was for the general a Mountainous Country, and was long since given
them for their Inheritance; and mine Elect shall ^^herit it, and my Servants
shall dwell there; that is, they shall be put into the actual possession of it.
But now under this, the Spiritual Seed that should replenish the Church in the
Days of the Gospel, may also be comprehend^d.

Ver. 10. And Sharon shall be a Fold of Flocks, and the Valley of Achor a place
for the Her^s to lie down in, etc.] As Sharon (for which see the Note, Cant.
2.1.) so also the Valley of Achor, (so called by occasion of the Execution that
was there done upon Achor and his Family, Josh. 7.26.) was a place it seems of
rich Pastures; and thence is that, Hos. 2.15. I will give her her Vineyards
from thence, and the Valley of Achor for a Door of hope. The Promise therefore
here intended is, that Gods People should not only be repossessed of the Land
of Canaan, but also that God should bless them therein; their Land that had
lain long waste and desert, should be very fruitful and full of Cattle, and
they should dwell in it safely and securely. But now under this, the plenty of
Spiritual Blessings in the Days of the Gospel may also be employed.

Ver. 11. But ye are they that forsake the Lord, etc.] See the Notes, Chap.
1.4.28. that forget my Holy Mountain; that is, that mind not my Holy Temple or
Mount Zion; that prepare a Table for that troop, or for Gad, as it is in the
Margin of our Bibles, according to the Hebrew. Some take this, and that also
which follows of Meni, to be the proper Names of two Idols. And again others
think, that by Gad (rendered in our Translation that troop) is meant either the
Planet Jupiter, or Mars, or that imaginary Deity of Fortune, which certainly
the Heathens Worshipped as a Goddess; Sed te, Nos facimus fortuna deam,
coeloque locamus; and they tell us great Stories of Tables which they used to
prepare for this Idol, furnished with all kind of Provision. But far more
probably I conceive others hold, that by that troop is meant the Host of
Heaven, or the numberless Multitude of the Stars they Worshipped; or rather the
huge Multitude of their Idol-Gods, which they daily increased, as if they
thought they could never have enough of them. And accordingly some think, that
by those words, they prepare a Table for that troop; is meant, the preparing of
Sacrifices which they laid on the Altars of these their Idol-Gods, the rather
enclining hereto, because Gods Altar is sometimes called the Table of the Lord,
as in Mal. 1.7, 12. But rather hereby is meant the solemn Feasts which they
kept in honor of their Idols, in the places where they Worshipped their Idols,
and of part of the Sacrifices, which they offered to their Idols; see the Note,
Judge. 9.27. much after the manner of the solemn Feasts, which Gods People were
appointed to keep in the Tabernacle and Temple: And then for the following
words; And that furnish a Drink Offering to that number; (where the Hebrew Word
Meni is again in the Margin) Some do hereby understand the Planet Mercury, the
Merchants God, because their business consists much in numbering and casting up
Accounts: And others again conceive that hereby is meant the seven Planets; or
some Constellation consisting of a certain number of Stars. But here again I
conceive it most probable, that the same is meant by that number, that was
before meant by that troop; to wit, the numberless number either of the Stars,
or rather of their Idol-Gods which they worshipped. And so by furnishing a
Drink Offering to that number, is meant, that they did liberally provide
Sacrifices and Drink Offerings for every one of them, not omitting any, though
there were such a huge Multitude of them.

Ver. 12. Therefore will I number you to the Sword, etc.] This is spoken with
reference to that number mentioned in the foregoing verse, to which they are
there said to have poured forth their Drink Offerings; as if it had been
expressed thus; Since you are so delighted with Numbers, or since you are so
pleased with the numberless number of your Gods, and are so zealous to worship
them all, not omitting any one of them; I also will deliver you up by
Multitudes to the Slaughter, or I will deliver you up to be slain by Tale and
Number, so that none of you shall escape; and ye shall all bow down to the
Slaughter; as if he had said, You that have bowed down to your Idols, shall
then bow down to be slain by your Enemies; because when I called, ye did not
answer, etc. That is, because ye were by my Prophets better instructed, and
often pressed to leave your Idolatries, and yet you would obstinately go on,
and would not hearken to them; but did evil before mine Eyes; See the Note
above, ver. 3. and did choose that wherein I delighted not; that is, and did
advisedly choose to do that which was an abomination to me.

Ver. 13. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold my Servants shall eat, but
ye shall be hungry, etc] That is, my Servants that continue faithful to me
shall live comfortably in the assurance of my favor, and be provided for, even
to full contentation, of all blessings requisite, both Temporal and Spiritual:
Whereas you that have forsaken me, to run after Idol-Gods, shall fall into
extremity of Misery. By the wicked here threatened, I understand those
Idolatrous Jews, to whom the Prophet now speaks, who because they had given
their Meat and Drink to Idol-Gods, should within a while be carried Captive
into Babylon, and there perish with hunger and thirst; and on the other side,
by the Servants of God, to whom so much good is here Promised, that faithful
Remnant, that should be delivered out of Babylon: for this indeed, I conceive,
is primarily here intended, as being most agreeable with the Context. But yet
some extend the Promises here made, to that Holy Seed that would rise up to his
Church in the Days of the Gospel.

Ver. 15. And ye shall leave your Name for a curse unto my chosen, etc.] As if
he had said, You now Glory in the name of being the Seed of Abraham, that holy
People of God; but alas! hereafter you shall find it quite contrary; Or,
whereas you hope to leave a Name of great renown behind you, instead hereof,
when you are gone, ye shall leave your Name for a curse; So that when men shall
curse any body, they shall instance in you, saying, May thou be cursed, as
the wicked Jews were cursed, that were carried Captives to Babylon; according
to that which is said, Jer. 29.22. And of them shall be taken up a curse by all
the Captivity of Judah which are in Babylon, saying, The Lord make thee like
Zedekiah, and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the Fire. But see
also the Notes, Chap. 43.28. and Numb. 5.21. For the Lord God shall slay thee,
as was said before, ver. 12. and call his Servants by another name; that is,
say some, not Jews but Christians. But I rather think, that hereby is meant
either, 1. That he would take other Nations to be his People. Or 2. That Men
should not use their name in cursing as they did the Jews, but rather in
blessing. Or 3. That they should be brought into a Glorious state and
condition; see the Note, Chap. 62.4.

Ver. 16. That he who blesses himself in the Earth, etc.] This is mentioned as
the effect of that bliss and joy which in the three foregoing verses God had
promised his People; to wit, that hereupon it should come to pass, That he who
blesses himself in the Earth, shall bless himself in the God of Truth; that
is, the true God, or the faithful God. Some understand this thus, that he who
judges himself to be in a blessed and happy Estate, and that comforts himself
with hope that he is in such an Estate, shall ascribe it wholly to God, and to
his Promises of Grace: But rather the meaning is, that whosoever shall wish or
pray for any blessing upon himself, shall wish it of God, or pray to the true
God for it. And though by those words in the Earth, may be meant in the Land of
Judea, and so the intent of the words may be, that after that, in that Land no
Man should bless himself in any other but the true God; yet rather it is meant
of the whole Earth in general, as having respect to the Days of the Gospel; to
wit, that all the World over Men should only bless themselves in the true God:
And he that swears in the Earth, shall swear by the God of Truth; to wit,
only, and not by any Idol God; and see the Note also, Chap 19.18. Because the
former troubles are forgotten; that is, because God shall put an end to all his
Peoples former troubles, or because he shall bring them to such a happy Estate,
that this shall make them forget all their former Miseries; (see the Note,
Chap. 54 4.) and because they are hid from mine Eyes; to wit, because I shall
quite take them away, as not being able any longer to see my Children in such
Misery. The inference is this, That because they should so plainly see, that it
was God that had made such a blessed change in their Estate, therefore they
should own and Worship no other God but him: But yet withal we must know, that
this which is said of the troubles of his People being forgotten and hid from
Gods Eyes, may be understood also in a Gospel-sense, of their being freed from
all the Miseries their Sins had deserved, partly by a full Pardon of their Sins
through Faith in Christ here, and completely by a perfect Freedom from all evil
in Heaven hereafter.

Ver. 17. For behold, I create new Heavens and a new Earth, etc.] See the Note,
Chap. 51.16. It is as if he had said, I am about to make such a wonderful
Change in my Church, that it shall seem to be as if there were a new World
created. This was begun at the Deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon. A
wonderful Change was then made, when those that were a little before in such
miserable Bondage in Babylon, were settled again in their own Land, and had
rebuilt the City Jerusalem, and their Temple therein; It might be well then
said, that God had then created new Heavens and a new Earth. The Heavens were
not Cloudy and frowning, as before, but clear and fair; the Earth was not
Barren and Desert, as before, but Fruitful and well Inhabited. But yet more
fully this was done in that far more wonderful Change that was wrought in the
World, when Christ accomplished the Work of his Peoples Redemption, and the
Gospel began to be Preached amongst all Nations: For then indeed in regard of
Doctrine, Ordinances, Worship, and the Gifts and Graces conferred upon Gods
People, th^re seemed to be a new face and state of things; yea there was an
alteration for the better in all things whatsoever, according to that of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.17. Old things are past away, behold all things are become
new; Yea and farther it shall be fulfilled at the Resurection, called
therefore, Acts 3.21. the time of the Restitution of all things; See the Note,
Psalm. 102.26. As for the following words, and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind; either it is meant of former troubles, and so is
the same with what was said in the foregoing Verse; or else rather of former
Times, or former Mercies, the former state of things, the former Heaven and
Earth; to wit, that the Spiritual excellency of the Church in Gospel Days,
should so far exceed that which had been in the time of the Law, that those
former things should not be once minded or thought on; see the Note, Chap.
43.18.

Ver. 18. But be you glad, and rejoice for ever in that which I create, etc.]
See the Note, Chap. 35.10. For behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her
People a joy; that is, I am about to do that for them, which shall yield them
matter of abundant joy; there shall be nothing in a manner but rejoicing
amongst them, as it is more fully expressed in the next Verse.

Ver. 19. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my People, etc.] This is
added, either as the main cause, why Gods People were in the foregoing verse
pressed to be so exceeding joyful, Gods Love and Favor being indeed the main
ground of his Peoples joy; or else, as a farther illustration of the Happiness
promised them; to wit, that it should be so great, that not only they should
rejoice, but even God also should rejoice for it together with them; And the
voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying; which,
as it has respect to the Jews that were brought home out of Babylon, must be
understood comparatively, that there should be no such weeping and crying
amongst them, as there had been formerly; See the Notes, Chap. 30.19. and 54.9.
and 60.18. But as it is spoken with respect to the People of God in the Days of
the Gospel, it must be meant of the eminent comfort which they should find here
even in their greatest Sorrows and Sufferings; because of the joy they have in
Eternal things, which they cannot lose; and likewise of their complete Freedom
from all Sorrow in Heaven; See the Notes, Chap. 25.8. and 35.10.

Ver. 20. There shall be no more thence an infant of Days, etc.] I pass by many
Expositions that are given of these Words that have indeed no show of
probability in them. Some indeed there are, which though I conceive they be not
intended in this place, yet more is said for them with some appearance of
truth, than for the other; as, 1. That the Prophet speaks here of the great
Change that should be in those happy times here promised, in regard of the
Wisdom, and Gravity, and Holiness that should be found amongst the People of
God; that there should be none amongst them so Foolish, and Childish, and Vain,
and Boyish, as there had been; their old Men should be such, in regard of their
prudence and Gravity, as might well be looked upon as Men fully of ripe Age,
and such as had every way carried themselves as became their Years: Nay
farther, even the Child should carry himself as if he were a Man of an hundred
years old; that is, a Man of great Years; See the Note, Eccles. 6.3. But as for
those that being old were yet void of saving knowledge, that lived vainly and
sinfully, like old Boys or Children, they should be looked upon as abominable
and accursed, or as such should be cut off by the Hand of God. And indeed thus
much may be said for this Exposition, that Men that are Childish and Vain for
Understanding and Manners, are termed Children and Babes in the Scripture; see
the Note, Eccles. 10.16. Or, 2. That this is spoken of the Spiritual Estate of
Gods People in the Days of the Gospel* to wit, that Believers should not always
continue in a state of Infancy in Knowledge and Grace, but that they should be
continually growing up in Grace unto a perfect Man, in which Estate, without
decaying, they should continue for ever, Ephesians. 4.12.16. Or, 3. That this must be
refered to the Resurrection, and to the Eternal Estate of Gods People in
Heaven, wherein there shall be no weakness of Infancy or Childhood, nor
Infirmities of old Age, but all shall be fresh and flourishing; Children shall
be raised in a perfect Stature, and Old Men in Youthful strength and vigor.
And as for old sinners, unbelieving and impenitent Persons, they shall have no
share in this blessed Estate. But certainly neither of these Expositions can
fairly be made to agree with the several branches of this verse* Questionless
it is long life, which is here amongst other Blessings promised to Gods People;
to wit, that neither Young nor Old amongst them should be cut off by untimely
Death, as they had been, but should accomplish the full time, which according
to the ordinary course of Nature they were like to reach, and which others of
their condition and constitution did usuall^ attain; There shall be no more
from thence an i^fant of Days; that is, there sh^^l not hereafter go out, or be
carried out to Burial, any that are but Infants or Children for Days; but being
healthful and strong, they shall grow up to their full stint of years; nor an
old Man that has not filled his Days; that is, that has not, according to the
ordinary course of Nature, lived to the full Period of his Days; For the Child
shall dye an hundred years old; that is, a very old Man; but the sinner being
an hundred years old, shall be accursed; as if he had said, but yet in the
midst of all the Prosperity of Gods People, if a Man lives a sinful wicked
life, though he lives never so long, he shall be accursed, both here and
Eternally hereafter.

Ver. 21. And they shall build Houses and Inhabit them, etc.] Here, together
with long life, pe^ce is promised. But here still under Temporal, many
understand Spiritual and Eternal Blessings.

Ver. 22. They shall not Build and another Inhabit, they shall not Plant and
another Eat, etc.] This Promise imports, not only that they should not be
bereaved of these things, neither by Foreign Enemies breaking in upon them, as
was said before. Chap. 62.8, 9. (For which see the Note there) Nor by the power
of Oppressors, too mighty for them; nor by being forced, through extreme
Poverty, ^o make them away; bu^ likewise principally, that they should not
Build and Plant merely for Posterity, but that they should themselves live to
enjoy them, as appears eviden^^^ both by the foregoing verses, and that which
here follows, For as the days of a Tree, are the days of my People, that is,
they shall like many long-lived Trees, live many years, as namely, the Oak,
the Elm, the Palm Tree, etc See the Note Psalm. 92 12. And mine Elect shall
long enj^y the work of their Hands; to wit, by reason of the lengthning out of
their Lives; See the Note Psalm. 128.2.

Ver. 23. They shall not labor in vain, etc.] To wit, as not living to enjoy
any benefit by what they had Built or Planted; ver. 22. See the Note, Deuteronomy.
28.30. nor bring forth for trouble; that is, they shall not bring forth
Children, either, 1. To the trouble of themselves, as being perplexed with fear
in times of War, lest their Children should be slain, or made Slaves; or in
times of Pestilence, lest they should be swept away by that devouring Sickness;
or as being troubled to see such Misery befall their Children; Or, 2. To the
trouble of their Children, they shall not by the loss of their Parents, or any
other sad Calamities that may befall them, be brought to look upon themselves
as born for nothing but grief and trouble. As they shall long enjoy their
Estates peaceably, so their Children too; and as they shall live quietly and
prosperously, so shall their Children also; For they are the Seed of the
Blessed of the Lord, and their off spring with them; that is, both they and
their Posterity are the genuine Children of those Holy Servants of of God, that
he Promised to bless; and therefore both they and their Children shall be
blessed of God.

Ver. 24. And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and
while they are yet speaking, I will hear.] That is, before they pray, whilst
they are only purposing to pray, or desiring a Mercy in their Hearts; at least
before they have finished their Prayer, I will come in to their help or supply.
The drift of the words is to show how exceeding ready God is to hear the
Prayers of his People.

Ver. 25. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat
Straw like the Bullock, and dust shall be the Serpents meat, etc.] That is,
being content with that Food, they shall no longer hurt either Men or Beasts;
But see the Note, Genesis 3.14. To the same purpose is that, Chap. 11.8. And the
Sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, etc. But for this whole Verse
see the Notes, Chap. 11.6, 7, 8, 9.

CHAP. LXVI.
VERSE. 1. THus says the Lord, etc.] As the Prophet in the beginning of his
Prophecy ( Chap. 1.1.) Expostulated with the Jews, concerning their carnal
confidence in their Temple and Sacrifices, so he does here again toward the
close of his Prophecy: The Heaven is my Throne; to wit, because there the
Majesty of God is most gloriously set forth: and the Earth is my Footstool;
that is, as vast a body as the Earth is, it is but a little Footstool for me;
Where is the House that ye build unto me? And where is the place of my Rest? So
the Temple was called; See Psalm. 132.14. This is my rest for ever. The drift of
the whole passage, I conceive, is this. Because the Jews were a wicked People,
falsehearted toward God, and wholly regardless of obeying his commands, and
yet in the mean season gloried much in Gods dwelling amongst them in his
Temple, as if they had thought, that God had been included in those Walls, and
thereupon they had no cause to question his favor, and his gracious acceptance
of the Service that was there done him, or to fear that he would ever forsake
them, or this his dwelling place; therefore the Lord does here from the
infiniteness and immensity of his being, which the whole World could not
contain, show them what a vain and foolish thing it was in them, to think that
any House could be built that should hold or contain him, or that he should
need, or be pleased with a House that should be set up for his Habitation (and
indeed to this purpose does Stephen cite this place, Acts 7.48. etc.) yea, that
he must needs be a Spirit, infinite in his Essence, and consequently that he
could only delight in Spiritual Service, and that therefore the mere outward
pomp of a stately house, and Carnal Ceremonies, could never be the things that
were pleasing in his sight; without a pure heart and a pure life, no Man can
serve God acceptably; yea, and some think too, that under this is also implied,
that there was a time coming, when this Temple-Services should be utterly
abbrogated, as our Savior says, John 4.21.

Ver. 2. For all those things has mine hand made, etc.] To wit, the Heaven and
the Earth and all things therein; and all those things have been, says the
Lord; that is, they have had their being, or they have consisted ( Col. 1.17.)
or continued in their being, by my hand, by being upheld by my power, Heb. 1.3.
Now the drift of this is to show, that since he made the World and all things
therein, he needed not a House to dwell in here, no more then he did from
Eternity, before he made these things; and that if he did desire a House,
surely he that mansions in Heaven and Earth, needed not to desire them to build
him an House; see the Notes, Psalm. 50.11, 12. but to this Man will I look; to
wit, out of great respect, and out of my tender and provident care over him:
Or, as to the House and Temple wherein I will choose to dwell, even to him that
is Poor and of a contrite Spirit; see the Notes, Chap. 57.15. and Psalm 51.16.
and trembles at my Word; that is, that fearing me, stands in awe of my Word,
and dares not decline in the least from what I have commanded him. It is as if
the Lord had said, though I be so infinitely great and high, and all sufficient
in my self, yet I overlook all the World to cast mine Eye upon these poor
humble ones, and these are the Temple that I will dwell in.

Ver. 3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a Man, etc.] That is, say
some, when Christ shall have put an end to the Legal Worship, the continuance
of these Sacrifices, will be as hateful to God, as the slaying of a Man would
be; yea, and because the Particle of similitude (as) is not in the Hebrew, but
it is there; He that kills an Ox, slays a Man, he that Sacrifices a Lamb,
cutteth off a Dogs Neck, etc. therefore some conceive that the Jews are charged
here with this, that at the same time, when they Srcrificed Oxen and Lambs,
etc. to God, according to Gods Law, they did also Sacri^ce to their Idol-Gods,
Men, and Dogs, and Swine, as the Heathens did. But I make no question but the
words are best Rendered with a Note of Similitude, as it is in our Translation;
and that the scope of the place is to show, that whilst they were such a wicked
People, void of all true fear of God, their Sacrifices were not only things
unacceptable, but even hateful and odious to him; see the Notes, Chap. 1.11.
etc. He that kills an Ox; to wit, for Sacrifice; is as if he slew a Man;
that is, he does that which I abhor as much as if he murdered a Man; or his
killing an Ox for Sacrifice, is no more pleasing to me, than if he slew a Man
for a Sacrifice, as the Heathens are wont to do. For it may well be that in
this expression (and so likewise in those that follow) his drift is to show,
that the abominable Sacrifices of the Heathens were as acceptable to him, as
theirs were; he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck, which
was not only one of those unclean Creatures, that might not be offered in
Sacrifice (though the Heathens did) but always also esteemed base and vile;
insomuch that whereas the Money that was taken for the Redemption of any
unclean Beast might be brought into the Temples Treasury, Lev. 27.11. there was
express Order, that no price of a Dog should be brought into Gods House; see
the Note, Deuteronomy. 23.8. he that offers an oblation, as if he offered Swines
blood; Creatures so unclean, that they might not be eaten, or touched, Lev.
11.7, 8. much less might they be offered in Sacrifice, as the Heathens did: he
that burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol; that is, praised it, or prayed
or sacrificed to it; yea, they have chosen their own ways; that is, wittingly
and knowingly they have chosen to walk in their own ways, rather than do what I
commanded them; where by their own ways may be particularly meant their
Will-worships, which were of their own devising, not of Gods appointment; or
generally their sinful, wicked ways, which alone were enough to make God abhor
their Sacrifices. And so also may the last Clause be understood; and their Soul
delights in their abominations. But see the Note also, Psalm. 11.5.

Ver. 4. I also will choose their delusions, etc.] This has reference to that
which was said in the close of the foregoing Verse; they have chosen their own
ways: And so it is as if God had said, They have made their choice, and so now
I will make mine; they have chosen to do what they pleased with me, even those
things which I would not have had done; and now by way of retaliation, I will
take what course I please with them, I will do to them what they would not have
done. Some read it, I also will choose their devices, (as it is in the Margin)
meaning the reward of their devices; they chose to do what they list in my
Worship, as if they were no way bound up to my Commands; and now I will choose
to do what I please with them, as if I had no way engaged my self by promise to
them. But it is better rendered, as it is in our Bibles; I also will choose
their delusions; where by their delusions may be meant (actively) the delusions
and mockeries which they put upon God; yea, and wherewith they deluded the
World and themselves too; in that they sought to cover their Hypocrisy and
Disobedience and Rebellions against God with a show of Piety, and a pretense
that they aimed at the advancement of Gods Glory; or by their delusions, may be
meant (passively) the delusions and mockages which they should endure from
others, and wherewith God would punish them for the other. So that both may be
included, and so we may understand it thus: Because they have thus vainly
deluded themselves, and wickedly sought to delude me, by bringing condign
punishment upon them, I will discover their wickedness, and thereby bring them
to be mocked, deluded, and derided by others; and will bring their fears upon
them; that is, those terrors and affrightments which their sins have deserved;
yet some hereby understand the Evils which they feared; to wit, that of being
ruined by the Heathens, which by complying with them in their Idolatry they
thought to prevent; because when I called none did answer, etc. see the the
No^^ Chap. 65.12.

Ver. 5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word, etc.] Here the
Prophet turns his speech to those that truly feared God amongst the Jews, of
whom God had said above, ver. 2. that they were more precious in his Eyes, than
all the World besides, and that he would look to them, as the Temple wherein he
would choose to dwell, rather than to the Temple in Jerusalem: your Brethren; to
wit, by outward profession (yet it may be taken as spoken Ironically, by way of
aggravating their wickedness, in their usage of the faithful amongst them) that
hated you, that cast you out; that is, that cast you out of their Society, and
shunned your company as polluted, as was said before; see the Note, Chap. 65.5.
Or, that Excommunicated you, as not worthy to be numbered amongst Gods People;
for my Names sake; that is, for my sake; and see the Notes, Psalm. 44.22. and
69.7. said, Let the Lord be glorified; which though some understand, as spoken
by way of justifying those Idolatrous courses, which the faithful amongst them
opposed; to wit, that they set up so many Altars and high Places, and so tied
not themselves to one place, but worshipped God in many several places, and
with more sorts of Sacrifices, purposely that Gods Glory might be the more
magnified: And others, as a reason given why the wicked Jews did persecute and
cast them out from amongst them; Namely, that God might be glorified in their
Just punishment; yet I rather think that this was spoken by their false
Brethren Ironically; Let God be glorified; that is, by bringing those Judgments
upon us, wherewith you tell us he intends to glorify himself; see the Note,
Chap. 5.19. or rather by appearing in some glorious manner to vindicate your
wrongs, or in doing some notable thing for you, that may discover that you are
so precious in his Eyes, as you pretend you are. For this suits best with the
answer, which in the following words the Prophet returns to this flout of
theirs; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed; to wit,
when he shall bring upon you the punishments which you have been threatened
with, and your Idol-gods shall not be able to help you; and God shall show
great mercy to them. All which some understand of all the Evil God brought upon
the Idolatrous Jews by the Chaldeans, and the good he did for the Faithful
amongst them, at their return from Babylon: and others of their ruin by the
Romans, and the wonderful thing he should do for those that embraced Christ and
his Gospel.

Ver. 6. A voice of noise from the City, etc.] The Prophet breaks forth
abruptly into these words; as if in a Prophetical Rapture he had heard the
noise here mentioned; see the Note upon a like passage, Chap. 13.4. A voice of
noise from the City, a voice from the Temple, etc. And some understand hereby
the voice of those that should go forth out of the City and Temple of
Jerusalem, to preach the Gospel amongst the Nations; which should be the savor
of Life unto Life to some, but the savor of Death unto Death to others; see
the Note, Chap. 2.3. But it is rather meant of the noise that should be in
Jerusalem, at the surprizal of the City, and that either by the Enemy, when in
their Fury they were exercising the cruelties of Wars u^^^ at such times,
plundering and burning their Houses, and slaughtering the People; or else by
the Inhabitants of the City, and Temple, or those that fled thither for
shelter, when there was such piteous outcries amongst them for fear of the
Enemy. And this some understand of the destruction of the City and Temple, by
the Chaldeans, and others; yea* the most of the destruction of them afterward
by the Romans. And because this was done originally by the appointment of God,
therefore in the very next words it is called; a voice of the Lord that
rendereth recompense to his Enemies; to wit, the wicked Jews. Because they
would not hear the gentler voice of Gods Prophets, therefore they should hear
this more dreadful voice, out of their City; yea out of their Temple, wherein
they so much trusted.

Ver. 7. Before she traveled, she brought forth, etc.] Lest the Faithful
amongst the Jews, hearing so much of the ruin of their City and Nation should
be overmuch dejected with fear, this is added to assure them, That for all
this, Gods Church should not only be preserved, but also on a sudden mightily
increased: For this, Before she traveled she brought forth, etc. is certainly
meant; 1. Of the full Peopling of Jerusalem, and the Land of Judea, with the
Captives that came from Babylon; suddenly and unexpectedly; (And it may well be
thought that it is spoken by way of advancing this their deliverance, above
(...) of their deliverance out of Egypt; that being effected with much
^^^ugling and striving, but this without any Labor on their parts; Cyrus of
his own accord giving them liberty to be gone). And, 2. Of the mighty and
sudden increase of the Church, by the Conversion of the Gentiles; for which see
the Notes, Chap. 49.18, 21. and 60.4. before her pain came, she was delivered
of a manchild; that is, a great and mighty People. And besides, as this is
intended concerning the increase of the Church of Christ, it may imply, that
the Believers in those days added to the Church, should be strong in Faith,
manly, and stout, and courageous for the Truth; and likewise, what exceeding
joy there should be for that great increase of the Church, as when a Child,
especially a man-child is born.

Ver. 8. Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? etc.] To wit,
as that mentioned in the foregoing Verse; see the Note, Chap. 64.4. Shall the
Earth be made to bring forth in one day? That is, the Fruits, which are usually
a long time sprouting out, and growing, till they come to ripeness and
perfection? Or, as some would have it, shall all the Women in a Country, or in
the whole Earth, be made to bring forth together in one day? Or shall a Nation
be born at once? That is, is it possible for one Woman to bring a Nation at one
Birth? Or for several Women to bring forth a Nation together at one time? for
as soon as Zion traveled, etc. as if he had said, yet so it is here; as soon
as Zion traveled, she brought forth her Children; that is, as soon as the time
of her Travel came, she brought forth multitudes, as it were a whole Nation at
once, or in one day; for which see the foregoing Note.

Ver. 9. Shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth, says the
Lord? etc.] Some read it, as it is in the Margin; Shall I bring to the birth,
and not beget? And so reading it, the meaning must needs be, shall I that cause
other Women to conceive and bring their Conceptions to the birth, continue
Childness my self, and not beget me Children of my Zion? But reading it, as it
is in our Bibles, the meaning seems rather to be this; Shall I bring to the
birth, and not cause to bring forth; that is, shall I bring my People to the
throes and pangs of a Childbearing Woman; and shall I not withal afford her
deliverance? see the Notes, 2 Kings. 19.3. Or, shall I undertake to bring forth
my People out of Captivity, and not fully accomplish it? Shall I set upon a
work, and not go through with it? And to the same purpose is the following
Clause; Shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb, says thy God? That
is, shall I confer upon Mankind, the power of propagation, and shall I withold
this blessing from my Zion? Or, having begotten Children upon my Zion, shall I
shut up her Womb, that she cannot bring them forth?

Ver. 10. Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her,
etc.] It is the Well-willers and Friends of Jerusalem, after the return of her
People from Babylon, and consequently also of the Church of Christ, after her
mighty increase by the Conversion of the Gentiles, that are here invited to
rejoice with her; to wit, as Friends are wont to rejoice with Women, after they
are safely delivered; especially if it have been of a man-child; as was before
figuratively said of the Church, ver. 7. rejoice for joy with her, all ye that
mourn for her; that is, that did mourn for her when she was in an afflicted and
distressed estate.

Ver. 11. That ye may suck, etc.] That is, say some, in that ye shall suck and
be satisfied, etc. for they take this to be added, as the cause of the joy,
whereto they were exhorted in the foregoing Verse: But considering that it was
the Faithful that were there exhorted to rejoice in the prosperity of the
Church; I conceive this may be added as the end of their rejoicing with the
Church, even that ye may suck and be satisfied with the Breasts of her
Consolations; that ye may suck your fill; (see the Note, Psalm. 22.26.) that is,
that you may partake with her in her Salvation, Prosperity, and Glory, that as
a Mother she may with full Breasts plentifully feed and nourish you up, that
you may be nursed up in Knowledge and Grace here, till ye come to be sharers
with her in the Glory of Heaven hereafter. With respect to that which was
before said, ver. 7. concerning the Churches bringing forth Children, the
Prophet does here likewise speak of her, as of a Mother giving suck; that ye
may suck and be satisfied with the Breasts of her Consolations; to wit, those
Gospel-Consolations, wherewith she shall be comforted of God, and wherewith she
shall comfort her Children, the sincere Milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.
refreshing as Milk for poor troubled Consciences: Yea, because there is mention
made, in the close of the foregoing Verse; of those that mourned for Jerusalem,
some think that in these words; that ye may suck, etc. there is an allusion to
Mothers giving their Children suck, to still them when they cry. As for the
next Clause, that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her
Glory; that is, the Churches Glory; see the Notes, Chap. 60.1, 2, 3.

Ver. 12. For thus says the Lord, Behold I will extend Peace to her like a
River, etc.] See the Note, Chap. 48.18. and the Glory of the Gentiles as a
flowing) stream; see the Note, Chap. 61.6. then shall ye suck, ye shall be born
upon her sides, and dandled upon her knees; see the Notes, Chap. 49.22, 23. and
60.4.

Ver. 13. As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort you, etc.] As if
he had said, You shall not only be comforted by the Church your Mother, but I
also will be to you as a tender Mother herein. For as an affectionate Mother is
wont by kind speeches, and by hugging and embracing her Child, and by all
possible expressions of her love, to labor to quiet and still it, and cheer it
up again, when it cries and weeps, because of some hurt it had taken, or
because she had formerly chid it, or beaten it; so will I comfort you, my
People, after I had for a time corrected you; and ye shall be comforted in
Jerusalem; that is, though Jerusalem has lain so long in such a desolate
condition, yet shall her prosperous and flourishing Estate be matter of great
comfort and rejoicing to you.

Ver. 14. And when ye see this, etc.] This is thus expressed, to imply the
undoubted certainty of it; with their Eyes they should see it accomplished;
your heart shall rejoice; that is, you shall rejoice heartily; and your bones
shall flourish like an herb; that is, your Strength and Beauty shall be
renewed, as it is with Herbs, that seeming dead and withered in the Winter, do
in the Spring sprout out freshly again. Because misery and sorrow do usually
waste the strength of men, making their very Bones to be dead and dry; see the
Notes, Prove. 12.4. and 17.22. and on the other side, cheerfulness and joy do
advance men's health, and fill their Bones with Juice and Marrow; see the Notes,
Job 21.24. and Prove. 15.30. Hence it is, that to set forth how exceedingly they
should rejoice in the prosperous estate of Jerusalem, he uses this expression;
your bones shall flourish like an Herb; Gods People were in Babylon like a
company of dead and dry bones, Ezekiel. 37.11. but these dead Bones should become
lively and moist and vigorous again; and the hand of the Lord shall be known
toward his Servants, and his indignation toward his Enemies; that is, notice
shall be taken of that, which in the time of your misery you would not believe:
Namely, that God has done these things out of his tender respect to you, and
out of his indignation against his Enemies.

Ver. 15. For behold, the Lord will come with Fire, etc.] Having said in the
close of the foregoing Verse, that the Lord would make known his indignation
toward his Enemies; here he sets forth in what a terrible manner he would fall
upon them, using expressions that may seem to imply, that he would break forth
upon them after the manner of some dreadful tempest (see the Notes, 2 Samuel
22.8. Psalm. 50.3. and 97.3.) or else as a King marching out against his Enemies
with a mighty and dreadful Army, as the mention of his Chariots here does
import; the Lord will come with Fire, and with his Chariots like a Whirlwind;
for which see the Note, Chap. 5.28. to render his anger with Fury, and his
rebuke with flames of Fire; that is, to punish them more sharply and severely
than is usually done; see the Note, Chap. 42.25. Now this I know some
understand of Gods coming in flaming Fire, to punish the wicked at the day of
Judgment; (and it is true indeed, that then their punishment shall be fully
accomplished) but this does not so well suit with that which follows in the
next Verse; and the slain of the Lord shall be many. However, questionless it
is primarily and principally meant of the vengeance executed upon the
Idolatrous Jews (as is evident by the description that is given of them, ver.
17.) by the Chaldeans, when they burnt up their City and Temple, and made such
havoc amongst the People; though we may well also take in that greater
destruction that was likewise executed on them afterward by the Romans.

Ver. 16. For by Fire, and by his Sword, will the Lord plead with all Flesh,
etc.] That is, with Men and Women of all sorts and ranks amongst his People;
for still he speaks of the same judgment, of which he spoke in the foregoing
Verse; to wit, the destruction brought upon them by the Chaldeans. Hitherto he
had pleaded with them by his Messengers, the Prophets; but now he would plead
with them in another manner, even by Fire and Sword; and the slain of the Lord
shall be many; that is, the Lord shall slay many and many of them; their
multitude shall not save them from his Vengeance.

Ver. 17. They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves, etc.] That
is, that by washing, and other superstitious Rites, do think to make themselves
holy and pure; in the Gardens; see the Note, Chap. 1.29. behind one Tree in the
midst; that is, behind some one eminent Tree in the midst of the Gardens, set
apart for that service of washing and purifying themselves; yet some would
rather have the meaning to be this, that they did it every one behind his own
Tree, about the midst of their Gardens made choice of for their own peculiar
use; as they had every one his own peculiar God, so they would have a peculiar
Tree, under which they would serve him. Well, but then the words may be
rendered (as they are in the Margin) one after another; and then the meaning
may be, either that they purified and washed themselves one after another (as
thinking it was the more religiously done, when they did in that manner) in the
midst; that is, openly in the midst of many, that stood about them when they
did it; wherein there might be much of lasciviousness, a sin usual amongst
Idolaters; or else that they flocked in to the performance of their Idolatrous
rites; one after another; to wit, by great Companies and Troops, out of their
great zeal for the Service of their Idol-gods; eating Swines flesh; to wit, as
some think, after they had offered it in Sacrifice; but see the Note, Chap.
65.4. and the abomination; whereby some think is meant, that which had been
sacrificed to Idols, others any meat forbidden by the Law; and others again,
because this is placed here between two distinct kinds of unclean Beasts, would
have it, that by the Hebrew word Shekets here used, some particular kind of
unclean Beasts is intended; and the Mouse; expressly forbidden to be eaten, Lev.
11.29. shall be consumed together, says the Lord, see the Note, Chap. 1.28.

Ver. 18. For I know their works and their thoughts, etc.] It is in the Hebrew
only, I know their works and their Thoughts; which our Translators conceive is
spoken by way of an Aposiopesis; as if he had said, I know well enough their
works and their thoughts; it shall come, that I will gather all Nations and
Tongues; that is, because their doings and thoughts are such as they are, it
shall come to pass, that I will gather the Gentiles to be my People in their
stead; and they shall come and see my Glory; to wit, 1. In Christ; see the
Note, Chap. 40.5. 2. In the glad tidings of Man's Salvation by Christ: And, 3.
In his glorious presence in his Ordinances.

Ver. 19. And I will set a sign among them, etc.] It is much questioned amongst
Expositors, who the Persons are of whom this is spoken, and what the sign is
that God would set among them. Some hold that God speaks here of a sign; that
is, an Ensign that should be set up, first among the Jews, and afterward
amongst the Gentiles, for the gathering in of his Church, and People; according
to what is elsewhere said of an Ensign, or Standard set up; see the Notes,
Chap. 11.12. and 49.22. And by this Sign, or Ensign, some think that Christ
himself is meant, for which see the Note, Chap. 11.10. and others the preaching
of the Gospel, together with the Miracles, wherewith it was confirmed;
particularly say some, the pouring forth of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostles, at the Feast of Pentecost; or more generally, say others, all the
wonders and signs wrought by those that preached the Gospel; whereby the Elect
amongst the Jews, were first Converted and added to the Church; and afterward
the Gentiles. But then again, some understand it of a mark, or sign, whereby
some Persons may be distinguished from others: Namely, That when God intended
to destroy the Jews, he would have a sign, or a mark amongst them, whereby they
should be known whom God had chosen, to be rescued and saved from the common
destruction that was coming upon that Nation; and that herein there is an
allusion to the mark of the Blood of the Paschal Lamb upon the Doors of the
Israelies in Egypt, whereby they were saved from the Sword of the destroying
Angel. And by this mark, or sign, might be meant the profession of the
Christian Faith; or the Word and Sacraments; or a Holy Life and Conversation,
according to the Rule of the Gospel; or, that inward Seal of Gods Sanctifying
Spirit, whereby they should be distinguished from counterfeits; see Ephesians. 1.13.
and 2 Timothy 2.19. Or rather, Gods appointing them to be saved, and his watchful
providence over them for their preservation, which should be as sure a means of
safeguarding them from the common destruction, as if there had been a sign or
mark set upon them for that end and purpose; and I will send those that escape
of them; that is, those of the Jews, thus preserved; unto the Nations; to wit,
to Preach the Gospel to them; to Tarshish, Pull, and Lud, that draw the Bow, to
Tubal and Javan, etc. for the understanding whereof, we must know, 1. That by
Tarshish may be meant Tarsus in Cilicia, or some other remote place; or the
Ocean Sea in general; and so the meaning might be, that they should go forth
both by Sea and Land, to Preach the Gospel. And, 2. That under the other
particular Nations here mentioned, (whereof it is commonly thought, that some
lie East, and some West, and some North, and South, all other Nations are
comprehended all the World over; to the Isles a far off; that is, the
Inhabitants of those remote Countries, of whom the Jews had little or no
knowledge; that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my Glory; that is,
that had never heard the report of, nor seen the glory of God and of his
glorious Works; see the Note, Cap. 52.15. and they shall declare my glory among
the Gentiles; that is, the glorious riches of my Grace in Christ; the great
things I have done for the Salvation of my People, and the destruction of their
Enemies.

Ver. 20. And they shall bring all your Brethren, etc.] The Apostles and other
Preachers of the Gospel shall bring in the Converted Gentiles, your Brethren,
as being by Faith made the Children of Abraham, for an Offering unto the Lord
out of all Nations; to wit, as a People Consecrate to Gods service; according
to that of the Apostle, Romans 15.16. that the Offering up of the Gentiles might
be acceptable, being Sanctified by the Holy Ghost; and again, Phil. 2.17. If I
be Offered upon the Sacrifice and Service of your Faith, I joy and rejoice with
you all; and Romans 12.1. Present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, etc. The Heathen that were counted an unclean People,
being now purified by Faith, should be tendered to God, as a Holy Sacrifice;
upon Horses and in Chariots, and in Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift
Beasts; which implies both, 1. That all possible helps and means should be used
to bring them in to believe and join themselves to the Church; 2. That this
should be done with much respect and tender care over them; see the Note, Chap.
49.22. And, 3. That hereby the Gospel should be speedily propagated into many
Countries; to my holy Mountain Jerusalem, says the Lord; that is, to the
Church of Christ; see the Notes, Chap. 2.2, 3. as the Children of Israel bring
an Offering in a clean Vessel into the House of the Lord; to wit, because these
converted Gentiles should be a pure and holy People.

Ver. 21. And I will also take them for Priests and for Levites, says the
Lord, etc.] It is as if he had said, Yea, some of these Gentiles, that were
counted so unclean, that they might not come into the Temple, will I take to be
Priests and Levites; that is, Ministers, Pastors, and Teachers in my Church,
(Ministers and Deacons say some,) for that it is not that Spiritual
Priesthood, common to all Christians (see the Note, Chapter 61.6.) that is hear
meant, but that peculiar Office of such as were to be Teachers in the Church,
as the Priests and Levites were, Deuteronomy. 33.8. is evident, because the promise is
only, that God would take of them, that is some of them, for Priests and for
Levites; whereas in the time of the Law, none were employed in those Holy
Callings, but those that were of the Tribe of Levi, then even Men of all
Nations should be set apart to these Holy Services.

Ver. 22. For as the new Heavens and the new Earth, which I will make, shall
remain before me, says the Lord, etc.] And concerning this promise of new
Heavens and a new Earth, see the Note, Chap. 65.17. so shall your Seed and your
Name remain; the meaning is, that as that new state of the Church should
continue unto Eternity, even after the World should have an end, so should the
Seed also of the Church, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, and consequently
their Name also, continue for ever. There shall never want a Seed of true
believers in this Church, but they shall continue for ever, even as the Bliss
or Happiness of their new Estate shall be.

Ver. 23. And it shall come to pass, that from one new Moon unto another, and
from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, says
the Lord.] That is, all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles; see the Note, Psalm.
40.5. It is therefore spoken concerning the days of the Gospel, when all legal
Festivals were to cease; and so the meaning is only, that in those days the
People of God should constantly attend the Worship and Service of God in their
Church Assemblies, as it is said they did, Acts 2.42, 46. only this is
expressed in terms borrowed from the solemn meetings of Gods People under the
Law, as before, Ver. 21. where the Ministers of the Gospel are termed Priests
and Levites, and so frequently in other places.

Ver. 24. And they shall go forth, etc.] Having spoken in the foregoing Verses
of the great good which God would do for his faithful Servants, yea, and that
unto Eternity, here the Prophet returns again to denounce Judgments, both
Temporal and Eternal, against those wicked and ungodly wretches, whom he had
before theatned, Ver. 15, 16. and promises that his faithful Servants should
be Eyewitnesses of it. And accordingly, I conceive, that those Words, and they
shall go forth and lock upon the Carcases of the Men that have transgressed
against me, may be meant; 1. Of the faithful that should escape being
slaughtered in that general havoc that was made amongst the Jews by the
Chaldeans, when they surprised Jerusalem, and plundered and burnt both their
City and Temple; to wit, that they should go forth out of Jerusalem (being to
be carried away Captives) and should with their Eyes behold, as they went
along, the Carcases of their Idolatrous Brethren, lying in great heaps unburied
(according to what is before noted upon Chap. 34.3.) rotted, and so full of of
crawling Vermin, Worms, and Maggots, and not fit therefore to be removed and
carried away, but only to be burnt up with Fire; and this I judge the more
probable, because it is clear, that these Idolatrous Jews were those that he
had before threatened, Ver. 16, 17. Or, 2. Of the Jews that were sent home by
Cyrus to their own Land; to wit, that they should go out of Babylon, and see
the Carcases of the Babylonians, slain by the Persians, lying unburied, in such
a manner as is before said. Or, 3. of the Saints and Servants of God in the
days of the Gospel, brought in from among the Gentiles, (of whom indeed he had
spoken in the foregoing Verses,) to wit, that they having been brought into
some straits by their Enemies, should after they had recovered their Liberty
again, go forth and look upon that woeful spectacle of the Carcases of their
Enemies, lying in such a rueful and horrid manner, as was before described. But
now withal we must know, that many learned Expositors do understand this (very
probably, I conceive) of any notable judgments of God, which the Righteous
should see executed upon wicked ungodly wretches, for their Idolatries,
profaneness, and contempt of the Gospel: Only these judgments and executions of
divine Vengeance upon wicked Men are figuratively set forth, by way of
resembling them to that dreadful spectacle of a company of dead Corpse, that lie
rotting and stinking above ground, full of crawling Worms, and so putrified,
that there was no touching them, they were only fit to be burnt with Fire; and
yet, because of their multitude and putrefaction, were like to be very long
burning, ere they would be consumed. And they shall go forth and look upon upon
the Carcases of the Men that have transgressed against me, for their Worm shall
not die, neither shall their Fire be quenched. And indeed this figurative
description of the judgments and vengeance of God upon wicked Men, is therefore
the fitter; 1. Because wicked and ungodly Men, void of all Grace and Spiritual
Life, are no better than the stinking Carcases of Men, dead whilst they live,
1. Tim. 5.6. Let the dead bury their dead, says our Savior, Math. 8.22. And,
2. because a main part of that vengeance which God pours forth upon wicked Men,
consists in those affrightments and terrors of conscience, wherewith they are
usually tortured, as with a Worm always gnawing on their Hearts, and a Fire
always burning within their bosoms, partly here in this World, but especially
afterward in Hell to all Eternity; for hereto does our Savior expressly apply
this passage of our Prophet, Mark. 9.43, 44. As for the last Clause, and they
shall be an abhorring unto all flesh; it may be understood, both of their being
loathed here in this World, by all flesh; that is, all People that should
behold the sad discovery of Gods wrath against them in that horrid condition
wherein they lay, and likewise especially of their being abhorred by all that
shall be Eyewitnesses of their extreme and unspeakable misery at the day of
Judgment.

FINIS.

