Agurto-atix. Or, some Brief ANIMADVERSIONS Upon two late TREATISES; One of
Master George Thomsons, ENTITLED, GALENO-PALE; The other of Master Thomas O
Dowdes, Called, The Poor Man's Physician: With a short Appendix, relating to the
Company of Apothecaries.

By William Johnson, Chemist to the Kings College of Physicians, in LONDON.

London, Printed by T. Mabb, for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1665.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Grigg,
May 10. 1665.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY Lord Marquess of DORCHESTER, Earl of Kingston,
Viscount Newark, Lord Pierrepoint, and Manvers, etc.
Right Honorable,
IF, in the great crowd of dedications, that daily flow in upon your Lordship
(the general Patron of Arts) there be yet a room left, I would endeavor to
break through the press, to throw my self, and this small Treatise at Your
Honors feet.

It is in You, my Lord, that Galen and Helmont are reconciled, and made
friends; and that (...) or wrestling my Author dreams of, is nothing else, but
coming to a close for their mutual Support; that thus United, each may stand
the faster, both pitching on Your Lordship, as upon a Common Pillar. And since
this League and Amity of Galcnicall and Chymicall Physic is no where else to
be found more Conspicuous, Justice it self must plead my Excuse, if there be
any Presumption in my Humble Desire of Your Lordships Patronage.

I must confess it was not matter of long dispute or study put me upon this
choice; it was of the same date with my Resolution to say something to this
Bold Pretender; For, besides, that in Your Lordship, having not only a
Powerful Patron, but a most proper and competent Judge, I was bound in
Gratitude to make use of this opportunity, to witness to the World my
particular Obligation to Your Lordship for the long Encouragement I have
received from Your Honor in my Profession of Chemistry.

Your Lordship cannot be ignorant, how numerous these Pseudochymists are now
grown; who whilst they would be thought, not only Sons of Art, but Doctors in
Physic, Viper like, eat out her very bowels: And though never so Unskilful,
yet they presume to boast themselves and their Juggling Faction, as the only
Friends and Zealots for Chemistry; whereas indeed, ignorance alone is the
Mother of their Devotion: This Crew I would summon to receive their Sentence at
the bar of your Lordships perfect Knowledge and Experience, where I doubt not
but these Pretenders to Pyrotechny, not able to undergo the Fiery Trial, will,
like their own false preparations, vanish in fumo; and they be discovered to be
neither Physicians nor Artists, but mere Impostors. As an Appendix to this
Sentence, I hope your Honor will absolve me from my fears of having
displeased your Lordship in my present Address, and vouchsafe still to continue
me according to my Great Ambition, in the favor of being,

My Lord, Your Lordships, Most Humble, and Obedient Servant, William Johnson.

A'(...) - M(...). OR SOME Brief Animadversions Upon a Treatise of Mr George
Thomsons, ENTITLED, GALENO-PALE:
OUr Author throughout his whole Treatise, quarrels so much with Method, that
I shall not observe his, by dividing my Reply into Chapters; but by one entire
thread of Discourse pass through his whole Labyrinth, that so I may securely
strike dead, or which will be all one, discover to the World, the Monster
therein locked up, in his true Dimensions.

In the very Entrance, nothing will satisfy the Fury of our Minotaure, but
Galen himself, thinking indeed in him at once to swallow all, that own his
Authority; but alas he finds him so tuff a bit, that his venomous tooth cannot
enter: His Reputation is so great and Universal, his Parts, Industry and
Success in Physic so Eminent, that he is put to it, where to take any hold
with his envious fangs, though sharpened with malice and detraction.

It is an Argument of a very ill nature, or of a bad design, to forge a Quarrel
between two, the most Eminent persons of their Times; that so he might have
some pretense and color to raise a Faction by assigning to each their distinct
followers; this is done all men know, upon a false supposition; for the
Judicious and Learned do not build the Praises of Galen, on the Disgrace of
Vanhelmont, but honor both according to their respective worth, and are ready
to confess that the German on Galens shoulders might possibly see more then he;
Nay, Vanhelmont himself will own, that he was Assisted by him in his further
prospect: but it is very justly to be suspected, that these Jugglers neglecting
of Galen, the Foundation, and per saltum mounted up to Vanhelmont, their heads
are grown dizzy, and it is no wonder they endeavor to cast a mist before the
eyes of others, when they can see nothing distinctly themselves.

The Ignorant Impudence of this man will further appear, when we consider him
making it his business, and professed design to cry down Galen, yet at the same
time is forced to confess him a man of Excellent Parts; how this Character can
consist with his Ignorance in Physic, I leave to any indifferent judge; since
it was in this Science, that his Wit and Learning, not without great Pains and
Study, have been transmitted to Posterity; witness those many great Volumes
writ upon that subject, which in all Ages Sober and Discreet Physicians have
received as the Oracles of Apollo, whom Antiquity makes the God of Physic.

I very much question, whether my Friend has ever read Galen, and more, whether
he understands him: I rather believe he speaks against him at a venture,
because he has met with a more easy, though a by way, to his ends, which is
not with Galen to cure, but delude the Patient; to purge him not of his
Disease, but of his Money.

I must confess, that I am not so much an Orator, as to be able to write
Galens Panegyric proportionable to his merit, and real worth; neither indeed
is it necessary, for what use is there of Rhetoric to persuade, what is
already so generally believed, both as to his Abilities, and our Authors
Ignorance: That which I intend by this Discourse, is to caution all sorts of
People, who are unacquainted with any such thing, as a difference between Galen
and Helmont, and are apt to be deceived by Master Thomson's scandalous
Reproaches of the one, and his great Elogiums of the other; whereas he neither
rayles or commends to any other end, then to bring an odium upon the College,
and all Physicians in general, who only by Sobriety, and long Study commend
themselves unto the World: He is not concerned either to oppose Galen, or cry
up Vanhelmont, but in order, to gain a reputation with the people to himself,
and the rest of those Fanatics in Physic, Master Odoud, Master Lockyer, and I
know not how many of the like Rabble, Footmen Gun-Smiths, Heel-Makers, and
Botchers, that are all made Doctors in the Opinion of the Vulgar, who deluded
with a few hard words, and the bare Names of Chemical Preparations (which is
all the stock these men set up with) are apt to admire what is above their
understanding; but I wish they would consider, that they deal with a sort of
Jugglers, that do not understand themselves.

Thus, the more plausibly to deceive all that are not capable of enquiring into
the Mystery of their Trade, but yet may be apt enough to avoid them as
Up-starts; they range themselves under the banner of Vanhelmont, whose Name
having made a considerable noise in the World, they think sufficient to silence
such as should question their Knavery; but their ignorance does not a little
appear in the very choice of their Patron, for had I been of their Council, I
would have suggested to them a more Ancient and Stouter Champion, whom Helmont
himself ownes, Theophrastus Paraselsus, who was the first, not that dissented
from Galen, but that made any considerable improvement in Chemistry; for it is
not to be questioned, but that He and Vanhelmont through their ingenious labor
in the fire, made discovery of many Rare and Excellent Medicines; but neither
of them buried Galen in the ashes, wholly laying aside, as these men would have
the World believe, his sober Rules and Prescriptions; and this ingenuity of
theirs has been abundantly requited by that Esteem, which has been paid them
by most learned Physicians since their time, but especially those now of
theColledge, (who for many years last past in all the Universities of Europe
have carried the vogue.)

My particular Relation bath given me opportunity of frequent converse with
these Famous Men, and when any discourse of Vanhelmont, or any Chemical Author
has occasionally being raised, they were so far from being traduced (as this
Impostor in diverse places of his Book impudently affirms) that they were never
mentioned without some remarques of Commendation; Indeed it is so much against
the Nature of any Ingenious Man to Vilify an Artist (such as doubtless
vanhelmont was) that I believe by this it will appear, our Adversaries
undervaluing of all, but themselves, must needs be out of malice and base
design; for my own part, I may presume to say, (without being guilty of much
boasting) it will be acknowledged, by a sufficient Testimony, that I understand
my Profession, but I should think my self very ungrateful, if I did not
acknowledge the helps and encouragements I have received from the College;
it is from their favorable influence my fires have received a new light and
heat, and they have taken care to blow and cherish the flame.

Let any Judicious man but look back, and compare the practice of our Worthy
Physicians for Twenty Years last past, with the preceding times, and he must
confess Chemistry, and its Improvement has been their great care, and constant
study; that pitch, to which this Noble Art is now advanced, is owed to them,
and if it ascend yet higher, the same hands must lend their assistance. Neither
am I so put to it, that I should urge barely their favors to my self, though
visible for this twenty years, as a sufficient conviction and evidence of their
zeal to Pyrotechny; they have given other large Testimonies, nay, most of them
have been so industrious, that they have actually put their hands to the
plough: if this be to vilify and reproach Vanhelmont, if this be to oppose
Chemistry, they may be justly accused: But since it appears far otherwise,
these Impostors do but betray their envy and ignorance; yet thus much I will
acknowledge they have in them of Chemistry, they know well how to blow the coal.

As to the abuses and disrepute the Galenists (as you are pleased to style our
Doctors) have brought upon Physic;

Mutato nomine de Te Fabula Narratur:

Surely the man's asleep, or how could he be guilty of so gross a mistake, for
doubtless this part of his Treatise is as it were designed to whip himself and
his Juggling Brethren; for at the same time when he mentions the sad
Exorbitances, Irregularities, and abuses in Physic, he in plain terms
confesses them to be introduced by swarms of Quacks in every place numerous, as
Locusts; he appearing in the head of this band himself, impudently bidding
defiance to the Doctors, and telling them to their teeth, they would fain put
them to the rout, if they had power equal to their will; But alas this
Exprobation of all others is the most frivolous; for give these Impostors but
rope enough, and they will hang themselves, withering like hasty weeds for want
of sap and root.

Among his other insignificant reproaches, it is very pleasant to observe, how he
quarrels with the College for their plain dealing, and openness, as if they
were to blame for imparting their fkill, and expounding the riddle of Physic
so far as is susficient to discover the Juggle of these Quacks and Mountebanks.

This Fellow goes on to tax the College with uncharitableness, which
accusation is better Answered by the Hospitals then by me, though many thousand
other poor people besides can testify their charity and readiness to do them
good freely without taking any thing for their Advise; whereas His and his
Brethrens, being nothing worth, their way is to exact money before hand of the
poorest for Physic of their own jumbling up; so that they do not only wrong
them, but those also whom they would seem to pity, under a title of the Poor
Apothecaries; and surely they are in a fair way to deserve this Epithet, if
they, with the help of the College do not get the practice of Physic purged
from such pitiful Physicians.

These subtle insinuations they use to foment a groundless discord between
Doctor and Apothecary; for doubtless the late Appeal to the Parliament, was
intended to tie the hands of such Usurpers as your selves, who would ingross
does Professions, without being qualisied for either: and this, contrary to
their ill grounded hopes, will in its due time take effect; and then if some
Epidemical contagious Disease, worse then your selves (the omen of which God
avert) should Reign amongst us, we doubt not Gods blessing upon the sober
endeavors of Doctor and Apothecary, each being careful in his respective
Sphere; and surely there is not much likelihood our Galenists that have stayed
the brunt of former infectious times, should now run from their colors, if the
like danger should happen: Almost in every Church in London, or Vestry, there
is to be found a Printed Memorial of their pains and care in the
Sickness-time; However I hope thus much in your behalf, that a Public Edict
will be isntrumental to free your Fraternity from the disgrace of a voluntary
flight.

It Is no wonder at all to hear you inveigh bitterly against Rule and Method in
Physic, when out of your Anarchical Principle, you are as ready to renounce
all Order and Government in the State; Your design is to subvert, what the
Laws of England, and the Customs and Privileges of both Universities have
Established, (Viz.) That none under so many years standing in one of our two
Universities, ought to be admitted to practice Physic; and the Degree of a
Doctor requires more: Yet after all this, according to an Ancient Grant from
His Majesty's Royal Ancestors given to the College of London; None, of these
persons though so qualified, can have liberty to practice Physic within diverse
miles of London without leave from the College: Yet every Heele-Maker,
Footman, or Botcher, that can but steal a Receipt from some Doctors Man (by the
consent of Master Thomson) shall presently mount the Common Stage, and under
the notion of a Chymicall Doctor, defy the whole Body of Physicians; Besides
you do not only go about to infringe the Liberties of this Honorable Society,
but you doubly incroach upon the Freedom of Apothecaries; who, as to the
Pharmaceutical part of Physic, have a Pattent of the same Authority (as to
their Corporation) with that of the College relating to the practice of
Physic, and unless a man be invested by one of these two Authorities, he can
neither Justify his preparing any Medicines, or practicing when he has done,
and in what degree then you rob the Apothecaries of their profession, I shall
have an occasion to demonstrate in another part of my Discourse; Though I would
have you take notice of what is now said, and consider how unjustly you assume
the practice of Physic in any respect whatever; and yet not withstanding all
this, through your fallacious ignorance, You wonder, and stand amazed (as you
say) to see such Learned Physicians, men so highly reputed for their Parts, to
carry on such a design, as the confirmation of their Pattent! You may as well
wonder why a man should defend his house against Thieves, which is but a
particular interest; but in this the common good is so much concerned, viz. the
keeping down such Drones and Quacks, as through their ignorance, and irregular
practice would prove prejudicial to the Commonwealth, creating more Diseases
then they cure.

I cannot deny but it is possible they may stumble upon success, in some of their
desperate attempts, but it is very rare, since Nature is doubly assaulted, by the
Remedy as well as the Disease. In this case of good Fortune they fail not to
open, and not unlike the Lottery-Mongers at Bartholomew Fair, who blow the
Trumpet before every single Prize, though never so inconsiderable, whilst all
the Blanks are hushed up in filence. Thus they make a great cry, where there is
no wool, unless it be that which their own wits are still gathering.

But these Impostors of late do flatter themselves with a new advantage, which
they make so much of, that they are willing to let go all their former shifts
and deceits to trust wholly to this; I mean a pretended quarrel between the
Doctors and the Apothecaries; Upon the Improvement of which, the Common Enemy
fancies to himself a perfect Victory; but alas the poor wretches are as much
mistaken in their Policy, as their prescriptions: this does but alarm both to
unite more strongly, and to join their Forces, for the more easy subversion of
these Apotheco-Medicasters.

I must confess this to be the only Reed they can with any hope of safety take
hold of now they are sinking, but it will doubtless prove in the end a broken
one, and they, if not in danger of being drowned, sure to prick their fingers
to the bone; Oh! how I long to see them show their teeth, when they cannot
bite, when they have nothing to fasten upon, and must be forced to turn their
fury upon themselves, and fret in their own grease; then the sport will be to
see these Factious Jugglers crumbled into diverse petty intrests, and devour
one another, Whilst Doctors and Apothecaries in a perfect amicable,
concurrence shall have nothing else to encounter, but the Distemper of the
Patient, and not be troubled to keep off a second infection, and more
dangerous, namely these intruding Empricks; of whom, though I should be silent,
the usual success of their care will evince to the World, that the abuse of
Physic for some late years past did not come from any Labourer, Drudge or
Excrement of the Doctors, as my Friend seems to aver, but from an ignorant, and
no less impudent sort of people, the very refuse of the whole Town, those
Swarms of Quacks, he mentions in his third Chap. with an ingenious
Acknowledgement, that it is themselves have made this Noble Science (The True
Professors where of Divine Writ has charged to be Honored) a very Trade to
get Money; to which end they have covered and adorned themselves with Jewels,
stolen out of other men's Clossets, those Arcana's he so often speaks of; but
alas in their ill wearing them, they are sullyed and lose their Native Luster
the greatest Arcana's in the world, when improperly applied, must needs fail in
the performance of their usual Effects.

When this undertaking first entered into my thoughts, I resolved out of my
affection to Chemistry, to take off this General Scandal, the ignorance of
these pretenders to the Art have brought upon it; knowing nothing more
destructive to Chemistry, then such Chemists, who presuming (as justly they
may) that the generality of the people cannot disprove them, do confidently
affirm themselves to be Artists; so that what Reputation they gain with the
Vulgar, it is wholly due to their tricks and noise; Subtle and Lungs in this case
making up but one Alchymist. Ben. Johnsons Alchy.
These fellows do by Chemistry, just as our Fanatics do in Religion, cry it up
zealously, but with a manifest design to pull it down; both being equally
Ignorant, and both Enemies to the truth.

It were to be wished, that this railer were guilty of what he accuses the
Galenist, (viz.) plausible Rhetoric; but he is now grown so abusive and
scurrilous, that in his Fourth Chapter, he is not content to scandalize the
Physicians, but also the Apothecaries, whom hitherto out of design he would
seem to have Courted, and in many places of his Book, does curry Favor with,
yet not minding his self-contradiction, when any thing falls into his purpose
against the Physicians, he does not stick falsely to asperse the whole Company
of Apothecaries, and accuse them of a sordid and base eomplyance, (that he
might wound the Reputation of Doctor and Apothecary together) impudently
asserting an Obligation upon them, Not only to speak for the Doctors, but to
lie for them, yea and to do some things for them to the hazard of their Souls,
being forced to maintain, and sometimes to own all their Miscariages,
Misdemeanors, and gross Aberrations in Physic, or else He, His Wife and
Children must bite on the bridle: But I am sure this Brute wants one in his
mouth; whither will he run in this full Carriere, casting dirt in the faces of
known honest men? but the best is, their Reputation is so unquestionably
unblemisht in the World, that all the dirt, which is thrown at them, will the
more forcibly return upon the Authors, and so stick the faster.

But do you hear, my good Friend, Oportet mendacem esse memorem; were not you
he that all along have accused the Galenists of being too communicative, and
now tell us it is their principal study to involve all in obscurity; And I pray
tell me, has not the dint of your Accusation been all along, that they Cried
down Chemistry, and do you now indite them for becomeing Chemists? But you say
it is of a sudden; and methinks that should please you, since it is your own case;
'Twas neither time nor pains perfected your Fraternity, you are a Generation of
Artists bred like Myrmidons or Mushromes, coming to full growth in one night:
and the truth is, among you, he is the best Chemist, that has most Impudence,
and least Conscience: But that our worthy Doctors allowed now to be Chemists,
are not become such of a sudden, needs little proof; I my self have been their
Servant near twenty years countenanced, and daily employed by them in making
Chemical Medicines, and long before that time, many of the College, whom I had
the Honor to know, kept private Elaboratories in their own Houses, and
notwithstanding, this is so Eminently known among all that were ever concerned
in Physic; yet this Impostor presuming many others know it not, thinks by
cajoling of the people, to reap not only the Profit, but the Credit too of all
their Industry and Labors.

To promote this, he tells you in the end of his Fourth Chapter, a story of a
perspicacious Gentleman, who extorted, after much urging, from a Physician,
this Answer, Hang it, we are but a company of Cheats; and says our Author
further, This was reported to us, etc. It seems there was a Juncto of Quacks
met, a Committee of Empricks, at whose sitting among others, as frivolous, this
report was made forsooth, and says our Author, By a Person of Quality; To
this, I shall only offer the improbability of the thing it self, for a
sufficient Answer, and Advise him for the future, to Lie more feisibly.

This Cunning Man being neither Chemist nor Astrologer, undertakes boldly to
personate both, upon the same presumption, that each of them is above the
Capacity of the Vulgar, whom it is his business to delude: Whereupon in his
Fifth Chapter, he talks to us of Predictions; but the vanity of this Cheat is
long ago exploded by the Learned and Judicious; besides it is known to be a
common refuge for such Ignoramuses, as can give no rational account of their
Patients Distempers; so that in this case, he that will confess himself never
to be mistaken, But as a Man, does ingeniously acknowledge he never is in the
right, which is our Authors case, in his own words, Happy be lucky, hitting
the mark with as much uncertainty as those People called Andabatae, that fought
wink ing.

Notwithstanding he blames the Doctors for being sober and modest, not daring
to promise what they never expect to perform; he quarrels with them for not
being as Impudent as his Faction, who confidently assert themselves to be
Infallible in the business of Physic, and in the most difficult cases, pretend
to exclude all conjecture. My good Friend, it is shrewdly to be suspected, he is
most Erroneous, that would have it thought he cannot err at all.

It will not be much from my purpose (which is chiefly to present this Crew in
their colors) to inform the World, that they not only pretend to bePhysitians,
but would be thought Able to recover for us, all other losses besides that of
Health, by their skill in Astrology; If one good Woman loses her Petticote,
another her wedding-ring, they are ready to cast a Figure for them; but believe
me, it is such a one, as will in the conclusion stand for a Cipher; and if at
any time they seem to make any discovery, it is sufficiently known they do it by
confederacy.

Neither do they take a course much different to come into credit with their
Quacking Trade, bringing and hiring all people whatsoever, to feign both
Sickness and Cure, that other silly poor Wretches, who really want help, may
be trapan'd into a false Opinion of their skill, and be gulled at least out of
their money, if not out of their lives.

I do not take up this barely upon the credit of a flying report, but I know it
by personal Experience, for there is not a Juggling Figure-flinger, or Quack in
the Town, but I have had some knowledge of him, and am very well acquainted
with all their Fallacious Actings and Designs; so that I might justly be
accused to be of their party, if I kept their Council, which I am little
concerued to do, since they are so unworthy as to make their pretended zeal to
Chemistry, a cloak for their knavish and pernicious practices.

There is hardly a page in his whole book but what is filled with some abusive
Language or other, though withal so full of self-contradiction, it is below me
to think him worth an Answer: besides he is an Enemy so inconsiderable, that I
can hope for little credit by undertaking him: In his Sixth Chapter, his main
business is to cry down Anatomy, as very insignificant, and little conducing to
the recovery of the Patient: I wish some of our Galenists had this Fellow under
their hands to cut him off the Simples; I am confident, were they to read a
Lecture upon him, they would discover his want of brains; but this is
sufficiently proved to all men by his own scribble; Did ever any Sober Man find
fault with Industry employed in Anatomical Dissections? Who ever imagined it
possible for a man to be a Good Physician, without great Skill and Judgment in
the subject of this Art; and most Diseases proceeding from Internal Causes,
what way to be taken for the discovery of them, but Anatomy? so that the great
care of the College in opening of Bodies cannot be; A mere Public Theatrical
business, more for Ostentation, and to get a fame abroad, then for any notable
improvement in the cure of Miserable Man: Though these be my Friends own words,
yet he is Master of so much reason, or Justice, as that presently after he
condemns himself, Ex ore suo, by an apparent recantation; Anatomy (says he)
we stand up for as much as any, without which a Physician we are certain, must
needs be defective in Physic: These contradictions are so frequent throughout
his whole Book, that it is not indeed worth the while to take notice of a single
one; In truth I think it had been a very good way of confuting this fallacious
Writer, only to have transcribed him; but the same in effect, every Judicious
Reader will do in the most cursory perusal.

It Is to me a wonder, the rest of his Fraternity do not fail upon him, for so
ill defending their Cause; 'I would be much for their Interest to have his Book
called in betimes; or I would Advise them to call a Conventicle of Jugglets,
and make a resolve, that this Pamphlet be forthwith distilled, and as one of
their own Chemical Operations for the future kept, inter Arcana, and so
privately, that the World may not be so fully informed of their Misterious
Cheat: But to return to his censure of Anatomy, which all along he both
magnifies, and cries down in one breath, he undervalues it, because the Skill
is not to be attained without great Pains, and a Study his Capacity comprehends
not, yet he is forced to admire it, as not being ignorant, that without the
knowledge of Anatomy, All their knowledge is in vain; And this he himself
confesses, in a comparison he makes of a Mechanic, who ought To have a
competent insight of that Machine, as Watch or Clock, which he goes about to
mend: Thus this Impostor by ye power of truth, is constrained against his will
and design to plead against himself, and condemn his own Up-starts ex tempore
Practice; Let the reader but observe what Herculean labor, he says is
necessary to attain the knowledge of Generous Medicines; what Sinews, and
Strength are to be put forth to find them out, how much precious time is to be
spent in hammering them out; and together with this Discourse of pains and
toil, consider how of a sudden these Fellows start up Able Physicians, out of
Shoo-Makers, Grooms, Botchers, and what not, that is furthest off from
Physic, he must conclude, they do all in their vain shows, but verba dare,
study to impose upon the too credulous populacy, over whom they have this
advantage, that the People are very willing in their Preferring of these men to
admire themselves, and do therefore swallow glibly, what they would never
endure in a Doctor of Physic, especially of the College, whom they look upon
as above them by many Degrees.

The Invention of the Circulation of the Blood, by Industrious Doctor Harvey is
highly to be commended, says our Author, but he subjoyns that the
Therapeutick part is little advanced thereby; It Is very strange to me, that this
Fellow can be so ignorant of the real advantage this discovery has brought to
Mankind, in order to the cure of Diseases, both Internal, and External, for
the blood being the seat and subject both of Health and Sickness, the knowledge
of its true motion must indisputably conduce to the preservation of the one,
and the expulsion of the other, by the right and judicious application of
apropriated Medicines, whether Officinall, or other ways: And though I confess
with our Author, that our Officinall Medicines, in his own sense, are not more
sufficient and powerful now, then they were before the improvement of Anatomy;
yet, the judgment of the Physicians in the use and more proper application of
them being advanced, the benefit which the Patient receives, must needs be the
greater.

After all these impertinences, he once more presents himself to us as a
Spagyrick, with his more prevailing helps; and this I observe to be the clinch
of all his Discourse, (next railing) and the hinge, on which all his design
turns; under this notion, he talks wildly of a Pyrotechnicall Anatomy, which
(as he says) shows us where every Disease is seated; It seems by this, these
Impostors, do not use to Anatomize Dead Carcasses, but Calcine them; so that
the Effect of this Operation must needs prove to be nothing else but a Caput
mortuum.

As in almost every Chapter of his Book, so in this Seventh, he has a new Hocus
to carry on his old design; he has been nibling formerly at the Apothecaries,
and now he would bring the Chirurgions to cut a way through for him, if he can
but raise a jealousy between them and the Doctors; to effect this, and the
better to bring his purpose about, he boldly undertakes to reprove the Doctors,
For the Ignorance of most of them in Surgery; which is an Art so distinctly and
properly, and as a due right belonging to another incorporated Society of Men;
thatwithout offense both to Civility and Justice they cannot engage in it; so
that they do not forbear Surgery for want of Skill, but out of a fair respect
to the Worthy Company of Chirurgions: They never would in point of manual
operation, infringe the least of their Liberties; and that is the reason our
Adversary makes himself so really concerned, not for the Doctors Ignorance (as
he pretends) for no man can imagine a good Physician to be a Novice in Surgery;
but because he would raise a feude; and himself confesses, that the business
of the Knife properly belongs to the Surgeon, yet censures the Galenists, as
Not being able to undertake a Whitlow, a Scald, a Green Wound, or any Trivial
Sore; indeed these may be counted high undertakings in himself, but they are
things even below a professed Surgeon to take notice of, as being the common
cures almost of every old Woman.

But at this rate he proceeds through the whole Chapter, taking occasion at
every inconsiderable conceit of his own Invention, either to cast some dirt
upon the College, or to promote some difference between them and the
Chirurgions; nay, rather then not propagate his own cause, he raises a quarrel
between them and his Medicines; Tell them (says he) of the Alkahest, or
Universal Menstruum, of Lapis Chrysopeius, or of a Panacea, they will but
deride and flout at it; These are things indeed Vanhelmont mentions, but I dare
be bold to say, our Author never saw any of them; and further, as to the Lapis
Chrysopeius, and Liquor Alkahest, I Affirm positively, there is no such
Arcana's to be found in Rerum Natura: It Is probable Master Thomson has a strong
faith, and It were to be wished, that he had as much patience, or it is
impossible he should continue till the dissolution or reduction of those
Coagulations, or Tumors into their first matter (as he mentions) be performed
by Art; nor is there any Arcanum to be found less then that Universal
Menstruum, he from Vanhelmont speaks of, from which it can rationally be
expected. But this I would advise him to take heed of, least, when he goes
about to Untye and Colliquate the Stone, he dissolve the whole Body, and bring
that into a fair way of reduction into its first matter.

As to his relation of three large stones expelled by a Chemical Physician from
a Maidservant; I once saw as great a matter done, and from a Maidservant too;
but rather by accident, then by the application of any Medicine at all; so that
his Turkeys Egg is addle: the stone that came from this Maid, was bigger then
any of these three he mentions, and very scraggy: It Is possible therefore for
Nature to free her self from such Monstrous products, merely by the force of
her own expulsive faculty.

I know there are many Chemical preparations, much conducing to this effect;
and as I have no reason, so I do not oppose this Accident, against that
Chymicall Physicians Experiment, in any respect, to take off the Validity of
Paracelsian Medicines; But to take away those pernicious and mistaken
inferences that Master Thomson draws from thence, (only to lay hold of any
means to scandalize the Physicians) as bleeding, Pernicious purgation,
Blistrings, etc. A practice which ne Physician uses barely in reference to the
Stone, but as some other accidental Distemper may require; Nor ever do they
appoint the Knife, till sound Judgment, upon serious deliberation counts it
necessary.

It Is very pleasant, how in his Eighth Chapter, he represents the Doctors as
concerned to vindicate their credit from these Jugglers Imputations; whereas
alas, they take no more notice of them, then a Lion does of a whiffling Curr,
or the Philosopher of his Scolding Xantippe: Notwithstanding, he is pleased to
begin this Chapter thus: Ye make your boast that ye possess (as well as we)
your laboratory and variety of Furnaces. In good time; (as well as we) Pray
what signifies this Parenthesis? Did ever any sober man think that You, or your
Brethren, ever rightly knew, what belonged either to Laboratory or Furnace?
Possibly you may like Doctor Subtle in the Play, keep about you some Coals and
Glasses, these alone being sufficient to cheat those you dare admit to the
inspection of your Operations: Your Medicines, and your Furnaces too, are to be
counted inter Arcana; and the truth is, the good you either have, or are like
to do with them, is yet, and always will be a secret; those that are friends
to truth, are like her, naked and unmaskt; they dare stand the test, nay,
invite the severest, and most piercing eyes to be witnesses of their
Faithfulness and industry. But stay, do you hear the News? our Author tells us,
It is not the Laboratory, nor specious Furnaces, that simply makes the
Spagyrical Physician.

Risum teneatis Amici?

Was ever any one so senseless as to imagine, or dream of a True Artist
without, or that a man can be so accounted, without convenient Utensils? Yet as
Books and Furnaces do not, merely of themselves, make either Scholars, or
Spagyricks, so it must be granted, neither Books nor Furnaces could be made
without them both; but away with these notorious truths, by you repeated to the
same purpose, with your as notorious lies and bare pretenfes to Chemistry, out
of which there arises only an ignis fatuus, making a false glare, like the
Meteor so called, which leads the poor Traveller out of his way, and leaves him
in a Ditch crying out for help; just thus do these Jugglers by their Patients,
who after they have been seduced, and ill handled by these Empiricks, are
forced to return to the discreet, and wary Physician for their Cure.

I should think it strange, out of any Mouth but our Authous, or his Accomplices,
to hear a Physician accused for not being desperate, and for using safe
Medicines, rather then those that are hazardous; would any but such mad men
AdministerChymical Preparations, without any further knowledge of the Medicine,
then that it has a hard name: For this I will only instance Master Lockier, who
must either confess himself ignorant, or a Notorious Liar in Print, as by a
Pyrotechnical Anatomizing of his Pill, in another place I shall plainly make
appear; besides Elixirs are not prodigally to be thrown away, or used, when any
honest, though meaner Medicine will recover the Patient: Chemistry is that
which is to help at a dead lift; but as for Universal Medicines, they are but
Chimera's things to be discoursed of, and wished, but doubtless never to be
attained, without a new revelation, which I wonder much, these Fanatics in
Physic do not boast of. I presume no Judicious Person can mistake me here, as
if I seemed to speak against Chemistry absolutely, when I condemn only the
promiscuous use of it in all cases alike, which is the custom of our unworthy
Empiricks and Abusers of Learned Vanhelmont; yet thus far I am willing to
comply with my Friend; It had been happy for the credit of his Art, (viz.) of
cozening by Chemistry, if no Chemical Medicines had ever been prescribed by the
College, for therein a palpable discovery of my Gentlemen's Villainy is made,
and the difference of True Gold seen, from that which only glisters.

I must confess there are many Adulterate and Sophisticate Preparations vented
in the Town, for Good; but this can in no sense be imputed to the College, for
they are sensible of this abuse, and are resolved to reform it in due time, as
an Appendix to the imposture and Knavery of these Jugglers. As to what our
Author hints concerning the Doctors ingratitude, I am confident he laughed at
himself in the mention, as very well knowing, his Faction was never in a
capacity to oblige that Worthy Society, unless it were by being as a foil, to
set off their Great Abilities.

Next he goes on, pretending An Answer to some Objections laid to their charge
by the Galenists; and truly in those charges which he mentions, there is
couched and implied so ingenuous a confession and home Character of the
Faction, that I think it a hard task to set them out more perfectly in their
own Colors. They are Objections indeed, with a witness; so undeniable, as that
himself is compelled to set his hand, and say; This we confess ingenuously is
not be denied in part, and we could wish it otherwise: If the Reader would but
peruse his Ninth Chapter, he will believe him to have sufficient reason, and
that it is as hard for him to Answer, or remove these Objections, as it was for
Ulysses to remove the great Stone from the mouth of Polyphemus his Cave; where
by the by, this crafty Grecian gave the Cyclops such an Arcanum, that what he
could not accomplish by strength, he brought about by wiles, and subtilty;
first he put out the Cyclops eye, then robbed his Flock: This course these
Empiricks usually take, casting a mist before the understandings of the
credulous people, and then picking their pockets.

But is any thing more childish and ridiculous, unless it be himself, then his
following words, on which he seems to lay the whole weight and stress of all
his Brethrens reputation. We know (says he) a Chemist, that desires no more
practice in Physic to get a competent living by, then those Patients to whom
ye cannot make the promise of a Cure after two or three months time, whom he
would undertake to resolve in less then a month: And no question is to be
made of this, but I presume, Sir, you mean a resolving them into their first
Principles, and then surely a month is too long a time for you, that usually
are more quick and nimble in your dispatches: Fie, Fie, will you become now so
cruel, as to think of torturing your Patients, for a whole month, who all
along have pretended to be such sudden Executioners; Kill or Cure is your
known maxim, and at that rate, the most desperate of Diseases, nay, death it
self may be styled a Physician: How consonant to the doctrine of this bold
maxim, does he go on to declare himself? For our parts, (says he) we should
think it very strange, and be infinitely ashamed, if any Patient should be
Cured by the Galenists, whom we have given over: For the truth is, they handle
the matter so for the most part, that they are sure to put it out of the power
of all Physic, to do any good to those they have tampered with, by misapplied,
and abused Chemistry.

His next, and Tenth Chapter seems to be spit out of the mouth of a Zealous
Brother at a meeting, where he holds forth the Doctrine of Vanhelmont, as down
right Gospel, and advises the College To Embrace it sincerely, and be wise to
Salvation; He improves the Exhortation in the same strain of Devotion; Let him
lay his hand upon his heart, and considering his own emptyness, reflect upon
himself, how he has deceived, and been deceived. Ah! doubtless this must needs
be a Precious man; How has Chemistry contributed to make him Spiritual, and his
trading in the fire inflamed his Zeal? And now that has run his pretense to
Physic, quite out of breath, it is time for me to make Observation that, Ubi
desinit Medicus, incipit Theologus: But least he should not be a thorough-paced
Fanatic, another part of this Chapter is spent in decrying of Humane Learning:
great Scholarship is ever a crime to a Dunce, and it being for the carrying on
his design, absolutely necessary, that our Author should either be a Scholar,
or a professed Enemy to the name; he takes the more easy and cheap way to his
end, which is to bring himself and ignorance, as much as in him lies, into some
credit in the World. But all will not do; neither Fanatic in Religion, nor
Physic, with all their specious Hypocrisy will ever be able to persuade the
World, that the Letter is not a fit Hand-mand to the Spirit; that Learning is
not subservient, and necessary to the cure both of soul and body.

I am not so well read in Vanhelmont, (neither do I think it my duty so to be)
as to be able to contradict my Friend, when he talks of that Learned Man's fair
proposals, Why (says he) has not your Sect yielded formerly to Helmonts fair
proposal while he was alive, that there might be a final conclusion of these
Controversies by matter of fact? (indifferent Judges appointed on both sides to
give their censure) it is very probable, this proposal was really made; but it is
very insignificant in his mouth, unless his Faction were in such a degree
Eminent, that they could make it out to all, that they are as able as
Vanhelmont himself: How far they are from this pitch, I dare fubmit to the
Judgment, not only of indifferent persons, but even of those that are some way
biased with Interest, and willing to be partial in the Empiricks Cause.

In his next hard Chapter, where he talks of the Principles of Philosophy,
which the Galenists own, he runs on upon a false supposition; for it is very
well known, that the Aristotelian Tenants, which Galen owned, are in many
things found little consonant to Nature and Truth; whereupon the Learned
Physicians of our Age, not sworn to the Opinion of any of the Ancients in
particular, (as our Author would have the World believe) do act according to
the freedom of their own Judgments, and do by a kind of rational Chemistry,
extract what is good either in Galen or Vanhelmont, refusing the dross of both;
so that these several Calumnies he reproaches the Doctors with, are groundless
and false.

Above all, these Quacks it seems are very desirous to be thought compassionate
and full of pity; as appears by their general outcry against sheding of blood:
I confess such a cautious behavior, as this, among the Welsh men, might bring
them into good practice; but here at home the long and successful use of
Phlebotomie, easily out-votes their groundless clamor against that process:
and though the Devil be undeniably a sworn Enemy to Mankind, I dare presume to
acquit him thus far, that he never suggested the wholesome Emission of Blood,
being very unlikely by this way to make good his title of a Murderer from the
beginning. What my Friend says concerning our being Governed by Nature, which
intends all things for its ownPreservation, etc. May very deservedly be
retorted upon him; for we plainly may observe yt oftentimes Nature is her own
Phlebotomist, in which she directs us to breath a vein rather then to expect
her help, usually afforded by sending forth blood at the Nostrils, which is
looked upon to be the best and purest: But the impudence of these men knows no
bounds, and thinks to outface common Experience, which assures us, that in
several Distempers, letting of blood is the only and certain Remedy; The like
may be said of Purgation, by which Nature is eased of a pernicious burden and
load, oppressing and obstructing her in her Vital Operations. And here by the
way let us examine the inference he makes from an Aphorism of Hippocrates, to
which he is forced to give the Epithet of Excellent; he quotes him in these
words, (...), and interprets them thus. If that be carried out of the Body by
Purgation, that ought to be, the Sick Man finds himself the better for it, and
his Spirits more cheerful, and better able to bear his Disease: From hence he
is pleased to infer that Hippocrates fore saw the great mischief, that was
likely to come upon indiscreet Evacuation: But surely, he, that has but half an
eye, will conclude from hence more naturally, that he foresaw likewise, the
great benefit, that was necessarily to ensue upon purging discreetly, by the
prescription of a Judicious Physician, and performed by proper Catharticks.

As to that common maxim of Contrariorum contraria sunt Remedia, how far it
holds true, and how far made use of by Physicians, I do not think my self a
competent Judge; but to my Apprehension, it seems to be very rational; For how
can the Disease be conquered, without an Enemy to give it battle?

The next thing our Learned Author flies at, is the Pharmacopoea; this he
pretends to accuse of several Infirmities, and would persuade us, that it is very
improbable, this Book should contribute to the cure of the Sick, when it self
is so Diseased, and needs a Physician: But let us put the Saddle on the right
Ass; the Sickness is in the man's brain, and it fares with him, as with one that
has the Jaundies, to whom all Objects seem yellow, whereas the Distemper is
only in the Organ.

The Title of his Fifteenth Chapter, is, A Brief Examination of their
Pharmacopoea. in this Judicial Procedure, he himself undertakes to sit as
Judge, Party, and Witness; and-because he is pleased to Pronounce Sentence of
Condemnation, all the World he thinks must necessarily subscribe to it, and
from hence forward look upon the Pharmacopoea Londinensis, as Out-lawed: But
stay a while, I shall make bold to bring a Writ of Error, and briefly examine
His Brief Examination. This Book has by the unanimous consent of the Learned in
Physic, been owned and approved of, as the best of that kind ever was extant;
and truly it is no small vindication of its worth, that it is Calumniated and
Vilified by our Author, and his Factious Ignorant Fraternity: Can there be a
greater Elogium out of the mouth of such a Nonsensical, Ridiculous, Improper,
and Languid Fellow as he is, then this, when he boldly says, the Pharmacopoea
contains, Nonsensical, Ridiculous, Improper and Languid Medicaments? Poor
mistaken fool, the only way for you to destroy the Dispensatory, is highly to
commend it, for nothing but your Approbation can ever bring its Credit into the
least question.

He is pleased to say, It would require a long time to set down the Errors of
the Dispensatory; I easily believe him, because really there are not any to be
discovered I am sure, not by his dim-sight, but however he will give us a
glance of some of them:

The first glance is this: We observe (says he) a great defect in the Analysis
or opening of the body of any concrete; I must confess this to be a glance
indeed, but no more, for had he seen perfectly or understood any thing in the
dispensation of a Medicine he might have known the pulverizing of most
Concretes, to be a sufficient preparation for the opening of their Bodies, as
proper Ingredients to any Electuary, Plaster or Conserve, into which
Dispensations, not only the Virtue and Crasis, sed totum corpus, of every
individual Concrete is to be put.

A second glance, is his Observation, What a Congeries, Cento, Linsey wolsey of
Simples they jumble and clutter together to some Scores, without any reasonable
contexture or congruity: What, does he see all these at a glance? Sure he must
either have those Argus Eyes he talks of, or else he can squint, and look nine
ways at once; But I think, I shall do him more right, to tell you he is
pur-blind, or else he might perceive with what admirable Judgment and Art, the
opposition of the several Ingredients in a Medicine is managed to make one
proper Compound, and how the properties and qualities of each Simple are either
improved or abated by a due and just temperament, as the condition of the
Patient may require; So that out of this Clashing, Conflicting, and Hostility,
there arises an agreement, as it is remarkable, that Peace is the consequent
and end of War; and the health of the whole Universe consists in the poize, and
just ballancing of contraries.

Our Author throws a sheeps eye once more, and in his third glance, tells us,
He cannot but especially take notice, and condole the Ineffectual, Frivolous,
and vain Corrections of those Virulent, and Poisonous Concretes, which they
take into many of their Compositions. For instance of which he Cites you
Scammonie and Colocynthis, two Concretes, that have been used in Physic, with
exceeding great safety, and no less success for many score years without any
other Correction, then what is appointed in the Dispensatory: And it is not his
spitting his Venom, can make these Medicines thus corrected to be Poison: But
against these two, he opposes Antimony, seeming to admire the Doctors should be
so wilfully ignorant, as to make no scruple of prescribing ten or twelve grains
of Scammony, and yet startle, and seem very nice, to give four or five grains
of Antimonium Diaphoreticum: Where first I would have the Reader take notice of
his mistake, or wilful ignorance; for to my knowledge, and as will appear by
the Bills or Prescriptions of diverse Eminent Physicians, for many years, they
have not scrupled to give 20 grains of Antimonium Diaphoreticum, at one Dose,
and that for several days together. Secondly, I would beg the Reader to
consider, that he opposes a Diaphoretical Preparation of Antimony, against a
purgative medicine of Scammony, by which advantage he would make Scammony
appear to be the strongest Poison: But if the Poison of any Concretes ought to
be proportionated by their force in heterogenious Operations on the Stomach,
and that force determined by their different Doses, Antimony will appear much
the stronger Poison, because four or five grains of any Purgative Preparation
of Antimony, being in substance exhibited into the Stomach, shall operate more
violently then sixteen or twenty grains of Scammony. Further, to imform our
Authors Judgment, let me tell him, the Purgative quality of Scammony may be
taken away, as well as of Antimony, and that secundum Artem, it may be made as
perfectly Diaphoretical; and then supposing them thus prepared, he must
acknowledge Antimony and Scammony, to be equally alike poisonous.

But by the way, it is not my business to maintain the Quarrel of Scammony
against Antimony; what has been said in the case, has only been to show
Master Thomson's unjust comparison; yet how much so ever we have differed in
this particular, I will agree with him in his following Expression recited;
That the best Remedies in the Dispensatory are Chymicall: but what, or who he
means by U S, when he adds, For which they are beholding to U S, I do not at
all understand; certainly he cannot be so impudent, as to join himself with any
part of the College, whom he may imagine more addicted to Chemistry then the
rest: And again, me thinks he should not be so stupid, as to think, that
himself joined in Commission with Master Lockier, Master Odowde, or any of
those Up-start pretenders to Chemistry, can any way oblige the College;
Besides, if I mistake not, there were Chemical Preparations in the Dispensatory
of London, before any of them had a Name.

To this truth, (viz.) that Chemical Preparations are the best Medicines; he
adds another, (which by the way is one more truth, then I have met withal in
any one page of his Book before) That these Chemical Preparations are not free
from being Sophisticated, which cannot be denied, and will hardly be prevented,
till by a Public Authority, some course be taken with those Fools, that will
be meddling, as well as the Knaves, that will be Cheating; and then, the True
Artists wanting no encouragement, these Medicines will be Exalted in their
hands.

In the next place, (says our Author) The most usual, safe, and best Vomit
(in their account) is borrowed from Antimony, called Infusio Croci Mettallorum;
By their Account, I suppose he means the College of Physicians, which may
pass as none of the least of his presumptuous conclusions, though I believe he
never saw a Catalogue of half the Vomits they make use on, and dare presume,
when he has viewed the Catalogue of his own Arcana's, he will find no Vomit
there like it, either for certainty or safety in its Operation, or for carrying
off the morbifick matter; If he thinks to reckon Mercurius vitae within the
number of his Arcana's, (which is also an Antimonial preparation,) as I presume
he may, because presently after he seems to wonder, They ever would venture to
admit it into a Catalogue of their Safe Medicines; the Catalogue he mentions,
will prove him a deceiver; For, it will appear to be a Medicine appointed in
the Dispensatory of London, before ever he could be capable of knowing any
thing in Physic; and this he cannot be ignorant of though he will rather
venture to be found guilty of some plausible falsities, then not to throw some
scandal or other upon the College; As for the Exalting or Graduating of these
Medicines, I may safely say, there are many Apothecaries Boys in the Town,
able to undertake it, with the most Learned, well Experienced Chemist, our
Author can find in all that Tribe, that so utterly renounces the Galenical
Method.

This man is furnished with a strange measure of confidence, I might very
justly say impudence; otherwise he could not possibly use this frequent
Exprobration, of the Doctors being beholden to them, obliged to them for
several Medicines: Surely he is of opinion, the Sun is beholden to the Stars,
which receive from him all the light they impart to the Inferior World: What
these men have in them, their Conscience bears them witness, is only gleanings
gathered from the College; these they feed upon, chewing the cud, and yet are
not to be numbered among the clean Beasts, for their ill digestion turns all to
putrefaction, making good that common maxim, Corruption optimi fit pessima.
Into the Catalogue of the Doctors Debts, there is foysted Oil of Vitriol, with
its use and virtue; for which our Author would have them confess, They are much
Obliged to them for the Discovery; But when the College comes to reckon with
all these wilful, and as fradulent mistakes, they will be glad to sneak out of
the way, as ashamed to own their account.

The next Quarrel he picks, is with The preparation of Pearls, and Corral with
Vinegar, concluding it to be no more then a bare pulverizing them into small
parts or atoms; if there were no more in it then thus to Alcohalize, or reduce
Pearls or Corral into such a fine Butraceous Magisterium, as is done by
Vinegar, it were worth the charge and trouble; but this is not the first error
his ignorance has made him Father, but it is a very gross one; we may certainly
and easily infer from the insipidness of the Spirit of Vinegar (from which all
the gross and corrosive Salts are separated by rectification) when the Pearl
or Corral is precipitated after dissolution, that the Medicament must needs be
exalted by the volatile Salt of Wine, the Vinegar leaves behind: Besides, as I
said before, the bare pulverizing either of Pearl or Corral, will never reduce
them into such a Butyrous substance instar Magisterii, as is performed by this
way of dissolution.

Diverse other preparations of Vitriol and Mercury he to as little purpose
makes mention of; for it is sufficiently known, they have been in long esteem
and use with the College; so that he might have spared the pains he has taken
to persuade the World, that the Doctors are always inveighing against Chemical
Medicines, unless he will be pleased to give us leave to understand them in
their own, and truest sense; for when they undertake to speak against Chymicall
Medicines, it is meant as they are Unchymically handled by Master Thomson, and
his Illiterate Faction; they know full well nothing can eat out the heart of
Chemistry, but the Hypocrisy of these combining Empiricks; They are very
sensible, that in all these Fellows preparations whatsoever, Mercury never is
wanting, since their Medicines smell more of the Knave then the Artist.

Notwithstanding all our Author can say, it remains evident, as well from the
great pains and study, as the common practice of the Doctors, that their grand
design has been to promote and encourage Chemistry; on the contrary, the
design their Adversaries drive at, is to promote themselves; This makes our
Pseudochymists, that they cannot endure such Rivalls as are likely in courting
the same Mistress, to discover their imperfections, and treacherous Love,
which is contented with the show and picture of Chemistry, but neglects the
truth and substance.

The Hogen-Mogens would seem wholly to ingross this Art, and pretend to a
Monopoly, when alas their ignorance is so great, and their stock known to be so
inconsiderable, I know not when they will have right and liberty to vent by
Retaile; and when any of them does open Shop, I am sure they must show their
wares at a false light, or else their Commodity will stick upon their hands;
and whereas they are pleased to pass in the world by ye name of Adepti, they
more justly may style themselves Servantes; for what Arcana's they have got,
they will be forced to keep.

Hitherto our Author has been casting dirt upon all occasions in the Doctors
faces, either as to the Materia Medica, or as to their general Method in
Practice; but now he comes to throw waters, Mineral Waters, to which (says he)
the Dogmatists fly, as to a Sanctuary, in difficult cases. It cannot be denied,
there is a Healing Virtue in these Natural Springs, but when they are to be
used, must be known from the Experienced Physician; for doubtless, in some
cases, they are like the Waters of Meribah, bitter and deadly, in others, as
healing as those of Bethesdah, after the Angel had descended into the Poole: I,
for my part, am of Opinion, That he is the Best and Ablest Physician, that
wanders least from the prescripts of Nature; that knows best how to apply the
helps she has provided for her own recovery; the finding out of which, together
with the due administration, is both the Physicians Employment and Excellence:
This being a task too difficult for humane Endeavor, recourse has been had to
the assistance of Art; yet so, as that they best manage it, that most imitate
nature; I shall not therefore dispute with my friend, How many by Virtue of
these Mineral Wells have been-restored, that have been brought to a very low
Ebb by ill Physicians, such as himself; But it is very rare, these Impostors
consult so much the Public Good, as to advise so Public a Remedy; No, they
are for the Arcana and Minerals of their own Sophistication, rather then for
being beholden to Kind Nature, who bath provided some better and more forceable
helps for the Poor Diseased, ready at hand. In the mean time then, he is very
impertinent, when, he as the representative of his Faction, says, We are
persuaded that they (meaning the College) looked upon the Waters with as
envious an eye, as ever they did upon our Chymicall Preparations. For in the
first place, the going to these waters is the Doctors frequent Advise to their
Patients, in many Chronical Distempers; And secondly, their Chemical
Preparations sure were never the subject of the Colleges Envy, but Contempt.

But let us attend; he opens as if he were about to say some thing in these
words, Who, that had not been Lazy and Supine, but would have found out e're
this a Succedaneum to Natural Martial Liquors, that so powerfully rectify the
Spleen, etc. Who, but an Ignoramus would ask such a question? This is done
long ago by the appointment of the College, whose indefatigable pains and
care in this very particular has been such, that there is not an Apothecaries
Shop, almost throughout all England, but what for many years has been furnished
with diverse Excellent Chemical Preparations, both from Iron and Steel, whose
Virtual Qualities are equivalent to those of Natural Martial Liquors, if not
exceeding them; However when there is no opportunity of repairing to the Wells,
of Tanbridge, Epsum, Spaw, and the like, the Patient may be supplied at home;
and by this means too, The excessive sumption of crude Water to Prejudice may
be prevented; though I must confess there are some circumstantial advantages by
drinking the Waters in Specie at the Spring head, which Art cannot supply.

My Friend comes next to inquire into the Benefit of Convenient Menstruums,
what may be done by insipid Liquors upon the Bodies of Minerals; Which I
believe to be but little, unless they are reserated first by some Corrosive,
which I take to be some thing of the Nature of our Master Vanhelmont's Liquor
Alkahest, without which, or some Succedaneum he does not promise you any Primum
ens Veneris, and consequently not the Primum ens, of any other Metal or
Mineral: But by the way, though this Operation cannot be performed without a
Corrosive, yet it must not be such a one, as operates in the Nature of other
Corrosives, destroying the Bodies of those Concretes dissolved in them, but as
the Acetum verum Esurinum, quod amice soluit concreta integre illi injecta; by
which means, e're twice three months pass, I intend to offer unto the World,
for its public benefit and satisfaction, with all respect due to Vanhelmont,
His Primum ens Veneris; not placing the Honor he merits, and the Credit of the
Medicine to my own contrivance, by concealing of its Name, under the notion of
an Arcanum of my peculiar Invention.

After this little digression, to bring my Discourse into its wonted Chanel, I
am here to mind the Reader, how my Friend in all his Clamorous Scrible, as well
in this Chapter, as elsewhere in his Book has been continually, both Accuser,
Witness, Judge, and Executioner, whereby he takes occasion, not only to Vilify
the Doctors at his pleasure, but to foist in whatsoever he thinks may advance
the Interest of his Quacking Brethren: Whereupon in this Sixteenth Chapter,
having decry'd the use of the Waters, says he, For our parts, few of us depend
upon these Mineral Fountains, having where with all to supply the wants of our
Patients, and to procure sanity at home. I am sure all the mineral waters in
the world, though of never so cleansing a Quality, will not be able to wash our
Author from the stain of his foul and base designs; the stream of which runs
all the same way, and drives directly at self-interest, without the least
regard to the good of Mankind; yet the better to palliate his Juggling, he will
undertake to give Faithful Advise in general, to such as drink these Waters:
which Counsel, though curtailed, and disguised, is yet so methodically drawn
up, and so expressly contrary to his own Principles, that it appears verbatim to
be borrowed from those, he calls Dogmatists.

The Title of Master Thomson's Seventeenth Chapter did at the first sight
deceive me into a tolerable Good Opinion of him, and I was in some hopes, we
should grow Friends; but in the perufal, I found the Text and the Comment, to
be of so different a hue, that once more I was forced to dip my pen in the same
sharp ink, that hitherto has dropped from it. The flattering inscription he has
prefixed is this; A Vindication of Chemical Medicines from that false Accusation
of being dangerous: The beginning of his Chapter is as specious, as the Title,
and carries in the front an undeniable truth, (viz.) That it is a hard thing to
strive against the stream of a Vulgar Opinion at any time, but especially, when
countenanced and backed by Men of Eminent Knowledge and Fame. That Chemical
Medicines are dangerous, is rather to be reckoned amongst the Vulgar Errors,
then Opinions; but yet this which seems an Error, if rightly stated, I am
afraid will appear too great a truth, and harder for my Friend to strive
against, if rightly understood; for indeed, the meaning of it is in respect of
the undue preparation by Unskilful hands, and it is upon this account backed and
Countenanced by those, whom he is forced to confess to be Men of Eminent
Knowledge and Fame.

It Is Evident, and something I have said before to the same purpose, but here I
must repeat it, that the beginning and rise of Fame to Paracelsian or
Hermetical Physic proceeded from some particular Physicians of the College;
whilst the Quacks and Mountebanks of these times, as they never are wanting in
that case, impudently assume to themselves, the repute of those beginnings, and
from time to time, have continued the same cheat; So that, when ever any
Chemical Medicine by the practice of the College began to get Credit, the
Empiricks lying at the catch, have made it their business, either really to
steal the Receipt, or, which is all one for their Design, to counterfeit the
Medicine; and then in their Bills posted in every Corner of the Streets, they
confidently impose upon the World a false Affirmation, which is, that by their
great Travels, and long Study they have produced these Excellent Secrets for
the benesit of their Country. Thus by such shifts, they have all along crept
into the Opinion of the Common People, in whose Inclination there is never
wanting a readiness to join with irregularity, rather then to adhere to any
thing, that carries the face of Order and Authority.

Notwithstanding these subtle insinuations, they could never have gotten such a
Repute in the World, but that they Politickly made an advantage of the Factious
Principles then abounding in the Common People of our late Unruly times, when
the Common Interest was to be carried on by crying down Humane Learning; then
these Illiterate Fellows spit in the face of all the Liberal Arts and Sciences:
And, as at that time, in point of Divinity, the Fanatics of that Faction
bawling against Learning, as Idolatrous, and Superstitious, yet to delude the
World, and better to carry on their Design, made use of necessitated persons,
that were Scholars, and of Jesuits too, who (though for another End and
Interest) were ready to be transformed into the shape and habit of Cobblers, or
any other mean Mechanics, pretending hereby they Preached by the Spirit. The
same Tricks and Devices have been continually used by our Fanatics in Physic,
who as well knew the current of those Times, did run in oposition to all Just
Authority: But they will find their case to be different, and the modesty of
those Discreet Men rewarded, who chose rather to let such snarling Whifflers go
on, as things inconsiderable, then appear contentious with such, who by their
own growing Enormities (now Justice is in the hand of the Proper Legislator)
will prove their own Destruction.

Our Author does not at all Decline from the common custom of other
Empiricks, who always wound the True Physicians with their own Weapons;
wherefore he is not ashamed in this Seventeenth Chapter to tell us, that it was
the Galenists course in the Infancy of this Noble Science, to cry down
Chemistry, with all might and main, conjuring the world, that they should avoid
all Chemical Medicines, as most dangerous, damning them all without
distinction; How the Doctors are to be understood in this particular, and what
Great Patrons they always have been of true Chemistry, I have already made out
sufficiently, and cannot say any thing to these last lines, without being
guilty of Tautology, and vain Repetition; Besides, I find he himself gives the
same Exposition, in this Hypothesis, If they be not well prepared; which is not
so impertinent as he would have us think, since it is not impossible they should
be well prepared, by such who are unprepared, as I may say, themselves, wanting
the Sublimate of Art, and abounding with the Precipitate of gross ignorance:
And hereupon I very readily fall in with my Friend, and say as he does, Who
that argues for Spagyrical Medicines, does not take it for granted, that they
ought to be made by an Artist? But if I be not mistaken, this inquiry of Master
Thomsons makes not at all for himself, nor his Ignorant Brethren, who are as
far from Art, as from fair and honest dealing: As in our days, so formerly
there never wanted bold Pretenders, who would venture at any thing, for their
private advantage, let the public damage be never so great, or the lives of
men never so much concerned; Such as would be thought Artists, though they were
not acquainted, so much as with Vessels requisite to Operation, nor knew the
Nature, hardly the Names, of those Minerals, with which they were to deal;
certainly the College had reason to advise all people in general, against the
use of any Medicament prepared by such hands, least it should come to pass that
those Minerals dugg out of the Earth (ill prepared) should make room to bury
those poor Mortals, whom such ignorant wretches were sure to murder.

But now our Author is mounted into the Chair, and speaks with Authority; You
would, says he, do very well to reslect upon your Dispensatory, wherein
(except some few Chemical lent you) all your Preparations either omit to do
what they should, or commit what they should not. He charges here the poor
guilty Dispensatory with sins of Omission, and Commission, but at the same time
betrays more of his own infirmity, or indeed presumption. Does he imagine that
every man of understanding should be swaid, or governed by his private
observation; sure it is impossible he should be believed, and I am willing to be
so much his Friend, as to think he does but droll.

In Answer to his next preamble, I am sorc't to recite more of the Authors own
Language then I am willing to give you the trouble of perusal, but because it
carries with it more of his impertinent boldness, then most of the rest; I
shall not think much of my own labor, to render it to you as follows, thus:
For Example, says he, and Experience, which is the true Touchstone that must
discover us; let any of you that is in perfect health pick out of your formal
Apothecaries Book, stuffed full of supernumerary preparations, the most safe
and active of them, that do you the greatest service, to the number of ten;
weigh out the known Dose of any one singly, with the strictest curiosity you
please; take each of you the same into your own Stomaks, and repeat the Dose as
often as you dare; and so proceed likewise with another, and so to the residue
of the ten: When ye have acted your parts, we likewife (every way sound)
selecting ten of our Arcana's, will swallow down (without trusting to the
Scales) a sufficient quantity of any one (that may be most suspected) which we
commonly exhibit to the sick for their recovery; look how often ye have taken
of each of your ten, so often will we iterate or duplicate the sumption of any
one of ours. And then let any indifferent person judge who bears their
Medicines best, having the fewest bad symptoms following, and so conclude
accordingly whose are most dangerous.

That the madness of this Man may appear as well as his folly, I will meet him
at the same Touchstone of Discovery he desires (as above mentioned) and will
give him leave to pick out any ten of those supernumerary preparations he talks
of in the Dispensatory, and when he has done, the known Doses shall be weighed
out; Then shall he also have liberty to pick ten of his own Arcana's, and
without any Juggling or Equivocation, according to his own Proposition here
recited, I will my self, before any such as shall be chosen, and counted
competent Judges, (allowing our selves to be equally sound) take Dose for Dose
with Master Thomson; provided, his Arcana's be as heartily discovered to the
World, as those Preparations in the Dispensatory, which is but reason: And if
Master Thomson refuse this, I may rationally believe his bold Challenge, was no
more then a plain Juggle; and his not trusting the Scales in the Dosing of his
Medicines, gains so little trust to either, that I am apt to compare him to an
Empirical Medicaster, whom I have known to perform his tricks upon the Stage,
in a Market Town; whose way of deceiving the people, was by a pretended
Antidote against Poison, or any Infection; for which purpose he suborned a
Fellow, that would take his pretended Poison and Antidote, to counterfeit both
Sickness, and Cure; but one day having neglected to make some Antidotes ready,
when the Fellow before all the People had taken his Dose of Poison, and there
was no Antidote at hand, the deceitful Empirick presently commands one of his
Servants to fetch a piece of the Venison of a leg of Mutton, and cut it in the
form of his Antidotes, which was all that he gave at that bout; and when they
had done, with a good round Oath, he affirmed it as good an Antidote as the
best: The truth of this story being so Eminently known to some others as well
as my self, compared with Master Thomsons careless dispensing of his Doses,
makes me much mistrust his Medicines. Hence one may conclude certainly, either
that his Medicines are invalide, or that expression of his, a sufficient
quantity, to be like the rest of his Equivocations; but take him which way you
will, he surely intends to play the Hocus-Pocus; his Medicine, and the
Medicasters Mutton differing but little in effect, only the Mutton is more
Nutritive, and his Medicines chips in the Porridge; And these are the
Medicines, says he, we commonly exhibit to the sick for their recovery: How
sad then must the condition of those Patients be, what little hope can they
expect of recovery, from such Medicines as these? Medicines, that may be given
by guess; let any man judge whether this be not hitting the mark with as much
uncertainty, as those People called Andabatae, that fought with one another
winking: And thus has he practiced hab nab, by his own confession, out of zeal
for the good of his Neighbors for some years; and he concludes this Chapter
with an admonishment to all that are desirous of being improved in the
Jatricall Art, To acquaint themselves with the practical use of those
Medicines they do profess; but the pains and study he injoynes them for this
Achievement, me thinks is abundantly more then is needful; for it is not a
business of labor, but impudence, to be an Empirick; and their Medicines
cannot be truly Jatrical, because they dare deliver them out to their Patients,
without trusting to the Scales.

Master Thomson very well knowing what makes for his Honor, does frequently
throughout his whole Book, and particularly in his Eighteenth Chapter speak of
the College of Physicians, as His Adversaries, whom he is pleased to introduce
here, as if they did Much glory and vaunt in their method of curing, asserting,
That if a Man have never so Excellent Medicines, if he be ignorant therein, he
cannot discharge his Duty as he ought. As to the terms of Glory and Vaunt, they
are but the continuation of his ill language; the subsequent words speak a
truth, which is, and deserves to be owned by all sober and judicious persons;
for Method is the life of all Science, without which, a man that knows much, is
but confounded with a farrago of notions; the want of this in His brain, has
made him so frequently contradict himself, and in this very particular given me
advantage to confute him out of his own Assertions; It Is not the Laboratory,
says he, or specious Furnaces that make a Spagyrical Philosopher, no more then
a vast Library of Books will of themselves make a Learned Scholar; And I may
consequently add, no more then a multitude of Excellent Medicines will make a
Good Physician; for the cause is not at all different; Furnaces, Books and
Medicines being no further useful, then as they are judiciously understood, and
methodically applied to their respective ends: I would ask the question
whether a Physician, being to cure a Fever would not be ridiculous, if he
should apply to the Patient a Medicine proper for the Gout? Or if our Author
were to be cured of his Vertigo, 'twould be counted proper to cut his Corns.
But is this Method, We pray, says my Friend, any more then a short way of
healing Maladies? I answer him, It Is the shortest Diseases can be capable of;
some of which are so inveterate, they are not presently to be removed; others,
whose roots are not so deeply fixed, are more suddenly pulled up, and
eradicated; In both which, the Physician is directed best by a good Method, and
orderly procedure: Should a man find a Box of Carpenters Tools, and thereupon
rapt up with his good fortune, presently fancy himself a Workman: Would not you
laugh to see him instead of a Saw to take up a Chisel, or for a Hammer use his
Axe, but yet his work all this while is, in a manner, at a stand; whereas, if
he had gone orderly and methodically to work, he might have done more with his
Saw in one hour, then he could perform with his Chisel in a whole day: Thus it
is with those Quacks who stumbling upon variety of Good Medicines, and ignorant
of their right application, are so far from making a progress in any cure, that
they rather go backwards, strengthening the Disease, and not their deluded
Patients: The rest of this Chapter is spent in railing and dirty Language, but
his tongue being no slander, I think it not necessary to rake in the kennel;
and this I forbear as a friend to my Author, for the more that is stirred, the
more he will stink; ill Language always having this property, that it does,
redire in Authorem.

The inscription of his next is, The Helmontian Method; and it fares with it,
as in other places, that it is not at all answered by the contents of the
Chapter; wherein he plainly declares in effect, that the method of the
Helmontians is to use no method at all: And after a long and tedious canting to
no purpose, he comes to his old way of Challenging; Moreover, says he, We
declare that we shall take twenty sick persons, that have Acute Fevers of what
kind soever, and of these twenty we will engage to secure under God sixteen of
them, upon the fifth or sixth day after our approach, or to give a Prognostic,
upon the same days, how the Disease will terminate; in which, if we fail, we
shall be willing to suffer accordingly, supposed that ye come to the like trial.

I am afraid here Master Thomson reckons without his Host; for the difficulty
in this case will be to find twenty persons, though sick of Fevers, so mad, and
hot headed, as to put themselves into his hands; this he so well knows to be
his security, that he carries himself as cowards usually do in the like case,
who ever seem most eager to fight, when they are sure the Company of
Standers-by will not permit the trial: But it is very observable, our Friend
Engages to secure sixteen of the forementioned number, or to give a prognostic
how the Disease will terminate: I easily believe he may do one of the two
without dispute, but most probably the latter; for I suspect he may give them
such a dead - doing Arcanum, as upon the sumption of it the Disease and Patient
may Terminate together; and this way I my self will engage he may Secure the
whole twenty; and it shall be done in such a manner, that none of them shall
ever be in a condition to open their mouths against his never failing practice:
But they shall confess by their silence, he has cured them of all Diseases:
And it is well known, this is the way for the most part which they take, To
relieve a languishing wretch, tortured and racked by some cruel malady, as our
Author phrases it, by putting him out of his pain, but in the worst sense;
wherefore in this extraordinary brevity, and compendious dispatches we cannot
expect Method, which is requisite only where multitude or confusion is to be
reduced into order, and not to be seen in one single attempt of a Quack, that
has but one Salve for all Sores.

Upon such a like account it is, Master Thomson makes inquiry (addressing
himself to the Doctors) What signifies it if ye abound with hundreds of
Medicaments, composed by your own Apothecaries? Take notice that this question
is not singly intended as a plea for his (...), or (...), but does implicitly
aim at the ruin of the Apothecaries; he designs to persuade the World, that
many Medicines, and the Profession of an Apothecary, are equally insignificant;
and this further appears by what he says immediately after, concerning
Preparations made with his own fingers; for it seems, Master Thomson, besides
his Panacea, has some Auxilary Preparations; But I will be bold to say, If his
Interest would give him leave to be honest, and deal plainly, that he will not
be able to produce one Medicine among all his thirty Auxiliary Forces, but what
he is beholden for to some Apothecaries Shop; but because our Empiricks
craftily use known Medicines by obscure names, this cheat is not so easily
demonstrated,

Thus has my Gentleman shown our Doctors the way, not to redeem the credit of
this noble Science, which he has endeavored to stain; but yet to restore it to
its pristine renown; yes, such as it was in the days of Yore, when Apollo and
Aesculapius were Deified for two or three good Receipts; and Chiron the
Centaure past for an Excellent Physician; in succeeding Ages Physic acquired a
greater growth; and then knowledge generally increasing in the World,
Hippocrates and Galen, though far exceeding their Predecessors, were yet
esteemed but as Men; This Noble Science from its small beginnings growing by
degrees, is arrived now at the highest top of perfection in the most Famous
College of London, in which there is not one Physician, but far out-shines
Apollo himself, with his brightest rays; and if they had lived in that Age,
had rivall'd him out of his Apotheosis: all this our Quacks are very sensible
of, and envy; and no wonder they endeavor to reduce Physic to its pristine
Renown, because according to that Calculation they might expect to be inserted
into the Catalogue of Physicians, and claim a share in the Patent or Diploma,
which the College does enjoy (to use our Authors phrase) ex condigno, these
Quacks for the same reason excluded.

This Rabble seeing themselves thus shut out of doors, have of late been
knocking their heads together for a New Patent, of which Master Thomson seems
to give a lame account in the twentieth and last Chapter of his Book,
Entitled, Some Animadversions upon the late attempt to procure a Patent from
his Gracious Majesty, for the Erecting a College of Chemical Physicians. And
here I cannot but take notice of His Sacred Majesty's great Prudence, together
with His Exceeding care for the good of his Subjects, whose lives he is so
tender of, that His Majesty would not entrust them in the desperate hands of
unskilful Empiricks; we are all concerned to give our most Humble thanks to our
most Gracious Sovereign, that this Design never went beyond an attempt; but
that this Monster was stifled in the birth, and proved Abortive, which
otherwise was like to prey upon, and devour us under the protection of
Authority.

Notwithstanding, our Author has the confidence to say, that Never was there a
more Just, Honest, Desirable, and useful Enterprise set upon in this Nation;
This last Hypocritical strain of his seems to be taken out of the late Rebels
Declarations, wherein, under the most specious pretenses of Justice and
Loyalty, they hid the most Desperate Treason; which, when the mask was taken
of, appeared in its own bloody Colors; And therefore I fear my Friend has lost
his jest, since all men are sufficiently awake to discover his Hypocrisy, that
desires to betray so many innocent lives, under the pretense of preserving them
by Physic.

Thus are the best of Virtues counterfeited by the worst of Vices; and those
that have the worst ends, are necessitated to guild them over with the fairest
shows, or else they would never be swallowed. The like carriage in our
newfound Chemists, did for a time deceive some honest men into a good opinion
of the undertaking, who, when under the honey they perceived the sting, drew
back from the Confederacy, and are become their greatest Opposers; just as it
fared with some honest heatted men who had been drawn in, and out of good
Principles had sided with the Factious in our late troubles; yet when the
blackness of their designs appeared, they proved the most Zealous Loyallists.

I am inclined to make use of this comparison, as very pertinent to my present
purpose; for just as the late Rebels Declared they would make His late
Majejesty, of Blessed Memory a Glorious King; so these Jugglers pretending To
Regulate and Reform the present Enormous Abuses in this Excellent Spagyrick
Science, talk of Advancing it to be Queen Regent in Physic, whil'it their real
intention is to dethrone Her, and set up themselves. I Wonder much at the
impertinence of these Reformers! Do not we all know, that Chemistry is already
fixed upon a good and sure fundation? If their design had been honest, as it is
found rotten and fallacious, to what purpose, I pray, should it be put down in
one place, to be set up in another? I would have these Jugglers know, (and
indeed they know it full well) there is already Erected a College of Chymicall
Physicians; for I dare say, there are none amongst our Doctors, that will not
own this Epithet, and I am sure, none more justly deserve it.

Besides, for a further Encouragement, and to show a particular countenance to
this Noble Art, His Majesty has caused a peculiar Elaboratory of his own to be
Erected, which is managed by Monsieur Febure, a Person of known Eminency and
Parts, who has approved himself to the World to be a most Able Artist: So that
these Up-starts must intrude partly upon his right, as well as upon the Company
of Apothecaries, and cannot justly be admitted Operators, their design being
under that notion to become Physicians.

The business of this new Patent, was carried on by Subscriptions to a
Petition, which being speciously penned, invited some few of Note to favor the
Design; but as I intimated before, they did upon second and better thoughts,
re-demand their hands. The number of Subscribers of all sorts, as Master Odowds
List informs me, did never exceed five and thirty, and when the forementioned
Persons had withdrawn, there were left behind, as Master Thomson confesses,
Certain very illiterate persons, that were (...), Chymici umbratiles, mock
Chemists, no whit exercised in Anatomy, and Botanicks, inexpert in the History
of Diseases, etc. And these Petitioners pray for a Patent, that they may be
admitted, in a Lawful way, to make good that Excellent Character Master
Thomson has given them.

I hope I need not make any Apology to those Ingenious and Worthy Men, who out
of their forward and true zeal to Pyrotechny at first consented: I am confident
they themselves will acquit me, that nothing in this Treatise is directed
against them; it must needs appear, that where I mention any, as concerned with
Master Thomson, I mean only those, whom he himself has confessed to be very
illiterate persons. They may likewise be assured, as to what relates to my
self, I shall ever be ready to give a perfect Testimony of a true and real
respect to them, as persons, whom I know without any sinister ends and
interest, to be such truly zealous laborers in the fire, that they ought not
to be blemished by those, who under the borrowed Mantle of their protection,
carry on unhandsome Designs.

As to what concerns Master Thomson, if he meets with any thing in my reply
beyond his expectation, he must thank himself, and his own Style, in whose Ink
the Gall and Vitriol exceeds the proportion allowed by others in the common
Menstruum. If I have touched him home, and to the quick, let him reflect upon
his own unhandsome language, and he will see, that he is paid but in his own
coin; Yet it is a hard matter to make the account even, in regard Master
Thomson asperses two worthy established Societies, Famous in their respective
Employments, viz. the Doctors, and Apothecaries, and yet falsely too; on the
other hand, what I say to him, is truth, and tends to the setting out, in their
own shape, an inconsiderable newborn Faction.

But after all, I am yet to give a further Character of Master Thomson, and his
Fraternity, those whom I presume he means every where by his u S and w E, when
he talks so highly of their great exployts: I shall give you likewise a
faithful description of his Elaboratory so much boasted on throughout (almost)
his whole Book, as if it were the Eighth Wonder of the World, as sure as he is
the Eight Wise Man. Both his Faction and his Furnace, I am the better fitted to
describe, having had an interview and personal Dialogue with him, which happened
at a meeting in his own House, to which I made a Journey upon the perusal of
his Book, in order to this my then intended discourse: And to do Master Thomson
all Just right, upon talking with the man, I found him as to Parts much beyond
my first apprehension, or what it was possible for me to believe, making my
conjecture only from his Book, wherein is so much self contradiction, and
impertinent abusive railing, that one must conclude the Author, (though guilty
of some Learning) far from any Ingenuity, as all those must needs be, who carry
on their design by calumniating the most Eminent Professors of that Science,
they pretend to own, and within the compass of which they aim at a reputation
in the World to themselves.

I may justly tell Master Thomson, that he abounds less with Learning, then
Choler, yet according to his proportion of each, he makes use of them together
in charging others as being culpable of what his own Omissions have
necessitated him deservedly to suffer, so that in effect, he complains of
Justice; doubtless had he gone on in a regular way, he might have expected
favor from the College: That which I would say, is this; had Master Thomson
sedulously applied himself to the study of Physic, and taken his Degrees, as
the custom of the Universities require, he might have obtained License to
practice; the College never denying such as are lawfully qualified: But since
our Author has minded only the end without the means he is to blame himself,
if he be disappointed.

I cannot positively accuse Master Thomson in particular, that he like the
Faction he owns, intended formerly some other profession, and that failing in
the attainment, either through Idleness or want of Ability, he stumbled upon
Physic; yet this I am sure he is guilty of, that he attempted to fly, before
he was pen-feathered, venturing upon Practice, before he was well versed in the
Theory; which is one reason he is no better acquainted with Method; But for the
rest of his Crew, they are obliged by their Ignorance to be utter Enemies to
Learning, and having nothing justly to plead for their irregular courses, must
make up the defect with impudence.

If so be, Master Thomson have in him something more then the rest of his
Illiterate Brethren, yet he is obnoxious to the same censure with them, in
regard he is of the Club, and it is a common Rule,

Noscitur ex sociis, qui non cognoscitur ex se:

With this rabble he frequently meets, and bears his part in the Consort, where
the burden of their Song is, railing against the Universities, the College,
and all Learning in General, but the Doctors especially; who if they oppose
them, do it not as they practice Chymically and not Galenically, but as they
presume to practice contrary to the rules of Order and Authority; But I am apt
to believe the private quarrels of this Faction, are like to save the Doctors a
labor; for there is now a great falling out among themselves, as I perceive by
Master Thomson's bitter inveighing against the Dropping Doctor, against Mr
Odowde, and some others; in the heat of his railing, he told me, they
especially were the persons that obstructed their business, and disenabled them
from achieving That which (in their account) would prove so useful to the
World; But I would have Master Thomson understand thus much, that it is not any
particular persons of his Faction that are his binderance, but the general
design of imposing upon the People.

Tandem aliquando, I am got into his Elaboratory which is so pitiful a sight,
that it minds me of an Expression in his Eighth Chapter, it is not the
Laboratory or Specious Furnaces that simply make a Spagyrick; For if his Skill
in Pyrotechny were to be calculated by his Utensils, he would hardly be thought
able to out - do Aniseed - Water - Robin: And whereas, in the beginning of the
forenamed Chapter, he says to the Doctors, Ye make your boast, that ye possess
(as well as we) your Laboratories and Variety of Furnaces; His Elaboratory
affords but two, one of Earth, the other of Iron; the former (like the Master)
for want of Lutum Sapientiae being cracked, was tied together with a Rope, that
of Iron in case of necessity, for some Kitchen might serve as a Chafing Dish,
for indeed it does not much exceed that Standard; when I compared his own large
boastings of this Fabric, with my ocular view, I began to think my Chemist had
showed me the Extract, and Elixir of his magnified Pile, which I admired to
behold, shrunk as it were into two Calcining Pots, and about that number of
broken Retorts.

Thus furnished, my Friend intends to venture at Helmonts Liquor Alkahest, and
makes no doubt of getting the Philosophers Stone, but I fear the poor wretch
will be gravelled in his design in the conclusion.

But that Master Thomson and I, may part Friends, I shall do the ossice of one
in advising him for the future, to rail less against those Worthy Men, whose
Books he is not worthy to carry, and to be less injurious to the Company of
Apothecaries, to whom he owes some Respect, though he disown it; however as to
the Doctors, me thinks he and his Brethren should the rather forbear, in regard
their Scandalous Tongues can do the College no more hurt, then the Arrows of
the Barbarians do the Sun, when they aim at this Fountain of Light, which
laughs at their vain and ridiculous Choler; and notwithstanding all their
bolts, continues the same course, and inunterrupted motion above the reach of
their foolish attempts: All the injury, that they are able to offer these
Eminent Men, resembles but the ill humor of Curs, that bark at the Moon and
Stars, but cannot by the importunity of their howlings, diminish eitheir their
Splendour or Influence.

SOME FEW REMARKES Upon a Treatise of Mr Thomas O Dowdes, Called, The POOR -
MAN'S - PHYSICIAN.
IT was wont to be said, Ubi desinit Medicus, incipit Theologus; but it seems
Master O Dowde has a particular design to make both Commence together,
ushering in his Pamphlet with two or three abused, and misapplied texts of
Scripture; notwithstanding before he and I part, he will appear to be neither a
Divine, nor a Physician, the inverse of that Title, which he has falsely put
upon his Book, justly belonging to himself; The Man's a Poor Physician: Whereas
he fondly talks of his Speaking with a Holy Reverence, I cannot but stand
amazed at his profane Impudence, in asserting this Hypotheticall Proposition,
That if Jesus Christ Himself were now on Earth, Professing, and Curing
Chymically, though to Mirable; rather then be admitted (so) to do that
universal Good, he would be Vilified, Scorned, Condemned, and Crucified:
Intending to disgorge at this presumptuous rate, He might well begin his
Preface with a Declaration, that He was conscious to himself he should have
many Enemies. How ill does this suit with the Charity his Pamphlet seems to
carry in the front; this is in effect to unchristian the College, and tell
them they are Jews; which is so gross and foolish a Scandal; so improbable and
groundless an imputation, that there needs nothing to be said to take it off,
but the very bare repetition; However, it sufficiently sets the Author out to
the World for one, that has but a small stock of modesty and less religion.

I cannot but take notice of the Man's Ingenuous Confession of the Imposture,
commonly practiced by those of his rank, but not so frankly acknowledged by
any, as himself; For I can make no other Interpretation of this specious
promise, If poor, says he, I will not only cure them, but likewise give them
considerable Gratuities for their Public appearance in the acknowledgement of
their several Cures: This is to me an evidence, that he trades with those that
are in want, and working upon their necessity does by an underhand agreement,
hire them to bear witness to the Cure, that never was performed; and this trick
of his managed with subtlety, might very easily make his Catalogue so numerous.
I really believe, that excepting some few Cured by accident, he is forced to
this Expense in all other Diseases, but the Pox; and in that particular these
Empiricks have another fetch to help themselves; but when examined, it will
prove of less credit, then the former, namely, their privy bargains.

The French Disease, having so much of shame intayled upon it, because
Contracted usually from great Debaucheries, it is the great care of all Persons
punished with it, to conceal it as much as is possible; and therefore such are
sure to loose their custom, who tells tales: Under this color, such as our
Author is, take occasion to Exagerate the number they have cured, setting them
out, and their Disease by several circumstances and degrees, and being excused
from naming the persons upon the account of Reputation, they leave us no
possibility of convincing them of their Knavery, but we must believe all upon
their single Word: This I take to be most of the Reason, why the Disease all
these Mountebanks most pretend to the cure of, is the Lues Venerea; in this
particular it is, Master O Dowde (as appears in his Preface) would have us all
acknowledge, His just and Christian Practices.

Master Grooms great drift and design, I perceive is, to decoy the rich, and
draw them into his Net; to this purpose he takes a very plausible course,
pretending much to the doing of good for Gods sake, and relieving the Poor that
want Medicine; That this is the end of all his Charity is very evident from his
own Discovery, He will traverse, he says, all the Streets, Lanes, and Allies,
of this Great and Glorious City, to find out the Poor and Necessitous wanting
help and Medicine; The conclusion of this is, that the overweening man
fancies, he shall Force the Rich to seek him; but alas, this Plot will not
take; while there are Good Physicians in the Kings Highway, we need not go
look such Cattle as he in the By-Lanes; and I would Advise Master O Dowde to
Endeavor all he can, to oblige the Yeomen of the Guard; for going of their
Errands, is still like to be his best employment.

It Is high time to Assure the World that he scorns to Print a Paper to beg a
Patient; Alas, that Cheat is worn threadbare, and though at the first coming
up, it served to delude for a time; yet now experience of the emptiness of such
like Manifesto's has made them as unprofitable, as they are common; This my
Gentleman is very sensible of, and therefore pretends to be above what he
cannot reach; and instead therefore of posting up his Bills, he has lately
clapped on a face of Godliness, which he hopes will be his great gain: This
strain runs parallel with his Railing throughout his whole Preface; Hence
springs such frequent mention of his Conscience; so much Charity to the
Diseased Poor; such Blessing of God; such imploring of the Great Creator: But
alas, I am afraid for him, this knack will hardly work upon the Brethren, and
the Holy Sisters in the City; His Manners and Conversation is so notoriously
known, that he of all others is like to make little advantage of his
Hypocrisy; therefore he had as good pull off the Vizard-masque, and appear in
his own shape.

And me thinks he appears to some purpose about the two or three and twentieth
page of his Book; where having told a long story of William Miller Servant to
Master Langston, whom, he says, he Cured of a violent Surfeit, Fever and
Lunacy, in the close of the Narration, Complains he received not a sufficient
Reward; This I thought was contrary to his Principles, but it seems it is only
against his Pretenses: That which is most strange, and much surpised me in a
Man of his Seraphick temper, that professes so much Piety, is, that thus
disobliged, as he calls it, upon occasion afterward, being sent for to the
Mistress, he should out of perfect spite and revenge, refuse to come; Nay, he so
stood it out, That he would in no case be importuned to it; And this is the
man, which has taken upon him the Profession of Physic, only to do good for
Gods sake. I cannot say after this, that he forgets himself, though he so
solemnly and boldly calls upon God To bear record with his Conscience,
concerning his Integrity and Single-hearted simplicity: No, this is the
remembrance of himself, and the forgetting of God, whose Name he so vainly
takes into his mouth.

Such is the profane craft and subtlety of this man, that, from his
Atheistical Principles, he is careless of his Words and Protestations, as to
the truth of them, so they do but carry on his design of deceiving, and get him
a reputation with honest meaning men, who being by their own charity betrayed
to him, may help to furnish him with money to spend upon his Vices: He, like
the tempter, applies himself in his Book suitably to the different inclination
of those he addresses himself to, and accordingly he has another way to tickle
the fancies of persons ill inclined, using diverse vain and lascivious
expressions; Nay, in a manner, downright encouraging them to pursue their
lusts, and venture for that loathed disease, because so obvious and easy to be
cured by him; as appears by his Relation of a Person of great Worth and
Fortune, who having got a Clap with a witness, came to him to be Cured within
fifteen days, because his concerns required he should then take a Journey; He
like an impudent Wretch answered him (they are his own words) If it might be a
Service to him, he should be as well Cured as in all his life, and have time to
get another if he pleased, and be Cured of that too in that time; And me thinks
here it had been proper for him to add to all, that he would do This for Gods
sake.

The greatest part of his Preface (which indeed is the whole Book, the rest
being as it were but an Index) is taken up in railing at the Doctors; this is
the Common Place or Topic of all these Mountebancks Rhetoric: Their sole
study (but all in vain) is to draw a Cloud over the luster of these men that
outshine them; and they think (but they are mistaken) to make their own
couterfeit glistering by this means pass for Gold: I confess, some of these
sort of Men do show some Wit and Parts in their Calumnies, and make the best of
their bad Cause it is capable of; but this Master O Dowde is so bold, and dull
an Ignoramus, that, as we say of a Notorious Villain, He is one that shames the
Gallows; So this Groom is such a Wretch, that he is a disgrace, even to his
most disgraceful Party; and that in such a measure, that they themselves cry
him down, and blush to own him.

One of the most considerable Champions, and Ringleaders of this Faction, I
take Master Thomson to be, and therefore I look on him to speak the mind of the
whole Junto; besides, he has been an Intimate Friend and Associate of O
Dowdes, and consequently one that best knows him: From his own mouth, I had it
to this essect, That he is an Illiterate Person, and so grossly Ignorant, that
he alone was able to bring into question, the Knowledge of all the rest, they
for his single sake lying under the censure of being men, as ignorant as
himself; and no doubt most of them did not much come behind him for this gift
and endowment of Ignorance. Master Thomson told me, That the Ignorance of this
Dunce alone occasioned the Obstruction of the Patent, which was lately in
Agitation, for the Erecting of a New College: In this I do not altogether give
Credit to Master Thomson, but however it serves for my present purpose, to
convince the World of Master O Dowdes insufficiency, when his own Party, whose
business it is to cry up one another Merit, shall blazon him for an unlettered
Groom.

It Is his gross Ignorance makes him so rude and saucy with the Doctors, as he
is; if he had had any Learning, I am sure he would have had more civility, and
better manners: What he undertakes to say of them, is as false, as his
Declaration, (viz.) That he scorned to Print a Paper to beg a Patient; whereas
he has spoiled many sheets only to that purpose, witness his First, Second,
and now a Third Edition of his Book published for the same design, and
imbroidered with a long Catalogue of counterfeit Cures, as if he intended now
his own Fraternity has cast him off, to put in for the Monopoly, and prove
Medicaster Universalis.

My Gentleman (though such an Atheist, that I think he seldom says his
Prayers) has notwitstanding at last found out Amen Corner (and I wish it prove
not a Formidable place to him) where he talks of a body, and where I have seen
many dissected, that had more brains, I believe, then himself, and yet had not
Wit enough to avoid that Destiny: By the whole Body of Amen Corner he talks on,
he must be supposed to mean the their Situated College of Physicians; Persons,
who for their Eminency and known Abilities in Physic and Anatomy, the King
Himself was Graciously Pleased lately to Honor with his Presence, and as a
signal Testimony of His Affection to the Professors, as well as to the
Profession, Conferred the Honor of Knighthood upon the Worthy Reader pro
tempore, (now Sir George Ent) together with diverse signal Expressions of Favor
and Respect to the whole Body of this Society: And yet such is the impudence of
this ignorant Scandalous Fellow, that with strange impertinent, insignificant,
and false aspersions he ventures to throw dirt upon those His Majesty thought
fit so highly to Honor.

But Perfasque, Nefasque, the old Design must go on; Self-interest and Juggling
must to be advanced, and no way else is possible to effect it, unless it be by
decrying those that are most likely to discover the Cheat. Thus our Autorculus,
and the rest of the Crew are of opinion, That if they do Calumniari fortiter,
aliquid haerebit; and indeed the mischief is, that, to the ruin of many simple
persons, they do it with some kind of success; but I hope for the future, all
sorts of men will be more careful of their lives, and not cast such pearls,
before them that are ready to devour; And I wish this little Book might serve
as a guide for some of the misled, to direct them, least they split upon this
Rock.

The Title of Master O Dowdes Book, (viz.) The Poor Man's Physician, Or, the
True Art of Medicine, as it is Chymically prepared, etc. Did not a little raise
my expectation; I hoped to have made a discovery there of something
extraordinary, as to the Preparations of Medicines, by the Art of Pyrotechny;
which indeed was the chief Reason why I Esteemed it worth my while to look into
it; for (Chemistry being both my Profession and Delight) the improving my
knowledge in this Art, is my sole Study, and that, for which I have not spared
either Cost or Pains: But upon the purusal, I found my self utterly
disappointed; For instead of performing what his specious Title promises, he
obtrudes upon the World a farrago of Names and Cures, most of which are
notoriously false, and fictitious; so that what in the Title Page is the true
Art of Medicine, is in the Book mere forgery, and the true Art of cozening.

I would not be thought to speak at random, or shoot at rovers, as this fellow
does his bolts, though it be in the case of so inconsiderable a person; and
therefore that I might be furnished to give a certain Testimony of his
insidelity, and demonstrate the dangerous consequence that must necessarily
ensue upon his bold undertakings, I have taken no small pains to examine the
truth of those particulars, he so mightily boasts of, and magnifies himself
for; and in truth I do not find one in ten to answer in the least to that he so
impudently asserts in his Book: I do believe, if it were possible to trace him
through his whole Catalogue, one in twenty would not appear to give him a good
report; and this sure comes far short of those Miraculous cures he would
possess the World with an opinion of being the performance of his daily
practice.

If one may judge Ex pede Herculem, I shall be able by showing the falsness of
some Cures he boasts of, give the world an Essay of the whole Muster: That
which he particularly insists on and by a formal Preface bespeaks the
attention of the Reader even to the least circumstance, is the Cure of one
Master Richard Rawlinson, mentioned in the fourth page of his Book, Living on
the backside of the Shambles, in New-Gate-Market; Out of my desire to know the
truth, I went to him, being my Neighbor, and had with him some Discourse
concerning this particular, he told me, he was brought very low by the Scurvey,
and had been for a good space in a course of Physic for his recovery by the
advice of a friend, and about that time, a Colonel of his acquaintance came to
visit him, and finding him so ill out of pity sent presently for Master O
Dowde, who very readily came, and after a cursory view of Master Rawlinson,
appointed him some of his Medicine (without any inquiry what had formerly been
given him) which operating with him, as well by vomit as by stool, gave him
present ease, and freed him, but 'twas only from a Rheumatismus, caused by the
effect of a Mercurial Preparation, which his friend, and my acquaintance had
given him (without discovering to Master Rawlinson the intent of the Medicine)
in order to his Recovery; with which method, who ever is acquainted, do very
well know the Effect, and will not wonder, that Master O Dowde found my
Neighbor in that Condition, he is pleased to call an unparalled Distemper;
but will rather admire he should call this a Cure, that did but only check the
former Medicine, and turn the Humor another way, which every Artist in Physic
or Surgery knows was a hare-brain'd rash undertaking, and in all probability,
did prevent the perfection of his Cure; Master Rawlinson, not withstanding the
repetition of Master O Dowde's Medicine, (being put out of his former course of
Physic) remains to this day uncured, being still deeply affected with the
Scurvey, and showing me spots upon his Arm, told me with his own mouth, that
because he did not continue Gratuities according to his expectation, he heard
no more of Master O Dowde. And thus I have given you an impartial account of
the great Cure, which this false and impudent man would Have stand as a
perpetual record to all Ages, against the sordid method of Galenical
Prescriptions: But let this stand as a perpetual record to all Ages against
Master O Dowdes false and scandalous aspersions, for to my knowledge, what had
been done before in order to this man's Cure was performed by a Chemical
Operator in Surgery, a Man so Eminently known to be able in his Profession,
that had not this bold intruder prevented, Master Rawlinson might have at this
time been perfectly well.

His great Idol being thus thrown down before the face of truth, all the other
petty Imps and Cures of little moment must needs be sensible of the fall; and I
shall put some of them to the trial, if they are able to stand the test: as I
take it, two or three of them well shaken and examined, being found too weak
and tottering, will be sufficient to give us an estimate of the whole Tribe,
and plainly evince, that they are all either absolutely forged, or only the
effcts of chance.

I shall begin with Master Adams, a Brewer in Saint Thomas Southwark, whom
Master O Dowde is pleased to say in the third p. of his Book, He Curedof a
violent Gout in two days of Medicine, which I must confess to be a very
expeditious Cure of such an inveterate Disease; But it is only said, not
performed, for a Friend of mine, a person of known Credit, afflicted with the
same pain, willing to be eafed, was inclined to believe what he so much desired
should be verified in himself; but he was not altogether so credulous, as to
venture upon Master O Dowde without a particular inquiry into the certainty;
whereupon, going to Master Adams, he was satisfied by him to the contrary, and
told, that O Dowde was a lying Fellow, and that he was no better then he was
before the taking of Master O Dowdes Medicine; the like account has been given
me by diverse of those persons mentioned in his Catalogue, within these few
days.

A second I went to speak withal my self not long ago, by Name Mr. Rawley a
Baker near Barking Church in Tower-street; this man (says O Dowde) was under a
five years Dropsy, Lask, and Bloody Flux, a Patient so remarkable, as to call
men, and Angels to witness against the Barbarous inhumanity of those Persons,
that style themselves Doctors, etc. 'Twould be too troublesome to relate the
whole Fable; to be brief therefore, after a lamentable, and as false a report,
he tells you, This Man after wishing for death, at last with a terrible Dropsy
became his Patient, his Legs and Thighs swollen, not imaginably to be moved,
and hard as boards, yet in Eleven days Medicine cured by him. The Man himself
was at that time a sleep upon the Bed, and I received the following Narration
from Mistress Rawley to this Effect, that as to Master O Dowdes description of
her Husbands Disease, 'twas in part true, but he was so far from being well or
cured in Eleven days, that he was half a year his daily Patient with little
benefit; and that Master O Dowde having received diverse gratuities, did at
several times after, bring more of his Medicine almost for the space of a year,
till at last, either for want of those former Gratuities, or for shame he had
not yet Cured him, from that day to this he never appeared: Her Husbands Legs,
and Thighs being swollen as much as ever, it seems Master O Dowde can cure the
Dropsy without the removal of the Symptoms.

A third lie he tells, is of Mistress Elizabeth Friend, who unfortunately became
his Patient, he says, for the Falling Sickness, and relates the Story in the
twenty seventh page of his Catalogue, to which for brevity sake I refer the
Reader: Some terrible fits of the Mother indeed she had, for the Cure of which,
by the Persuasion of some Friend, that was deceived into an Opinion of Master O
Dowde, she was Boarded at his House, where he Physick't her at his old rate;
this poor Gentlewoman by the excessive, or (to use his own phrase) The
wonderful Operation of his Three and Twenty times Medicine, had so lost her
Spirits, that she became deeply affected with a Lethargy, which he minces into
an Indisposition and Drowsiness: After this, she had the Small Pox, but
recovered of that Disease, she went on in the former course of Medicine, till
her Lethargy was attended by a kind of Distraction, and her former fits so much
heighthned, that when they were upon her, she would stare, and start, like one
perfectly out of her Senses, and in the times of her intermission, her face was
puffed up and bloated; which by one of Master O Dowdes Figures, he calls in his
forty sixth page her growing fat, After twenty nine days of Medicine, to the
Operation of at least Two Hundred Vomits, and One Hundred and odd Stools, grew
Strong, Cheerful and Fat; which Fatness was such Bloatiness, that they
(indeed) who had not been acquainted with her, might look on it as the usual
habit of her body: This poor young Gentlewoman, whose Cure this impudent man so
much boasts of, dyed in one of these fits, to the great grief of her Friends,
and in particular her Mother, who is at the very Name of O Dowde like a
distracted person, to think she should be so indiscreet as to suffer her self
to be deluded by such a vain bragging Impostor. This Relation was given me by
the Gentlewomans near Friends, who likewise told me, they dare not mention O
Dowdes Name to her Mother in any case, least by the disturbance of her Spirits,
she should fall into the like passionate fits with her Daughter.

After these several Convictions, I take it for granted, that all sober Men
will know Master O Dowde for a Liar, and I doubt not but he will have his due,
and proper punishment, which is never to be believed.

Certainly, had this Man been of sober Principles, he would never have vented
so much Vanity and Frothiness in several places of his Scribble; it is so gross,
that it is hardly fit for modest ears: Some of that which is most cleanly, I
met with in a passage concerning a young Gentleman, whom he Cured of the Pox:
After a long up-braiding of the Doctors under the notion of Dogmatists, with a
tedious Method of Curing the Old Gentleman (as he calls it) to show his
Dexterity that way, he brings in for Witness; A Witty and Accomplished Young
Gentleman, who some years since, from a simple Gonorrhea, was run into a most
prodigious POX, and almost Two Years course of Physic; who afterward becoming
my Patient, was perfectly Cured long since; And many Months after getting an
Inveterate Clap, was in less then Ten days cured by Me; and then pleasantly
assured me, that he now was satisfied, that in a Clap, nothing more was
needful, then to Pray the Physician (not to the God our Author so often
invocated) and pay him well, and to it again, for it was Cured as soon as a
scratcht finger. This is the Young Gentleman's Descant upon the Old One; Master
O Dowde gives him the style of Witty and Accomplished, flattering him into the
humor of Paying Well, and as it may be guest by this Familiar Dialogue,
finding him sit for his Company, they became Cronies; by which Debauchery you
may likewise guess at our Authors vain Conversation.

As it was tedious for me to examine every particular in Master O Dowdes Index,
of those he says he has Cured, so it would be to as little purpose to make a
New Catalogue of All those I may say he has Killed; If I should undertake it, I
am of Opinion, I could fill a Book as Large as his own; for when I made inquiry
after those whom he Cured (in his Book but no where else) I met with several
Tragic Stories of his bold undertakings: I shall recount one or two, that
Master O Dowde may take notice of, and add them in the next Edition of his Book.

The first was one Thomkins, at the spread Eagle near Fleet-Bridge, who was
another of his Patients for the Old Gentleman, but his Medicine wrought so
violently with him, that he dyed of a Scowring; but while under those Gripes
and Tortures, occasioned by his Potion, would often say if he recovered, he
would be revenged of him, and if he dyed, which he did suddenly after, he was
confident O Dowde was the cause of his death.

Another was a Maidservant, that unfortunately became his Patient, in
Long-Lane; she upon taking of his Medicine, which wrought so violently with
her, presently died, having strange kind of Cramps and Fits; diverse others I
am furnished to recite, but I forbear to trouble my Reader, whom I am confident
I have already satisfied, and more will nauseate.

This Master O Dowde, though never so desperate in the exhibition of his
Medicine, as he all along phrases it, yet in his manner of Dispensing, he uses
a more then ordinary caution: I made a discovery of this, as well by his
carriage, set out in his own Book, as from the relation of several of his
Patients: His way is never to trust his Medicine in the hands of his Patients,
but they must either in the presence of Himself, or his Boy, take down whatever
he gives or appoints; and in my Opinion, this can bear no other interpretation,
then that he is afraid his Knavery should be discovered in using some common
rejected preparation, under the show of his own invented Chymicall Arcanum.

Just such another Fellow is Master Lockier, (and I think these Geese are sitly
coupled together) who by difguising of Vitrum Antimonii, commonly called
Stibium, has exposed to the world his Pilula, Radiis solis extracta, and for
some considerable time, has sold it for Sixteen Shillings per Ounce; whereas,
to my own knowledge, the same quantity, of the same Commodity, might be had
without any trouble in any Apothecaries Shop for Three Pence: Such kind of
Cheats as these are frequently put upon the easily deluded and credulous
people, by such Politic Empiricks and Falsifiers in Physic as these.

I leave it therefore to Master Lockiers choice, whether he had rather be
couuted a Knave, or a Fool, one of the two he cannot avoid; for having Published
in Print, that there is no Antimony in his Pill; either he is so ignorant, he
knows not what Antimony is, or else he resolved to deceive the World: Though
for my own part, I was well satisfied, and found diverse of the same Opinion,
concluding it to be a Mineral, and that nothing else could Operate in so small
a proportion; yet notwithstanding, for the further satisfaction or the World, I
made an Experiment, in the Public Elaboratory of the College, before diverse
of the Fellows, in order to a Pyrotechnicall Resolution of this Pill, as
follows.

A Resolution of Mr Lockiers PILL.
AFter the dissolution of half an ounce of Master Lockiers Pills, in a
sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine, which served only to take away the
mucilaginous substance, with which they were formed into those small
proportions; I found a remaining powder, which after it was dry, answered (as I
thought) in color and weight to Vitrum Antimonii; for further discovery, I
pulverized half an Ounce of Vitrum Antimonii, and in the opinion of all that
were present, there was no ocular demonstration to the contrary, but that they
were all one: However, that it might be put beyond all dispute, I melted down
Master Lockiers Pills, and out of that half Ounce, I reduced Two Drams and
Eleven Grains of pure Regulus of Antimony; after this, I melted down the same
quantity of Vitrum Antimonii, out of which I also did reduce the same quantity
of Regulus, wanting but five Grains, which is not only an undeniable
demonstration, that Master Lockiers Pills are altogether Antimonial, but as
evidently plain, that they are nothing else but Vitrum Antimonii, powdered and
formed into those small Granula's, in which form he has so publicly sold them
all England over.

And now what will be the dangerous consequence, and hazard to many men's lives,
to whom these Impostors thus unadvisedly offer their Medicine, without any
consideration or respect, either to the nature of the Disease, habit of Body,
constitution of the Patient; but in all cases, to persons of all Ages and
Constitutions, at a venture, give it in like quantity, I say, what evil event
must ensue such absurd practices, I leave to the Judgment of All Rational Men.

The Appendix.
Worthy Gentlemen,
WHen I first undertook an Answer to these indirect Practitioners in Physic, I
also intended to offer something oy way of Proposal, or rather a most Humble
Address to You; The President, Fellows, and Commonalty of the Kings College of
Physicians in this Famous City; As also to the Master, Wardens, and Company of
Apothecaries, in order to the rectifying of some Enormous abuses, that within
the space of some fevv years past, have crept into the general Practice of
Physic.

But having perused a little Book Entitled, A Letter concerning the present
State of Physic; Written by a Person of Quality, and without dispute great
Learning, who has so effectually and fully discust the whole matter, and
proposed such excellent means and ways, as well to prevent the like for the
future, as for the advancing all the desiderata of this Profession; in all
which his principal aim is, the restoring of this Practice of Physic to its
ancient Constitution, which, as this Worthy Gentleman says, Till good Learning
came to be over-thrown and laid wast by the Furious irruption of the Goths
(though it now stands divided, between the Surgeon and Apothecary, was then
the sole care of the Physician only; and it is very true, they did then
officiate in all the faculties of Physic: But it is observed likewise, that
this Profession in general never flourished better then it has in these three
Branches, (viz.) Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries; nor has there been
a greater improvement in Physic, in any Age of the World, then what has been
made within this Thirty years last past; and I presume without disparagement to
any, I may affirm, this to have been brought about, by the Industry and Pains,
principally of the Honorable Society of Physicians in London, as well in the
business of Anatomy, as Physic: Nor has the Surgeons, and Apothecaries been
unuseful in this advancement; but each of them in their respective Spears,
have been Exemplary to our Neighboring Nations.

Then, what remains to the perfect advancement of this God-like Profession, but
a reuniting of the whole Body consisting of these Branches) into those true and
amicable respects, in which current, to this day Physic has so well prospered;
and the rather, because, as this noble Gentleman has well observed, it might
otherwise Be looked upon in respect of these (though additional) two very
Worthy Societies of Men (Surgeons and Apothecaries) as a thing extremely
unreasonable to undertake such an alteration, as the restoring of that ancient
way would necessarily introduce: Besides the great difficulty must needs be
expected in bringing this expedient to its intended perfection, it may probably
be conjectured, that then the continuance of more time, with some other
inconveniences falling in, may again produce the same exigency.

Wherefore I humbly suppose, as being of the same sentiment (in that
particular) with this Noble Gentleman, the best expedient, for the
rectification of all past abuses, and to free this Honorable Profession of
Physic from all those degenerating Vipers, (that do not only eat out her
bowels, by their sinister practices, but by their illiterate, rude behavior,
stick on it, like dirt) will in my opinion be found to be, if the College
would please (continuing to own the improvement of Rational Chemistry) as an
addition to all their former manifeftations; procure (as this Gentleman
advises) by an address to His Majesty, a Public Authority, and Command, that
all Apothecaries may be obliged, to buy those Chemical Preparations made in
their Public Elaboratory for the use of His Majesty's Subjects, or else give
satisfaction to the College, that they have the same of their own making, to
the end, that no Chemical Preparations may be taken into their shops, from the
hands of any unskilful or dishonest Operator, but from such only as shall be
allowed by the College; the rather, because there are several in this City,
who have served an Apprentiship to this profession, and are esteemed persons of
such Integrity, that what Medicines soever they sell, the College (to whom in
obedience they will be ready to give satisfaction in this point) may acquiesce
in their just prepatation; for further satisfaction to the College, I humbly
propose, that the Master and Wardens of the Company of Apothecaries, would
please to Enact, under a severe penalty, that from henceforth none of their
Members, shall use, or put to sale any dispenst Medicine, but what they either
make themselves, or for convenience in their Trade be furnished by some Member
of their own Society; since that by this means the Mystery of Physic will not
only be preserved with her due bounds, but the profession will be much
advanced, and that door, by which all the forementioned abuses crept in, will
be stopped up: Thus much I humbly offer as my own private thoughts and desires,
begging pardon, if I have too much presumed.

I cannot after all, better conclude then with the words of that incomparable
Epistle; Since then, Worthy Doctors, Your selves look upon Rational Chemistry,
as an Excellent way of enquiry into the natures of things, and managed with
sound Reason and Philosophy, an excellent way also of preparing Medicines;
Since you are as much conversant in Chemical Authous, as any others, and have
as many, and more assistances, of learning and experience to judge of them; to
all which I may very well add, since you have also a Perfect and Candid
Resolution to Countenance and Improve them; as I am Bound in Duty, so I humbly
make Bold to Offer the Continuance of my Devoted Service, in what ever your
Honors shall be pleased to employ,

Your most Humble and, Faithful Servant, William Johnson.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 11. read tough, for tuff. p. 11. l, 20. r, by these subtle. pa.
12. l. 11. r. both for does. p. 16. l. Past, r. interest for intrest. p. 52. l.
17. r. inform for imform. p. 57. l, 2. r. fraudulent for fradulent. p. 14. l.
5. r. to give.


