A Letter from a Freeholder, to the rest of the Freeholders of ENGLAND, and all
Others, who have Votes in the Choice of Parliament Men.
THE Power of Parliaments, when they are duly Elected, and rightly Convened, is
so very Great, that every man, who has any share in the Choice of them, has the
weight of his whole Country lying upon him: For it is possible for my single
Vote to determine the Election of that Parliament Man, whose single Vote in the
Parliament House, may either save or sink the Nation. And therefore it behooves
men, who thus dispose both of themselves and their Posterity, and of their
whole Country at once, to see that they put all these into safe hands, and to
be as well advised, as much in earnest, when they choose Persons to serve in
Parliament, as they usually are when they make their last Will and Testament.
And if this is to be done at all times, certainly a much greater proportion of
Care is to be taken at this Time, when endeavors have been used, not only to
forestal the Freedom of Elections, but even the Freedom of Voting in the
Parliament House: and when the Counties of England have been practiced upon, to
be made Repealers, both within doors and without: They have been Catechized,
whether, if they were Parliament Men, they would Repeal the Penal Laws and
Tests; or, if they were not Chosen themselves, whether they would Choose such as
would. And as for the Boroughs, they have been all of them Sifted to the very
Bran: nay, some Persons have been wrought upon to enter into Engagements
beforehand, in their Addresses: But, I suppose, those that have been so very
forward to promise themselves to serve a Turn, will never be thought worthy to
serve in Parliament. And at the same time others have made it their business,
to render these Laws very odious to the People, and to hoot them out of the
World; they have been Arraigned and Condemned as Draconicks, as Bloody and
Canibal Laws, as Ungodly Laws, and contrary to the Divine Principle of Liberty
of CONSCIENCE, without the common Justice of ever being Heard: For the
Preambles of these Laws, which show the Justice and Equity of them, and the
reasonableness both of their Birth and Continuance, have been industriously
suppressed. This indeed has been a very bold Adventure, for I am apt to think
there is much truth in my Lord Chief Justice Coke's Observation, That never any
Subject Wrestled a Fall with the Laws of England, but they always broke his
Neck: And therefore, according to the Courtesy of England, I shall wish Friend
William Pen, and his Fellow-Gamesters, a good Deliverance. But while they have
taken the liberty to say their Pleasure of these Laws, which are now in as full
Force as the day they were made, I shall take leave, according to the Duty of a
Loyal Subject, (with whom the Laws of the Land are a Principle, and who must
always own the Majesty and Authority of them, till such time as they are
lawfully Repealed) to offer a few words in their behalf, which shall be
dictated by nothing but Law, Truth, and Justice; and if every word that I say,
do not appear to be such, I am content to have this whole Paper go for nothing,
and be as if it had never been written.

And to proceed the more clearly and distinctly, I shall (1st) consider the
Penal Laws (as they are called) against the Papists, and the two Tests: And
(2dly) the Penal Laws against the Dissenters.

In the Statute 3o Iacobi c. 1. which is read every Fifth of November, in our
Churches, the Laws made against the Papists in Queen Elizabeth's time, and the
Confirmation of them 1o Iacobi (against which the great Outcry is now made,
and for the sake of which, they then attempted to blow up both the King and
Parliament) are called Necessary and Religious Laws: And if I prove them to be
undoubtedly such, I hope the good People of England will look upon them an
hundred times, before they part with them once.

First, The Laws against the Papists are Religious Laws; they are Laws made for
the high Honor of GOD, as well as for the common Profit of the Realm, which is
the old Title of all our Laws, and is the right End to which all Laws ought to
be directed. But why are they called Penal Laws, for have not all Laws a
Penalty annexed to them? Perhaps they mean, that these are Laws which interpose
in Matters indifferent, such as is the eating of Flesh on Fridays. But is not
Popery Malum in se? Is Idolatry an Evil only by chance, and by happening to be
prohibited? Is not the Worship of a Wafer God, an Onion God, or a Red-cloth
God, an unspeakable Dishonor to the GOD of Heaven, in all places, in every
season of the Year, every day of the Week, and all hours of the Day? Is it not
eternally Evil? The Laws of the Land found Idolatry prohibited to their hands,
by the written Law of GOD, and even antecedently to that, it was prohibited by
the Law of Nature; and no Municipal Laws in the World need desire a better
Warrant: And therefore to Repeal the Laws made against the Idol of the Mass,
Agnus Dei's, Blocks Almighty, and the infinite Idolatry which is interwoven
with Popery, is neither more nor less, than to undertake to Repeal the Laws of
GOD.

2dly, The Laws made against the Seminary Priests and Romish Missioners, are
Religious Laws, because they are made in pursuance of St. John's Precept, 2
Epist. 10. 11. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed: For he that bids him
God-speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. But do the Seminaries come and bring
us the true Doctrine of Christ? Do they not bring us another Gospel? As Dr.
Sherlock has Unanswerably proved upon them, in the Second Part of his
Preservative against POPERY. And therefore as every private man is bound to
shut his Doors against these Deceivers and Seducers, by the same reason every
Community is bound to expel and drive them out of the Nation. And I think there
never were such errant Cheats and Impostors as these are: for they, by their
Masses, can fetch Souls out of Purgatory, of their own putting in; they can
forgive Sins, in the Sacrament of Confession; they can drive away the Devil,
with Crosses and Holy Water; and they can make their God, in the Sacrament.
They make a God! they make a Pudding!

Again, 2ly, The Laws against the Papists, are called Necessary Laws, and so
they were to the very Being of the Kingdom. In the first of Elizabeth, the Oath
of Supremacy was absolutely necessary to throw off the Romish Yoke, and that
intolerable Usurpation and Tyranny of the Pope, under which both the Crown and
Kingdom were perfect Slaves: And af^^^wards, was it not time to look after the
Pope's Chaplains, when they had raised a Rebellion in the North, and he himself
had sent a Bull to Depose the Queen, and to Absolve her Subjects from their
Allegiance? I do not mention the continual Minings of the Queen of Scots, in
which the Popish Party always joined with her, and besides, had drawn in
several deluded Protestants; which made a great Jest to the Papists, That
Protestants should be so infatuated, as to assist the Queen of Scots to their
own Destruction: as is to be seen in Sir Francis Walsingham's Letter, written
from Paris, still extant in the Cabala of Letters. In short, it appears by the
Preambles of all those Statutes in that Reign, that the Kingdom made every one
of them in their own Defense, and to Preserve themselves from Popish Attempts,
and that the Nation had utterly perished without them.

And then in Kings James's time, Did not the Papists digg under the very
Pillars of the Kingdom, and make them shake, when they laid so many Barrels of
Gunpowder under the Parliament House? And was it not high time to tie their
hands by the Acts which followed; by more closely confining them to their
Houses, by banishing them ten Miles from London, by disabling them not only
from all Offices, but from being in any public Employment, and by thoroughly
disarming them, so much as from wearing a Sword.

And was it not time, in the late King's Reign, to put new life into the
Disabling Acts, by the addition of a Test, when several Papists had gotten the
greatest Offices of the Kingdom into their hands? And then as for the
Parliament-Test, that the Papists may not be our Lawgivers, besides the
perpetual Necessity of such a Law, the Occasion of it is still upon Record both
in Men's Minds, and very largely in the Iournal of the House of Lords, and in
other inferior Courts of Record.

And if these were all of them Necessary Laws when they were made, they are
become ten times more Necessary since: for now Popery has Beset us, and and
Hemmed us in on every side. We have an Army of Priests and Jesuits, the true
Forerunners of Antichrist, in the Bowels of the Kingdom; nay, the Pope
himself, who by several Laws is declared to be the public Enemy of the
Kingdom, has arrived some time since in his Nuncio, and is now Compassing the
Land in his Four Apostolic Uicars. And therefore to talk of Repealing Laws,
when we want the strictest Execution of them, is talk only fit for Bedlam: and
that Nation which Repeals Necessary Laws, when it has the greatest Necessity
for them, must be concluded to be weary of its own Life, and is Felo de se!

Secondly, I come now to the Penal Laws against the Dissenters, concerning
which, I shall say the less, because GOD's time for the Repealing of those Laws
is not yet come; For if they cannot be Repealed in this juncture of time,
unless the Dissenters put forth their hands to the setting up of Idolatry, then
they cannot be Repealed: and therefore what cannot be now done without manifest
Impiety, must even be let alone till it can be done with a good Conscience. As
for the good Disposition which is in the Conformists, to Repeal those Laws,
with the first Opportunity, that is always to be measured by Actions rather
than Words, and therefore I shall give them an Instance of it in the Bill for
Repealing the 25th of Elizabeth, which passed both Houses, of a Church of
England Parliament, tho the Dissenters lost the Benefit of that Pledge, and
Earnest of their Good will, and are not Ignorant which way it was lost. But in
the mean time, if our Dissenting Brethren should endeavor to get these Laws
Repealed, by parting on their side with the Laws against Popery, then I beg of
them to mind the plain English of such Conditions. It is as if the Dissenters
should say thus to the Papist: Do you help us to set up Meeting Houses, and we
will do as much for your Mass-Houses: let but the pure Worship of GOD be
established without Ceremonies, and we are content, that Idolatry itself shall
go share and share like, in the same Establishment: to make a Magna Charta
which shall be equal, let CHRIST have his part in it, and Antichrist shall be
sure to have his: our business is to receive the Sacrament without Kneeling;
and upon that Condition, we will join in the making of Laws, which shall
Authorize the Deifying a bit of Bread, the Worshipping of it for a God, the
Praying to it, Idolatry, Blasphemy, any thing in the World for them that like
it.

Now is not this a very fair Speech, and does it not well become the mouths of
Protestants! I would fain press this home upon the Consciences, both of those
Dissenters who are hired, and of those who are not hired, to labor the Repeal
of our Laws: Do you fear the Informers more than GOD? Will you, for the sake of
your little Conveniences, do the greatest Evils, which you know to be such?
You know in your very Hearts, that the Worship of Images, Crosses, and of a
Wafer, is abominable Idolatry; that the half Communion is Sacrilege; and that
many other Points of Popery are Blasphemous Fables: And will you set up this
for one of your Religions, as by Law established? Will you do all that hands
can do, to entail Idolatry upon the Nation, not only Removendo prohibens, as
Divines destinguish, by pulling down the Laws which hinder it, but also
Promovendo adjuvans, and by making a perpetual Magna Charta for it? The Laws
and Constitution of a Country do denominate that Country; if Atheism were here
Authorized by Law, this would be an Atheistical Nation; and if Idolatry be set
up by Law, it is an Idolatrous Nation; and all that have any hand in it, make
it the Sin of the Nation, as well as their own. Think therefore of these things
in time, before you have involved both yourselves and your Country in a
miserable Estate; and remember poor Francis Spira who went against Light.

But, 2ly, there is just as much Prudence as Conscience in these Proceedings;
For by Repealing the Laws against Popery, you Reverse the Outlawry, and take
off those legal Disabilities which the Papists now lie under, and which have
hitherto tied their hands from Destroying Heretics. When Papists shall be
Right Justices and Sheriffs, and not Counterfeits, when they shall be Probi and
legales homines, and pass Muster in Law, when they shall be both our Legal
Judges and our Lawful Juries, and when Protestants come to be Tried by their
Country, that is to say, by their Twelve Popish Godfathers, they may easily
know what sort of Blessing they are to expect. The Papists want nothing but
these Advantages, to make a fair riddance of all Protestants; for we see by
several of their late Pamphlets, that if any thing be said against Popery, they
have a great dexterity in laying it Treason. Now this is a civil way of
Answering Arguments, for which we are bound to thank them, because it so
plainly discovers what they would be at, if it were in their Power. But how
comes it to be Treason to speak against a Religion which is itself High
Treason, and is Proscribed by so many Laws? Why, their Medium is this, That
Popery is the King's Religion, and therefore, by an Innuendo, what is said
against that, is meant against him. But is there any Law of England, that
Popery shall be the King's Religion? Or is it Declared by any Law, that Popery
either is, or can be his Religion? On the other hand, we are enabled by an Act
in this very Reign, to Pronounce Popery to be a False Religion, and to Assert
the Religion which is now Professed in the Church of England, and Established
by the Laws of this Realm, to be the True Christian Religion. Act for Building
St. Anne's Church, p. 133. But these Gentlemen it seems are for Hanging men
without Law, or against Law, or any how; and therefore we thank them again, for
being thus plain with us beforehand. Now if they be thus Insolent, when they
are so very Obnoxious themselves, and have Halters about their own Necks, with
what a Rod of Iron will they Rule us, when they are our Masters! What havoc
will they then make of the Nation, when we already see Magdalen-Colledge, which
was lately a Flourishing Society of Protestants, now made a Den of Jesuits;
and that done too in such a way, as shakes all the PROPERTY in England? Or who
can be safe, after our Laws are Repealed, when Endeavors have been lately
used, to extract Sedition even out of Prayers and Tears, and the Bishops Humble
Petition was threatened to be made a Treasonable Libel?

But here the Dissenters have a plausible Excuse for themselves: For say they,
We have now an opportunity of getting the Laws which are against us Repealed,
which is clear Gain; and as for our refusing to Repeal the Laws against Popery,
there is nothing gotten by that, either to us or to any body else; for they are
already as good as Repealed by the Dispensing Power: and therefore such
Discourse as this, only advises us to stand in our own light, without doing any
good to the Nation at all; for there will be Popish Justices, Sheriffs, Judges,
and Juries, whether we will or no, for whatsoever we refuse to do, the
Dispensing Power will supply.

To which I Answer, Do you keep your hands off from Repealing the Laws, let who
will Contravene or Transgress them, for then you are free from the Blood of all
Men; you have no share in the Guilt of those Mischiefs which befall your
Country, which would, sooner or later, be a heavy Burden, and a dead Weight
upon the Conscience of any Protestant. But besides, let the Laws alone, and
they will defend both themselves and us too: For if the Law says, That a Papist
shall not, nor cannot have an Office, then he shall not nor cannot; For who can
speak Louder than the LAWS!

As for a Dispensing Power, inherent in the King, which can set aside as many
of the Laws of the Land as he pleases, and Suspend the Force and Obligation of
them, (which has been lately held forth by many False and Unlawful Pamphlets)
the Dissenters know very well that there is no such thing; but that no body may
pretend Ignorance, I shall here prove, in very few words, That by the
Established Laws of the Land, the King cannot have such a Dispensing Power;
unless Dispensing with the Laws, and Executing the Laws be the same thing; and
unless both keeping the Laws himself, and causing them to be kept by all
others, be the English of Dispensing with them: For in the Statute of
Provisors, 25th Edw. 3. c. 25. we have this laid down for Law, That the King is
bound to Execute those Statutes which are Unrepealed, and to cause them to be
kept as the Law of the Realm: the words are these, speaking of a Statute made
in the time of Edward the First, Which Statute holds always his Force, and
was never Defeated or Annulled in any point, And by so much our Sovereign Lord
the King is bound by his Oath to do, the same to be kept as the Law of this
Realm, although by Sufferance and Negligence it has since been attempted to
the contrary. So that the Coronation Oath, and the Dispensing Power, are here
by King Edward the Third, and his Parliament, Declared to be utterly
Inconsistent. Now the Coronation Oath is a Fundamental Law of this Kingdom, for
it is antecedent to the Oath of Allegiance. Accordingly if you look upon the
Coronation Oath in the Parliament Roll, 1st Hen. 4th, you shall there find,
that in the third Branch of it, the King Grants and Promises upon his Oath,
That the Laws shall be Kept and Protected by him, secundum Vires suas, to the
utmost of his Power; and therefore he has no Power left him to Dispense withal.

By which it appears, that those men are the wretched Enemies both of the King
and Kingdom, who would fain persuade the King that he has this Dispensing
Power; because therein they endeavor to persuade him, that Perjury is his
Prerogative. Heretofore, in Tresilian's time, 11. R. ^.
some of the Oracles of the Law were consulted, Whether it could stand with the
Law of the Kingdom, that the King might Obviate and Withstand the Ordinances
concerning the King and the Kingdom, which were made in the last Parliament, by
the Peers and Commons of the Realm, with the King's Assent, though (as the
Courtiers said) forced in that behalf? And they made Answer, That the King
might Annul such Ordinances, and Change them at his pleasure, into a better
fashion, because he was above the Laws, Knyghton Col. 2693. Now this was very
False Law, as those Judges found afterward to their Cost; and it was grounded
on the worst Reason that could be: For they must needs know from all their
Books, and from the Mirror in particular, p. 282. That the first and Sovereign
Abusion of the Law (that is, the chief Contrariety and Repugnancy to it) is for
the King to be above the Law, whereas he ought to be Subject to it, as is
contained in his Oath. Neither could they be ignorant of that Argument which
the Peers used, to show the Absurdity of such a supposition; it is Recorded in
the Annals of Barton, set forth, as I take it, by Mr. Obadiah Walker. Si Rex
est supra Legem, tunc est extra Legem; Number Rex Angliae est Exlex? If the King
be above the Law, then he is without the Law. What! is the King of England an
Outlaw? And as for the words of Bracton, they were too plain either to need a
Comment or Translation, Rex habet Superiorem Deum, item Legem per quam factus
est Rex, item Curiam suam, scil. Comites and Barons. As likewise those other
words of his, Ubi Voluntas Imperat and non Lex, ibi non est Rex: Where he makes
it the very Essence of our King, to Govern according to Law.

Having therefore shown, that the Laws are always in full Force till they are
Revoked by the same Authority which made them, and that all Persons whatsoever
are bound to the Laws, and that the Laws themselves were never in Bondage to
any Man; we know from thence, what we are to conclude, concerning those
Papists, who pretend to be in Office, in Defiance to the Laws. We had once a
mischievous Distinction of Sheriffs de Iure, and Sheriffs de Facto; but those,
who pretend to be in Office without taking the TEST, are no Officers either in
Right or in Fact: for the 25 Car. 2. says, That their Offices are ipso facto,
void, and then those Officers are ipso facto, no Officers, and can do us no
more hurt than if they were under Ground; and therefore we need not trouble our
Heads about them, though they may in all likelihood fall under the Care and
Consideration of a Parliament.

After all, some persons may possibly be so far deluded, as to think there is
somewhat of Equity in the Toleration of Papists, and that it is the Christian
Rule Of doing as one would be done by. Now for any Papist to plead this Rule of
Equity himself, or any body else in his behalf, is just as if a High-way-man
should thus urge it upon his Judge; My Lord, if you Hang me, you break the
Golden Rule; for I am sure you are not willing to be so served yourself, nor to
Hang with me. Now the Equity of the Judge in this case does not lie, either in
forbearing to punish the Offender, or in Hanging with him for Company, but in
being Content to submit to the same Law, if he himself should commit the same
Crime And so are we willing to lie under all the Penal Laws, whenever we turn
Papists: And therefore no body can tax us with want of Equity; because we do no
otherways to the Papists, than we are willing to be done by, in the same case.
But it may be said, that our Conscience does not serve us to be Papists, though
theirs does. Neither does the Judge's Conscience serve him to Rob, though it
seems the High-way-man's did; and therefore take heed of Liberty of Conscience.
Still it may be further Replied, That this is properly a Judicial Cau^^,
because Robbery is a breach of the Peace and of Property, and therefore ought
to b^ ^^^^shed: whereas the Worship and Service of God according to a Man's
Conscience, (...) it be amiss, yet it ought not to be punished by Humane Laws,
but is to be reserved to the ^^^^^ment of God alone, who is Lord of Conscience.

Now this is the New Doctrine which I shall prove to be False, by positive and
ex^^^ss Scripture. For Job says, Chap. 31. v. 28. That if his Heart had been
secretly persuaded, and he had thereupon kissed his Hand to the Sun or Moon,
This were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, because he had therein Lied
against the God above. So that though a Man's Heart and Conscience lead him to
Idolatry, yet Job tells us, this is Inditable; it is avon pelili, a Judicial
Crime, and as Punishable by Human Laws, as Adultery with another Man's Wife is;
as you have it in the same Phrase in the 11th verse of the same Chapter.

The second Instance of a Punishable Conscience in the Service of God, is that
which our Savior gives us, 16 John 2. Yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think he does God Service. Now I would fain (...) whether
such a Conscience as this ought not to be Restrained and Punished: And whether
it be Sacrilege for Human Laws to Control Conscience, I mean such a one (...)
Kills and Murders for God's Sake? And I ask again, whether there be no
Consciences of this Stamp now in the World: and whether there has not been an
Holy Inquisition, Religious Crusadoes, and Meritorious Massacres to extirpate
Heretics, and abundance of this Divine Service in the Church of Rome? Whether
they have not offered up whole Hecatombs of these Sacrifices in most Countries?
And whether a Neighboring Prince has not been highly Extolled, and had all his
most Christian Titles double Gilt, with the Flatteries of his Clergy, for the
late Merit of his Religious Service in this kind? And therefore if men will do
things in order, let them first send for a breed of Irish Wolves, and give them
English Liberties; let them dig down their Walls, and let in the Sea; let them
begin with some of these Preliminaries, before they think of Repealing the Laws
against Popery, and of letting loose such Consciences as these upon us.

To conclude therefore, It highly concerns you, in the Choice of
Parliament Men, to decline all those men, who are willing to Consent to so
Great and so Fatal a Revolution, as the Repeal of so many Laws at once; which
would plainly expose the Protestant Religion to be Swallowed up. You want men
like their Ancestors, who had the Courage and Resolution to declare in
Parliament, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari; We will not have the Laws of England
Altered. Choose such as will not betray the Great Trust you repose in them. The
Writ for Elections says, That you Empower your Representatives; Tell them
therefore for what you Empower them; for the Maintenance and Preservation of
the Protestant Religion, and of our good Laws, and not for their Destruction.
And when you have done this, and taken all the care you can, you have done your
Duties: And I have nothing more to add, but, God Speed your Elections.

FINIS.

