A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen At GUILDHALL-Chappel, on
Palm Sunday, 1679.

And now published as it was then delivered.

By SAMUEL JOHNSON, a Minister of the Church of England as it is now by Law
established.

LONDON; Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin in the
Old Bailey. 1684.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE Clergy.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers;
I Presume with all Humility, to offer this small Discourse, rather to You,
than to any other Patrons; because being levelled against the Church of Rome,
the implacable and mortal Enemy of the Protestant Religion, it is a Service to
You in the first place; and therefore has an immediate right to Your Acceptance
and Encouragement. The Protestant Cause against Popery, is a very Good One in
it self; but besides, You have so many, and so strong Engagements to it, that
whenever a Defense of it is recommended to Your Patronage, it comes to its Own,
and therefore I hope will be received by You. It is a great part of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, to say, that we are not Papists; and very
many of the thirty nine Articles are wholly spent in condemning and renouncing
Artic. 14.
the Arrogant and Impious Doctrines; Artic. 22.
The fond, and vain, and unwarrantable Inventions; Artic. 31.
The blasphemous Fables, and dangerous Deceits of that False Religion. I have
endeavored to justify that Doctrine of our Church, by giving some further
Reasons, why we are not Papists; and by showing, that we can never be made
Papists, but by putting out the Eyes of the Nation.

My Design both in the preaching this Sermon heretofore, and in publishing it
now, was partly, to prevent, as far as in me lay, the Ruin and Destruction of
those many millions of Souls which are now your Charge; and will certainly
perish, if ever they come under the Conduct of the blind Romish Guides: And
partly, to free my self from the Blood of our miserable Posterity, which will
undoubtedly be required of this Generation, if Popery return again in our Days,
after it has been so long cast out.

Popery is the worst Religion, or pretended Religion, in the whole World; for
she puts out the Understandings of those of her own Communion, and tears out
the Hearts of all others: whom she cannot deceive, she will destroy. Upon which
account she is the Common Enemy of Mankind, and of us in particular, whom she
has threatened with utter Extirpation, and has given it us under the Hand of her
Secretary Coleman. Now I can as soon believe Transubstantiation to be true, as
believe that we are bound to encourage and assist her intended Cruelty against
us, by meeting it halfway, and by vowing our selves Sacrifices to it. On the
other hand; Unless we use our best Endeavors, both against Popery, and all
those treacherous Inlets which make a way for it, we do but mock God when we
pray against it; and particularly, when we say that excellent Prayer against
the Popes of Rome, which our own Church has put into our Mouths.

The Lord of heaven and Earth The 2d Part of the Sermon for Whit sunday, p. 286.
defend us from their Tyranny and pride, that they never enter into his
Wineyard again, to the disturbance of his silly poor Flock: but that they may
be utterly confounded and put to flight in all Parts of the World: and he of
his great Mercy so work in all Men's hearts, by the mighty Power of the holy
Ghost, that the comfortable Gospel of his Son CHRIST may be truly preached,
truly receibed, and truly followed in all places, to the beating down of Sin,
Death, the Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist, that like
scattered and dispersed Sheep, being at length gathered into one fold, we may
in the end rest altogether in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, there to
be partakers of Eternal and Eherlasting Life, through the Derits and Death of
Jesus Christ our Savior.

Amen.
S. Mat. 15. latter part of the 14th Verse. -- And if the Blind lead the Blind,
they shall both of them fall into the Ditch.
THese words are spoken of the Scribes and Pharisees, as appears plainly by the
Context; who though they were perversely and stupidly ignorant, yet undertook to
be the only Guides and Instructors of the People: And they again were so simple
and besotted, as to put themselves under their Conduct and Direction.

And now, what good can come of such senseless Doings? Our Savior here tells us
what the Effect of it will be, They shall both of them fall into the Ditch, and
ingulf themselves together in Perdition. And this is so certain, that in
another place, the 6th of St. Luke, verse. 39. He appeals to the common sense of
Mankind, whether this be not likely to prove the last issue of such a course;
He would fain know how it can be otherwise; Can the Blind lead the Blind? shall
they not both fall into the Ditch?

In handling these words, I shall consider;
I. Why our Savior calls these Scribes and Pharisees, blind Guides. II. Why he
calls the People, their Followers, blind. III. The Danger of both Parties
engaged in this senseless Course.
1. Why our Savior calls the Scribes and Pharisees, blind Guides.

And the Reasons of it may be referred to these two Heads.
1. Because their Doctrines were contrary to Reason and common Sense. And
therefore he often calls them Fools and Blind. 2. Because they were contrary to
the Holy Scriptures. They made void the Commandments of God through their
Traditions.
1. Because their Doctrines were contrary to Reason and common Sense. What wise
Heathen would not have scorned that idle Conceit, that washen Hands could
contribute to a Man's inward Sanctity? And yet this was the standing Tradition
of the Elders, that none must eat with unwashen Hands; that so the Hands might
not defile the Meat, nor the Meat the Man. And they were so careful to have
this Practice duly observed, that they came on purpose to our Savior, to
complain of his Disciples for their scandalous neglect in this Point, and to
challenge him for suffering them in it: As you have a full account of it in the
beginning of this Chapter; together with our Savior's sense of this outside
and superficial Religion, which is so far from the Heart. And upon this
occasion it is, he here calls them blind.

Another Instance of this, was, their senseless distinctions about the
Obligation of Oaths, St. Matthew. 23. 16, 17. Woe unto you, ye blind Guides, which
say, Whosoever shall swear by the Temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall
swear by the Gold of the Temple, he is a Debtor; i. e. bound to take care of
his Oath, and make it good. Ye Fools, and blind; for whether is greater, the
Gold, or the Temple which sanctifies the Gold? These were profound Casuists
indeed, to determine so awkardly and absurdly, and quite the wrong way, in
Subtilties of their own making.

2. Because their Doctrines were contrary to the Holy Scriptures, they made
void the Commandments of God, through their Traditions. Our Savior shows us
how they transgressed the Fifth Commandment, and made it of none effect through
their Tradition, in the 4th Verse of this Chapter. And so he shows in other
places, how they had evaded and eluded the other Commandments, by their false
Glosses and Interpretations. They taught Men how to supplant Justice and
Honesty, by pretenses of Piety; and to break the Tables of the Law one against
another. They were very punctual in little Observances, about paying Tithe of
Mint, Anise, and Cummin, which it is very disputable whether God did command or
no; but in the mean time, made no Conscience of the more weighty and
substantial things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faithfulness. Which makes
our Savior call them again, blind Guides, which strain at a Gnat, and swallow
a Camel. St. Matthew. 23. verse. 24.

II. And yet, in the second place, these blind Guides were taken for no less
than Infallible, by their blind and ignorant Followers. For they had swallowed
down all their false and absurd Doctrines, without any scruple or examination:
Insomuch that it was a great part of our Savior's Business, both in his Sermon
upon the Mount, and elsewhere, to undeceive them in these Matters. The People
had captivated their Understandings and Belief to the Dictates of these Men, to
such a degree, that it was laid down as a Rule amongst them, That if a Scribe
said, their right Hand was their Left, R. Bechai.
they were bound to believe him. The Scribes and Pharisees, it seems, had
gained such an absolute Empire and Dominion over the Minds of the People, that
they thought it their Duty, rather to distrust their own Sense and Reason, than
what their Teachers delivered, though it were never so apparently false.

What has been said concerning these Jews, with whom we are less concerned, is
enough to put you in mind of certain Priests and People in the World, who
exactly agree with this Character, and seem to inherit the very Spirit and
Temper of these Men. And to be plain, it is in the Romish Religion where this
odd Scene has been acted over again, and the Blind have led the Blind for
several Ages together. The blind Guides of that Church, have affronted the
Reason of Mankind, and voided the Holy Scriptures more effectually, than ever
the Scribes and Pharisees did; and all their Dictates have been followed with
as blind an Obedience by the People.

First, Their Doctrines and Traditions, as the Pharisees were, are contrary to
Reason, and the common Sense of Mankind. Prayer in an unknown Tongue, is
certainly a most unreasonable and contradictious thing. It is making their
Requests known unto God, for that is the English of Prayer, when they do not
know them themselves. It is the performance of a reasonable Act, without the
help of the Understanding. In a word, It is the truest Sacrifice of Fools. Now,
this is imposed upon the generality of Christians, as C. Perronne tell us, for
Uniformity sake, that the Mass may be said alike in all places; That Latin may
be kept up in the World, to Reply to K. James.
prevent the ill sounding of old and obsolete words in vulgar Tongues; and for
suchlike Reasons, which are as vain and ridiculous, as the practice which they
are brought to justify.

The Doctrine of Merit and Supererrogation, is a false and insolent Doctrine at
the first sight: whereby they teach, that our great Creator may be put into
Debt, and owe vast Arrears to one of his own Creatures: That some particular
Men may have goodness enough, and to spare; and may help out others with that
overplus. And upon the Stock of these Merits, is raised the Fund of Roman
Indulgences; whereby the Pope does make large Abatements of the Number of Men's
Sins; and whereas they owe for Hundreds or Thousands, can, with the unjust
Steward, bid them sit down and write Fourscore.

It would be endless to rip up the Absurdities of a Purgatory Fire, which is to
refine Men's Souls; Souls, I say, for it is plain that their Bodies are then
lying in the Grave. Of Auricular Confession, where a Man unlades himself of all
his Sins, by whispering them into the Priest's Ear. Of praying to Dead Men,
which cannot hear us; and for Dead Men, which are past help. Of worshipping
Images, and expecting great good from them; concerning which, what David says,
is the Verdict of mere natural Reason; They Psalm. 115. 8.
that make them, are like unto them; and so are all they that put their trust
in them. As very Stocks and Stones as what they worship.

Of Transubstantiation; where Men must renounce all their five Senses at once,
and where Absurdities, Repugnancies, and utter Impossibilities lie upon heaps.
A Doctrine that lies so cross to a Man's Understanding, as if it were framed in
spite to our reasonable Faculties. But so much the better; for now we are able
to demonstrate the falsehood and impossibility of it; and if it had not been so
very absurd, it had been the harder to confute. But now, that it is so
point blank contrary to the most evident and certain Truths we have, either in
the Mathematics, or in Philosophy, we are able to bring this Controversy to a
short and speedy issue. For if Transubstantiation be true, it has the good luck
to be the only Truth in the World, and there is never another beside.

And after all, The Doctrine of the Pope's Infallibility, keeps a very good
decorum with the rest. For though he has, by his Authority, spread these false
and absurd Doctrines over a great part of the World; and though they seem to be
very unreasonable, yet they are really true, because he that delivers them, is
out of a possibility of erring; He alone cannot err, and all others, without
some of his assistance, cannot but err. But it is very hard to believe, that
one single Man in the World is more than a Man, and that all the rest are less
than Men. That if he place himself in his Chair, he cannot err if he would; and
that others lie under as fatal a necessity of erring, if they be left to
themselves, without his guidance and direction. And it is still the harder to
believe it, because these Oracles have been found contradicting each other. So
that besides their Infallibility, they must have another privilege beyond all
other mortal Men, and that is, to contradict one another, and yet be both in
the right.

Secondly, Their Traditions and Doctrines are contrary to the Holy Scriptures.
Their Prayers, in an unknown Tongue, are directly contrary to the 14th Chapter
of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Their Worship of Images is so plain a
breach of the Second Commandment, that themselves seeing how irreconcilable
they are, and that they cannot both stand together, have wisely let slip that
Commandment out of their Catechisms. And so it were as easy to show you
concerning the rest. The Sacramental Elements are called Bread and Wine in
Scripture, even after Consecration. But instead of particular Instances, the
Infallibility, and sole Prerogative of interpreting Scripture, is that which
undermines the whole Gospel all at once. For it makes the Scripture but a
Stale, and gives the Pope's Interpretations all the Authority, which of right
belongs to the Scripture. So that as Bellarmine says, If the Pope call Virtue,
Vice; or Vice, Virtue, he is to be believed and obeyed. And this indeed is a
short and compendious way, of making all the Commandments of God of none
effect; for Men must observe them no longer, than the Bishop of Rome thinks
sit. And thus much for the first thing, which was, to show how contrary the
Doctrines of the Romish Priests are both to Scripture and Reason; and
consequently, that they have as much right to that Title of blind Guides, or
more, than ever the Scribes and Pharisees had.

The second Thing is to show you, That they are attended by as blind and
ignorant Followers. And this is notorious to the World; for Ignorance is
industriously cherished among the common People, to make them the better
Catholics; according to that Proverb, which has been a long time current among
them, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. There is a kind of Contract of
Error made betwixt them; The Clergy are loath to have the People examine Things;
and the People, on the other side, are as ready to take Things upon trust, that
they may not be at the pains of examining: And so they have right the Nuncio's
Blessing, Si Populus vult decipi, decipiatur, If the People are willing to be
deceived, let them.

Nay, they have enslaved themselves to such Principles, as will for ever keep
them low and ignorant, and which cut off all enquiry after Truth. For they are
made to believe, that it is a mortal Sin to doubt of any part of their
Religion: And then it is another mortal Sin, not to confess this to the Priest;
who questionless will take care to keep them from staggering, and effectually
prevent their Apostasy from the Church.

The Holy Scripture, which is the best means of instructing them better, is
either locked up from them in an unknown Tongue, or at least the free use of it
is denied to them. And yet they take this Injury so patiently, that most of
them are really and heartily persuaded that it is for their good, and that they
are thereby the farther removed from all danger of falling into Heresy.

They content themselves with that short Creed, To believe as the Church
believes; with an implicit Faith, that is, with a Belief in another's keeping.
Or as Cardinal Perrone In his Letter to Casaubon.
explains the thing, It is to believe with the Faith of the Church, or adhere
to the Church which believes such things: By the Faith of which Church, says
he, they live, as long as they continue in its Communion; as Children live by
the Nourishment of the Mother, all the while they are in her Womb. Which is the
fittest resemblance in Nature that can be found out for them.

By virtue of this Faith, all the Embrioes of that Religion do believe, that
all these absurd Doctrines are contained in Scripture. Nay that
Transubstantiation it self is in the Apostles Creed. For the Trent Catechism
says expressly, That it is not lawful for any of the Faithful to doubt, but it
is comprehended in these two Articles; J believe in God De Sacram.
Eucharistiae. Sect. 25.
the Father Almighty, and I believe in the Holy Catholic Church. The father
Almighty is able to effect and bring it to pass, and the Holy Catholic Church
tells us, he does effect and being it to pass: and there it is. Now if this be
not blind Belief, I would fain know what is.

III. The third thing I propounded was, to show you the Danger of both Parties
engaged in this senseless course; If the Blind lead the Blind, they shall both
fall into the Ditch. And I shall choose this way to do it.

First, By laying open before you what a great Fault it is in the Priests.
Secondly, In the People. And then your selves may easily judge of the Danger.
First, What a great Fault it is in the Priests.

And that (1.) in advancing Doctrines contrary to Reason and common Sense;
whereby they go about, as much as in them lies, to extinguish that great Light
which God has set up to enlighten every Man that comes into the World. Reason
is the only thing we have to trust to, in the last issue and result of things.
And our very belief of Divine Revelations, must finally be resolved into it: Or
else we shall very ill comply with St. Peter's Advice, to be ready to render a
Reason of the hope that is in us. It is that which lays in us the Foundation of
all Religion, I mean, a true Notion of God; It teaches us due apprehensions of
him, and to conceive rightly concerning him. It instructs us, that we received
our Being, and all our Faculties from him, that we cannot be deceived by them,
in those things which we evidently and distinctly perceive; and that to think
otherwise, would be to reflect upon God. Nay, it teaches us, that Omnipotence
it self cannot make a clear Conception to be false: It can indeed make
something out of nothing, but it cannot make something to be nothing.

These, and such like Principles of Reason, are the Rock upon which all
Religion stands; and if any Man will go wisely and orderly to Work, he must be
satisfied in these things, before he can think of Revelation. As for our
Reasonable Faculties, we know whence we had them, and are assured that God has
spoken to us by them: But as for any Revelation, we know not whence it is, till
we have tried and examined it. Till we see how it agrees with our natural
Notices of God, till we find that it is worthy of God, and becoming his
Holiness, Wisdom, Goodness, and Truth: for then it bears God's Mark and
Superscription upon it, and carries along with it one great Evidence, that it
came forth from God. When a revealed Religion, and the Reason of Mankind, do
perfectly correspond, and bear Witness to one another, it is a sign they both
proceed from one Author, and were both given us by the same Hand. If a
Doctrine, which pretends to come from God, does teach us over again the first
Principles of our Creation, and the Eternal Laws of Heaven and Earth, and
nothing at all contrary to them, who can reasonably doubt but this is the very
Mind and Will of him who made the World?

However, this is an undeniable Consequence on the other hand; if any pretended
Revelation contain in it things contrary to Reason, such as we are able to
prove false, it cannot come from God, it is immediately convicted of Fraud and
Imposture. For whatsoever is false in Philosophy, can never be true in
Divinity. If natural and supernatural Truths could be supposed to cross one
another, we should be bound to Contradictions and Impossibilities, we should be
engaged at once to believe and disbelieve the same things; and in the self-same
instance, to act both as reasonable, and unreasonable Creatures.

Therefore when Men first teach what is contrary to Reason, and then vilify and
disparage it, as that which savours not the things which be of God, as that
which is pur-blind, and sees little or nothing in Matters of Religion, as that
which is stark blind, and sees nothing at all; What do they, but undermine the
Foundations of all Religion, and eclipse that common Light which discovers God
to the World, and that bright Star which leads all Wise Men to Christ; and, in
a word, take the ready way, not to leave a Christian, or a reasonable Man, in
the World?

2. It is likewise a great Fault, to teach Doctrines contrary to the Holy
Scripture. For it is to unteach the People what God has taught them; It is to
set them free from those Obligations which God has laid upon them, and to make
them the Servants of Men: It is the presumptuous entitling of God to their own
Errors and Falsehoods, and saying, the Lord has spoken it; when he never said
it, neither did it ever come into his mind.

It is an unspeakable Injury to our Blessed Savior, to misrepresent his Holy
Gospel, and to make him be thought the Author of an absurd, and senseless, and
loose, and cruel Religion. It is enough to alienate the minds of those, who
only know Popery, and the dark side of our Religion, from Christianity it self;
and to make them take up the Resolution of Averroes, Quandoquidem Christiani
adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis. As long as the Christians
worship what they eat, let my Soul be with the Philosophers.

It deceives Men in Matters of the greatest Consequence, in the weighty
Concerns of their Soul, and of Eternity; wherein, of all other things, it is
the most horrid and barbarous to impose upon them. In a word, It is the
shrewdest ill turn, under pretense of the greatest Charity; it is destroying
Men, in the way of making them happy; it is poisoning the Sacrament, and it is
the Blood of Souls.

And the badness of this practice will further appear, by considering the
Motives which draw Men to it. And in some Points of Popery, it is visible that
it is Covetousness, making merchandise of Souls for filthy Lucre sake. And
indeed, no Gain can be so foul and dishonest, as that for which Men sell Truth,
and the everlasting Interests of Men.

In other Points, the Motive is Reputation; which is so plain in the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, that one of their own Writers, cannot forbear enlarging
upon the great Honor which it derives upon the Rushw. Dial. 1. Sect. 4.
Clergy, by giving them such a Privilege, as if all the learned Clerks, that
ever lived since the Another says, the Priest has hereby the Honor of being
the Father of Christ, whom he has begotten in the Sacrament. See this, with
much other Blasphemy, in Andr. Rivet, Explic. Decal. P. 1364.
beginning of the World, should have studied to raise, advance, and magnify
some one State of Men to the highest pitch of Reverence and Eminency, they
could never ( without special Light from Heaven) have thought of any thing
comparable to this. That is, they can make their Maker: Sacerdos est Creator
sui Creatoris.

The Sweets of Government, and the extreme and accursed Pleasure of having a
Spiritual Dominion, and reigning over the Minds and Belief of Men, seems to be
the Original of other Points, as namely, Infallibility and Confession.

It is much to be feared, that Ambition, Secular Profit and Advantages, that
the God of this World has blinded their Eyes in these, and many other
Particulars. I know, they plead Councils, and Fathers, and uninterrupted
Tradition, in behalf of their Doctrines: but with so little probability, that
it may put us in mind of what Polybius says concerning the declaring of War;
That one Reason is given out, but generally that which is concealed is the true
Reason.

However, we are sure, that if such worldly Considerations do not blind their
Eyes, and bias their Understandings; Yet want of considering and examining
things freely and impartially, is a Fault, of which they will never be able to
acquit themselves. And that is Crime enough for a Man to bury his Reason alive,
and hide his Talent in a Napkin, because he will not be at the pains of
improving it. It is an unpardonable slighting of Heaven, and of the right way
thither; as if they were not worthy of their enquiry after them, and is
sufficient to destroy, both themselves and them that hear them. Who are
likewise,

Secondly, In great Danger, if we consider what a great Fault it is in them, to
follow their blind Guides with a blind Belief and Obedience.

1. In Doctrines which are contrary to Reason and common Sense. This must be
the worse, because a Man cannot do it without some reluctance, and without
offering violence to his own mind. We are apt to have very uncomfortable
thoughts of the Heathen World, as sitting in Darkness, and in the shadow of
Death; but Men that yield up their Belief to the Dictates of others, betray
themselves into a worse condition; they expose themselves to greater Errors
than ever the Heathens were guilty of; of which the single Doctrine of
Transubstantiation will serve for a thousand Instances: And not only so, but
they put it out of their power ever to correct their Errors, and lie wholly at
the mercy of another.

Mahomet requires no more than this tractable Principle, to keep Men Turks and
good Mussel-men, for this will for ever reconcile them to all the absurd and
bloody Doctrines of the Alcoran. In the 32 Azoara of which Book, he cautions
his Followers not to enter into Debate about their Religion, nor to argue for
it; but if any one offer to dispute with them, to say, That God shall discuss
all Controversies in the Day of Judgment: which it is as easy for him to do, as
if it lay written before him in a Book, seeing all things are his. And in
another place he says, That no Body understands the Alcoran, but God alone; but
they that have the depth of Wisdom, say of it, We believe it, for all of it
comes from our good God. And if they be true to these Principles, it is utterly
impossible to bring Men over from that senseless and barbarous Religion, or ever
to put them out of conceit with it.

And besides, this temper not only exposes Men to the belief of the greatest
Cheats and Impostures in Religion, but likewise is a folly, which admits of no
manner of defense or excuse. Why did God give every Man a Conscience of his
own, if he were to be guided and directed by another Man's Conscience, and not
his own? It is the Birthright of Mankind to be governed by their own Reason in
their sense of Religion, and as to their inward belief; but these Men part with
it upon cheaper terms, than profane Esau sold his, and fairly renounce it at
a Priest's bidding.

Where should Men use their Reason and Understanding most, but in Matters of
the greatest Moment? and such without controversy Religion is. Did God endow us
with these Divine Faculties, only to measure Lines and Angles, or to learn
Trades, or to drive Bargains? We may as well say, that he created the Sun to
save Candle. No, he bestowed them upon us for nobler and higher Purposes; that
we might know Him and know our selves, what Relation we have to him, and what
Service we owe him; that we might distinguish betwixt True and False, Right and
Wrong, and might be able to think and act as becomes reasonable Creatures. And
those that commit these precious Talents to another's keeping, are like to give
but a very ill account of them.

2. In Doctrines which are contrary to the Holy Scripture. Here the People may
more easily be abused than before, and be misled without being aware of it:
because the Institutions of Revealed Religion are not so well known, nor so
obvious to Men, as the Dictates of Nature. But the Priests very forbidding the
People to read the Scripture, gives them a just suspicion that they are abused,
and would make any considerate Man the more eager to examine whether the things
they teach be so or no. For which the generous Beraeans are commended in
Scripture, who would not take the Apostle's bare word, but searched the
Scriptures themselves.

If any Doctrine decline Trial, it is a great Argument against it; for Truth
loses nothing by being brought to the Test. If any Religion be too good to be
examined, it is too bad to be believed.

Men would not be thus tamely cheated in Worldly Matters; they will not buy, or
bargain, at this blind rate: and therefore it is a sign that they less care
what becomes of their Souls, than of their Money and Estates.

So that in the last place, this Temper resolves it self into a great
indifferency and unconcernedness about Religion, which ought to be our first
and chief care. It proceeds from a brutish degeneracy of mind, which makes Men
content to be like the Horse and Mule, which have no understanding. It has in
it all the bad Ingredients of Sloth and Negligence; of Folly, and Credulity,
and Irreligion. And I am sure there can be no safety in such a state of mind;
for it is far from Truth, and far from God.

We may take occasion, from what has been said, to thank God that it is
otherwise with us. For who has made the difference? This was the Case of our
Forefathers, in the dark and long Night of Popery. Blessed be God that it is
not ours.

2. Let us stand fast in that Liberty wherewith God has made us free, and never
suffer our Souls to be brought into Bondage to any Man, whatever becomes of our
Bodies.

3. Let us heartily pity, and as we are able, seek the recovery of those that
are in this bad condition.

4. Let us take a special care to live up to that Knowledge which God has given
us: otherwise we have but little reason to pity them, they are in a better
condition than we. Let us think often of those words of our Savior, St. John
9. the last Verse, Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no
Sin, that is, none in comparison; your Sin would be the less: But now ye say,
we see, therefore your Sin remains, and will be the harder to wipe out.

These things require more enlargement than the time will bear, I shall
therefore leave them, as they are, to your own Consideration.

FINIS.

