A UUarning to Drunkards BY The Sad and Sudden DEATH OF John Woolman, OF
SARRET, in the County of Hartford. With A LETTER of Exhortation written to the
People on that sorrowful Occasion. By WILLIAM JOLE, Minister of Sarret.

LONDON, Printed for N. P. and Sold by Rich. Ianua, in Queens-Head Court, in
Paternoster Row, 1680.

A Short Narrative of the manner of his Death.
JOhn Woolman Son of John Woolman of Sarret, was by Trade a Tailor, a young Man
of a very Intemperate Life, as some know that have kept his Company (Oh that
all such may be allarmed by his fatal End to amend their Lives) Monday October
the Eleventh, he was at a House near Sarret, called Michlefield-Green, where
being too eager of Strong-drink, what he had before he came thither, and what
he added to his Load there, grew too much for his Brain; It seems he told them,
He would go upon the Barley-Mow to sleep, and being by some dissuaded (in
regard it was a high Mow) possibly this might make his whimsical Brain the more
resolute to climb up, for when the Brain is turned with drink impossible things
seem easy to such a Man, and a drunken Man will venture on that which a sober
Man is afraid to look at. Up he did climb, and is supposed to sleep there all
Night, but the next Morning was found stone dead upon the Flower, his Hat
remained on the top of the Barley-Mow; How he fell down is unknown, because no
body was in the Barn when he Fell: It was a Clay Flower, where his Head pitched
on a Peble-stone, which brake a hole in his Skul, and let out much Blood and
Water.

The Letter to the People.
Loving Neighbors,
SOlomon says, That a word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver, Prove. 25.11. That is to say, it has all that may Invite our Attention.
Surely then it is a fit time to speak to the Ear, when God, by any dreadful
Judgment does speak to the Eye. Although my Mouth is stopped at present, and I
am denied to Speak unto you in the Pulpit, yet no Law can hinder me from
Writing unto you; and the End of my Writing at this time is to exhort you to
hear God, now loudly speaking unto every one of us by the dismal Judgment upon
John Woolman, calling on every one of us to Repent and Turn from our sinful
Courses, and more particularly calling upon every Drunkard to forsake his
Drunkenness, beholding the Woeful Effects of that Sin in this sad Example. It
will not become a Minister to Aggravate the Faults of the Dead, my desire is to
press upon the Living to lay his woeful End to heart.

Would you not have the Judgments of God to Cut you off in your Sins, and to
stop your Breath, before you have time to ask Pardon? then be Exhorted and
Persuaded to Repent, to day while it is called to day, and do not harden your
Hearts any longer against such Warnings as this. We say, It is best striking
while the Iron's hot, Therefore admit this Word of Exhortation while there is
some Warmth remaining upon your Souls, by that which you have seen or heard of
the sudden Death of this poor Wretch; Happy and wise are those who take Warning
by other Men's Harms. Let me desire you to Read frequently those words, Proverbs
29.1. He that being often Reproved, hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without Remedy. Mayer, on those words says, For all sins
there is forgiveness, but for hardness of Heart and Neck, there is none; and
therefore, such cannot escape Destruction. And then a Man is judged to be thus
Hardened, when being often Reproved, he relenteth not, but goes on obstinately
still in his Sins. Hear this, all ye Swearers, and Drunkards of Sarret; and
though it is not a seemly thing to name Persons, and say, you John, or you
Thomas, or you Richard; yet, I beseech the Lord, to set it home on every Soul
particularly, both mine and yours, throughout the Parish, and let those
Drunkards, who are so busy to erect a New Alehouse in the Town, take notice,
how God threatens such doings, and let them desist from their Enterprise, lest
God mark them out to be the next Examples of his Wrath.

They sufficiently tell the World, what they are that thrust out their
Minister, and endeavor to set up another Alehouse.

God has set me as your Watchman, Ezekiel. 33.7, 8, 9. Turn to it, and read it
your selves. Therefore, that I may free my own Soul, and that the Blood of
impenitent Sinners may not be required at my hands, have I written this Letter,
to be read in your hearing.

Does not God say to the wicked Drunkard, Thou shall surely die, when he shows
him a Drunkard struck dead suddenly? I beseech you therefore all my Christian
Neighbors, take these following Considerations home to your Hearts, to make
you hate Drunkenness.

First, Consider what a Brutish, Beastly kind of Sin Drunkenness is; and there
is no Beast, that I ever read of, that will drink to be drunk, but the Swine,
to which a Drunkard is most like; a Drunkard makes his Belly like a Hogshead,
to be filled with Strong-Drink, his Throat is the Tunnel to let it down; until,
by overbriming his Vessel, he force it to run out at his Mouth again; if once
the strong Liquor begin to work in his Guts, it flies up to his Brain, and
quickly drowns the Reason, and robs him of all that should bespeak him a Man,
and lays a Swine in his Room, you cannot say, that now he utters, but mutters
his words, his Tongue greatly laboring to speak, but lying drowned under
Water, is not able to bring forth any sensible Words, you may discover an Ape
in every Posture of him, and he goes, Like what? no Comparison can be vile
enough, unless you will say, That he goes like himself, or like another
Drunkard.

Secondly, Consider what heinous Aggravations this Sin admitts of; As,

First, The mispending that precious Time in bad Company, and Tippling-Houses,
which he ought to redeem, to work out his Salvation; a Saint may be
distinguished from a Sinner by this Character, as well as others. The Saint is
desirous to redeem Time, the Sinners great Study is, how to drive away Time;
the Saint spends his time in Duty and Lawful Busyness, the Sinner mispends his
time in drinking and unlawful Sports; so that a Drunkard wilfully throws away
his precious Time, as if it were a Burden to him, and seeks for Damnation in
that Time which is allotted him to seek for Salvation; and how inexcusable is
that Sinner that will not be saved.

Secondly, Consider how one Drunkard makes many more Partakers of his Sin.
Drunkenness is a sociable Vice, and the Drunkard calls himself a Good Fellow.
It is very rare, that a Man should drink himself drunk alone; love of the
Company makes many drunk, who say they do not love Drink. And the Devil has
found a rare Expedient to help forward this Sin, by Drinking of Healths. If any
one begin a Health, it is now reckoned a great Piece of Rudeness, not to stay
to pledge it; yes, and not to drink all that is filled unto you; the Healths
forsooth, must go round by any means. If the Devils in Hell be capable of
Laughing, surely this might make them Laugh, to see how eagerly Drunkards are
working out their own Damnation, and by this Stratagem, drinking away the
Health of Soul and Body both, and pulling many others into Hell with them by
this Diabolical Stratagem.

Thirdly, Consider what a wasting Sin Drunkenness is? the Drunkard consumes,
that Money on his Vice, which should maintain his Family, and how many good
Estates have been wasted by this Sin? How many have drunk Ale so long, until
they have been forced to sell Ale for a Livelihood?

The Drunkard poures it in by whole Flagons, while his Wife and Children would
be glad of a Draught of Small Beer ^o quench their Thirst, so he Feeds his Sin,
by that which should relieve his Family.

Fourthly, Consider that this Sin of Drunkenness exposes to every Sin, I have
formerly told you a remarkable Story, which I read in a Book called (Tragica)
Page 117. in Latin, he begins thus: Quidam cum Pietate sedulo studeret,
assiduis Diaboli Tentationibus infestabatur, suadentis ut ex tribu^ Peccatis
unum quod perpetraret sibi eligeret, etc. which I thus English, A certain Man
very studious of Piety, was daily infested by the Temptations of the Devil, to
choose which of these three Sins he would commit, either to be once drunk, or
to defile his Neighbors Wife once, or to commit Murder (victus tandem
consensit in Primum Peccatum says my Author) at last being overcome, he yielded
to be drunk, because he judged that to be the lest Sin of the three, but in his
Drink he defiled his Neighbors Wife, who coming in, and seeking to Revenge the
Injury, him he murdered, and so was by his Drunkenness guilty of all the three
Sins.

Fi^thly, Consider Drunkenness is a Heathenish Sin; Bacchus was a heathen God;
what does the Drunkard, but sacrifice his Estate and Time to Bacchus?

Sixthly, Consider how Drunkenness incapacitates a Man for all Duties, and for
all Cevil Actions; Brawling, and Quarrelling, and Fighting, and often Murder,
have been the Woeful Fruits of Drunkenness.

Lastly, Consider how often the Lord does punish some Drunkards with sudden
Death, to warn others; how many have fallen into the Water, and have been
drowned? some have tumbled down Stairs (as I knew one in London came in Drunk,
and instead of going up Stairs, fell down into his Cellar, and never spoke
more. Others falling from their Horses, have broke their Necks; and how this
poor Sinner perished, you all know better perhaps chan I can tell you.

Let me close up this Exhortation with these Words, Psalm. 50.22. Now consider
this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver.

I hope you will take this kindly from your poor Seque^tred Minister, who still
looks on you as his Charge, and earne^^^y desires your Salvation; if the Lord
be pleased to set home this sad Dispensation upon your Consciences, it may do
you more good than many Sermons; and how happy shall I be if his Grace make use
of my poor Endeavors by this Letter to make such an Impression upon you, that
may stick and abide, and not wear out again. Amen, Good Lord, So let it be, on
Me and all my Flock. Amen, Amen.

From my Study, October the 13th. 1680.
FINIS.

